
                    Acknowledgments
is book would not have happened without the support of many colleagues. e process would
have not even started without the original suggestion from Rich Uhlig to Margaret Martonosi,
the series editor. e process, in all likelihood, would have never ended without the constant,
gentle probing of Mike Morgan; we thank him for his patience. Ole Agesen, Christoffer Dall,
Arthur Kiyanovski, Shih-Wei Li, Jintack Lim, George Prekas, Jeff Sheldon, and Igor Smolyar
provided performance figures specifically for this book; students will find the additional quanti-
tative data enlightening. Margaret Church made multiple copy-editing passes to the manuscript;
we thank her for the diligent and detailed feedback at each round. Nadav Amit, Christoffer
Dall, Nathan Dauthenhahn, Canturk Isci, Arthur Kiyanovski, Christos Kozyrakis, Igor Smolyar,
Ravi Soundararajan, Michael Swift, and Idan Yaniv all provided great technical feedback on the
manuscript.
       e authors would like to thank EPFL, Columbia University, and the Technion—Israel
Institute of Technology, for their institutional support. Bugnion’s research group is supported in
part by grants from Nano-Tera, the Microsoft EPFL Joint Research Center, a Google Grad-
uate Research Fellowship and a VMware research grant. Nieh’s research group is supported in
part by ARM Ltd., Huawei Technologies, a Google Research Award, and NSF grants CNS-
1162447, CNS-1422909, and CCF-1162021. Tsafrir’s research group is supported in part by re-
search awards from Google Inc., Intel Corporation, Mellanox Technologies, and VMware Inc.,
as well as by funding from the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) grant No. 605/12, the Israeli Min-
istry of Economics via the HIPER consortium, the joint BSF-NSF United States-Israel Bion-
ational Science Foundation and National Science Foundation grant No. 2014621, and the Eu-
ropean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme grant agreement No. 688386
(OPERA).

Edouard Bugnion, Jason Nieh, and Dan Tsafrir
Lausanne, New York, and Haifa
January 2017
