
                                        CHAPTER                              1

                                      Definitions
is chapter introduces the basic concepts of virtualization, virtual machines, and virtual machine
monitors. is is necessary for clarity as various articles, textbooks, and commercial product de-
scriptions sometimes use conflicting definitions. We use the following definitions in this book.

    • Virtualization is the application of the layering principle through enforced modularity,
      whereby the exposed virtual resource is identical to the underlying physical resource being
      virtualized.

    • A virtual machine is an abstraction of a complete compute environment through the com-
      bined virtualization of the processor, memory, and I/O components of a computer.

    • e hypervisor is a specialized piece of system software that manages and runs virtual ma-
      chines.

    • e virtual machine monitor (VMM) refers to the portion of the hypervisor that focuses
      on the CPU and memory virtualization.¹

e rest of this chapter is organized as follows. We formalize the definitions of virtualization,
virtual machines, and hypervisors in §1.1, §1.2, and §1.3, respectively. §1.4 classifies existing hy-
pervisors into type-1 (bare-metal) and type-2 (hosted) architectures. We then provide a sketch
illustration of a hypervisor in §1.5 while deferring the formal definition until Chapter 2. In ad-
dition to the three basic concepts, we also define useful, adjacent concepts such as the different
terms for memory (§1.6) and various approaches to virtualization and paravirtualization (§1.7).
We conclude in §1.8 with a short description of some of the key reasons why virtual machines
play a fundamental role in information technology today.

1.1       VIRTUALIZATION
           Virtualization is the application of the layering principle through enforced
           modularity, whereby the exposed virtual resource is identical to the underlying
           physical resource being virtualized.
      .
¹N.B.: the terms hypervisor and virtual machine monitor have been used interchangeably in the literature. Here, we prefer
 the term hypervisor when describing an entire system and the term VMM when describing the subsystem that virtualizes the
 CPU and memory, or in its historical formal context in Chapter 2.
2    1. DEFINITIONS
    is definition is grounded in two fundamental principles of computer systems. First, layering
    is the presentation of a single abstraction, realized by adding a level of indirection, when (i) the
    indirection relies on a single lower layer and (ii) uses a well-defined namespace to expose the
    abstraction. Second, enforced modularity additionally guarantees that the clients of the layer
    cannot bypass the abstraction layer, for example to access the physical resource directly or have
    visibility into the usage of the underlying physical namespace. Virtualization is therefore nothing
    more than an instance of layering for which the exposed abstraction is equivalent to the underlying
    physical resource.
            is combination of indirection, enforced modularity, and compatibility is a particularly
    powerful way to both reduce the complexity of computer systems and simplify operations. Let’s
    take the classic example of RAID [48], in which a redundant array of inexpensive disk is aggre-
    gated to form a single, virtual disk. Because the interface is compatible (it is a block device for both
    the virtual and physical disks), a filesystem can be deployed identically, whether the RAID layer
    is present or not. As the RAID layer manages its own resources internally, hiding the physical
    addresses from the abstraction, physical disks can be swapped into the virtual disk transparently
    from the filesystem using it; this simplifies operations, in particular when disks fail and must be
    replaced. Even though RAID hides many details of the organization of the storage subsystem
    from the filesystem, the operational benefits clearly outweigh any potential drawbacks resulting
    from the added level of indirection.
            As broadly defined, virtualization is therefore not synonymous to virtual machines. It is
    also not limited to any particular field of computer science or location in the compute stack. In
    fact, virtualization is prevalent across domains. We provide a few examples found in hardware,
    software, and firmware.

    Virtualization in Computer Architecture: Virtualization is obviously a fundamental part of
    computer architecture. Virtual memory, as exposed through memory management units (MMU),
    serves as the canonical example: the MMU adds a level of indirection which hides the physical
    addresses from applications, in general through a combination of segmentation and paging mech-
    anisms. is enforces modularity as MMU control operations are restricted to kernel mode. As
    both physical memory and virtual memory expose the same abstraction of byte-addressable mem-
    ory, the same instruction set architecture can operate identically with virtual memory when the
    MMU is enabled, and with physical memory when it is disabled.

    Virtualization within Operating Systems: Operating systems have largely adopted the same
    concept. In fact, at its core, an operating system does little more than safely expose the resources
    of a computer—CPU, memory, and I/O—to multiple, concurrent applications. For example, an
    operating system controls the MMU to expose the abstraction of isolated address spaces to pro-
    cesses; it schedules threads on the physical cores transparently, thereby multiplexing in software
    the limited physical CPU resource; it mounts multiple distinct filesystems into a single virtualized
    namespace.
                                                                           1.1. VIRTUALIZATION        3
Virtualization in I/O subsystems: Virtualization is ubiquitous in disks and disk controllers,
where the resource being virtualized is a block-addressed array of sectors. e approach is used
by RAID controllers and storage arrays, which present the abstraction of multiple (virtual) disks
to the operating systems, which addresses them as (real) disks. Similarly, the Flash Translation
Layer found in current SSD provides wear-leveling within the I/O subsystem and exposes the
SSD to the operating systems as though it were a mechanical disk.
       Whether done in hardware, in software, or embedded in subsystems, virtualization is al-
ways achieved by using and combining three simple techniques, illustrated in Figure 1.1. First,
multiplexing exposes a resource among multiple virtual entities. ere are two types of multiplex-
ing, in space and in time. With space multiplexing, the physical resource is partitioned (in space)
into virtual entities. For example, the operating system multiplexes different pages of physical
memory across different address spaces. To achieve this goal, the operating system manages the
virtual-to-physical mappings and relies on the architectural support provided by the MMU.
  Abstraction

                      X         X            X             X                         Y

                           Virtualization             Virtualization            Virtualization
  Physical Resource

                                 X               X         X           X             X

                          (a) Multiplexing           (b) Aggregation            (c) Emulation

Figure 1.1: ree basic implementations techniques of virtualization. X represents both the physical
resource and the virtualized abstraction.

       With time multiplexing, the same physical resource is scheduled temporally between virtual
entities. For example, the OS scheduler multiplexes the CPU core and hardware threads among
the set of runnable processes. e context switching operation saves the processor’s register file in
the memory associated with the outgoing process, and then restores the state of the register file
from the memory location associated with the incoming process.
       Second, aggregation does the opposite, it takes multiple physical resources and makes them
appear as a single abstraction. For example, a RAID controller aggregates multiple disks into
a single volume. Once configured, the controller ensures that all read and write operations to
the volume are appropriately reflected onto the various disks of the RAID group. e operating
system then formats the filesystem onto the volume without having to worry about the details of
4    1. DEFINITIONS
    the layout and the encoding. In a different domain, a processor’s memory controller aggregates
    the capacity of multiple DIMMs into a single physical address space, which is then managed by
    the operating system.
           ird, emulation relies on a level of indirection in software to expose a virtual resource or
    device that corresponds to a physical device, even if it is not present in the current computer sys-
    tem. Cross-architectural emulators run one processor architecture on another, e.g., Apple Rosetta
    emulates a PowerPC processor on an x86 computer for backward compatibility. In this example,
    X=PowerPC and Y=x86 in Figure 1.1c. e virtual abstraction corresponds to a particular proces-
    sor with a well-defined ISA, even though the physical processor is different. Memory and disks
    can emulate each other: a RAM disk emulates the function of a disk using DRAM as backing
    store. e paging process of virtual memory does the opposite: the operating system uses disk
    sectors to emulate virtual memory.
           Multiplexing, aggregation, and emulation can naturally be combined together to form a
    complete execution stack. In particular, as we will see shortly in §1.5, nearly all hypervisors in-
    corporate a combination of multiplexing and emulation.

    1.2       VIRTUAL MACHINES
    e term “virtual machine” has been used to describe different abstractions depending on epoch
    and context. Fortunately, all uses are consistent with the following, broad definition.

              A virtual machine is a complete compute environment with its own isolated
              processing capabilities, memory, and communication channels.
          .

    is definition applies to a range of distinct, incompatible abstractions, illustrated in Figure 1.2:

       • language-based virtual machines, such as the Java Virtual Machine, Microsoft Common
         Language Runtime, Javascript engines embedded in browsers, and in general the run-time
         environment of any managed language. ese runtime environments are focused on running
         single applications and are not within the scope of this book;

       • lightweight virtual machines, which rely on a combination of hardware and software iso-
         lation mechanisms to ensure that applications running directly on the processor (e.g., as
         native x86 code) are securely isolated from other sandboxes and the underlying operating
         system. is includes server-centric systems such as Denali [182] as well as desktop-centric
         systems such as the Google Native Client [190] and Vx32 [71]. Solutions based on Linux
         containers such as Docker [129] or the equivalent FreeBSD Jail [110] fall into the same
         category. We will refer to some of these systems as applicable, in particular in the context
         of the use of particular processor features; and
                                                                              1.2. VIRTUAL MACHINES     5

    Abstractions
                                               Virtual Machine

                   Language-based               (system-level)                          Lightweight
                   Virtual Machine             Virtual Machine                        Virtual Machine

                                                                                        Popek /
    Platforms              Machine Simulator                     Hypervisor           Goldberg Th.

                               Bare-metal Hypervisor (type-1)            Hosted Hypervisor (type-2)

Figure 1.2: Basic classification of virtual machines and the platforms that run them.

   • system-level virtual machines, in which the isolated compute environment resembles the
     hardware of a computer so that the virtual machine can run a standard, commodity oper-
     ating system and its applications, in full isolation from the other virtual machines and the
     rest of the environment. Such virtual machines apply the virtualization principle to an entire
     computer system. Each virtual machine has its own copy of the underlying hardware, or at
     least, its own copy of some underlying hardware. Each virtual machine runs its own inde-
     pendent operating system instance, called the guest operating system. is is the essential
     focus of this book.
       Figure 1.2 also categories the various platforms that run system-level virtual machines. We
call these platforms either a hypervisor or a machine simulator, depending on the techniques used
to run the virtual machine:
   • a hypervisor relies on direct execution on the CPU for maximum efficiency, ideally to
     eliminate performance overheads altogether. In direct execution, the hypervisor sets up the
     hardware environment, but then lets the virtual machine instructions execute directly on
     the processor. As these instruction sequences must operate within the abstraction of the
     virtual machine, their execution causes traps, which must be emulated by the hypervisor.
     is trap-and-emulate paradigm is central to the design of hypervisors; and
   • a machine simulator is typically implemented as a normal user-level application, with the
     goal of providing an accurate simulation of the virtualized architecture, and often runs at
     a small fraction of the native speed, ranging from a 5? slowdown to a 1000? slowdown,
     depending on the level of simulation detail. Machine simulators play a fundamental role
     in computer architecture by allowing the detailed architectural study of complex work-
     loads [36, 124, 153, 181].
6    1. DEFINITIONS
    1.3       HYPERVISORS
    A hypervisor is a special form of system software that runs virtual machines with the goal of
    minimizing execution overheads. When multiple virtual machines co-exist simultaneously on
    the same computer system, the hypervisor multiplexes (i.e., allocates and schedules) the physical
    resources appropriately among the virtual machines.
          Popek and Goldberg formalized the relationship between a virtual machine and hypervisor
    (which they call VMM) in 1974 as follows [143].

              A virtual machine is taken to be an efficient, isolated duplicate of the real ma-
              chine. We explain these notions through the idea of a virtual machine monitor
              (VMM). As a piece of software, a VMM has three essential characteristics.
              First, the VMM provides an environment for programs which is essentially
              identical with the original machine; second, programs running in this envi-
              ronment show at worst only minor decreases in speed; and last, the VMM is
              in complete control of system resources.
          .

          Popek and Goldberg’s definition is consistent with the broader definition of virtualization:
    the hypervisor applies the layering principle to the computer with three specific criteria of equiv-
    alence, safety and performance.

    Equivalence: Duplication ensures that the exposed resource (i.e., the virtual machine) is equiv-
    alent with the underlying computer. is is a strong requirement, which has been historically
    relaxed in some measure when the architecture demands it (see §1.7).

    Safety: Isolation requires that the virtual machines are isolated from each other as well as from
    the hypervisor, which enforces the modularity of the system. Critically, the safety of the design is
    enforced by the hypervisor without it making any assumptions about the software running inside
    the virtual machine (including the guest operating system).

    Performance: Finally, and critically, Popek and Goldberg’s definition adds an additional re-
    quirement: the virtual system must show at worst a minor decrease in speed. is final requirement
    separates hypervisors from machine simulators. Although machine simulators also meet the du-
    plication and the isolation criteria, they fail the efficiency criteria as even fast machine simulators
    using dynamic binary translation [32, 124, 153, 184] slow down the execution of the target system
    by at least 5?, in large part because of the high cost of emulating the TLB of the virtual machine
    in software.
                                                      1.4. TYPE-1 AND TYPE-2 HYPERVISORS               7
1.4       TYPE-1 AND TYPE-2 HYPERVISORS
Finally, Figure 1.2 shows that hypervisor architectures can be classified into so-called type-1 and
type-2. Robert Goldberg introduced these terms in his thesis [77], and the terms have been used
ever since. Informally, a type-1 hypervisor is in direct controls of all resources of the physical
computer. In contrast, a type-2 hypervisor operates either “as part of ” or “on top of ” an existing
host operating system. Regrettably, the literature has applied the definitions loosely, leading to
some confusion. Goldberg’s definition (using an updated terminology) is as follows.

          e implementation requirement specifies that instructions execute directly
          on the host. It does not indicate how the hypervisor gains control for that
          subset of instructions that must be interpreted. is may be done either by a
          program running on the bare host machine or by a program running under
          some operating system on the host machine. In the case of running under an
          operating system, the host operating system primitives may be used to simplify
          writing the virtual machine monitor. us, two additional VMM categories
          arise:
             • type-1: the VMM runs on a bare machine;
             • type-2: the VMM runs on an extended host, under the host operating
               system.
          [...] In both type-1 and type-2 VMM, the VMM creates the virtual machine.
          However, in a type-1 environment, the VMM on a bare machine must per-
          form the system’s scheduling and (real) resource allocation. us, the type-1
          VMM may include such code not specifically needed for virtualization. In a
          type-2 system, the resource allocation and environment creation functions for
          virtual machine are more clearly split. e operating system does the normal
          system resource allocation and provides a standard extended machine.
      .

We note that the emphasis is on resource allocation, and not whether the hypervisor runs in
privileged or non-privileged mode. In particular, a hypervisor can be a type-2 even when it runs
in kernel-mode, e.g., Linux/KVM and VMware Workstation operate this way. In fact, Goldberg
assumed that the hypervisor would always be executing with supervisor privileges.
       Both types are commonly found in current systems. First, VMware ESX Server [177],
Xen [27, 146], and Microsoft Hyper-V are all type-1 hypervisors. Even though Xen and Hyper-
V depend on a host environment called dom0, the hypervisor itself makes the resource allocation
and scheduling decisions.
       Conversely, VMware Workstation [45], VMware Fusion, KVM [113], Microsoft Virtu-
alPC, Parallels, and Oracle VirtualBox [179] are all type-2 hypervisors. ey cooperate with a
8    1. DEFINITIONS
    host operating system so that the host operating system schedules all system resources. e host
    operating system schedules the hypervisor as if it were a process, even though these systems all
    depend on a heavy kernel-mode component to execute the virtual machine. Some hypervisors
    such as VMware Workstation and Oracle VirtualBox are portable across different host operating
    systems, while Fusion and Parallels runs with the Mac OS X host operating system, Microsoft
    Virtual PC runs with the Windows host operating system and KVM runs as part of the Linux
    host operating system. Among these type-2 systems, KVM provides the best integration with
    the host operating system, as the kernel mode component of the hypervisors is integrated directly
    within the Linux host as a kernel module.

    1.5     A SKETCH HYPERVISOR: MULTIPLEXING AND
            EMULATION
    With the basic definitions established, we now move to a first sketch description of the key ele-
    ments of a virtualized computer system, i.e., the specification of a virtual machine and the basic
    building blocks of the hypervisor.
           Figure 1.3 illustrates the key architectural components of a virtualized computer system.
    e figure shows three virtual machines, each with their own virtual hardware, their own guest
    operating system, and their own applications. e hypervisor controls the actual physical resources
    and runs directly on the hardware. In this simplified architecture, the hardware (virtual or physical)
    consists of processing elements, which comprises one or more CPUs, their MMU, and cache-
    coherent memory. e processing elements are connected to an I/O bus, with two attached I/O
    devices: a disk and a network interface card in Fig 1.3. is is representative of a server deploy-
    ment. A desktop platform would include additional devices such as a keyboard, video, mouse,
    serial ports, USB ports, etc. A mobile platform might further require a GPS, an accelerometer,
    and radios.
           In its most basic form, a hypervisor uses two of the three key virtualization techniques of
    §1.1: it multiplexes (in space, and possibly in time) the physical PE across the virtual machines,
    and it emulates everything else, in particular the I/O bus and the I/O devices.
           is combination of techniques is both necessary and sufficient in practice to achieve the
    efficiency criteria. It is necessary because without an effective mechanism to multiplex the CPU
    and the MMU, the hypervisor would have to emulate the execution of the virtual machine. In fact,
    the principal difference between a machine simulator and a hypervisor is that the former emulates
    the virtual machine’s instruction set architecture, while the later multiplexes it. Multiplexing of the
    CPU is a scheduling task, very similar to the one performed by the operating system to schedule
    processes. e scheduling entity (here, the hypervisor) sets up the hardware environments (register
    file, etc.) and then lets the scheduled entity (the virtual machine) run directly on the hardware
    with reduced privileges.
           is scheduling technique is known as direct execution since the hypervisor lets the vir-
    tual CPU directly execute instructions on the real processor. Of course, the hypervisor is also
                              1.5. A SKETCH HYPERVISOR: MULTIPLEXING AND EMULATION                     9

         App App App                     App App App                     App App App

              Guest OS                         Guest OS                       Guest OS

         PE              PE              PE                PE            PE              PE

      Disk           NIC               Disk            NIC            Disk           NIC

                                              Hypervisor

                               PE       PE            PE         PE

                                      Disk            NIC

Figure 1.3: Basic architecture of a virtual machine monitor. Each processing element (PE) consists
of CPU and physical memory.

responsible to ensure the safety property of the virtual machine. It therefore ensures that the
virtual CPU always executes with reduced privileges, e.g., so that it cannot execute privileged in-
structions. As a consequence, the direct execution of the virtual machine leads to frequent traps
whenever the guest operating system attempts to execute a privileged instruction, which must
be emulated by the hypervisor. Hypervisors designed around direct execution therefore follow a
trap-and-emulate programming paradigm, where the bulk of the execution overhead is due to
the hypervisor emulating traps on behalf of the virtual machine.
       Physical memory is also multiplexed among the virtual machines, so that each has the
illusion of a contiguous, fixed-size, amount of physical memory. is is similar to the allocation
among processes done by an operating system. e unique challenges in building a hypervisor lie
in the virtualization of the MMU, and in the ability to expose user-level and kernel-level execution
environment to the virtual machine.
       e combination of multiplexing and emulation is also sufficient, as I/O operations of to-
day’s computer systems are implemented via reasonably high-level operations, e.g., a device driver
can issue simple commands to send a list of network packets specified in a descriptor ring, or is-
sue a 32 KB disk request. A hypervisor emulates the hardware/software interface of at least one
representative device per category, i.e., one disk device, one network device, one screen device,
10    1. DEFINITIONS
 etc. As part of this emulation, the hypervisor uses the available physical devices to issue the actual
 I/O.
         I/O emulation has long been the preferred approach to the virtualization of I/O device
 because of its portability advantages: a virtual machine “sees” the same virtual hardware, even
 when running on platform with different hardware devices. Today, modern hardware includes
 advanced architectural support for I/O virtualization which enables the multiplexing of certain
 classes of I/O devices, with notable performance benefits in terms of throughput and latency, but
 still at the expense of reducing the mobility and portability of the virtual machines.
         Table 1.1 provides a concrete example of the combined use of multiplexing and emulation
 in VMware Workstation 2.0, an early, desktop-oriented hypervisor, released in 2000. Clearly,
 the hardware is dated: USB is notably missing, and most readers have never seen actual floppy
 disks. e concepts however remain the same. For each component, Table 1.1 describes the front-
 end device abstraction, visible as hardware to the virtual machine, and the back-end emulation
 mechanisms used to implement it. When a resource is multiplexed, such as the x86 CPU or the
 memory, the front-end and back-end are identical, and defined by the hardware. e hypervisor
 is involved only to establish the mapping between the virtual and the physical resource, which the
 hardware can then directly use without further interception.

Table 1.1: Virtual Hardware of early VMware Workstation [45]

                 Virtual Hardware (front-end)     Back-end
     Multiplexed 1 virtual x86-32 CPU             Scheduled by the host operating system
                                                  with one or more x86 CPUs
                 Up to 512 MB of contiguous       Allocated and managed by the host OS
                 DRAM                             (page-by-page)
     Emulated    PCI Bus                          Fully emulated compliant PCI bus with
                                                  B/D/F addressing for all virtual mother-
                                                  board and slot devices
                 4 x 4IDE disks                   Either virtual disks (stored as files) or direct
                 7 x Buslogic SCSI Disks          access to a given raw device
                 1 x IDE CD-ROM                   ISO image or real CD-ROM
                 2 x 1.44 MB floppy drives        Physical floppy or floppy image
                 1 x VGA/SVGA graphics card       Appears as a Window or in full-screen mode
                 2 x serial ports COM1 and COM2 Connect to Host serial port or a file
                 1 x printer (LPT)                Can connect to host LPT port
                 1 x keyboard (104-key) and mouse Fully emulated
                 AMD PCnet NIC (AM79C970A) Via virtual switch of the host
                                                                     1.6. NAMES FOR MEMORY           11
       When the resource is emulated, however, the front-end device corresponds to one canon-
ically chosen representative of the device, independent of the back-end. e hypervisor imple-
ments both the front-end and the back-end, typically in software without any particular hardware
support. e front-end is effectively a software model of the chosen, representative device. e
back-end emulation chooses among the underlying resources to implement the functionality.
ese underlying resources may be physical devices or some higher-level abstractions of the host
operating system. For example, the disk front-ends in VMware Workstation were either IDE
or Buslogic SCSI devices, two popular choices at the time, with ubiquitous device drivers. e
backend resource could be either a physical device, i.e., an actual raw disk, or a virtual disk stored
as a large file within an existing filesystem.
       Although no longer an exact duplicate of the underlying hardware, the virtual machine
remains compatible. Assuming that a different set of device drivers can be loaded inside the guest
operating system, the virtual machine will have the same functionality.
       So far, this hypervisor sketch assumes that the various components of the processing el-
ements can be virtualized. Yet, we’ve also alluded to the historical fact that some hardware ar-
chitectures fail to provide hardware support for virtualization. is discussion will be the core of
Chapter 2 and Chapter 3.

1.6     NAMES FOR MEMORY
e cliché claims (apparently incorrectly according to linguists) that Eskimos have many names
for snow. Similarly, computer architecture and system designers have used at times overlapping,
somewhat confusing definitions for the many facets of memory. e reason is simple. Like snow to
Eskimos, virtual memory is fundamental to operating systems and arguably the most significant
enhancements over the original von Neuman model of computing in this context. In reality, there
are fundamentally only two types of memory: virtual memory converts into physical memory
via the combination of segmentation and paging.
Virtual memory: Virtual memory refers to the byte-addressable namespace used by instruction
sequences executed by the processor. With rare exceptions, all registers and the instruction pointer
that refer to a memory location contain a virtual address. In a segmented architecture, the virtual
address space is determined by a base address and a limit. e former is added to the virtual
address and the latter is checked for protection purposes. In a paging architecture, the virtual
address space is determined by the memory management unit on a page-by-page basis, with the
mapping defined either by page tables or by a software TLB miss handler. Some architectures
such as x86-32 combine segmentation with paging. e virtual address is first converted (via
segmentation) into a linear address, and then (via paging) into a physical address.
Physical memory: Physical memory refers to the byte-addressable resource accessed via the
memory hierarchy of the processor, and typically backed by DRAM. In a non-virtualized com-
puter system, the physical address space is generally determined by the resources of the hardware,
12   1. DEFINITIONS
 and defined by the memory controller of the processor. In a virtualized computer system, the
 hypervisor defines the amount of physical memory that is available to the virtual machine. Tech-
 nically, the abstraction visible to the virtual machine should be called “virtual physical memory.”
 However, to avoid confusion with virtual memory, it is most commonly called guest-physical
 memory. To further avoid ambiguity, the underlying resource is called host-physical memory.
 Note that some early virtualization papers used different terminologies, in particular using the
 terms physical memory and machine memory to refer to guest-physical and host-physical mem-
 ory, respectively.

 1.7     APPROACHES TO VIRTUALIZATION AND
         PARAVIRTUALIZATION
 e lack of clear architectural support for virtualization in earlier processors has led to a range
 of approaches that solve the identical problem of running a virtual machine that is either similar
 or compatible with the underlying hardware. is text covers the three pragmatic approaches to
 virtualization.

 Full (software) virtualization: is refers to hypervisors designed to maximize hardware com-
 patibility, and in particular run unmodified operating systems, on architectures lacking the full
 support for it. It includes in particular early versions of VMware’s hypervisors. is is also refer-
 enced as software virtualization in some papers. We will describe the approach in §3.2.

 Hardware Virtualization (HVM): is refers to hypervisors built for architectures that provide
 architectural support for virtualization, which includes all recent processors. Such hypervisors also
 support unmodified guest operating systems. Unlike software virtualization approach in which the
 hypervisor must (at least some of the time) translate guest instruction sequences before execution,
 HVM hypervisors rely exclusively on direct execution to execute virtual machine instructions. In
 the literature, HVM is at times referred to as HV. e requirements for an HVM are formally
 defined in Chapter 2. Architectures and hypervisors that follow the approach are the focus of
 Chapter 4 for x86 with VT-x and Chapter 7 for ARM with Virtualization Extensions.

 Paravirtualization: is approach makes a different trade-off, and values simplicity and overall
 efficiency over the full compatibility with the underlying hardware. e term was introduced by
 Denali [182] and popularized by the early Xen hypervisor. In its original usage on platforms with
 no architectural support for virtualization, paravirtualization required a change of the guest oper-
 ating system binary, which was incompatible with the underlying hardware. In its contemporary
 use on architectures with full virtualization support, paravirtualization is still used to augment the
 HVM through platform-specific extensions often implemented in device drivers, e.g., to manage
 cooperatively memory or to implement a high-performance front-end device. We will describe
 this in §3.3.
                                            1.8. BENEFITS OF USING VIRTUAL MACHINES              13
1.8     BENEFITS OF USING VIRTUAL MACHINES
So far, we have discussed the “how” of virtualization as any good engineering textbook should,
but not the “why?”, which is equally relevant. Virtual machines were first invented on mainframes
when hardware was scarce and very expensive, and operating systems were primitive. Today, they
are used very broadly because of fundamentally different considerations. We enumerate some of
the most popular ones.

Operating system diversity: Virtualization enables a diversity of operating systems to run con-
currently on a single machine. is benefit is the key reason behind many desktop-oriented type-2
hypervisors, e.g., Fusion and Parallels are essentially used to run Windows (and sometimes Linux)
on Mac OS X.

Server consolidation: Enterprise IT best practices today still mandate that each server runs a
single application per machine. With the rise in power and efficiency of hardware, that machine
is today more often than not a virtual machine [95].

Rapid provisioning: Deploying a physical server is complex, time-intensive task. In contrast, a
virtual machine can be created entirely in software through a portal or an API, and software stack
can be deployed as virtual appliances [157].

Security: Virtualization introduces a new level of management in the datacenter stack, dis-
tinct and invisible from the guest operating systems, and yet capable of introspecting the behav-
ior of such operating systems [49], performing intrusion analysis [68], or attesting of its prove-
nance [73]. e hypervisor can also control all I/O operations from the virtual machine, making
it easy to insert e.g., a VM-specific firewall or connect into a virtual network [114].

High-availability: A virtual machine is an encapsulated abstraction that can run on any server
(running a compatible hypervisor). Specifically, a virtual machine can reboot following a hardware
crash on a new server without operational impact, therefore providing a high-availability solution
without requiring guest operating system-level configuration or awareness.

Distributed resource scheduling: e use of live migration technologies turns a cluster of hyper-
visors into a single resource pools, allowing the automatic and transparent rebalancing of virtual
machines within the cluster [96].

Cloud computing: In a virtualized environment, different customers (tenants) can operate their
own virtual machines in isolation from each other. When coupled with network virtualization (a
technology outside of the scope of this text), this provides the foundation for the cloud comput-
ing technologies, including the ones of Amazon Web Services, Google Compute Engine, and
Microsoft Azure.
14   1. DEFINITIONS
 1.9     FURTHER READING
 We rely largely on Salzer and Kaashoek’s book, Principles of Computer Systems [155], for defini-
 tions of layering and enforced modularity. e book provides excellent further reading to readers
 interested in additional background material, or who wish to look at other examples of virtual-
 ization. Tanenbaum and Bos’ Modern Operating Systems, 4th ed. [165] also dedicates a chapter to
 virtualization.
