
                                  CHAPTER                      2

  e Popek/Goldberg eorem
In 1974, Gerald Popek and Robert Goldberg published in Communications of the ACM the sem-
inal paper “Formal Requirements for Virtualizable ird-Generation Architectures” that defines
the necessary and sufficient formal requirements to ensure that a VMM can be constructed [143].
Precisely, their theorem determines whether a given instruction set architecture (ISA) can be
virtualized by a VMM using multiplexing. For any architecture that meets the hypothesis of the
theorem, any operating system directly running on the hardware can also run inside a virtual
machine, without modifications.
       At the time, the motivation for the work was to address the evidence that new architectures
accidentally prevented the construction of a VMM. e authors cited the DEC PDP-10 in their
article, where seemingly arbitrary architectural decisions “broke” virtualization. Despite the sim-
plicity of the result, the relevance of the theorem was lost on computer architects for decades, and
generations of new processor architectures were designed without any technical considerations
for the theorem.
       Much later, as virtual machines once again became relevant, Intel and AMD explicitly made
sure that their virtualization extensions met the Popek and Goldberg criteria, so that unmodified
guest operating systems could run directly in virtual machines, without having to resort to software
translation or paravirtualization [171].
       Today, the theorem remains the obvious starting point to understand the fundamental rela-
tionship between a computer architecture and its ability to support virtual machines. Specifically,
the theorem determines whether a VMM, relying exclusively on direct execution, can support
guest arbitrary operating systems.

2.1     THE MODEL
e paper assumes a standard computer architecture, which the authors call a conventional third-
generation architecture. e processor has two execution modes (user-level and supervisor), and
support for virtual memory. Such an architecture is both necessary and sufficient to run a con-
ventional operating system. In particular, the operating system can configure the hardware to run
multiple, arbitrary, potentially malicious applications in isolation from each other. For the pur-
pose of the proof, the paper defines a simple model that remains representative of the broader
class of these architectures. Specifically, the model has the following features.

   • e computer has one processor with two execution levels: supervisor mode and user mode.
16   2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
      • Virtual memory is implemented via segmentation (rather than paging) using a single seg-
        ment with base B and limit L (called the relocation-bound register pair in the paper). e
        segment defines the range ŒB; B C LŒ of the linear address space for valid virtual addresses
        Œ0; LŒ. ere is no paging, so linear addresses map 1:1 directly to physical addresses. Virtual
        memory is used in both supervisor and user mode for all memory accesses.

      • Physical memory is contiguous, starting at address 0, and the amount of physical memory
        is known at processor reset time (SZ ).

      • e processor’s system state, called the processor status word (PSW) consists of the tuple
        .M; B; L; P C /:

          – the execution level M D fs; ug;
          – the segment register (B,L); and
          – the current program counter (PC), a virtual address.

      • e trap architecture has provisions to first save the content of the PS W to a well-known
        location in memory (MEM[0]), and then load into the PS W the values from another well-
        known location in memory (MEM[1]). e trap architecture mechanism is used to enter into
        the operating system following a system call or an exception in executing an instruction.

      • e ISA includes at least one instruction or instruction sequence that can load into the
        hardware PS W the tuple .M; B; L; P C / from a location in virtual memory. is is required
        to resume execution in user mode after a system call or a trap.

      • I/O and interrupts are ignored to simplify the discussion.

 Let’s first consider what an operating system for such an architecture would look like (in the
 absence of a VMM).

     1. e kernel would run in supervisor mode (M D s ), and applications would always run in
        user mode (M D u).

     2. During initialization, the kernel first sets the trap entry point: MEM[0]
        (M:s,B:0,L:SZ,PC:trap_en).

     3. e kernel would allocate a contiguous range of physical memory for each application.

     4. To launch or resume an application stored in physical memory at [B,B+L[ and currently ex-
        ecuting instruction P C , the operating system would simply load PS W    (M:u,L,C,PC).

     5. At the trap entry point (P C Dtrap_en), the kernel would first decode the instruction
        stored at MEM[1].PC to determine the cause of the trap, and then take appropriate action.
                                                                            2.2. THE THEOREM         17
Although idealized, notably because of the lack of registers, this architectural model is not fun-
damentally different from the ones that we are all familiar with today. For such an architecture,
Popek and Goldberg posed the following formal research question.

          Given a computer that meets this basic architectural model, under which pre-
          cise conditions can a VMM be constructed, so that the VMM:
              • can execute one or more virtual machines;
              • is in complete control of the machine at all times;
              • supports arbitrary, unmodified, and potentially malicious operating sys-
                tems designed for that same architecture; and
              • be efficient to show at worst a small decrease in speed?
      .

      e answer to this question determines whether a VMM can be constructed for a particular
architecture, so that the resulting “virtual machine can be an efficient, isolated duplicate of the real
machine.” When the conditions are met, the theorem must therefore ensure compliance with the
following three criteria.
Equivalence: e virtual machine is essentially identical to the underlying processor, i.e., a du-
plicate of the computer architecture. Any program running within the virtual machine, i.e., any
guest operating system and application combination, should exhibit identical behavior as if that
program had run directly on the underlying hardware, save for the possible exception of dif-
ferences caused by timing dependencies, or the availability of resources such as the amount of
physical memory.
Safety: e VMM must be in complete control of the hardware at all times, without making
any assumptions about the software running inside the virtual machine. A virtual machine is
isolated from the underlying hardware and operates as if it were running on a distinct computer.
In addition, different virtual machines must be isolated from each other. e theorem and its
proof focus on the first safety property. e second property can be achieved by simply ensuring
that there is no shared state within the VMM between two virtual machines.
Performance: e efficiency requirement implies that the execution speed of the program in a
virtualized environment is at worst a minor decrease over the execution time when run directly
on the underlying hardware.

2.2       THE THEOREM
e first theorem itself is simple.
18   2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM

              eorem 1 [143]: For any conventional third-generation computer, a virtual
              machine monitor may be constructed if the set of sensitive instructions for
              that computer is a subset of the set of privileged instructions.
       .

       e key observation is that the answer to Popek and Goldberg’s research question depends
 on the classification of the instructions of the ISA. An instruction is control-sensitive if it can
 update the system state, behavior-sensitive if its semantics depend on the actual values set in
 the system state, or an innocuous instruction otherwise. An instruction is also privileged if it
 can only be executed in supervisor mode and causes a trap when attempted from user mode. e
 theorem holds when all control-sensitive and behavior-sensitive instructions are also privileged,
 i.e.,

           fcontrol-sensitiveg [ fbehavior-sensitiveg ? fprivilegedg:

 Proof by construction: A VMM can be constructed if the architecture meets the constraints of
 the theorem. With some caveats, the converse normally holds, i.e., a VMM cannot be constructed
 if the architecture does not meet the constraints of the theorem.
        Figure 2.1 illustrates the construction. First, Figure 2.2 delineates the relationships between
 the three key forms of memory: the host-physical memory, the guest-physical memory, and the
 virtual memory. en, Figure 2.2 illustrates how the processor’s PSW, and in particular the ex-
 ecution level M and the relocation-bound pair, is configured to run in three distinct situations:
 when running the VMM, the guest operating system, and the application.
        If the conditions of the theorem are met, the VMM operates as follows.

     1. e VMM is the only software actually running in supervisor mode. e VMM reserves
        a portion of physical memory for its own code and data structures, which is never mapped
        into any virtual address space of any virtual machine.

     2. e VMM allocates the guest physical memory for each virtual machine contiguously in
        the host physical address space. Each virtual machine has a fixed, given amount of memory.
        ose parameters are illustrated as addr0 and memsize in Figure 2.2.

     3. e VMM keeps in memory a copy of the system state of each virtual machine: the vPSW.
        Like its hardware counterpart, the vPSW consists of the virtual machine’s execution level,
        segment register (B,L) and program counter.

     4. e virtual machine resumes execution by loading from memory PSW            .M 0 ; B 0 ; L0 ; P C 0 /,
        with:

             • M0      u: the virtual machine always executes in user mode;
                                                                           2.2. THE THEOREM         19
                                vPSW.B
                                                  vPSW.L

                                               virtual memory
                     addr0
                                            memsize

                                      guest physical memory

                  VMM                         VM1                               VM2

                       (a) Host physical, guest physical, and virtual memory.

                   reloc                      bound
    M=u

                                           application
    M=u

                                guest operating system
    M=s

            VMM

 (b) Hardware configuration when executing applications, the guest operating system, and the VMM.

Figure 2.1: Construction of the the Popek/Goldberg VMM.

          • B 0 addr0+vPSW.B: the guest-physical offset is added to the virtual machine’s seg-
            ment base;
          • L0   min(vPSW.L,vPSW.memsize-vPSW.B): in normal circumstances, the virtual
            machine’s segment limit is used directly. However, a malicious guest operating sys-
            tem may attempt to allow its application to read beyond the end of guest-physical
            memory. e second clause of formula prevents this to ensure the safety property; and
          • PC0    vPSW.PC: to resume execution of the virtual machine.

  5. e VMM updates the PC (vPSW.PC            PSW.PC) on every trap. e other fields in the
     vPSW do no need updating even after an arbitrarily long direct execution period. Indeed,
     any instruction that can update the base, limit, or execution privilege level of the PSW is
     control-sensitive. e VMM assumes here that all control-sensitive instructions are also
20   2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
        privileged (the hypothesis of the theorem) and relies on the fact that the virtual machine
        always executes with PSW.M ? u).
     6. e VMM then emulates the instruction that caused the trap. If the guest operating system
        was running (vPSW.M ? s ), the VMM decodes the instruction and then emulates the se-
        mantic of the privileged instruction according to the ISA. For example, the VMM emulates
        the instruction that changes the segment register pair by updating vPSW.B and vPSW.L ac-
        cording to the new values set by the guest operating system. After a successful emulation, the
        VMM increments the program counter (vPSW.PC++) and resumes execution of the virtual
        machine according to step #4.
     7. e VMM may however conclude that the emulation of the instruction is actually a trap
        according to the ISA. For example, consider the case where the virtual machine was in user
        mode, (i.e., when vPSW.M? u) and a malicious application attempted to issue a privileged
        instruction. Or perhaps if an application accesses memory beyond the limit set forth by
        the guest operating system in the segment descriptor. e VMM then emulates the trap
        according to the architecture, i.e.:
           • MEM[addr0] vPSW: store the virtual machine’s vPSW into the first word in guest-
             physical memory, according to the architecture;
           • vPSW      MEM[addr0+1]: copy the second word in guest-physical memory into the
             vPSW, according to the architecture. is updates the state of the virtual machine in
             line with the configuration set forth by the guest operating system; and
           • resume execution according to step #4.
     8. If the hypothesis of the theorem is met, then all instructions that update the system state
        (other than the program counter) are control-sensitive, and therefore privileged. ese will
        cause a trap. is would include any instruction that changes the base-bound registers defin-
        ing the virtual address space (see above), or transitioning between supervisor and user mode.
        e VMM emulates such instructions according to the architecture specification.
     9. If the hypothesis is met, any behavior-sensitive instruction would also be privileged, and
        therefore cause a trap from user mode. e VMM emulates these instructions as well. Con-
        sider for example an instruction that reads the execution level (PSW.M) or the base of the
        segment (PSW.B). e behavior of such an instruction is directly dependent on the actual
        values of the processor state, which are subject to alteration through the virtualization pro-
        cess. Such instructions must be privileged to ensure that the correct values are returned to
        the program.
 e actual proof, which establishes the correspondence between the architecture and the existence
 of a VMM, requires some formalism. Rather than focusing on the formalism, let’s first look at
 some counter-examples from the early era.
                 2.3. RECURSIVE VIRTUALIZATION AND HYBRID VIRTUAL MACHINES                          21
   • Clearly, a single unprivileged, control-sensitive instruction would be a considerable concern.
     It would prevent the VMM from guaranteeing correct execution semantics, and possibly
     create security holes. In the formal model, this would include unprivileged updates to the
     segment register, even when M is unmodified. is was the key issue with the PDP-10 that
     motivated the paper, caused by the semantics of the JRST 1 “return to user” instruction
     issued in user mode.

   • Instructions that read the system state are behavior-sensitive and their use violates the equiv-
     alence criteria. If they are not privileged, the operating system may perform incorrectly as
     the hardware does not behave as defined in the architecture. Consider the simple case where
     an instruction would copy the value of PSW.M into a general-purpose register: the guest op-
     erating system could conclude, to much confusion, that it is running in user mode(!). e
     Intel x86-32 architecture has such instructions.

   • Instructions that bypass virtual memory are behavior-sensitive, since their behavior depends
     on the actual value of the relocation registers. For example, some IBM VM/360 mainframes
     had such instructions. As long as the instruction is also privileged, it can be emulated. And
     provided the frequency of occurrence of that instruction is rare, this does not pose a perfor-
     mance problem.

       e proof-by-construction highlights the fact that a VMM is really nothing more than
an operating system. Both VMM and conventional operating systems share the fundamental
construct of letting the untrusted component run directly on the hardware. Both must ensure
that they remain in control and must correctly configure the hardware to achieve their goals. e
difference is that one runs applications whereas the other runs entire virtual machines, with guest
operating systems and applications. e key consequence of this difference is in the expected level
of architectural support: it’s a given for operating systems on nearly any computer architecture
today, but much less obvious for VMMs.

2.3     RECURSIVE VIRTUALIZATION AND HYBRID VIRTUAL
        MACHINES
e paper includes two additional theorems, which cover requirements for recursive virtualization
and hybrid virtual machines, respectively.
       e formalism also extends to reason about recursive virtualization. Indeed, the idealized
architecture that meets the criteria of the theorem can also support recursive virtual machines. In
this scenario, a virtual machine can run a VMM in guest-supervisor mode rather than an operating
system. at VMM of course can run multiple virtual machines, their guest operating systems
and their respective applications. e second theorem of the paper formalizes the minimal set of
additional assumptions posed on the VMM (but not the architecture) to support recursive virtual
machines. In recursive virtualization, the VMM itself must run (unmodified) within a virtual
22   2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
 machine. is topic of recursive virtualization has received renewed research interest in the last
 few years [33, 191].
        e paper also introduces the notion of hybrid virtual machines, which discusses the case
 when the criteria fails but only according to specific circumstances. Consider again the PDP-
 10 JRST 1 instruction, which can be used both to return to user mode from supervisor mode,
 but equally to return from a subroutine when already in user mode. Clearly, this is catastrophic
 since the virtual machine would transition between the guest operating system and the applica-
 tion without a necessary trap into the VMM. Should that happen, the virtual machine would be
 executing application code when the VMM thinks that it is still in guest-supervisor mode.
        Even though this is evidently unacceptable, the key observation for this particular instruc-
 tion is that it is control-sensitive only when the virtual machine is in supervisor mode. When the
 virtual machine is in user mode, the specific instruction is not sensitive to virtualization.
        Formally, let’s define an instruction to be user-sensitive if it is behavior-sensitive or control-
 sensitive in supervisor mode, but not in user mode. e theorem states the following.

           eorem 3 [143]: A hybrid virtual machine monitor may be constructed for
           any conventional third-generation machine in which the set of user-sensitive
           instructions are a subset of the set of privileged instructions.
       .

 eorem 3 is much weaker than eorem 1, and the resulting hybrid VMM is quite different
 than the traditional VMM. Specifically, a hybrid virtual machine monitor works around such
 limitations.
     • e hybrid VMM acts like a normal VMM when the virtual machine is running applica-
       tions, i.e., is in guest-user mode.
     • Instead of direct execution, the hybrid VMM interprets in software 100% of the instruc-
       tions in guest-supervisor mode. In other words, it interprets the execution of all paths
       through the guest-operating system. Despite the high overheads of interpretation, this ap-
       proach may be practical as long as the portion of time spent in the operating system is small
       for the relevant workloads.
 is third theorem precociously identified a key nuance that would play a crucial role much later
 with the emergence of paravirtualization and of hybrid solutions that combine direct execution
 with binary translation. ose will be discussed in Chapter 3.

 2.4       DISCUSSION: REPLACING SEGMENTATION WITH
           PAGING
 e original 1974 paper recognizes that virtual memory is a fundamental pre-requisite for any
 kind of virtualization support.
                                                            2.5. WELL-KNOWN VIOLATIONS             23
       For the sake of simplicity, the authors assumed that virtual memory is implemented via a
single relocation-bound register pair. As an exercise, consider a more realistic model where virtual
memory is implemented via paging rather than segmentation.
       Does the theorem still apply if virtual memory is implemented using paging? e short
answer is yes, but a deeper analysis identifies subtleties not present in the third-generation model
and these will play a practical role when building actual systems. In particular, instructions that
access memory may be location-sensitive as the VMM must also be present somewhere in mem-
ory. Also, the guest operating system must remain protected from the application despite the
fact that it is running in a de-privileged manner. ese two issues will be revisited for the x86
architecture in §4.1 as the address space compression and ring compression challenges, respectively.
       Finally, the VMM must compose the virtual address space by combining the page table
mappings specified by the guest operating system with the mappings between guest-physical
memory and host-physical memory. Whereas this is a simple matter of composition in an ide-
alized segmented architecture, it is much more complex in page-based system. Indeed, there are
two commonly used approaches to this problem, which are referred to as shadow page tables (see
§3.2.5) and extended page tables (see §5.1).

2.5     WELL-KNOWN VIOLATIONS
In their article, Popek and Goldberg use the DEC PDP-10 as the example of an architecture that
fails to meet the virtualization requirement. May the PDP-10 rest in peace. Instead, we list here
some of the known violations of the reasonably modern era. e list of violations is not exhaustive.
For the architectures discussed, we focus on the violations that had a practical impact in limiting
the deployment of processor architectures with no claims of completeness. We do identify a few
patterns of violations:

   • direct access to physical memory: some architectural decisions expose directly physical
     memory into hardcoded portions of virtual memory. is occurs in particular with the MIPS
     architecture (see §2.5.1);

   • location-sensitive instructions: other decisions expose the location in memory of certain
     sensitive data structures via unprivileged instructions (e.g., the global descriptor tables in
     x86, see §2.5.2); and

   • control-sensitive violations: this occurs when the ISA clearly defines different semantics
     for the same instruction, depending on the privilege level (e.g., iret, popf on x86, see
     §2.5.2).

2.5.1 MIPS
e MIPS architecture is a classic RISC ISA. It has three execution modes: kernel mode (most
privileged), supervisor mode, and user mode (least privileged). Only kernel mode can execute
24   2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
 privileged instructions. e supervisor mode is really an alternate form of user mode, with the
 explicit benefit that it can access portions of virtual memory not available to the regular user
 mode.
        First, the good news: is is a very promising start for an efficient hypervisor design. In-
 deed, the hypervisor would run in kernel mode, and could simply run the guest operating system
 in supervisor mode, emulating all privileged instructions according to their original semantic. e
 availability of supervisor mode leads to an important optimization: since supervisor virtual mem-
 ory is protected from applications, the hypervisor can simply emulate transitions between guest
 operating system and applications as transitions between supervisor mode and user mode. Such
 transitions do not require changes to the configuration of virtual memory, or flushes of the TLB.
        In the MIPS architecture, virtual memory is divided into multiple, fixed-sized regions,
 each with hardcoded attributes that determine which execution mode is required to access the
 region, how to relocate the address by either using the TLB (mapped) or via a hardcoded mask
 (unmapped), and whether the access should go through the cache hierarchy or not. Table 2.1
 shows the regions for the 32-bit architecture. e 64-bit extensions create additional fixed-sized
 regions with the same general philosophy.

Table 2.1: Regions in the MIPS 32-bit architecture

         Region          Base          Length     Access K,S,U       MMU             Cache
        USEG         0x0000 0000        2 GB          P,P P          mapped          cached
        KSEG0        0x8000 0000      512 MB           P,x,x        unmapped         cached
        KSEG1        0xA000 0000      512 MB           P,x,x        unmapped       uncached
        KSSEG        0xC000 0000      512 MB          P,P,x          mapped          cached
        KSEG3        0xE000 0000      512 MB           P,x,x         mapped          cached

        And now the bad news: e MIPS architecture is not virtualizable, first and foremost be-
 cause of its use of regions. Indeed, the use of the regions is location-sensitive (a form of behavior-
 sensitivity), since it is a function of the privileged level of the processor. is has severe conse-
 quences, as any operating system expected to run in kernel mode will be compiled to use the
 KSEG0 and KSEG1 segments. Should a hypervisor attempt to run that OS in supervisor mode
 or user mode, every memory load/store instruction would cause a trap, thereby violating the effi-
 ciency criteria of virtualization. Since operating systems are generally not compiled or linked to
 run as position-independent code, the virtualization of the MIPS architecture requires at least
 the full recompilation of the guest operating system kernel. We discuss in §3.1 the architecture
 and compromise required in the implementation of Disco, a MIPS-based hypervisor.
                                                                       2.5. WELL-KNOWN VIOLATIONS   25
2.5.2 X86-32
e Intel x86-32 architecture is a notoriously complex CISC architecture, in part as it includes
legacy support for multiple decades of backward compatibility. Over the years, the architecture
introduced four main modes of operations (real mode, protected mode, v8086 mode, and system
management mode), each of which enabled in different ways the hardware’s segmentation model,
paging mechanisms, four protection rings, and security features (such as call gates).
       e x86-32 architecture was not virtualizable. It contained virtualization-sensitive, unpriv-
ileged instructions which violated the Popek and Goldberg criteria for strict virtualization [143].
is ruled out the traditional trap-and-emulate approach to virtualization.
       Specifically, Robin and Irvine identified 17 problematic instructions that are sensitive and
yet unprivileged [151]. Table 2.2 groups these instructions into 5 categories: instructions that
manipulate the interrupt flag, manipulate segments registers and segment descriptors, can peek
into the location of system data structures, and finally call gate-related instructions. e impli-
cations are severe and were well known. Indeed, before the introduction of VMware, engineers
from Intel Corporation were convinced their processors could not be virtualized in any practical
sense [74].

Table 2.2: List of sensitive, unprivileged x86 instructions

 Group                                          Instructions
 Access to interrupt flag                       pushf, popf, iret
 Visibility into segment descriptors            lar, verr, verw, lsl
 Segment manipulation instructions              pop <seg>, push <seg>, mov <seg>
 Read-only access to privileged state           sgdt, sldt, sidt, smsw
 Interrupt and gate instructions                fcall, longjump, retfar, str, int <n>

       e x86-32 architecture did provide one execution mode that was strictly virtualizable ac-
cording to the Popek/Goldberg theorem: v8086 mode was specifically designed to run a 16-bit
virtual machine running the 16-bit Intel 8086 ISA. is mode was central to Windows 95/98 as
it allowed these 32-bit operating systems to run legacy MS-DOS programs. Unfortunately, that
mode was only capable of executing 16-bit virtual machines.

2.5.3 ARM
e ARM architecture is a RISC ISA. At a high-level from a virtualization perspective, ARM can
be viewed as having two main execution modes, one or more privileged modes and user mode.
Only privileged modes can execute privileged instructions. For example, ARMv6 has 7 processor
modes, user mode and 6 privileged modes,¹ while ARMv8 has effectively user mode and a single

¹See pages A2-3 to A2-5 in the ARM Architecture Reference Manual [20] for more information.
26     2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
 privileged mode, although ARMv8 terminology refers to them as exception levels.² Each mode
 has a number of banked registers, which means, for instance, register 13 points to a different
 physical register in each mode. e differences between the privileged modes only concern the
 banked registers and can be ignored for the purposes of this discussion.
         e ARM architecture was not virtualizable. It contained virtualization-sensitive, unprivi-
 leged instructions, which violated the Popek and Goldberg criteria for strict virtualization [143].
 is ruled out the traditional trap-and-emulate approach to virtualization. Dall and Nieh iden-
 tified 24 problematic instructions that are sensitive and yet unprivileged [59]. e specific in-
 structions were identified for ARMv6, but are also present in other versions of the architecture.
 For example, ARMv7 is quite similar to ARMv6 in this respect. ere are similar problematic
 instructions even in the most recent version of the ARM architecture, ARMv8. e instructions
 deal with user mode registers, status registers, and memory accesses that depend on CPU mode,
 as listed in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: ARM sensitive instructions
         Description            Instructions
         User mode              LDM (2), STM (2)
         Status registers       CPS, MRS, MSR, RFE, SRS, LDM (3)
         Data processing        ADCS, ADDS, ANDS, BICS, EORS, MOVS, MVNS, ORRS, RSBS,
                                RSCS, SBCS, SUBS
         Memory access          LDRBT, LDRT, STRBT, STRT

        ere are various load/store multiple instructions that access user mode registers when in
 privileged mode. However, these instructions are defined by the ARM architecture as unpre-
 dictable when executed in user mode, which means the result of the instruction cannot be relied
 upon. For example, one common implementation of an unpredictable instruction is that it is
 ignored by the processor and does not trap.
        Status register instructions relate to special ARM status registers, the Current Program
 Status Register (CPSR) and Saved Program Status Register (SPSR). CPSR specifies the cur-
 rent mode of the CPU and other state information, some of which is privileged. SPSR is a banked
 register available in a number of the privileged modes. e basic ARM protection mechanism
 works by copying the CPSR to the SPSR when the processor enters the respective privileged
 mode via an exception so that CPU state information at the time of the exception can be de-
 termined. Similarly, the SPSR is copied to the CPSR at various times to update the mode of
 the CPU as the preferred exception return mechanism. ere are three types of problems arising
 with these instructions. First, MRS can be used in any mode to read the CPSR and determine
     ²Although in ARMv8 terminology, what we refer to here as a mode is more precisely called an exception level, we will continue
      to use the term mode even when referring to ARMv8 to avoid architecture version-specific terminology and provide a more
      consistent comparison with other architectures.
                                                                     2.6. FURTHER READING          27
the CPU mode, although this is no longer the case for ARMv8. Second, CPS is used to write
the CPSR and change the CPU mode, but is ignored when executed in user mode. ird, other
status register instructions are unpredictable when executed in user mode. For example, LDM (3)
copies the SPSR into the CPSR as part of the instruction when executed in privileged mode, but
is unpredictable when executed in user mode.
       Almost all data processing instructions have a special version, which replaces the CPSR
with the SPSR in addition to their ALU operation. ese instructions are denoted by appending
an S to the normal instruction. ey are designed for exception return so that, for example, it is
possible to jump to userspace from a kernel and change modes at the same time. ese instructions
are unpredictable when executed in user mode.
       Memory access instructions access memory using a different CPU mode from the one be-
ing used for execution. e virtual memory system on ARM processors uses access permissions
to limit access to memory depending on the CPU mode. e architecture defines four instruc-
tions called load/store with translation that access memory using user mode access permissions
even though the CPU is in a privileged mode, which will therefore trap due to memory access
violations. However, when executed in user mode, these instructions behave as regular memory
access instructions. For example, when running the OS kernel in user mode as part of a VM, the
semantics of the instructions are different than when running the OS in kernel mode, so the OS
may not see the memory access faults it expects.

2.6     FURTHER READING

e proof in the Popek and Goldberg’s paper was done for an idealized uniprocessor, third-
generation architecture with a single virtual memory segment. Of course, current-generation ISAs
are much more complex: they support multiprocessor architectures with cache-coherency and
well-defined, subtle, memory consistency models. ey support virtual memory via paging, ei-
ther as an alternative to segmentation or in addition to segmentation. To make matters worse, the
devil is in the details, in particular on CISC architectures with their numerous legacy execution
modes and instructions.
       With those caveats, the proof-by-construction provides a framework to reason about vir-
tualization. e classification of control-sensitive and behavior-sensitive instructions is a helpful
guide to evaluate any modern computer architecture. Motivated readers are encouraged to read
the seminal paper from Popek and Goldberg in enough detail so that they can reason about known
architectures [143].
       e limitations of x86-32 were documented by Robin and Irvine [151]; the paper, however,
incorrectly concludes that no practical and secure virtualization solution can be built as a result.
Chapter 4 describes how Intel later relied on Popek and Goldberg’s theorem as a framework to
add virtualization support in x86-64 processors [171].
28   2. THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
        e limitations of ARMv6 and earlier ARM architectures were documented by Dall and
 Nieh [59]. Chapter 7 describes how ARM later added virtualization support in ARMv7 proces-
 sors [39] and how the architecture relates to Popek and Goldberg’s theorem.
