
                                  CHAPTER                      3

               Virtualization without
               Architectural Support
is chapter is about the past. Practitioners who are only interested in understanding how virtual-
ization operates on contemporary hardware and hypervisors may be tempted to skip to Chapter 4.
       However, the past does remain relevant to any computer scientist who needs to understand
how we got to today’s situation, and to those interested in the specific techniques developed in
an earlier era. Indeed, many of the software techniques precedently developed have applications
outside of virtualization. In addition, computer architects reading this chapter will get an appre-
ciation of the unanticipated consequences of architectural decisions made both before and after
the introduction of hardware support for virtualization. Case in point, both VMware and Xen
relied on segmentation for protection on 32-bit architectures, as we will explain in this chapter.
Segmentation was removed with the introduction of VT-x on x86-64 as it was no longer needed
to build hypervisors. However, segmentation had other applications, e.g., to provide protection
to lightweight virtual machines such as VX32 [71] and the original Google Native Client [190].
       e violations of the Popek and Goldberg theorem for MIPS, x86-32, and ARM were
previously described in §2.5. As a direct consequence of these violations, no hypervisor—at
least no hypervisor built using the techniques anticipated by Popek and Golberg of trap-and-
emulate combined with direct execution—can be built to simultaneously address the equiva-
lence, safety, and performance requirements. is chapter describes how three systems—Disco,
VMware Workstation, and Xen—each use different techniques or made different tradeoffs be-
tween equivalence, safety, and performance to work around the limitations of the theorem.
       Table 3.1 provides a map to the rest of this chapter. Each section presents, as a case study,
the salient features of a particular hypervisor, and the sections are ordered chronologically with
respect to the introduction of each system.

3.1     DISCO
Disco [44, 81] was a research hypervisor designed for the Stanford FLASH multiprocessor [117]
built using MIPS [85] processors. Disco is credited for its historical role in the resurgence of
virtual machines [2].
       e primary motivation for Disco was the inability for operating systems to readily take
advantage of new hardware trends. In the case of FLASH, the innovation was scalable shared-
memory multiprocessors. Although research groups had demonstrated that prototype operating
Table 3.1: Case studies of hypervisors designed for architectures with no virtualization support

                   Disco             VMware                    Xen                 KVM for ARM
                                     Workstation
     Architecture MIPS               x86-32                    x86-32              ARMv5
     Hyp type     Type-1             Type-2 (§4.2.4)           Type-1 with         Type-2 (§4.5)
                                                               dom0 (§4.4)
     Equivalence   Requires modi-    Binary-compatible         Required mod-       Required modi-
                   fied kernel       with selected kernels     ified (paravirtu-   fied (lightweight
                                                               alized) kernels     paravirtualized
                                                               (§4.3)              kernels (§4.5)
     Safety      Via de-privileged   Via dynamic binary        Via de-privileged   Via de-privileged
                 execution using     translation; isolation    execution with      execution using
                 strictly virtual-   achieved via segment      safe access to      strictly virtual-
                 ized resources      truncation                physical names      ized resources
     Performance Via localized       By combining direct       Via paravirtual-    Via paravirtual-
                 kernel changes      execution (or appli-      ization of CPU      ization of CPU
                 and L2TLB           castions) with adap-      and IO interac-     and IO interac-
                 (§4.1.2)            tive dynamic binary       tions               tions
                                     translation (§4.2.3)

 systems could scale and address fault-containment challenges [47, 172], these designs required
 significant OS changes. In particular, scalability was achieved by the partitioning of the system
 into scalable units that communicated with each other like a distributed system. In addition,
 machines such as FLASH had a non-uniform memory architecture, which required additional
 complex changes within the virtual memory subsystem of the operating system [175]. So, even
 though prototypes could be built, the complexity of the approach made their relevance question-
 able.
        Disco addressed this same problem very differently, by developing a new twist on the rel-
 atively old idea of hypervisors and virtual machines. Rather than attempting to modify existing
 operating systems to run on scalable shared-memory multiprocessors, Disco inserted an additional
 layer of software between the hardware and the operating system. In this design, the hypervisor
 handled the changes required to support scalable shared-memory computing, in particular re-
 source management and transparent resource sharing (described in the original paper) and fault
 containment, described in Cellular Disco [81].
        Disco was architected around the traditional trap-and-emulate approach formalized by
 Popek and Goldberg. Disco itself runs in kernel mode; guest operating systems (which were de-
                                                                                     3.1. DISCO    31
signed to run in kernel model) run in supervisor mode, and applications run in user mode. Disco
handled the equivalence, safety, and performance requirements as follows:

Equivalence: Disco did not attempt to run binary-compatible kernels as guest operating sys-
tems. MIPS instructions are location-sensitive as a consequence of the hardcoded virtual mem-
ory segment ranges. Unfortunately, many MIPS operating systems, including IRIX 5.3, place
the kernel code and data in the KSEG0 segment, which is not accessible in supervisor mode (see
§2.5.1). As a result, Disco requires that the operating system be relocated from the unmapped
segment of the virtual machines (KSEG0) and into a portion of the mapped supervisor segment of
the MIPS processor (KSSEG). Making these changes to IRIX required modifying two header files
that describe the virtual address space layout, changing the linking options, as well as 15 assembly
statements. Unfortunately, this meant that IRIX had to be entirely re-compiled to run on Disco.

Safety: Disco isolated the VM without making assumptions about the guest. It relied on virtual
memory and the MIPS’ three privilege levels (kernel, supervisor, user) to protect the hypervisor
from the VM, and the VM’s guest operating system from its applications. Specifically, supervisor
mode code (i.e., the guest operating system) cannot issue privileged instructions, which trigger
traps. Disco virtualized all resources and hid the physical names from the VM, e.g., the VM only
operated with guest-physical memory without any visibility into host-physical mappings. Disco’s
approach to memory management is discussed in §3.1.3.

Performance: In their idealized model, Popek and Goldberg assumed that traps were rare, and
therefore that the performance requirement can be met as long as the guest instructions run
directly on the processor and the hypervisor handles the traps efficiently. is assumption does
not hold on RISC architectures such as MIPS. To address this, Disco introduced special memory
pages as an alternative to read-only privileged registers, hypercalls (see §3.1.1) and a larger TLB
(see §3.1.2).

3.1.1 HYPERCALLS
In a strict approach to virtualization, the guest operating system runs identically in a virtual ma-
chine as it would on actual hardware. Disco, because of the limitations of MIPS, requires that its
guest kernels be recompiled anyway. Disco relied on special memory pages to eliminate having to
take a trap on every privileged register access, as this can cause significant overheads when running
kernel code such as synchronization routines and trap handlers that frequently access privileged
registers. To reduce this overhead, Disco augments the instruction set architecture through special
pages in the address space containing frequently accessed privileged registers. e guest operat-
ing system is then patched in a handful of locations to convert certain privileged instructions that
access these registers into regular load instructions.
       Disco further deviates from the strict approach through its use of hypercalls. A hypercall
is a higher-level command issued by the guest operating system to the hypervisor. It is analogous
 to a system call, which is issued by the application to the operating system. Hypercalls are used to
 provide higher-level information, in particular around the use of memory resources. For example,
 Disco has a hypercall to free a guest-physical page. is is called by the guest whenever a page
 is put on the operating system’s free list. To the virtual machine, the only side effect is that the
 content of that page will be zeroed out upon next use. To the global system, however, this provides
 the ability to substantially reduce the global host-physical memory footprint of the consolidated
 workload.

 3.1.2 THE L2TLB
 Popek and Golberg assumed that traps resulting from the de-privileged execution of the guest op-
 erating systems would be sufficiently rare that the hypervisor’s trap-and-emulate approach would
 not cause significant performance problems. is was a reasonable assumption in mainframe-era
 computers characterized by complex privileged instructions issued relatively rarely during oper-
 ating system execution.
        e Popek/Goldberg further model assumed that virtual memory was implemented
 through segmentation. MIPS implements virtual memory through paging, with TLB misses han-
 dled in software by a TLB miss handler. Processors of that era had small TLBs (e.g., with ? 64
 entries), leading to frequent misses. As a result, the TLB itself was virtualized with low overheads
 to meet the performance requirement of virtualization.
        Software-reloaded TLBs introduce a few complications. First, the page table format is
 defined by the operating system, and not the architecture. An OS-agnostic hypervisor would
 therefore be incapable of handling a TLB miss directly. Instead, the hypervisor has to transfer ex-
 ecution to the guest’s TLB miss handler. Unfortunately, that sequence typically contains multiple
 privileged instructions, causing high virtualization overheads. Second, a workload executing on
 top of Disco will suffer an increased number of TLB misses since the TLB is additionally used
 for all operating system references (now using KSSEG rather than KSEG0). ird, virtualization
 introduces an additional level of indirection between guest-physical and host-physical memory,
 with each virtual machine having its own guest-physical address space.
        To lessen the performance impact, Disco cached recent virtual-to-host physical translations
 in a second-level software TLB (or L2TLB). On each TLB miss, Disco’s TLB miss handler first
 consults the second-level TLB. If it finds a matching virtual address it can simply place the cached
 mapping in the hardware TLB, otherwise it forwards the TLB miss exception to the operating
 system running on the virtual machine. e effect of this optimization is that virtual machines
 appear to have much larger TLBs than the MIPS processors.
        Each virtual CPU has its own L2TLB, which replaces the original TLB in the architecture
 of the virtual machine. e only visible change to the architecture is the number of entries in
 the TLB itself. Fortunately, the impact on operating systems is very contained. In fact, the only
 complication from such a large TLB was the need for the operating system to recycle address
 space identifiers associated with processes, the details of which can be found in [44].
                                                                                    3.1. DISCO    33
3.1.3 VIRTUALIZING PHYSICAL MEMORY
e primary research motivation of Disco was to provide efficient resource management on top
of a scalable shared-memory multiprocessor. One goal was to ensure that a distributed workload
running on a cluster of virtual machines would have comparable memory usage patterns as the
same workload running as a collection of processes on a non-virtualized deployment. Fortunately,
the additional level of indirection between guest-physical and host-physical memory provides the
enabling mechanism to solve this problem as long as host-physical names are not visible to the
VM. en, the mapping between guest-physical and host-physical can take many forms and
change over time without impacting the execution of the VM. In the case of Disco, mappings
could change as the result of either (1) transparent page migration and replication, which improve
CC-NUMA locality or (2) transparent memory sharing, which reduced overall memory pressure
and disk I/O bandwidth. In later commercial systems, mappings would change as the result of
memory ballooning and content-based page sharing [177].
       In its most basic form, each host-physical page (of the machine) is used by at most one
guest-physical page of a single virtual machine. However, Disco’s memory management mecha-
nisms enabled three additional use cases:

Many-to-one mappings: Disco implemented a copy-on-write mechanism that operates within
and across virtual machines. As in the well-known copy-on-write mechanism of operating sys-
tems, corresponding entries are inserted read-only into the TLB. Upon a page fault, due to a
legitimate write by the virtual machine (application or operating system), the hypervisor simply
copies the content to a newly allocated host-physical page. e mechanism was exposed transpar-
ently to the virtual machines through I/O operations: disk reads from the same sector and network
traffic between two virtual machines on the same server could be shared transparently. In addi-
tion, the mechanism was also exposed explicitly through a remap function with the semantics of
bcopy routine that used a hypercall to remap the page whenever possible.

One-to-many mappings: Disco provided transparent page replication for read-only pages that
suffer frequent cache misses. On a cc-NUMA machine such as FLASH, this optimization ensures
that such pages always suffer cache misses served by the local NUMA node rather than a remote
node. In Disco’s implementation, two virtual CPU of the same VM can therefore map the same
guest-physical page to two distinct host-physical pages.

NUMA migration: Unfortunately, page replication is only effective for read-only pages. When
a page is accessed (read and written) by a single NUMA node, Disco transparently migrates the
page to that node. To do so, it must allocate a new host-physical page and then atomically copy its
content, change the guest-physical to host-physical mapping and invalidate the hardware TLB
and L2TLB.

ese three mechanisms each require subtle interactions between the physical memory manage-
ment aspect, which manages the mappings between guest-physical and host-physical memory,
 and virtual memory and TLB miss handling logic. Disco’s core data structures were specifically
 designed with these in mind. For example, Disco maintains an inclusion property within the TLB
 hierarchy to efficiently determine when hardware invalidations are required. Here also, the details
 are in [44].

 3.2     VMWARE WORKSTATION—FULL VIRTUALIZATION
         ON X86-32
 VMware Workstation 1.0 was released in 1999 and was the first VMM for the 32-bit x86 ar-
 chitecture [45, 46, 65, 162]. As a commercial product, the company’s vision was a virtualization
 layer useful on commodity platforms built from x86-32 CPUs and primarily running the Mi-
 crosoft Windows operating systems (a.k.a. the WinTel platform). e benefits of virtualization
 could help address some of the known limitations of the WinTel platform, such as application
 interoperability, operating system migration, reliability, and security. In addition, virtualization
 could easily enable the co-existence of operating system alternatives, in particular Linux.
        With its focus on commercial, closed-source operating systems, the x86 computing envi-
 ronment was sufficiently different to require new approaches to virtualization; recompiling the
 kernel, as was previously done in Disco or later in Xen, was not an option. Furthermore, the x86
 industry had a disaggregated structure. Different companies independently developed x86 proces-
 sors, computers, operating systems, and applications. System integrators then combine these com-
 ponents into a supported “out-of-the-box” solution. For the x86 platform, virtualization would
 need to be inserted without changing either the existing hardware or the existing software of the
 platform. As a result, VMware Workstation was architected as:
     • a pure virtualization solution, compatible with existing, unmodified guest operating sys-
       tems; and
     • a type-2 hypervisor for existing Linux and Windows host operating systems.
       VMware Workstation adapted Popek and Goldberg’s three core attributes of a virtual ma-
 chine to x86-based target platform as follows:
 Equivalence: As discussed in §2.5.2, the x86-32 architecture has 17 virtualization-sensitive,
 non-privileged instructions, which violated the Popek and Golberg criteria for strict virtualiza-
 tion [151]. is ruled out the traditional trap-and-emulate approach to virtualization. Indeed,
 engineers from Intel Corporation were convinced their processors could not be virtualized in any
 practical sense [74]. VMware’s solution combines direct execution (used whenever possible and
 in particular to run applications) with dynamic binary translation (whenever required, and in par-
 ticular when running guest operating systems). Dynamic binary translation is an efficient form
 of emulation; see §3.2.2.
 Safety: A hypervisor must guarantee the isolation of the virtual machine without making any
 assumptions about the software running inside. VMware Workstation configured the hardware,
                            3.2. VMWARE WORKSTATION—FULL VIRTUALIZATION ON X86-32                35
and in particular made extensive use of segment truncation to isolate the virtual machines (see
§3.2.3). To simplify testing and reduce the likelihood of introducing security vulnerabilities in
untested code paths, VMware Workstation only supported the subset of the x86-32 architecture
necessary to run some specified, supported guest operating systems. Any unsupported requests,
e.g., attempting to execute code at %cpl¹=1 or %cpl=2, which never happens with any supported
guest operating system, would simply abort execution.

Performance: As a design goal, VMware aimed to run relevant workloads at near native speeds,
and in the worst case to run them on then-current processors with the same performance as if
they were running on the immediately prior generation of processors without virtualization. Such
performance levels would allow users to use virtual machines as effectively as real machines. is
was based on the observation that most x86 software wasn’t designed to only run on the latest
generation of CPUs.

To achieve such performance goals, VMware Workstation required total control over the hardware
during execution, despite its type-2 architecture and the presence of a host operating system.
§3.2.3 describes how the segment table and the CPU are configured to reduce the overheads of
the dynamic binary translator. §3.2.4 describes the modular design of the type-2 hypervisor into
three distinct components: a user-level process of the host operating system, a kernel module
within the host operating system and the VMware VMM, which runs in total control of the
hardware. is is enabled by the world switch, which gives the VMware VMM total control
in co-location with the host operating system. Finally, §3.2.5 describes shadow paging, which
allows the virtual machine (including the guest operating system) to directly use the MMU of
the underlying hardware.

3.2.1 X86-32 FUNDAMENTALS
A short introduction to the x86-32 architecture is required before explaining how VMware vir-
tualized it. Readers already familiar with it can skip to the solution in §3.2.2. For the CPU, the
architecture specifies legacy and native execution mode, four privilege levels, and an additional
I/O privilege levels.

    • e processor has a native execution mode, called protected mode. It contains three ad-
      ditional non-native mode which are the legacy real, system management, and v8086
      modes.

    • In protected mode, the current privilege level (or cpl) separates kernel execution (%cpl=0)
      from user-level execution (%cpl>0). ere are four modes although in practice user-level
      code runs at %cpl=3 and the intermediate modes are unused.

    • e I/O privilege level (iopl) further allows user-level code to enable or disable interrupts
¹cpl=current privilege level in x86 protected mode, a.k.a. the ring
        As far as memory, the architecture includes both segmentation and paging. Segmentation
 is handled by six segment registers which correspond to code (%cs), stack (%ss), data (%ds), and
 extra segments (%es, %fs, %gs). Each segment defines through a base and a limit a portion
 of the 32-bit linear address. Paging then converts the linear address into a physical address. e
 x86-32 architecture specifies a three-level page table structure rooted at privilege register %cr3.
 On a TLB miss, the processor directly walks the page table structure and inserts the mapping in
 the TLB without relying on a software handler.

 3.2.2 VIRTUALIZING THE X86-32 CPU
 A hypervisor built for a virtualizable architecture uses the trap-and-emulate approach described
 by Popek and Goldberg. is technique is also known as direct execution (DE) as the VM in-
 structions directly execute on the processor. With a design goal to run unmodified guest operating
 systems on a non-virtualizable architecture, direct execution alone is not a strategy.
        An alternative would have been to employ an all emulation approach. e experience with
 the SimOS [153] machine simulator showed that the use of techniques such as dynamic binary
 translation (DBT) running in a user-level program could limit overheads of complete emulation
 to a 5? slowdown. While that was fast for a machine simulation environment, it was clearly
 inadequate for our performance requirements.
        VMware’s solution to this problem combined two key insights. First, although direct exe-
 cution could not be used to virtualize the entire x86 architecture, it could actually be employed
 most of the time, in particular to run applications. e second key insight was that by properly
 configuring the hardware, particularly by using the x86 segment protection mechanisms carefully,
 system code under dynamic binary translation could also run at near-native speeds; this will be
 discussed below in §3.2.3.
        Figure 3.1 shows the actual algorithm dynamically determining whether direct execution
 can be used or whether dynamic binary translation must be used [65]. e algorithm depends on
 the state of a few specific registers of the virtual machine and leads to the following decisions:

     • (line #1–#3): %cr0.pe is set only in protected mode and v8086 mode. DBT is required
       when the VM is in either real mode or system management mode. For example, the
       BIOS runs in real mode;

     • (line #4–#6): e x86 v8086 mode can always be used directly to virtualize guests in v8086
       mode using DE, e.g., to run MS-DOS emulation in Windows 95 [111];

     • (line #7–#9): DBT is required whenever the VM can control the interrupt flag. e disjunc-
       tion includes the common case when the guest executes in kernel mode execution (cpl=0),
       but also the rare case where a user-level process can establish critical regions by disabling
       interrupts (e.g., on Linux using the iopl(2) system call);
                      3.2. VMWARE WORKSTATION—FULL VIRTUALIZATION ON X86-32                       37

 Input:      Current state of the virtual CPU
 Output:     True if the direct execution subsystem may be used;
             False if binary translation must be used instead
 1: if Šcr0:pe then
 2:    return false;
 3: end if
 4: if ef lags:v8086 then
 5:    return true
 6: end if
 7: if .ef lags:i opl ? cpl/jj.Šef lags:if / then
 8:    return false;
 9: end if
10: for all seg     .cs; ds; ss; es; f s; gs/ do
11:    if “seg is not shadowed” then
12:       return false;
13:    end if
14: end for
15: return true

Figure 3.1: x86 virtualization engine selection algorithm.

   • (line #10–14): DBT is required whenever the hidden content any of the six segment de-
     scriptor registers is not recoverable from memory. is is a somewhat obscure corner-case
     that must be handled to correctly run Windows 95; and
   • DE can be used in the remaining cases, and in particular at user level when interrupts cannot
     be disabled.
       If we exclude the corner cases, the algorithm has the VMware VMM use DBT to execute
the guest operating system and DE to run the applications. is is good news since the amount
of kernel code is bounded, and most applications spend the majority of the execution time at user
level.
       is algorithm has two interesting properties: (i) it does not make any assumption on the
guest instructions that may execute in the future but instead executes in O.1/; and (ii) it can be
implemented in a handful of assembly instructions through a careful encoding of the state of the
virtual processor.
Formal considerations: Popek and Goldberg discuss a similar situation with their hybrid vir-
tual machines (see §2.3 and the 3rd theorem [143]), which applies to architectures in which all
user-sensitive instructions are privileged. e x86-32 architecture nearly falls into that category:
 sgdt, sidt, sldt, and smsw are the only non-privileged, user-sensitive instructions. Fortunately,
 even Intel’s manual describes them as available but not useful to applications [102]. In addition,
 segment truncation, which is used to isolate the VMware VMM, is visible to application via the
 lsl instruction. VMware Workstation’s use of direct execution violates the equivalence require-
 ment only, with few practical consequences other than to provide an easy way to determine if an
 application is running in a virtualized environment.

 3.2.3 THE VMWARE VMM AND ITS BINARY TRANSLATOR
 e main function of the VMM was to virtualize the CPU and the main memory. At its core,
 the VMware VMM combined a direct execution subsystem with a dynamic binary translator. In
 simple terms, direct execution was used to run the guest applications and the dynamic binary
 translator was used to run the guest operating systems.
        Dynamic binary translation (DBT) [84] is an efficient form of emulation. Rather than
 interpreting the instructions one by one, DBT compiles a group of instructions, often a basic
 block, into a fragment of executable code. e code is stored in a large buffer called the translation
 cache so that it can be reused multiple times. DBT comes with some well-known optimizations
 such as chaining, which allows for direct jumps between compiled fragments [53]. VMware relies
 on DBT so that, instead of executing or interpreting the original virtual machine instructions, the
 processor executed natively the corresponding translated sequence within the translation cache.
        e performance of DBT, and in particular of system-level DBT, is very sensitive to the
 configuration of the hardware. For example, Embra [184] suffers from a 5? slowdown largely
 due to the cost of MMU emulation. In general, DBT systems also runs in the same address
 space as the software they emulate. With VMware, the challenge was to ensure that the VMware
 VMM could share an address space safely with the virtual machine without being visible to the
 virtual machine, and to execute this with minimal performance overheads. Given that the x86
 architecture supported both segmentation-based and paging-based protection mechanisms, a so-
 lution might have used either one or both mechanisms. For example, operating systems that use
 the flat memory model only rely on paging (and not segmentation) to protect themselves from
 applications.
        e VMware VMM used segmentation, and segmentation only, for protection. e linear
 address space was statically divided into two regions, one for the virtual machine and one for the
 VMM. Virtual machine segments were truncated by the VMM to ensure that they did not overlap
 with the VMM itself.
        Figure 3.2 illustrates VMware’s use of segment truncation, with the example of a guest
 operating system that employs the flat memory model. Applications running at %cpl=3 ran with
 truncated segments, and were additionally restricted by their own operating systems from access-
 ing the guest operating system region using page protection.
        When running guest kernel code via binary translation, the hardware CPU was at %cpl=1.
 Binary translation introduced a new and specific challenge since translated code contained a mix
                       3.2. VMWARE WORKSTATION—FULL VIRTUALIZATION ON X86-32                         39
                                      %cs, %ds, %gs

      cpl = 3    userspace (direct execution)

                                            %ds                                     %cs, %gs

      cpl = 1                                              kernel code/data       VMM      TC

                                                                                  %cs, %ds, %gs

      cpl = 0                                                                     VMM

                             pte.us = 1                            pte.us = 0
                                           Linear Address Space
                                                                              0xffc00000

Figure 3.2: Using segment truncation to protect the VMware VMM [45]. In this example, the virtual
machine’s operating system is designed for the flat memory model. Applications run under direct
execution at user-level (cpl=3). e guest operating system kernel runs under binary translation, out
of the translation cache (TC), at cpl=1.

of instructions. Some needed to access either the VMM area (to access supporting VMM data
structures), while others needed to access the virtual machine’s portion of the linear address space.
       e solution was to rely on hardware protection instead of any run-time memory checks.
Specifically, the VMware VMM reserves one segment register, %gs, to always point to the VMM
area: instructions generated by the translator used the <gs> prefix to access the VMM area, and
the binary translator guaranteed (at translation time) that no virtual machine instructions would
ever use the <gs> prefix directly. Instead, translated code used %fs for virtual machine instructions
that originally had either an <fs> or <gs> prefix. e three remaining segments (%ss, %ds, %es)
were available for direct use (in their truncated version) by virtual machine instructions.
       Of course, virtual machine instructions may have had a legitimate, and even frequent, rea-
son to use addresses near the top of the linear address space, where the VMM actually resides. As
expected, segment truncation triggered a general protection fault for every such reference, which
can be emulated by the VMM. To reduce the number of such traps, VMware Workstation relied
on adaptive binary translation as an optimization to eliminate most general protection faults at
run-time. Adaptive binary translation is premised on the notion that the same few locations in
the guest kernel cause nearly all such general protection faults. It re-translates the basic block and
replaces the original instruction (that causes the trap) with a specific sequence that safely emulates
the memory access without causing the trap.
        Figure 3.2 also illustrates the role of page-based protection (pte.us). Although not used to
 protect the VMM from the virtual machine, it is used to protect the guest operating system from
 its applications. e solution is straightforward: the pte.us flag in the actual page tables was the
 same as the one in the original guest page table. Guest application code, running at %cpl=3, was
 restricted by the hardware to access only pages with pte.us=1. Guest kernel code, running under
 binary translation at %cpl=1, did not have the restriction.

 3.2.4 THE ROLE OF THE HOST OPERATING SYSTEM
 VMware Workstation is a type-2 hypervisor that appears to run on top of a host operating system
 such as Linux or Windows, when in fact the hypervisor, and specifically the VMware VMM, has
 full control of the CPU when it executes the virtual machine [46, 162]. Figure 3.3 illustrates
 the hosted architecture of VMware Workstation, which consists of three components: (i) a user-
 level program (VMX), responsible for all interactions with the end-user and the host operating
 system, in particular for I/O emulation purposes; (ii) a small device driver installed within the
 kernel (VMM Driver); and (iii) the VMware VMM, which runs at the same level as the host
 operating system, but in a disjoint environment in which the host operating system has been
 temporarily suspended and removed from virtual memory.

                                   VMX
                   Any
                   Proc.                         Emulator                Virtual Machine

                                                                                                  User-level
                                        AIO

                   Host OS
                                                          5
                                                  ioctl
                               4
                            scsi
      Disk                 driver
                                                   VMM world

                                                                                                  System-level
                                                   Driver switch
                                                                   VMM
                                   int handler              2
                           3                                                        int handler
         CPU
        idtr
               1
                               Host OS Context                       VMM Context

 Figure 3.3: e VMware Hosted Architecture [45]. VMware Workstation consists of the three
 shaded components. e figure is split vertically between host operating system context and VMM
 context, and horizontally between system-level and user-level execution.
                      3.2. VMWARE WORKSTATION—FULL VIRTUALIZATION ON X86-32                         41
        e world switch is the low-level mechanism that frees the VMware VMM from any in-
terference from the host operating system, and vice-versa. Similar to a traditional context switch,
which provides the low-level operating system mechanism that loads the context of a process, the
world switch loads and restores the VMware VMM context, as well as the reverse mechanism that
restores the host operating system context. e difference between a traditional context switch
and the world switch is its scope: the context switch only concerns itself with callee-saved reg-
isters, the stack, and the address space and can furthermore assume that the kernel is identically
mapped in the outgoing and incoming address spaces. In contrast, the world switch must save
everything, including the x86-32 segment descriptor tables and the interrupt descriptor tables,
and must assume disjoint address spaces.
        Although subtle in a number of ways, the implementation was quite efficient and very ro-
bust. It relied on two basic observations: first, any change of the linear-to-physical address map-
ping via an assignment to %cr3 required that at least one page—the one containing the current
instruction stream—had the same content in both the outgoing and incoming address spaces.
Otherwise, the instruction immediately following the assignment of %cr3 would be left undeter-
mined. e second observation is that certain system-level resources could be undefined as long
as the processor did not access them, e.g., the interrupt descriptor table (as long as interrupts are
disabled) and the segment descriptor tables (as long as there are no segment assignments). By
undefined, we mean that their respective registers (%idtr and %gdtr) could point temporarily to
a linear address that contained a random, or even an invalid page. With these two observations,
VMware developed a carefully crafted instruction sequence that saved the outgoing context and
restored an independent one. In an early version of VMware Workstation, the cross-page instruc-
tion sequence consisted of only 45 instructions executing symmetrically in both directions, with
disabled interrupts.
        Figure 3.3 puts the world switch into perspective by illustrating the sequence of steps that
occur when an external interrupt (e.g., a disk interrupt) occurs while the VMware VMM is in
total control of the hardware. is example highlights that fact that the host operating system is
really oblivious to the existence of the VMware VMM.
  1. e hardware interrupts the execution of the virtual machine. e interrupt descriptor table
     (%idtr) points to a VMware VMM interrupt handler.
  2. As the VMware VMM cannot handle I/O requests directly, the interrupt handler initiates
     a world switch back to the host operating system context.
  3. Within the host operating system, the VMM Driver implements the other end of the world
     switch. When the cause of the world switch is an external interrupt, the VMM Driver issues
     in software the same interrupt received in step #1.
  4. At this point, the host operating system handles the interrupt as if it had occurred in the
     normal host operating system context, and will call the appropriate subsystems, in this case
     the disk handler.
     5. After the interrupt has completed, execution resumes where it was interrupted, i.e., within
        the VMM Driver, which is understood by the host operating system as merely handling an
        ioctl system call. e ioctl completes and returns control back to the VMX application.
        is transition back to userspace allows the host operating system to make scheduling de-
        cisions, and the VMX application to process asynchronous I/O requests (AIO). To resume
        execution of the virtual machine, the VMX issues the next ioctl.

 3.2.5 VIRTUALIZING MEMORY
 is section describes how the VMware VMM virtualized the linear address space shared with
 the virtual machine, and how the VMM virtualized guest-physical memory and implemented a
 central mechanism called memory tracing.
        e VMM was responsible for creating and managing the page table structure, which was
 rooted at the hardware %cr3 register while executing in the VMM context. e challenge was in
 managing the hardware page table structure to reflect the composition of the page table mappings
 controlled by the guest operating system (linear to guest-physical) with the mappings controlled
 by the host operating system (guest-physical to host-physical) so that each resulting valid pte
 always pointed to a page previously locked in memory by the VMM Driver. is was a critical
 invariant to maintain at all times as to ensure the stability and correctness of the overall system.
 In addition, the VMM managed its own 4 MB address space.

 Memory tracing: Memory tracing provided a generic mechanism that allowed any subsystem
 of the VMM to register a trace on any particular page in guest physical memory, and be notified
 of all subsequent writes (and in rare cases reads) to that page. e mechanism was used by VMM
 subsystems to virtualize the MMU and the segment descriptor tables, to guarantee translation
 cache coherency, to protect the BIOS ROM of the virtual machine, and to emulate memory-
 mapped I/O devices. When composing a pte, the VMM respected the trace settings so that pages
 with a write-only trace were always inserted as read-only mappings in the hardware page table.
 Since a trace could be requested at any point in time, the system used the backmap mechanism
 to downgrade existing mappings when a new trace was installed. As a result of the downgrade
 of privileges, a subsequent access by any instruction to a traced page would trigger a page fault.
 e VMM emulated that instruction and then notified the requesting module with the specific
 details of the access, such as the offset within the page and the old and new values.
         Unfortunately, handling a page fault in software took close to 2000 cycles on the processors
 of the time, making this mechanism very expensive. Fortunately, nearly all traces were triggered
 by guest kernel code. Furthermore, there is an extreme degree of instruction locality in memory
 traces, and in particular only a handful of instructions of a kernel modified page table entries and
 triggered memory traces. For example, Windows 95 has only 22 such instruction locations. As
 with segment truncation, the DBT relied on adaptive binary translation to generate an alternative
 code sequence that avoided the page fault altogether.
                                   3.3. XEN—THE PARAVIRTUALIZATION ALTERNATIVE                    43
       is was not a mere optimization. As we will discuss later in §4.2.3, memory tracing is only
practical when used in conjunction with adaptive binary translation [3].

Shadow page tables: e first application of the memory tracing mechanism was actually the
MMU virtualization module itself, responsible for creating and maintaining the page table struc-
tures (pde, pte) used by the hardware.
        Like other architectures, the x86 architecture explicitly calls out the absence of any co-
herency guarantees between the processor’s hardware TLB and the page table tree. Rather, cer-
tain privileged instructions flush the TLB (e.g.,invlpg, mov %cr3). A naive virtual MMU
implementation would discard the entire page table on a TLB flush, and lazily enter mappings
as pages are accessed by the virtual machine. Unfortunately, this generates many more hardware
page faults, which are in order of magnitude more expensive to service than a TLB miss.
        So, instead, the VMM maintained a large set of shadow copies of the guest operating sys-
tem’s pde/pte pages, as shown in Figure 3.4. By putting a memory trace on the corresponding
original pages (in guest-physical memory), the VMM was able to ensure the coherency between a
very large number of guest pde/pte pages and their counterpart in the VMM. is use of shadow
page tables dramatically increased the number of valid page table mappings available to the vir-
tual machine at all times, even immediately after a context switch. In turn, this correspondingly
reduced the number of spurious page faults caused by out-of-date page mappings. is category
of page faults is generally referred to as hidden page faults since they are handled by the VMM
and not visible to the guest operating system. e VMM could also decide to remove a memory
trace (and of course the corresponding shadow page), e.g., when a heuristic determined that the
page was likely no longer used by the guest operating system as part of any page table.
        Figure 3.4 shows that shadowing is done on a page-by-page basis, rather than on an address
space by address space basis: the same pte pages can be used in multiple address spaces. In fact,
this is commonly used by all operating systems which map the kernel portion identically into all
address spaces. When such sharing occurred in the operating system, the corresponding shadow
page was also potentially shared in the shadow page table structures. e VMM shadowed multi-
ple pde pages, each potentially the root of a virtual machine address space. So even though the x86
architecture does not have a concept of address-space identifiers, the virtualization layer emulated
it.
        e figure also illustrates the special case of the top 4 MB of the address space which is
always defined by a distinct pte page. is portion of memory is reserved for the VMM itself,
and protected from any access by the virtual machine through segment truncation (see §3.2.3).

3.3     XEN—THE PARAVIRTUALIZATION ALTERNATIVE
Despite its many optimizations, VMware Workstation was viewed as an explicit trade-off between
equivalence and performance, and indeed performed poorly on many micro benchmarks and some
system-intensive workloads [27]. e use of dynamic binary translation and of shadow paging—
              PDE pages                                    PTE pages

                                              …
              …
              …                                              …
                                                                             …

                            …                                                                 VM
      cr3                   …

                                                                                           VMM
                                                …
               …
                                                              …
                                                                              …

                             …                                                            …
      cr3
                                                                                      VMM area

Figure 3.4: Using shadow page tables to virtualize memory [45]. e VMware VMM individually
 shadows pages of the virtual machine and constructs the actual linear address space used by the hard-
 ware. e top-most region is always reserved for the VMware VMM itself.

 required because of its equivalence goal—introduced a degree of atypical complexity to the current
 system software.
        Paravirtualization refers to hypervisors that sacrifice certain aspects of the equivalence
 property for a higher degree of efficiency or scalability. e term was introduced by the Denali
 isolation kernel in 2002 [182], a system designed to runs hundreds of concurrent lightweight
 virtual machines, each with a single address space. e term was the popularized by the Xen
 hypervisor [27]. Xen is the most influential open-source type-1 hypervisor for x86 architectures.
 Since its first release in 2003, Xen has gone through numerous iterations, in particular to take
 advantage of hardware support for virtualization.
        In its original form on x86-32 architectures, Xen relied on paravirtualization to simply
 undefine all of the 17 non-virtualizable instructions of §2.5.2 [151], which must not be used.
 As a replacement, Xen defines an alternate interrupt architecture which consists of explicit calls
 from the guest operating system to the hypervisor (called hypercalls) and additional memory-
 mapped system registers. e Xen hypervisor relies on this modified x86-32 architecture to run
 virtual machines using direct execution only. e architecture also exposes a simplified MMU
 architecture that directly, but safely, exposes host-physical memory to the guest operating system.
                                     3.3. XEN—THE PARAVIRTUALIZATION ALTERNATIVE                       45
e guest operating system combines virtual-to-guest-physical mappings with the guest-physical
to host-physical information readable from the hypervisor to generate virtual-to-host-physical
mappings, which are then passed down to the hypervisor for validation.
      Table 3.2 lists the paravirtualization x86 interface of Xen [27], i.e., the list of changes to the
underlying ISA exposed to virtual machines. ere are changes in terms of memory virtualization,
CPU virtualization and device I/O. As I/O is discussed later in the text (Chapter 6), we limit the
discussion here to the first two topics.

Table 3.2: Xen’s paravirtualized interface [27]

              Memory Management
 Segmentation Cannot install fully privileged segment descriptors and cannot overlap with the
              top end of the linear address space.
 Paging       Guest OS has direct read access to hardware page tables, but updates are
              batched and validated by the hypervisor. A domain may be allocated discontin-
              uous machine (aka host-physical) pages.
              CPU
 Protection   Guest OS must run at a lower privilege level than Xen.
 Exceptions   Guest OS must register a descriptor table for exception handlers with Xen.
              Aside from page faults, the handler remains the same.
 System calls Guest OS may install a “fast” handler for system calls, allowing direct calls
              from an application into its guest OS and avoiding indirection through Xen on
              every call.
 Interrupts   Hardware interrupts are replaced with a lightweight event system.
 Time         Each guest OS has a timer interface and is aware of both “real” and “virtual”
              time.

Memory management: Like VMware Workstation, Xen relies on segment truncation for pro-
tection. e Xen hypervisor is the only entity that runs at %cpl=0 and can configure the segment
descriptor tables. All segments available to virtual machines are truncated to exclude the top
64 MB of the linear address space. Xen runs out of that protected 64 MB region.
       Xen has a paravirtualized approach to the virtualization of the MMU: Each VM consists
of a contiguous guest-physical address space and a discontinuous set of host-physical pages. Both
namespaces are visible to the guest operating systems. e guest OS can directly read the hardware
page table structure accessed by the hardware CPU with PDE and PTE defined as host-physical
addresses. To change a mapping, the guest OS determines the new host-physical mapping, to be
validated by the hypervisor. Validations can be batched for performance. is approach is different
 from VMware Workstation, which relies on memory tracing to implement shadow paging, and
 hides the host-physical names from the VM.

 CPU: Xen’s simply replaces the 17 non-virtualizable instructions [151] with corresponding
 hypercalls which allow the guest to explicitly communicate with the hypervisor, e.g., to setup
 segment descriptors, disable interrupts, receive interrupt notification, and transition between
 userspace and the kernel. Non-virtualizable instructions are undefined and should not be used.
 With these changes, the augmented x86 architecture meets the Popek and Goldberg criteria, and
 Xen is architected as a trap-and-emulate hypervisor, unlike VMware.
        Xen uses the x86-32 rings for protection: Xen runs at %cpl=0. e guest operating systems
 run at %cpl=1 and applications at %cpl=3. Page protection bits (pte.us) are used to protect
 the guest OS from the applications. rough the combination of segment truncation and page
 protection bits, a single address space can safely combine the Xen hypervisor itself, the guest
 operating system and the currently running application.
        To eliminate unnecessary transitions via the hypervisor, the ISA extensions include the
 ability to perform fast system calls directly transitioning from the application to the guest OS.
 is insight was later picked up by the virtualization extension to reduce software overheads.

 3.4     DESIGNS OPTIONS FOR TYPE-1 HYPERVISORS
 §3.2.4 described the role of the host operating system in VMware Workstation, a type-2 hy-
 pervisor. We now discuss the approaches to type-1 hypervisor design used by VMware ESX
 Server [7, 177], Xen [27], and Microsoft Virtual Server.
        Figure 3.5 shows the two main approaches to building a type-1 hypervisor. In both cases,
 we first note that the hypervisor is running, at all times, on all CPUs of the system. is is a
 major architectural difference with the hosted architecture of VMware Workstation (see §3.2.4).
 VMware Workstation has an asymmetrical architecture with a world switch, which implies that
 no piece of software is loaded at all times in memory. In contrast, type-1 hypervisors are always
 present in memory, able to directly handle all processor traps and I/O interrupts. No world switch
 is required.
        e primary difference between flavors of type-1 hypervisors is whether the device drivers
 are embedded within the hypervisor or whether they run in a distinct, schedulable entity.
        VMware ESX Server provides high performance disk and network I/O by implementing
 an efficient path from the I/O requests from the applications running in the virtual machines
 down to the physical devices [7]. e drivers are part of the hypervisor. e same CPU and the
 same thread of control are involved in all interactions necessary to initiate I/O, which reduces
 latency.
        In contrast, the Xen and Microsoft Virtual Server do not include device drivers. Instead,
 they rely on a distinct, schedulable entity, called “dom0”, which runs with elevated privileges, and
 in particular the ability to run physical device drivers. dom0 is scheduled by Xen and its main
                                     3.5. LIGHTWEIGHT PARAVIRTUALIZATION ON ARM                    47

          Guest OS
        Disk       NIC
        driver    driver                                    dom0                Guest OS
                                                        Disk       NIC        Disk       NIC
                                                        driver    driver      driver    driver
       Disk         NIC
       emul        emul
       Disk         NIC
       Driver      Driver        Hypervisor                                          Hypervisor

           CPU                      CPU                     CPU                      CPU

                 Disk         NIC                                Disk          NIC

Figure 3.5: Two approaches to type-1 hypervisors: embedding drivers in the hypervisor (left) or
scheduling them in dom0 (right).

function is to perform the back-end of I/O operations on behalf of all virtual machines. e
virtual machines issue I/O request through asynchronous messages sent to dom0. is approach
has the advantage of simplicity and portability as device drivers run in a standard operating system
such as Linux (for Xen) or Windows (for Virtual Server). But it requires two distinct threads of
control. In practice, the virtual machine and dom0 typically run on distinct cores of the system,
and can take advantage of the natural overlap and asynchrony in I/O operations.

3.5     LIGHTWEIGHT PARAVIRTUALIZATION ON ARM
A downside to paravirtualization is that it can require detailed understanding of the guest operat-
ing system kernel to know how to modify its source code, and then requires ongoing maintenance
and development to maintain potentially heavily modified versions of operating systems that can
be run in virtual machines. Furthermore, the modifications are both architecture and operating
system dependent, which only further add to the maintenance burden.
       An alternative approach is lightweight paravirtualization [59]. Lightweight paravirtual-
ization is a script-based method to automatically modify the source code of a guest operating
system kernel to issue calls to the hypervisor instead of issuing sensitive instructions to enable a
trap-and-emulate virtualization solution. Lightweight paravirtualization is architecture specific,
but operating system independent. It is completely automated and requires no knowledge or un-
derstanding of the guest operating system kernel code.
48   3. VIRTUALIZATION WITHOUT ARCHITECTURAL SUPPORT
         Lightweight paravirtualization differs from Xen’s paravirtualization as it requires no knowl-
 edge of how the guest is engineered and can be applied automatically on any OS source tree
 compiled by GCC. For instance, Xen defines a whole new file in arch/arm/mm/pgtbl-xen.c,
 which contains functions based on other Xen macros to issue hypercalls regarding memory man-
 agement. Instead of existing kernel code, preprocessor conditionals are used to implement calls to
 these Xen functions in many places in the kernel code. Lightweight paravirtualization completely
 maintains the original kernel logic, which drastically reduces the engineering cost and makes the
 solution more suitable for test and development of existing kernel code.
         However, there is a performance tradeoff between lightweight paravirtualization and tra-
 ditional paravirtualization. e former simply replaces sensitive instructions with traps to the
 hypervisor, so that each sensitive instruction now traps and is effectively emulated by the hypervi-
 sor. If there are lots of sensitive instructions in critical paths, this can result in frequent traps and
 if traps are expensive, this can become a performance bottleneck. Traditional paravirtualization
 approaches typically optimize this further by replacing sections of code that may have multiple
 sensitive instructions with one paravirtualized hypercall to the hypervisor instead of repeated traps
 on each individual sensitive instruction, thereby improving performance.
         While the designers of Xen took a traditional paravirtualization approach for x86, a
 lightweight paravirtualization approach was viewed more favorably in the context of support-
 ing virtualization on ARM platforms. Two early efforts at building ARM hypervisors, KVM
 for ARM [59] and VMWare’s Mobile Virtualization Platform (MVP) [28], were based on
 lightweight paravirtualization to address the problem that the original ARM architecture was
 not virtualizable. e designers of these systems hypothesized that the trap costs on ARM were
 lower than on x86, and that ARM’s sensitive instructions occurred less frequently in critical code
 paths compared to x86 code, making a lightweight paravirtualization approach attractive.
         Let us take a closer look at how lightweight paravirtualization was done in KVM for ARM,
 which was originally built for version 5 of the ARM architecture. As will be discussed in detail in
 Chapter 4, KVM is a type-2 hypervisor integrated into Linux that was originally designed for ar-
 chitectures that had hardware support for virtualization. Although ARM originally did not have
 such architectural support, the dominance of Linux on ARM made KVM an attractive starting
 point for building an ARM hypervisor. Linux provided a large amount of widely supported soft-
 ware functionality that runs on ARM hardware. KVM for ARM was an approach that simplified
 the development of a hypervisor by combining the benefits of lightweight paravirtualization with
 existing Linux infrastructure support for ARM.
         To avoid the problems with sensitive non-privileged instructions, lightweight paravirtual-
 ization is used to slightly modify the guest kernel source code. ere was no need to worry about
 user space software as user space applications will execute in the same CPU mode as if they were
 executing directly on a physical machine. Sensitive instructions are not generated by standard
 C-compilers and are therefore only present in assembler files and inline assembly.
                                     3.5. LIGHTWEIGHT PARAVIRTUALIZATION ON ARM                     49
       KVM for ARM’s lightweight paravirtualization is done using an automated scripting
method to modify the guest kernel source code. e script is based on regular expressions and
has been tested on a number of kernel versions with success. e script supports inline assembler
syntax, assembler as part of preprocessor macros, and, assembler macros.
       It works by replacing sensitive non-privileged instructions with trap instructions and em-
ulating the sensitive instruction in software when handling the trap. However, KVM for ARM
must be able to retrieve the original sensitive instruction including its operands to be able to
emulate the sensitive instruction when handling a trap. KVM for ARM accomplishes this by
defining an encoding of all the sensitive non-privileged instructions and their operands into trap
instructions.
       e SWI instruction on ARM always traps and is normally used for making system calls.
e instruction contains a 24-bit immediate field (the payload), which can be used to encode
sensitive instructions. Unfortunately, the 24 bits are not quite enough to encode all the possible
sensitive non-privileged instructions and their operands. Some additional instructions that trap
are needed for the encoding.
       e ARM architecture defines coprocessor access instructions which are used to access
the coprocessor interface. is interface does not relate to an actual physical coprocessor, but is
merely used to extend the instruction set by transferring data between general purpose registers
and registers belonging to one of the sixteen possible coprocessors. For example, the architecture
always defines coprocessor number 15 which is called the system control coprocessor and controls
the virtual memory system. Coprocessor access instructions are sensitive and privileged, so they
will always trap, even for coprocessors that are not defined by the architecture. Only a few of the
coprocessors are defined and in use, so those that are not defined can be repurposed for encoding
sensitive non-privileged instructions. Specifically, coprocessors zero through seven are not in use
and repurposed by KVM for ARM by using the coprocessor load/store access instruction. Taken
together, the coprocessor load/store access instruction has 24 bits for its operands which can
be leveraged to encode the sensitive non-privileged instructions. e combination of the SWI
and coprocessor access instructions is sufficient to encode all possible sensitive non-privileged
instructions and their operands.
       e VMM needs to be able to distinguish between guest system calls and traps for sensitive
instructions. KVM for ARM makes the assumption that the guest kernel does not make system
calls to itself. Under this assumption, if the virtual CPU is in privileged mode, the payload is
simply interpreted and the encoded instruction is emulated. If the virtual CPU is in user mode,
the SWI instruction is considered as a system call made by the guest user space to the guest kernel.
       As discussed in §2.5.3, the ARM architecture defines 24 sensitive non-privileged instruc-
tions in total. KVM for ARM encodes the instructions by grouping them in 15 groups; some
groups contain many instructions and some only contain a single instruction. e upper 4 bits
in the SWI payload indexes which group the encoded instruction belongs to (see Table 3.3). is
leaves 20 bits to encode each type of instruction. Since there are 5 status register access functions
50   3. VIRTUALIZATION WITHOUT ARCHITECTURAL SUPPORT
 and they need at most 17 bits to encode their operands, they can be indexed to the same type and
 be sub-indexed using additional 3 bits. ere are 12 sensitive data processing instructions and
 they all use register 15 as the destination register and they all always have the S bit set (otherwise
 they are not sensitive). ey are indexed in two groups: one where the I bit is set and one where
 it’s clear. In this way, the data processing instructions need only 16 bits to encode their operands
 leaving 4 bits to sub-index the specific instruction out of the 12 possible. e sensitive load/store
 multiple and load/store with translation instructions are using 12 of the remaining 13 index values
 as can be seen in Table 3.3.

Table 3.3: Sensitive instruction encoding types

                         Index    Group/Instruction
                         0        Status register access instructions
                         1        LDM (2), P-bit clear
                         2        LDM (2), P-bit set
                         3        LDM (3), P-bit clear and W-bit clear
                         4        LDM (3), P-bit set and W-bit clear
                         5        LDM (3), P-bit clear and W-bit set
                         6        LDM (3), P-bit set and W-bit set
                         7        STM (2), P-bit set
                         8        STM (2), P-bit clear
                         9        LDRBT, I-bit clear
                         10       LDRT, I-bit clear
                         11       STRBT, I-bit clear
                         12       STRT, I-bit clear
                         13
                         14       Data processing instructions, I-bit clear
                         15       Data processing instructions, I-bit set

        In Table 3.3 only the versions of the load/store instructions with the I-bit clear are defined.
 is is due to a lack of available bits in the SWI payload. e versions with the I-bit set are encoded
 using the coprocessor load/store access instruction. When the I-bit is set, the load/store address is
 specified using an immediate value which requires more bits than when the I-bit is clear. Since the
 operands for coprocessor access instructions use 24 bits, 2 bits can be used to distinguish between
 the 4 sensitive load/store instructions. at leaves 22 bits to encode the instructions with the I-bit
 set, which is exactly what is needed.
                                                                       3.6. FURTHER READING          51
       An example may help illustrate the implementation of the KVM for ARM solution. Con-
sider this code in arch/arm/boot/compressed/head.S:
mrs       r2, cpsr       @ get current mode
tst       r2, #3         @ not user?
bne       not_angel
       e MRS instruction in line one is sensitive, since when executed as part of booting a guest, it
will simply return the hardware CPSR. However, KVM for ARM must make sure that it returns
the virtual CPSR instead. us, it can be replaced with a SWI instruction as follows:
swi       0x022000       @ get current mode
tst       r2, #3         @ not user?
bne       not_angel
       When the SWI instruction in line one above generates a trap, KVM for ARM loads the
instruction from memory, decodes it, emulates it, and finally returns to line two.
       KVM for ARM using lightweight paravirtualization was implemented for ARMv5 and
ARMv6, but never merged into the mainline Linux kernel. With the introduction of hardware
virtualization support in ARMv7, a new KVM/ARM was designed to leverage ARM hardware
virtualization extensions as discussed in Chapter 7, which became the fully supported Linux ARM
hypervisor now available in mainline Linux.

3.6     FURTHER READING
e original VMware Workstation hypervisor is described in detail in [45]. Other papers describe
key aspects of VMware Workstation, including its I/O and networking performance [162], the
virtualization of its GPU [66]. Since their introduction, VMware Workstation has matured and
successfully transitioned to take advantage of the emerging architectural support for virtualization
of VT-x and AMD-v. Agesen et al. describe the evolution of VMware’s approach to virtualization
(see [4]).
       Similarly, Pratt et al. describe the evolution of Xen, and in particular the transition from
paravirtualization to full-virtualization (on machines with hardware support for it) [146]. Chis-
nal’s 2007 textbook “e Definitive Guide to the Xen Hypervisor” provides a detailed description
of the internals of Xen, both before and after the adoption of hardware virtualization [50].
       VMware ESX Server (now called vSphere) is a commercial type-1 hypervisor. It shares the
same VMware VMM subsystem as VMware Workstation, but packaged as part of a type-1 hyper-
visor that schedules I/O, CPU, and memory resources directly [7, 82, 177] and can live migrate
VMs [135]. We particularly recommend Waldspurger’s description of ESX memory manage-
ment [177], which has been recognized by an ACM SIGOPS Hall of Fame Award [2].
       KVM for ARM is described in more detail in [59] and VMware’s MVP is described in [28].
An abandoned port of Xen for ARM [91] required comprehensive modifications to the guest
52   3. VIRTUALIZATION WITHOUT ARCHITECTURAL SUPPORT
 kernel, and was never fully developed. None of these paravirtualization approaches could run
 unmodified guest OSes. ese approaches have been superseded by solutions leveraging ARM
 hardware virtualization support, first introduced in ARMv7, as will be discussed in Chapter 7.
