
                                         CHAPTER                              4

          x86-64: CPU Virtualization
                  with VT-x
We now describe in a sequence of three chapters the architectural support for virtualization in
x86-64 processors. is architectural support is the combination of innovation in the CPU (Chap-
ter 4), MMU (Chapter 5), and I/O subsystem (Chapter 6).
       is chapter describes VT-x, the Intel technology that virtualizes the CPU itself.¹ §4.1
first describes the key requirements set forth by Intel engineers in designing VT-x. §4.2 describes
the approach to CPU virtualization, the concept of root and non-root modes, and how the ar-
chitecture relates to the Popek and Goldberg theorem. §4.3 uses KVM—the Linux kernel virtual
machine—as its case study on how to build a hypervisor that is explicitly designed to assume
hardware support for virtualization. §4.4 discusses the performance implications of CPU virtual-
ization, and in particular the implementation cost of atomic transitions between modes. Finally,
like all chapters, we close with pointers for further reading.

4.1       DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Intel Virtualization Technology, generally known as VT-x [171], was introduced in 2005 with
the primary objective to provide architectural support for virtualization.

           A central design goal for Intel Virtualization Technology is to eliminate
           the need for CPU paravirtualization and binary translation techniques, and
           thereby enable the implementation of VMMs that can support a broad range
           of unmodified guest operating systems while maintaining high levels of per-
           formance.
                                                      R. Uhlig et al., IEEE Computer, 2005 [171]
      .

In stating this goal, Intel engineers observed that existing techniques such as paravirtualization
and dynamic binary translation faced some hard technical challenges in virtualizing the existing
x86 architecture. Uhlig et al. [171] lists the following specific challenges to approaches using
software techniques.
¹AMD’s approach to virtualization, called AMD-v, is architecturally similar to VT-x.
54   4. X86-64: CPU VIRTUALIZATION WITH VT-X
      • Ring aliasing and compression: guest kernel code designed to run at %cpl=0 must use the
        remaining three rings to guarantee isolation. is creates an alias as at least two distinct
        guest levels must use the same actual ring. Yet, software running in these two rings must be
        protected from each other according to the specification of the architecture.
      • Address space compression: the hypervisor must be somewhere in the linear address space
        in a portion that the guest software cannot access or use.
      • Non-faulting access to privileged state: some of the infamous Pentium 17 [151] instruc-
        tions provide read-only access to privileged state and are behavior-sensitive, e.g., the location
        in linear memory of the interrupt descriptor table (sidt), global descriptor table (sgdt), etc.
        ese structures are controlled by the hypervisor and will be in a different location than the
        guest operating system specifies.
      • Unnecessary impact of guest transitions: to address the efficiency criteria, it is essential that
        sensitive instructions (which must trigger a transition) be rare in practice. Unfortunately,
        modern operating systems rely extensively on instructions that are privilege-level sensitive,
        e.g., to suspend interrupts within critical regions, or to transition between kernel and user
        mode. Ideally, such instructions would not be sensitive to virtualization.
      • Interrupt virtualization: the status of the interrupt flag (%eflags.if) is visible to unpriv-
        ileged instructions (pushf). Since the flag can never be cleared when the guest is running
        as this would violate safety, any direct use of that instruction by the guest will lead to incor-
        rect behavior. Furthermore, the popf instruction is control-sensitive as its semantic differs
        based on whether the CPU can control interrupts (i.e., whether %cpl? %eflags.iopl).
      • Access to hidden state: the x86-32 architecture includes some “hidden” state, originally
        loaded from memory, but inaccessible to software if the contents in memory changed. For
        example, the 32-bit segment registers are hidden: they are loaded from memory into the
        processor, but cannot be retrieved from the processor back into a general-purpose register
        or memory. As long as the contents in memory does not change, a segment register can be
        reloaded back into the processor, e.g., after a trap resulting from virtualization and hidden
        from the guest operating system. However, should the memory content ever change, that
        segment register can never be reloaded. Unfortunately, some legacy operating systems, and
        in particular Windows 95, modify the content of the segment descriptor table in some
        critical regions and yet explicitly rely on these very specific x86-32 semantics.
 Of course, the evidence from the systems described in Chapter 3 suggests that these challenges
 can be mitigated in practice, but not entirely eliminated. For example, the address space com-
 pression challenge impacts performance whenever the top of the linear memory is used by the
 virtual machine: some guest operating systems may perform very poorly as a consequence. More
 concerning, a subset of the infamous “Pentium 17” instructions always return incorrect results to
 applications running at user-level, a limitation to equivalence [45].
      In designing VT-x, Intel’s central design goal is to fully meet the requirements of the Popek
and Goldberg theorem, with the explicit goal that virtual machines running on top of a VT-x-
based hypervisor meet the following three core attributes of equivalence, safety, and performance.

Equivalence: Intel’s architects designed VT-x to provide absolute architectural compatibility
between the virtualized hardware and the underlying hardware, which was furthermore to be
backward-compatible with the legacy x86-32 and x86-64 ISA. is is much more ambitious than
VMware Workstation, which was pragmatically focused on a set of well-defined guest operating
systems, and of paravirtualization approaches such as Xen, which required kernel modifications
and in practice only applied to open-source operating systems.

Safety: Prior hypervisors based on dynamic binary translation or paravirtualization provided
security and isolation, but through a reasoning that involved complex invariants that had to be
maintained in software, such as the correct use of segmentation for protection. rough archi-
tectural support specifically designed for virtualization, a much-simplified hypervisor can provide
the same characteristics with a much smaller code base. is reduces the potential attack surface
on the hypervisor and the risk of software vulnerabilities.

Performance: Ironically, an increase in performance over existing, state-of-the-art virtualization
techniques was not a release goal with the first-generation hardware support for virtualization.
Instead, the goal at the beginning was merely to setup the appropriate architecture and a roadmap
for ongoing improvements at the architectural and micro-architectural level. Indeed, the first-
generation processors with hardware support for virtualization were not competitive with state-
of-the-art solutions using DBT [3].

4.2     THE VT-X ARCHITECTURE
e architecture of VT-x is based on a central design decision: do not change the semantics of
individual instructions of the ISA. is includes of course the instructions that most obviously
violate the virtualization principle. As a corollary, the architecture does not attempt to separately
address the individual aspects of the architecture that limited virtualization, as described in §4.1.
Instead, VT-x duplicates the entire architecturally visible state of the processor and introduces
a new mode of execution: the root mode. Hypervisors and host operating systems run in root
mode whereas virtual machines execute in non-root mode. is architectural extension has the
following properties.

   • e processor is at any point in time either in root mode or in non-root mode. e transi-
     tions are atomic, meaning that a single instruction or trap can transition from one mode to
     the other. is differs notably from the conventional implementation of a context switch
     by an operating system, which requires a convoluted instruction sequence.
      • e root mode can only be detected by executing specific new instructions, which are only
        available in root mode. In particular, it cannot be inferred through any other mechanisms or
        memory access. is is necessary to ensure that root-mode execution itself can be virtualized
        and to support recursive virtualization.

      • is new mode (root vs. non-root) is only used for virtualization. It is orthogonal to all other
        modes of execution of the CPU (e.g., real mode, v8086 mode, protected mode), which are
        available in both modes. It is also orthogonal to the protection levels of protected mode
        (e.g%cpl=0--%cpl=3) with all four levels separately available to each mode.

      • Each mode defines its own distinct, complete 64-bit linear address space. Each address
        space is defined by a distinct page table tree with a distinct page table register. Only the
        address space corresponding to the current mode is active in the TLB, and the TLB changes
        atomically as part of the transitions.

      • Each mode has its own interrupt flag. In particular, software in non-root mode can freely
        manipulate the interrupt flags (%eflags.if). External interrupts are generally delivered in
        root mode and trigger a transition from non-root mode if necessary. e transition occurs
        even when non-root interrupts are disabled.

 Figure 4.1 illustrates how the central design of VT-x is intended to be used by system software:
 in root mode, software has access to the full (non-virtualized) architecture of x86-64, including
 all privilege rings of protected mode (shown in the figure) as well as the legacy modes of exe-
 cution (not shown). is provides backward compatibility in the architecture, and consequently
 for software, e.g., a host operating system will typically run in root-%cpl=0 and its application
 programs will run in root-%cpl=3. e hypervisor also runs in root-%cpl=0 where it can is-
 sue new privileged instructions to enter into non-root mode. Figure 4.1 also shows that virtual
 machines execute with the full duplicate of privilege rings: each guest operating system runs in
 non-root-%cpl=0 and applications run in non-root-%cpl=3.

 4.2.1 VT-X AND THE POPEK/GOLDBERG THEOREM
 Recall Popek and Goldberg’s central virtualization theorem, discussed in §2.2.

            eorem 1 [143]: For any conventional third-generation computer, a virtual
            machine monitor may be constructed if the set of sensitive instructions for
            that computer is a subset of the set of privileged instructions.
       .

 e VT-x architecture meets the criteria of the theorem, but through a significant departure from
 the original model proposed to demonstrate the theorem. Popek and Goldberg identified the key
 criteria for virtualization. rough their proof-by-construction of the theorem, they furthermore
                     Host                              VM 1                                    VM 2

                                               cpl 3            user                   cpl 3            user

                                    non-root

                                                                            non-root
                                               cpl 2                                   cpl 2
                                               cpl 1                                   cpl 1
                                               cpl 0          Guest OS                 cpl 0          Guest OS

             cpl 3          user
             cpl 2
  root

             cpl 1
             cpl 0                             Hypervisor and/or Host Operating System

Figure 4.1: Standard use by hypervisors of VT-x root and non-root modes.

demonstrated that virtualization was achievable without requiring any additional hardware con-
straints than those necessary to support protected operating systems, and specifically by using
address space compression and ring aliasing (running both the guest operating system and appli-
cations at user level) to build the hypervisor.
       Intel pragmatically took a different path by duplicating the entire state of the processor
and introducing the dedicated root-mode. In particular, the full duplication of the architecture
was motivated by the need to ensure backward compatibility for the ISA and full equivalence
for virtualized workloads [171]. Terms must therefore be redefined to convincingly express that
VT-x follows the Popek/Goldberg criteria. e corresponding core VT-x design principle can be
informally framed as follows.

               In an architecture with root and non-root modes of execution and a full dupli-
               cate of processor state, a hypervisor may be constructed if all sensitive instruc-
               tions (according to the non-virtualizable legacy architecture) are root-mode
               privileged.

               When executing in non-root mode, all root-mode-privileged instructions are
               either (i) implemented by the processor, with the requirement that they oper-
               ate exclusively on the non-root duplicate of the processor or (ii) cause a trap.
         .

We make three observations.

  1. Unlike the original Popek and Goldberg theorem, this rephrasing does not take into ac-
     count whether instructions are privileged or not (as defined by their availability to software
        running at %cpl>0), but instead only takes into consideration the orthogonal question of
        whether they are root-mode privileged.

     2. ese traps are sufficient to meet the equivalence and safety criteria. is is similar to the
        original theorem.

     3. However, reducing transitions by implementing certain sensitive instructions in hardware
        is necessary to meet the performance criteria for virtualization.

        A few examples help illustrate how the notion of sensitivity is orthogonal to that of (reg-
 ular) privilege. First, a guest operating system running in non-root-%cpl=0 will issue certain
 privileged instructions such as reading or even writing control registers: these instructions must
 operate on the non-root duplicate of the processor state. Following the principle, two imple-
 mentations are possible in this situation: (i) either execute the instruction in hardware onto the
 non-root context since the entire processor state is duplicated. e hypervisor must not be in-
 formed since the hardware fully handles the instructions; and (ii) or take a trap from non-root
 mode, which allows a hypervisor to emulate the instruction.
        e former is preferred from a performance perspective as it reduces the number of transi-
 tions. Obviously, it requires specific architectural support by the processor. e implementation
 decision is therefore a tradeoff between hardware complexity and overall performance.
        As a second example, the instructions that manipulate the interrupt flag (cli, sti, popf)
 are sensitive, in particular since other instructions can actually leak information about the inter-
 rupt flag itself onto memory (pushf). However, recall that these four instructions are not privi-
 leged instructions in the architecture, i.e., they are available to user-level applications, at least in
 some cases. Given their high execution rate in modern kernels, their non-root implementation is
 handled directly by the processor.
        As a third example, some instructions available at user-level such as sgdt and sidt, are
 known to be behavior-sensitive. ese rare instructions are not privileged, yet virtualization-
 sensitive. erefore, they must be (and are) root-mode-privileged.

 4.2.2 TRANSITIONS BETWEEN ROOT AND NON-ROOT MODES
 Figure 4.2 shows the key interactions and transitions between root mode and non-root mode
 in the implementation of VT-x. e state of the virtual machine is stored in a dedicated structure
 in physical memory called the Virtual Machine Control Structure (VMCS). Once initialized,
 a virtual machine resumes execution through a vmresume instruction. is privileged instruction
 loads the state from the VMCS in memory into the register file and performs an atomic transition
 between the host environment and the guest environment. e virtual machine then executes in
 non-root mode until the first trap that must be handled by the hypervisor or the next external
 interrupt. is transition from non-root mode to root mode is called a #vmexit.

                                 cpl 3     user       VM

                      non-root
                                 cpl 2
                                 cpl 1
                                 cpl 0   Guest OS
                                                  #vmlaunch
                             #vmexit              #vmresume

                                                        vmread

             ring 0
                                                                          Hypervisor
              root
                                         VMCS
                                                        vmwrite

Figure 4.2: VT-x transitions and control structures.

      Table 4.1 lists the various possible reasons for a #vmexit. e reason itself is stored in a
dedicated register (vmcs.exit_reason) to accelerate emulation. e reasons for an exit can be
grouped into categories including the following.

   • Any attempt by the guest to execute a root-mode-privileged instruction, as this is the fun-
     damental requirement of the Popek and Goldberg theorem. is includes most of the priv-
     ileged instructions of the classic (i.e., non-virtualizable) x86 architecture, as well as the
     sensitive-yet-unprivileged instructions causing violations of the theorem.

   • e new vmcall instructions, designed to allow explicit transitions between non-root mode
     and root-mode, and in particular hypercalls made by the guest operating system and des-
     tined to the hypervisor. is is analogous to the sysenter instruction that transitions be-
     tween user mode and kernel mode.

   • Exceptions result from the execution of any innocuous instruction in non-root mode, that
     happens to take a trap. is includes, in particular, page faults (#PF) caused by shadow
     paging, the access to memory-mapped I/O devices, or general-purpose faults (#GP) due to
     segment violations.

   • EPT violations are the subset of page faults caused when the extended page mapping (under
     the control of the hypervisor) is invalid. is exit was introduced with extended paging (see
     Chapter 5).

   • External interrupts that occurred while the CPU was executing in non-root mode, e.g., as
     the result of network or disk I/O on the host. Such events must be handled by the hypervisor
     (in the case of type-1 designs) or the host operating system (for type-2 designs) and may or
     may not have any side-effects to the virtual machine itself.
       • e interrupt window opens up whenever the virtual machine has enabled interrupt and
         the virtual machine has a pending interrupt. Following the #vmexit, the hypervisor can
         emulate the pending interrupt onto the virtual machine.

       • Finally, the ISA extensions introduced with VT-x to support virtualization are also control-
         sensitive and therefore cause a #vmexit, each with a distinct exit reason. Such exits
         never occur during “normal virtualization,” but play a fundamental role in nested virtual-
         ization [33, 191].

Table 4.1: Categories VT-x exit codes

     Category        Exit Reason     Description
     Exception       0               Any guest instruction that causes an exception
     Interrupt       1               The exit is due to an external I/O interrupt
     Triple fault    2               Reset condition (bad)
     Interrupt       7               The guest can now handle a pending guest interrupt
     window
     Legacy          9               Instruction is not implemented in non-root mode; software
     emulation                       expected to provide backward compatibility, e.g., task
                                     switch
     Root-mode       11-17, 28-29, x86 privileged or sensitive instructions: getsec,
     Sensitive       31-32, 46-47: hlt, invd, invlpg, rdpmc, rdtsc, rsm,
                                   mov-cr, mov-dr, rdmsr, wrmsr, monitor,
                                   pause, lgdt, lidt, sgdt, sidt, lldt,
                                   ltr, sldt
     Hypercall       18            vmcall : Explicit transition from non-root to root mode
     VT-x new        19-27, 50, 53   ISA extensions to control non-root execution: invept,
                                     invvpid, vmclear, vmlaunch, vmptrld,
                                     vmptrst, vmreas, vmresume, vmwrite,
                                     vmxoff, vmxon
     I/O             30              Legacy I/O instructions
     EPT             48-49           EPT violations and misconfigurations

 e transitions between root and non-root mode are architecturally atomic: a single instruction,—
 vmresume—transitions back to non-root mode and loads the VMCS state into the current pro-
 cessor state. In the other direction, the trap #vmexit stores the state of the virtual CPU into the
 VMCS state. Although the VMCS state is backed by a specific memory region, the architec-
ture does not specify whether the processor must spill the entire state into the cached memory,
or whether it can hold off to a subset into the processor itself. As a result, the in-memory state
of the current VMCS is undetermined. In addition, the layout of the VMCS is undefined. e
hypervisor software must access selected portions of the guest state via the vmread and vmwrite
instruction pair.²

4.2.3     A CAUTIONARY TALE—VIRTUALIZING THE CPU AND IGNORING
          THE MMU
Today, all processor architectures with virtualization support also virtualize the MMU. is, how-
ever, has not always been the case. Indeed, the first-generation Intel CPU with VT-x provided
only elementary support for memory virtualization. In such a design, root-mode and non-root
mode each have a distinct %cr3 register specifying the base of the page table tree. e cr3 register
is atomically updated as part of the vmentry and #vmexit transition between root and non-root
mode. As a result, a hypervisor can configure 100% disjoint address spaces. is solves the ad-
dress compression challenge of previous hypervisor and removes the need to rely on segmentation
for protection of the hypervisor. But in such a minimal design, every other aspect of memory
virtualization is left to software. As in prior architectures without any architectural support, two
approaches remain possible: (1) to shadow the page tables of the virtual machine (with guest-
physical values) with a duplicate set of page tables which contains the host-physical values as was
done by VMware (see §3.2.5); or (2) to rely on paravirtualization of the virtual memory subsystem
and inform the hypervisor to validate all new mappings (see §3.3).
       is choice had a severe and unanticipated consequence when shadowing page tables. Us-
ing shadow paging, the first two generations of Intel processors failed to address the performance
criteria: over 90% of #vmexit transitions were due to shadow paging and the resulting virtual
machine performance was slower than when simply disabling VT-x and using software tech-
niques [3].
       e explanation for this anomaly is actually subtle: shadowing operates by keeping the
mappings of the hardware page tables in sync with the changes made by the guest operating
system in its own page tables. e mechanism to identify changes is the MMU itself: all guest
page table pages are downgraded to read-only mappings to ensure a transition from the virtual
machine to the hypervisor, i.e., a trap in classic architectures and a #vmexit in VT-x. A hypervisor
that relies entirely on direct execution will therefore necessarily suffer a trap for every change in the
virtual memory of the guest operating system. In contrast, VMware’s memory tracing mechanism
relied on adaptive binary translation to eliminate the overwhelming majority of page faults.
Adaptive dynamic binary translation is an effective technique as it relies on the great locality
of the instructions that manipulate page table entries, a handful per operating system. Once these
instruction locations have been dynamically identified, the adaptive retranslation process simply
²In designing its own virtualization extension, AMD took a slightly different approach that architecturally defines the in-
 memory data structure which it calls the virtual machine control block (VMCB). Even though ISAs differ, Intel’s VMCS and
 AMD’s VMCB each offer an equivalent, yet incompatible, abstraction of the virtual CPU state.
 emulates the instructions and updates the shadow entries without ever dereferencing the memory
 location directly and therefore without taking an expensive trap.
        Fortunately, this anomaly was addressed in subsequent processors.

 4.3          KVM—A HYPERVISOR FOR VT-X
 So far, we have described the hardware extensions introduced by VT-x, and discussed a few ar-
 chitectural considerations. We now use KVM [113], the Linux-based Kernel Virtual Machine,
 as a case study to put the innovation in practice. KVM makes for an interesting study because of
 its maturity and simplicity.

        • KVM is the most relevant open-source type-2 hypervisor. It is used in numerous projects,
          cloud hosting solutions, and deployed in enterprises and private clouds. KVM is the offi-
          cially supported hypervisor of major commercial Linux distributions and the foundation of
          most Openstack deployments.

        • KVM relies on QEMU [32], a distinct open-source project, to emulate I/O. Absent KVM,
          QEMU is a complete machine simulator with support for cross-architectural binary trans-
          lation of the CPU, and a complete set of I/O device models. Together with KVM, the
          combination is a type-2 hypervisor, with QEMU responsible for the userspace implemen-
          tation of all I/O front-end device emulation, the Linux host responsible for the I/O backend
          (via normal system calls) and the KVM kernel module responsible to multiplex the CPU
          and MMU of the processor.

        • e kernel component of KVM, which implements the functionality of CPU and memory
          virtualization equivalent to the VMware VMM, has been a built-in component of the Linux
          kernel and is designed to avoid unnecessary redundancies with Linux. KVM was designed
          from the beginning to be part of Linux, with the explicit goal to merge all kernel-resident
          components with the mainline Linux source tree. is was achieved with the merge of the
          KVM kernel module into the Linux mainline as of version 2.6.20 in 2007.

        • Unlike Xen or VMware Workstation, KVM was designed from the ground up assuming the
          existence of hardware support for virtualization.³ is makes for a particularly good study
          of the intrinsic complexity of a hypervisor designed for VT-x.

 4.3.1 CHALLENGES IN LEVERAGING VT-X
 e developers of KVM adapted Popek and Goldberg’s three core attributes of a virtual machine
 as follows.
     ³Originally, KVM was designed for x86-64 processors with either VT-x or AMD-v; since then, it has evolved to virtualize
      other architectures notably ARM/ARM64. See §7.6.
                                                        4.3. KVM—A HYPERVISOR FOR VT-X              63
Equivalence: A KVM virtual machine should be able to run any x86 operating system (32-bit
or 64-bit) and all of its applications without any modifications. KVM must provide sufficient
compatibility at the hardware level such that users can choose their guest operating system kernel
and distribution.

Safety: KVM virtualizes all resources visible to the virtual machine, including CPU, physical
memory, I/O busses and devices, and BIOS firmware. e KVM hypervisor remains in complete
control of the virtual machines at all times, even in the presence of a malicious or faulty guest
operating system.

Performance: KVM should be sufficiently fast to run production workloads. However, KVM’s
explicit design of a type-2 architecture implies that resource management and scheduling deci-
sions were left as part of the host Linux kernel (of which the KVM kernel module is a component).
To achieve these goals, KVM’s design makes a careful tradeoff to ensure that all performance-
critical components are handled within the KVM kernel module while limiting the complexity of
that kernel module. Specifically, the KVM kernel module handles only the core platform functions
associated with the emulation of the x86 processor, the MMU, the interrupt subsystem (inclusive
of the APIC, IOAPIC, etc.); all functions responsible for I/O emulation are handled in userspace.
       To further simplify the implementation, the original version of KVM leveraged highly two
existing open-source project: (i) QEMU [32] for all I/O emulation in user-space and (ii) the x86-
specific portions of Xen, which served as the starting point for the Linux kernel module. Since
then, KVM and Xen have followed largely disjoint paths, but the evolution of QEMU is mostly
driven by the requirements for KVM.

4.3.2 THE KVM KERNEL MODULE
e kernel module only handles the basic CPU and platform emulation issues. is includes the
CPU emulation, memory management and MMU virtualization, interrupt virtualization, and
some chipset emulation (APIC, IOAPIC, etc.). But it excludes all I/O device emulation.
       Given that KVM was designed only for processors that follow the Popek/Goldberg prin-
ciples, the design is in theory straightforward: (i) configure the hardware appropriately; (ii) let
the virtual machine execute directly on the hardware; and (iii) upon the first trap or interrupt,
the hypervisor then regains control, and “just ” emulates the trapping instruction according to the
semantic.
       e reality is much more complex. Our analysis is based on the linux-4.8 release of Oc-
tober 2016. e KVM kernel module alone has over 25,000 source lines of code (LOC). e
complexity is due in part to: (i) the need to support multiple distinct versions of VT-x going back
to the first processor with VT-x (Intel’s Prescott ); (ii) the inherent complexity of the x86 instruc-
tion set architecture; and (iii) the remaining lack of architectural support in hardware for some
basic operations, which must be handled in software.
       Figure 4.3 illustrates the key steps involved in the trap handling logic of KVM, from
 the original #vmexit until the vmresume instruction returns to non-root mode. Immediately

                                exit condition

       #vmexit                                              handle_*
                                                              handle_*
                                                                handle_*

                                                                  handle_*

                                                                 hardware trap

                                            1
             #GP,
                                  fetch
             #PF,…
                                                                      5          #DIV0
                                                         em_*
                                            2
              #UD                decode                           6
                                                     wr mem                  #GP,#PF

                                            3
            #GP,#UD             privcheck                         7
                                                     wr regs
                                            4        wr %rip
            #GP,#PF             read mem

                                                                          #vmentry

Figure 4.3: General-purpose trap-and-emulate flowchart of KVM.

 upon the #vmexit, KVM first saves all the vcpu state in memory. e Intel architectural
 manual [103](Appendix I) defines 54 possible exit reasons (see Table 4.1). KVM then per-
 forms a first-level dispatch based on vmcs.exit_reason, with a distinct handler (handler_*
 in arch/x86/kvm/vmx.c) for each exit reason. Most of these handlers are straightforward. In
                                                        4.3. KVM—A HYPERVISOR FOR VT-X              65
particular, some common code paths rely exclusively on VMCS fields to determine the necessary
emulation steps to perform. Depending on the situation, KVM may:
   • emulate the semantics of that instruction and increment the instruction pointer to the start
     of the next instruction;
   • determine that a fault or interrupt must be forwarded to the guest environment. Following
     the semantic of x86, KVM changes the stack pointer and stores on the stack the previous
     instruction and stack pointers. Execution will then resume at the instruction specified by
     the guest’s interrupt descriptor table;
   • change the underlying environment and re-try the execution. is occurs for example in the
     case of an EPT violation; and
   • do nothing (at least to the virtual machine state). is is the case for example when an
     external interrupt occurs, which is handled by the underlying host operating system. Non-
     root execution will eventually resume where it left off.
Unfortunately, the information available in the VMCS is at times inadequate to handle the #vmexit
without actually decoding the instruction that caused it. KVM—as well as any hypervisor for VT-
x which attempts to provide equivalence—must therefore also include a general-purpose decoder,
capable of decoding all instructions, and a general-purpose emulator, which can emulate them.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the key steps involved in the general-purpose emulator implementation of
KVM. e core logic that performs this basic step is implemented in arch/x86/kvm/emulate.c,
a file with 5000+ lines of code filled with macros, complexity, and subtleties. e key steps of the
emulator are:
  1. fetch the instruction from guest virtual memory (%cs:%eip). First, the virtual address must
     be converted into a linear address, then into a guest-physical address, and finally fetched
     from memory;
  2. decode the instruction, extracting its operator and operands. e CISC nature and variable
     length of the x86-64 instructions makes this process non-trivial;
  3. verify whether the instruction can execute given the current state of the virtual CPU, e.g.,
     privileged instructions can only execute if the virtual CPU is at cpl0;
  4. read any memory read-operands from memory, as is the common case in the x86 CISC
     architecture using the same virtual to linear to guest-physical relocation steps as for instruc-
     tion fetches;
  5. emulate the decoded instruction, which could be any of the instructions defined in the x86
     architecture. Each instruction opcode is emulated via its own dedicated emulation routine
     (em_* in the source);
66   4. X86-64: CPU VIRTUALIZATION WITH VT-X
     6. write any memory write-operands back to the guest virtual machine; and
     7. update guest registers and the instruction pointer as needed.
 Clearly, these steps are complex, expensive, and full of corner cases and possible exception condi-
 tions. Figure 4.3 further shows the intricacy as every stage contains a possible exception case, in
 which the trap-and-emulate logic concludes that the guest instruction cannot successfully execute,
 and instead should generate a fault in the guest virtual CPU, e.g., a virtual #GP, #PF, or #UD.
 Furthermore, the instruction emulation step can, in some rare cases, lead to a fault in the actual
 hardware such as when dividing by zero. is is shown in red in the figure, leading to additional
 complexity.
        e emulator is also notoriously brittle, and its implementation has evolved over the years
 to address defect reports as well as ongoing ISA extensions. It remains error-prone. A recent study
 by Amit et al. [15] identified 117 emulation bugs in the KVM kernel module, of which 72 were
 in the emulator alone.

 4.3.3 THE ROLE OF THE HOST OPERATING SYSTEM
 KVM was specifically designed to be part of Linux. Unlike other type-2 hypervisors such as
 VMware Workstation [45] or VirtualBox [180] which are host-independent, KVM is deeply
 integrated into the Linux environment. For example, the perf toolkit has a specific mode to
 profile KVM virtual machines; this is made possible by the deep integration of the KVM and
 Linux projects.
       Figure 4.4 shows the core KVM virtual machine execution loop [113], shown for one virtual
 CPU. e outer loop is in usermode and repeatedly:
      • enters the KVM kernel module via an ioctl to the character device /dev/kvm;
      • the KVM kernel module then executes the guest code until either (i) the guest initiates I/O
        using an I/O instruction or memory-mapped I/O or (ii) the host receives an external I/O
        or timer interrupt;
      • the QEMU device emulator then emulates the initiated I/O (if required); and
      • in the case of external I/O or timer interrupt, the outer loop may simply return back to
        the KVM kernel module by using another ioctl(/dev/kvm) without further side-effects.
        is step in userspace is however essential as it provides the host operating system with the
        opportunity to make global scheduling decisions.
 e inner loop (within the KVM kernel module) repeatedly:
      • restores the current state of the virtual CPU;
      • enters non-root mode using the vmresume instruction. At that point, the virtual machine
        executes in that mode until the next #vmexit;
                                                     4.4. PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS               67

              User mode                        Kernel mode               Non-root

                  Issue Guest
               Execution ioctl                   Enter
                                                 non-root

                                                                        Execute Guest
                                                 Handle
                                                 #vmexit

                                         yes        IO
                                                         no

                     Handle                       Signal
                      IO                 yes     pending?

                                                         no

Figure 4.4: KVM Virtual Machine Execution Loop, adapted from [113].

   • handles the #vmexit according to the exit reason, as described in §4.3.2;

   • if the guest issued a programmed IO operation (exit_reason = IO) or a memory-mapped
     IO instruction (exit_reason = exception, but only when accessing a memory-mapped
     IO page), break the loop and return to userspace; and

   • if the #vmexit was caused by an external event (e.g., exit_reason = interrupt), break
     the loop and return to userspace.

4.4     PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS
e design of VT-x is centered around the duplication of architectural state between root and non-
root modes, and the ability to atomically transition between them: a single instruction, vmresume,
transitions back to non-root mode and loads then VMCS state into the current processor state.
In the other direction, the trap #vmexit stores the entire state of the virtual CPU into the VMCS
state.
       Atomic transitions between modes do not imply a high execution speed, and certainly not
a single-cycle execution time. Intuitively, such transitions are expected to stall the entire execu-
68   4. X86-64: CPU VIRTUALIZATION WITH VT-X
 tion pipeline, given that the whole register file, privileged state, and instruction pointer change.
 In reality, the measured cost of these transitions is high, and suggests a complex implementation
 within the processor’s microcode firmware. Table 4.2 shows the cost of a hardware round-trip, de-
 fined by a #vmexit followed by a NULL handler in the hypervisor that increments the instruction
 pointer and resumes execution of the virtual machine. In early generations, such as Prescott, the
 cost of a single hardware round-trip was measured in microseconds, largely exceeding the cost of
 a regular trap. Since then, transitions have improved by 5? but remain high.
Table 4.2: Hardware round-trip latency, from [5]

                        Microarchitecture       Launch Date     Cycles
                        Prescott                3Q05            3963
                        Merom                   2Q06            1579
                        Penryn                  1Q08            1266
                        Nehalem                 3Q09            1009
                        Westmere                1Q10            761
                        Sandy Bridge            1Q11            784

        Table 4.3 further shows the cost of individual VT-x instructions and transitions for a
 broader set of processors, including more recent releases [6]. Despite the lack of description by
 Intel or an independent study of the cause of the changes, one can reasonably infer that certain
 instructions, (e.g., vmread) went from being implemented in microcode to being integrated di-
 rectly into the pipeline. Nevertheless, all the atomic transitions (vmresume or #vmexit) remain
 very expensive despite having been highly optimized, and have not improved noticeably in the
 past five generations of processors.

 4.5     FURTHER READING
 Amit et al. [15] identified minor hardware limitations to the claim that VT-x is virtualizable
 according to the Popek/Goldberg theorem: the physical address width is available directly through
 the CPUID instruction and not virtualizable. is can cause a problem when live-migrating a
 virtual machine [51, 135] across systems with different physical address widths. Also, some of the
 FPU state is not fully virtualizable, and workarounds are required.
        In the same work, Amit et al. primarily identified software bugs in the implementation
 of KVM that violate the safety equivalence property expected of hypervisors. By comparing sys-
 tematically the behavior of a KVM virtual machine with Intel’s reference simulator [15], they
 identified 117 distinct bugs in KVM. e common cause for these bugs is that the entire com-
 plexity of the x86 ISA is exposed to software. Although the majority of these bugs are corner-case
 equivalence limitations with little practical impact, at least 6 bugs have led to security vulnerabil-
 ities and can cause host DoS, guest DoS, or privilege escalation. ese concerns have called for
                                                                    4.5. FURTHER READING           69
Table 4.3: Hardware costs of individual VT-x instructions and #vmexit for different Intel processors

                                                           Sandy     Ivy
     Processor     Prescott   Merom   Penryn   Westmere                      Haswell   Broadwell
                                                           Bridge   Bridge
     VMXON           243       162      146       302       108       98        108       116
    VMXOFF           175       99       89         54        84       76        73         81
   VMCLEAR           277       70       63         93        56       50        101       107
   VMPTRLD           255       66       62         91        62       57        99        109
    VMPTRST          61        22        9         17        5         4        43         44
    VMREAD           178       53       26         6         5         4         5         5
   VMWRITE           171       43       26         5         4         3         4         4
  VMLAUNCH          2478       948      688       678       619       573       486       528
  VMRESUME          2333       944      643       402       460       452       318       348
   vmexit/vmcall    1630       727      638       344       365       334       253       265
   vmexit/cpuid     1599       764      611       389       434       398       327       332
    vmexit/#PF      1926      1156      858       569       507       466       512       531
    vmexit/IOb      1942       858      708       427       472       436       383       397
   vmexit/EPT       N/A       N/A      N/A        546       588                 604       656

a refactoring of the KVM kernel module, and in particular to consider moving the instruction
emulator to userspace where bugs can be more easily contained [37].
       Readers interested in getting a deeper understanding of KVM will quickly realize that the
source code is the best form of documentation, even though the KVM website [118] does contain
some useful pointers.
       All hypervisors for the x86 architecture have embraced VT-x since its introduction in sil-
icon. Current versions of VMware Workstation leverages the VT-x MMU capabilities similarly
to KVM: the world switch no longer exists in its original form, and the core execution loop of
VMware Workstation resembles that of KVM. Adams and Agesen [3] study in great detail this
tradeoff between DBT and direct execution in the presence of hardware support. e tradeoff is
substantial whenever the hypervisor must shadow in-memory data structures that are frequently
accessed in practice. e tradeoff was fundamental prior to the introduction of extended paging
in processors, and the authors conclude that VT-x (without extended paging) hurts performance.
       Xen also embraced VT-x early under the term hardware virtualization (HVM) [50, 146].
With HVM, guest operating systems no longer need to be paravirtualized to run on Xen. In-
stead, paravirtualization is merely an optional set of extensions that improve performance and
functionality by directly communicating with the hypervisor.
       To the best of our knowledge, the micro-architectural cost of transitions from root to non-
root mode has never been academically studied in depth, and the salient aspects of their imple-
70   4. X86-64: CPU VIRTUALIZATION WITH VT-X
 mentation in Intel or AMD processors have not been disclosed. e cause of the 5? improvement
 from Prescott to Sandy Bridge remains the cause for speculation. Instead, the focus has been to
 relentlessly reduce the software cost of handling a #vmexit.
