
                                 CHAPTER                      5

      x86-64: MMU Virtualization
       with Extended Page Tables
Hypervisors must virtualize physical memory, so that each virtual machine has the illusion of
managing its own contiguous region of physical memory. Recall the definitions of §1.6: each vir-
tual machine is provided the abstraction of guest-physical memory, while the hypervisor manages
host-physical memory, the actual underlying physical resource.
       is creates a two-dimensional problem: the guest operating system defines mapping be-
tween virtual memory and guest-physical memory. e hypervisor then independently defines
mappings between guest-physical memory and host-physical memory.
       In the absence of any architecture support in the memory management unit, hypervisors
rely on shadow paging to virtualize memory. In shadow paging, the hypervisor manages a com-
posite set of page tables that map virtual memory to host-physical memory (see §3.2.5 for a
description of VMware’s implementation). Shadow paging, as implemented in software, is ar-
guably the most complex subsystem of a hypervisor. It relies on memory tracing to keep track of
the changes to page table structures in memory. Shadow paging also relies heavily on heuristics
to determine which pages should be traced, as page tables can be anywhere in physical memory
and can be allocated and reallocated at the discretion of the guest operating system. Further, the
introduction of VT-x had a negative impact on the performance of shadow paging (see §4.2.3).
       Extended page tables provide architectural support for MMU virtualization. §5.1 describes
the design of extended paging in x86-64 processors. §5.2 describes how KVM manages and vir-
tualizes memory, and takes advantage of extended page tables. §5.3 measures the cost of MMU
virtualization. Finally, like all chapters, we close with pointers for further reading.

5.1     EXTENDED PAGING
Extended page tables, also known as nested page tables, eliminates the need for software-based
shadow paging. e design was published by Bhargava et al. [35] in 2008 and available in silicon
by both AMD and Intel around that same time.
      Extended page tables combine in hardware the classic hardware-defined page table struc-
ture of the x86, maintained by the guest operating system, with a second page table structure,
maintained by the hypervisor, which specifies guest-physical to host-physical mappings. Both
structures are similarly organized as a tree.
72   5. X86-64: MMU VIRTUALIZATION WITH EXTENDED PAGE TABLES
        With extended paging, the TLB lookup logic, which is deeply integrated with the pro-
 cessor, does not change: the TLB remains organized as a set associative cache that map virtual
 pages to host-physical pages. On architectures that support superpages (e.g., 2 MB and 1 GB on
 x86-64), there is typically a distinct cache for each page size.
        What changes fundamentally is the TLB miss handling logic. Whenever a mapping is not
 present in the TLB, the x86-64 architecture specifies that the processor will walk the page table
 tree, rooted by %cr3 and insert the missing mapping in the TLB. On x86-64, in the absence of
 extended paging, the tree is a n D 4 level tree for regular pages, n D 3 for 2 MB pages, and n D 2
 for 1 GB pages. e page walk logic therefore must access n locations in memory to find the
 missing mapping. Only then can the CPU perform the actual memory read or write.
        Let’s consider the case where the virtual to guest-physical tree is n-level and the guest-
 physical to host-physical tree is m-level. is is shown in Figure 5.1. On TLB misses, the hardware
 walks the guest page table structure which consists entirely of guest-physical pages, with each
 guest-physical reference required to be individually mapped to its own host-physical address. To
 resolve each reference in the first tree, the processor must first perform m references in the second
 tree, and then lookup the mapping in the first tree. ere are n such steps, each requiring m C
 1 references. ese n ? .m C 1/ references lead to the desired guest-physical address. Another
 m lookups are required to convert this guest-physical address into a host-physical address. e
 number of architecturally defined memory references required for an extended page lookup is
 therefore n ? m C n C m.
        In summary, extended paging composes the two independent mappings via a quadratic
 lookup algorithm. Although architecturally quadratic, current-generation processors rely exten-
 sively on secondary data structures to reduce the number of actual references to the memory
 hierarchy.

 5.2      VIRTUALIZING MEMORY IN KVM
 KVM was originally released prior to the introduction of extended paging. As a result, the KVM
 kernel module may be configured to enable or disable the feature [42]. In practice, however, any
 considerations to the use of KVM today (in 2017) without extended paging are limited to cases
 of nested virtualization, e.g., the Turtles research prototype [33].
        Figure 5.2 shows the key aspects of memory management in KVM. e figure shows that
 there are three distinct page table structures, each managed by a distinct entity (visualized by the
 red dot).
      • QEMU, as a userspace process, allocates the guest-physical memory in a contiguous portion
        of its own virtual address space. is is convenient for a number of reasons: (i) it lets the
        details of memory management and allocation to the host operating system, in line with
        a type-2 architecture; and (ii) it provides convenient access from userspace to the guest-
        physical address space; this is used in particular by emulated devices that perform DMA to
        and from the guest-physical memory. Like any process on the machine, Linux manages a
                                                      5.2. VIRTUALIZING MEMORY IN KVM              73

             EPT

                                1            6          11           16            21

                                2            7          12           17            22

                                3            8          13           18            23

                                4            9          14           19            24

                                                                                 TLB
            gCR3                5         10            15           20
                                                                                 entry

                        idx 4        idx 3         idx 2         idx 1        offset

                     = guest PTE                             = host PTE

Figure 5.1: Sequence of architecturally-defined memory references to load a TLB entry with extended
page tables (m D 4 and n D 4).

     page table tree for this process. When the QEMU process is scheduled—which includes all
     situations where the virtual machine’s VCPU is running—, the root mode %cr3 register
     defines an address space that includes QEMU and the contiguous guest-physical memory.

   • e virtual machine manages its own page tables. With nested paging enabled, the
     non-root cr3 register points to the guest page tables, which defines the current address
     space in terms of guest-physical memory. is is under the exclusive control of the guest
     operating system. Furthermore, KVM does not need to keep track of changes to the guest
     page tables nor to context switches. In fact, assignments to cr3 in non-root mode do not
     need to cause a #vmexit when the feature is enabled.

   • In the x86 architecture, the format of the regular page tables (as pointed by the cr3 register)
     are different from those of the nested pages. e KVM kernel module is therefore respon-
     sible for managing nested page tables, rooted at the eptp register on Intel architectures.
74          5. X86-64: MMU VIRTUALIZATION WITH EXTENDED PAGE TABLES

                                                                 App                cr3

     non-root mode
                                                                                 non-root
                                       Guest-physical            GOS
                                         memory

     usermode
                                               gemu

                      cr3                                                          ept
     kernel mode

                     root                   Linux

                                                        kvm.ko

                     Host-physical memory

Figure 5.2: Access to guest-physical memory in KVM by the userspace QEMU/KVM component,
 the kvm.ko kernel module, and the guest operating system. Each red dot represents the entity that
 manages the corresponding hardware page table.

 We make one more additional observation, which has performance implications: it is easier for the
 hypervisor to access guest-physical address space than it is to access guest-virtual address space.
 Specifically, the VT-x architecture lacks architectural support for root mode software to access
 efficiently the virtual address space of non-root mode environments.
        Figure 5.2 shows that it is simple for the hypervisor to access the guest-physical address
 space: the userspace process can simply add a constant offset to reference a memory location. e
 KVM module itself can actually use the same approach, since the userspace process is already
 mapping the address space. It is, however, much harder and complex for the hypervisor to access
 the current virtual address spaces of the virtual machine as those mappings are only present in
 the MMU of the processor while the virtual machine is executing, but not when the hypervisor
 is executing.
        Unfortunately, the guest instruction pointer is a virtual address and the KVM decoder must
 read the content of the faulting instruction from memory. Similarly, all the memory operands of
 the instruction refer to virtual addresses of the virtual machine. As a consequence, the KVM
 decoder and emulate makes repeated references in software to the guest page tables to determine
 the location in guest-physical memory of the instructions and operands.
                                                    5.3. PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS                 75
        e type-2 hypervisor design of KVM introduces a complication when managing guest-
physical memory. Although the format differs, the semantic mapping of the guest-physical ad-
dress space in the nested page tables must be consistent with the mappings of guest-physical ad-
dress space of the host operating system. For example, should the guest-physical mapping change,
e.g., a new page is allocated when handling an #vmexit from the virtual machine, the same map-
ping must also be reflected in address space of the QEMU process on the host. Conversely, should
the host operating system decide to swap out a page from the QEMU process, the corresponding
guest-physical extended mapping must also be removed.
        e current version of KVM contains some key optimizations in the area of memory man-
agement. In particular, Linux’s KSM mechanism [19] allows for the transparent sharing of mem-
ory, similar to the solution introduced in VMware ESX Server [177]. KSM allows memory pages
with identical content to be transparently shared between Linux processes, and therefore between
KVM virtual machines. A match is detected when two distinct pages belonging to potentially
different processes, are found to have the same content and that content is declared stable, i.e.,
unlikely to change in the near future. KSM then (i) selects one page from the set; (ii) establishes
read-only mappings in all address spaces to that page; and (iii) notifies the KVM module to do
the same for the nested page tables; and (iv) deallocates all other replicas of the same page.

5.3     PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS
Extended page tables provide significant performance benefits over shadow paging. It eliminates
the need for memory tracing, which accounts for as much as 90% of all #vmexits in typical
virtualized workloads [5]. It also eliminates the memory footprint of the shadow page tables.
       However, extended paging is not free. A two-dimensional page-walk, as defined architec-
turally, is prohibitive in 64-bit address spaces: with 4 KB pages, the guest and the host page tables
are each 4-level trees with n D m D 4 for a total of 24 architecturally defined memory references
for a single TLB miss (vs. only 4 for a non-virtualized configuration). Fortunately, the existence
of page walk caches inside the processors can limit the impact of the design [35].
       Despite the ongoing focus on micro-architectural improvements, the overheads of virtual-
izing can be readily measured. Drepper measured it in 2008 [67], shortly after the introduction of
the technology, using a simple pointer-chasing benchmark. Drepper’s measurements show that
the virtualized workload executes up to 17% slower on Intel CPU and up to 39% slower on AMD
CPU when compared to the non-virtualized execution on the same processor. With such a bench-
mark, the difference in execution time is attributed nearly entirely to the difference in the TLB
miss handling logic of the processors, and the number of memory references that are required to
be fetched.
       We perform a similar pointer-chasing experiment on a more recent, 2011-era Intel “Sandy
Bridge” processor running at 2.4 Ghz. To measure the cost of TLB misses, we create a list that
randomly links objects from a 32 GB heap, and then measure the average cost of a pointer refer-
ence. is micro-benchmark is designed to have no locality and to ensure that the great majority
76   5. X86-64: MMU VIRTUALIZATION WITH EXTENDED PAGE TABLES
 of pointer references will incur a TLB miss, irrespective of page size. Indeed, this benchmark has
 a TLB miss rate between 93% and 99.9%, depending on the configuration. e test only uses
 local memory for both data and page tables, as to avoid NUMA effects. Finally, the linked list is
 constructed to use different caches lines of the various pages, as to ensure that the last-level cache
 is efficiently used.
       Figure 5.3 shows the performance of the different combination of (guest) page sizes and
 extended page sizes. Since the regular page table and the extended page table are orthogonal
 to each other, one can be larger or smaller than the other without any particular complication.
 e first block of results shows the performance for the standard 4 KB page size, with different
 extended page sizes, as well as for the non-virtualized case. e second and third blocks show the
 benefit of using super pages in the (guest) operating system. We report the performance in cycles
 per memory reference, which includes the cost of the memory reference (and the potential cache
 miss) as well as the cost of the TLB miss.
                                  900

                                  800
        Cycles/Memory Reference

                                  700

                                  600

                                  500

                                  400

                                  300

                                  200

                                  100

                                    0
                                        4KB 2MB 1GB   4KB 2MB 1GB       4KB 2MB 1GB   4KB 2MB 1GB
                                          EPT 4KB       EPT 2MB            EPT 1GB    No Virtualization
                                                              (Guest) Page Size

Figure 5.3: Measured cost of TLB misses on Intel “Sandy Bridge” processors for various combination
 of page sizes and extended page sizes.

        In Figure 5.3, we first observe that the results of this micro-benchmark are all very high,
 with a reference costing at least 200 cycles on average. Fortunately, realistic workloads have much
 better TLB behavior because of the nearly universal locality principle [64]. We also note a sub-
 stantial difference in the cost of these TLB misses: TLB misses of the most expensive configura-
 tion (4 KB pages, 4 KB extended pages) is 3.25? more expensive than the cheapest configuration
 (1 GB pages, non-virtualized). Finally, we observe that 4 KB page sizes are noticeably more ex-
                                                                   5.4. FURTHER READING         77
pensive than 2 MB and 1 GB page sizes, but that 2 MB and 1 GB page lead to comparable TLB
load times. Larger page sizes reduce the number of architecturally defined memory references re-
quired to load the TLB. For example, the number of required references goes from 24 down to 17
by simply increasing the extended page table size to 2 MB (since m W 4 ! 3). More importantly,
the reduced number of page table entries dramatically reduces the probability that the memory
references will not be served by the processor L3 cache.
       Developers have recognized the need to carefully trade-off flexibility and performance in
the management of memory of virtual machines. Today, 2 MB super pages available are a standard
feature of commodity operating systems such as Linux, and most carefully tuned applications will
take advantage of the feature. Many hypervisors today use 2 MB pages for extended page tables
whenever possible. For example, VMware ESX preferably uses 2 MB extended pages. It uses 4 KB
pages only when the system is under global memory pressure and the ballooning or transparent
memory sharing mechanisms [177] kick in to reduce memory pressure [176].

5.4     FURTHER READING
Bhargava et al. [35] described the benefit of the page walk cache implemented in AMD Opteron.
Ahn et al. [8] propose to use a flattened host page table array to reduce the memory refer-
ences from n ? m C n C m to 2n C 1 references , with n ? 4 based on the guest page size used.
Gandhi et al. [72] recently measured the cost of nested paging on Intel “Sandy Bridge” CPU
for large-memory workloads, and proposed to use segmentation instead of the conventional page
table tree layout. Yaniv et al. propose to hash extended page table rather than the conventional
2D radix walk [189].
       Agesen et al. [4] describe how introduction of extended paging and the dramatic reduction
in the number of #vmexit, improves efficiency and allowed VMware to rely on direct execution
to run most of the guest kernel code. More recently, Agesen et al. [5] describe how the judicious
use of DBT for very short code sequences can be used to eliminate #vmexit and further increase
performance.
