
                                  CHAPTER                       6

        x86-64: I/O Virtualization
e previous chapters define virtual machines in terms of the three key attributes proposed by
Popek and Goldberg—equivalence, safety, and performance—which help us to reason about vir-
tualization from a CPU and MMU perspective. When introducing I/O capabilities to virtual
machines, a fourth attribute becomes handy: interposition. e ability to interpose on the I/O of
guest virtual machines allows the host to transparently observe, control, and manipulate this I/O,
thereby decoupling it from the underlying physical I/O devices and enabling several appealing
benefits.
       e I/O that is generated and consumed by virtual machines is denoted virtual I/O, as op-
posed to physical I/O, which is generated and consumed by the operating system that controls the
physical hardware. §6.1 enumerates the benefits of having interposable virtual I/O. §6.2 describes
how physical I/O is conducted and provides the necessary background for the chapter. §6.3 de-
scribes how equivalent I/O capabilities are provided to guest VMs, without utilizing hardware
support for I/O. §6.4 describes how to enhance the performance of virtual I/O with the help of
hardware support that was added specifically for this purpose; we shall see that there is a cost
to pay for this performance enhancement—losing the ability to interpose and all the associated
benefits.
       We note that, in this chapter, the notion of “hardware support” is additive to the previous
chapters. Namely, unless otherwise stated, we assume that CPU and MMU virtualization is al-
ready supported by hardware and focus on hardware features that were added to help accelerate
the processing of virtual I/O. Some parts of this chapter are independent of the specific archi-
tecture of the CPU, but other parts are architecture-dependent. In the latter case, as the title
of this chapter suggests, we assume an Intel x86-64 processor with the VT-x virtualization ex-
tension [171]. In particular, with respect to architecture-dependent issues, this chapter describes
Intel’s x86-64 hardware support for I/O virtualization, which is called VT-d [1, 106].

6.1     BENEFITS OF I/O INTERPOSITION
e traditional, classic I/O virtualization approach—which predates hardware support—
decouples virtual from physical I/O activity through a software indirection layer. e host exposes
virtual I/O devices to its guests. It then intercepts (traps) VM requests directed at the virtual de-
vices, and it fulfills (emulates) them using the physical hardware. is trap-and-emulate approach
[78, 143] allows the host to interpose on all the I/O activity of its guests, as schematically illus-
trated in Figure 6.1.

                           Application                                         Application
     User                                               User
                         Device Driver                                        Device Driver
     Kernel                                             Guest Kernel
                             Device                                      Software-based Device
     Hardware                                           Hypervisor

Figure 6.1: Traditional I/O virtualization decouples virtual I/O activity from physical I/O activity,
 allowing the hypervisor to interpose on the I/O of its virtual machines.

        e benefits of I/O interposition are substantial [178]. First, interposition allows the hyper-
 visor to encapsulate the entire state of the virtual machine—including that of its I/O devices—at
 any given time. e hypervisor is able to encode the state of the devices because (1) it implements
 these devices in software, while (2) interposing on each and every VM I/O operation. Encapsu-
 lation makes it possible for the hypervisor to, for example, suspend the execution of a VM, store
 its encoded representation (denoted as the VM image), and resume execution at a later time. e
 combination of encapsulation and decoupling of virtual from physical I/O is especially powerful,
 providing transparent VM portability between different servers that may be equipped with dif-
 ferent I/O devices. e hypervisor’s role is to map between virtual to physical I/O devices. us,
 it can suspend the VM’s execution on a source server, copy its image to a target server, and resume
 execution there [115], even if the physical I/O devices at the source and target servers are differ-
 ent. All that is required is for the target hypervisor to recouple the virtual devices of the VM with
 the locally available physical devices. e VM remains unaware throughout the move—nothing
 has changed from its perspective. In fact, the VM need not stop execution while it moves between
 servers, a feature known as live migration [51, 135].
        e hypervisor can exploit its ability to interpose on the I/O and dynamically decouple/re-
 couple a physical device from/to a VM even if the VM stays on its original machine rather than
 moves. For example, when upgrading, reconfiguring, or otherwise modifying the VM’s storage
 device, the hypervisor can use its indirection layer to hide the modifications, e.g., by copying the
 stored content from an old device to a new one, in a transparent manner, while the VM is running.
        Arguably, the most notable benefit of CPU virtualization is consolidation, namely, the abil-
 ity to run multiple virtual servers on a much smaller number of physical servers, by multiplexing
 the hardware. With classic I/O virtualization, it is the ability to interpose on the I/O that provides
 I/O device consolidation. Specifically, interposition allows the hypervisor to map multiple virtual
 devices onto a much smaller set of physical devices, thereby increasing utilization, improving ef-
 ficiency, and reducing costs.
        I/O interposition additionally allows the hypervisor to aggregate multiple physical I/O de-
 vices into a single, superior virtual device. e virtual device provides better performance and
 robustness by seamlessly unifying physical devices, exposing them to VMs as one, load balancing
                                                                                   6.2. PHYSICAL I/O       81
between them, and hiding failures of individual devices by transparently falling back on other
devices.
       I/O interposition further allows the hypervisor to add support for new features that are
not natively provided by the physical device. Examples include: replicated disk writes to trans-
parently recover from disk failures; preserving old versions of disk blocks, instead of overwriting
them, to allow for snapshots, record-replay, and time travel capabilities; storage deduplication,
which eliminates duplicate copies of repeated data and thus utilizes a given storage capacity more
effectively; seamless networking and storage compression/decompression and encryption/decryp-
tion; metering, accounting, billing, and rate-limiting of I/O activity; quality of service guarantees
and assurances; and security-related features such network intrusion detection and deep packet
inspection.
       Lastly, while not immediately obvious, traditional I/O virtualization realized through I/O
interposition allows hypervisors to apply all the canonical memory optimizations to the memory
images of VMs, including memory overcommitment (where the combined size of the virtual
address spaces allocated to VMs exceeds the size of the physical memory), demand-based paging
and lazy allocation based on actual memory use, swapping of unused memory to disk, copy-on-
write, page migration, transparent huge pages, and so on. If VMs were allowed to use physical I/O
devices directly, these optimizations would not have been possible, because (1) I/O devices are
often capable of directly accessing the memory on their own without CPU involvement, (2) this
type of direct access does not tolerate page faults, and (3) hypervisors have no general way to know
which memory regions would serve as target locations of such direct device accesses. We further
discuss this issue below.

          In summary, classic I/O virtualization is implemented via I/O interposition,
          which provides many advantages such as added features and state encapsula-
          tion that allows for migration.
      .

6.2       PHYSICAL I/O
e previous section conducted a high-level discussion about the advantages of traditional virtual
I/O. Next, our goal is to describe how virtual I/O really works. In order to do that, we first need a
better understanding of physical I/O, as virtual machines believe that they perform such I/O, and
it is the hypervisor’s job to maintain this illusion. A lot of topics, details, and legacy issues fall under
the title of physical I/O that hypervisors need to virtualize—much too many to fit in the limited
space of this book. erefore, in this section, we only briefly describe some key mechanisms that
are required to allow us to explain the more important aspects of virtual I/O; these mechanisms
would then be used in the following sections. Readers who already have reasonable understanding
regarding how physical I/O works, notably over PCIe fabrics, may skip this section.
        DRAM                                                                                                                      DRAM
                               CPU1 up to 22 cores                                 CPU2 up to 22 cores
                   DDR4                                                                                                  DDR4
                                                                        QPI link

                               Controller

                                                                                                        Controller
                               Memory

                                                                                                        Memory
                   DDR4                             Xeon                            Xeon                                 DDR4
                                                   E5-2600                         E5-2600
                   DDR4                              v4                 QPI link     v4                                  DDR4
                   DDR4                                                                                                  DDR4
                               Host to    Host to                                          Host to
                              DMI bridge PCI bridge                                       PCI bridge

                                                                                   PCIe

                                                                                                            PCIe
                                       DMI
                                                                 Total 40                                            Total 40

                                                       PCIe x8

                                                                                              PCIe x8
        HDDs                                                     PCIe lines                                          PCIe lines
                 SATA                                            to CPU1                                             to CPU2

                               C610
                               series                                                           SSD
                              I/O hub
                 USB
     USB flash
                                                     Intel 40GbE PCIe                        Intel NVMe SSD
                  VGA                        PS2     ethernet adapter
       Display

                        Keyboard                    Mouse

Figure 6.2: High-level view of a possible internal organization of an Intel server. In this example,
 the server houses two CPUs from the E5-2600 v4 family, each of which may consist of 4–22 cores,
 depending on the specific model.

 6.2.1 DISCOVERING AND INTERACTING WITH I/O DEVICES
 A typical computer consists of a wide variety of I/O devices, including network controllers, disk
 drives, video, mouse, and keyboard. Figure 6.2 depicts a high-level view of a possible organization
 of a modern Intel server. Such a system may house several CPU packages, which communicate via
 the Intel QuickPath Interconnect (QPI) [134]. CPU cores access the memory modules (DIMMs)
 through their memory controllers, and they communicate with the various I/O devices through
 the relevant host bridges. Notably, communications with Peripheral Component Interconnect
 Express (PCIe) devices flow through the host-to-PCIe bridge [141]. e PCIe fabric poses the
 greatest challenge for efficient virtualization, because it delivers the highest throughput as com-
 pared to other local I/O fabrics. For this reason, hardware support for I/O virtualization largely
 focuses on PCIe; this chapter likewise focuses on virtualizing PCIe devices, for the same reason.
        Upon startup, at boot time, the operating system kernel must somehow figure out which
 devices are available in the physical machine. e exact way to obtain this goal is nontrivial; it
 varies and depends on several factors, but typically it involves the Basic Input/Output System
 (BIOS) firmware [63], or its successor, the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) [170].
 e firmware (BIOS or UEFI) then provides a description of the available devices in some
 standard format, such as the one dictated by the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface
 (ACPI) [169]. In §6.2.3, we provide a detailed example of how PCIe devices are discovered. Gen-
erally speaking, however, the device discovery process requires the host OS to query the physical
firmware/hardware. us, when virtualizing the OS, it will be the hypervisor that will be queried,
allowing it to present devices as it sees fit to the guest OS, irrespective of the real physical devices.
       Let us assume that the I/O devices have been discovered. In this state, they interact with
the CPU and the memory in three ways, as depicted in Figure 6.3 and as discussed next.

                                         CPU Package
                           Core

                                                                Controller
                                                                Memory
                                                                                          RAM

                                                                             (2) DMA
                                    Host Bridge

             (1) MMIO           (3)
                 and PIO     Interrupt                      Local I/O Bus

                I/O Device                I/O Device              I/O Device

Figure 6.3: ere are three ways that I/O devices can interact with the CPU and the memory:
(1) MMIO and PIO allow CPU cores to communicate with I/O devices; (2) DMA allows I/O devices
to access the memory; and (3) interrupts allow I/O devices to communicate with CPU cores.

PIO and MMIO: Port-mapped I/O (PIO) and memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) provide the
most basic method for CPUs to interact with I/O devices. e BIOS or UEFI associate the
registers of the I/O devices with unique, dedicated addresses. e CPU often uses these addresses
to implement control channels, namely to send commands to the I/O devices and then to receive
the corresponding statuses by polling the appropriate registers for reading.
       Addresses of PIO—called “ports”—are separated from the memory address space and have
their own dedicated physical bus. Such addresses are typically limited to 16 bits. ey are used via
the special OUT and IN x86 instructions, which write/read 1–4 bytes to/from the I/O devices.
e addresses are usually well known and set by hardware vendors; for example, ports 0x0060–
0x0064 are used to read from and send commands to keyboards and mice with PS/2 connectors.
       MMIO is similar, but the device registers are associated with physical memory addresses,
and they are referred to using regular load and store x86 operations through the memory bus. e
association between device registers and memory addresses is predetermined on startup. e host
bridge controller and memory controller are aware of these associations and route data accordingly.
84   6. X86-64: I/O VIRTUALIZATION
 DMA: Using PIO and MMIO to move large amounts of data from I/O devices to memory
 and vice versa can be highly inefficient. Such data transfers might take a long time, during which
 the core must be continuously and synchronously involved to perform explicit in/out/load/store
 instructions. A better, more performant alternative is to allow I/O devices to access the mem-
 ory directly, without CPU core involvement. Such interaction is made possible with the Direct
 Memory Access (DMA) mechanism. e core only initiates the DMA operation, asking the I/O
 device to asynchronously notify it when the operation completes (via an interrupt, as discussed
 next). e core is then free to engage in other unrelated activities between the DMA initiation
 and completion.

 Interrupts: I/O devices trigger asynchronous event notifications directed at the CPU cores by
 issuing interrupts. Each interrupt is associated with a number (denoted “interrupt vector”), which
 corresponds to an entry in the x86 Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT). e IDT is populated on
 startup by the OS with (up to) 256 pointers to interrupt-handler OS routines. When an interrupt
 fires, the hardware invokes the associated routine on the target core, using the interrupt vector
 to index the IDT. e OS declares the location and size of the IDT in a per-core IDT register
 (IDTR). e IDTR value can be different or the same across cores; it holds a virtual address.

 LAPIC: During execution, the OS occasionally performs interrupt-related operations, includ-
 ing: enabling and disabling interrupts; notifying the hardware upon interrupt handling comple-
 tion; sending inter-processor interrupts (IPIs) between cores; and configuring the timer to deliver
 clock interrupts. All these operations are performed through the per-core Local Advanced Pro-
 grammable Interrupt Controller (LAPIC). e LAPIC interrupt request register (IRR) consti-
 tutes a 256-bit read-only bitmap marking fired interrupt requests that have not yet been handled
 by the core. e LAPIC in-service register (ISR) similarly marks interrupts that are currently be-
 ing handled. When the OS enables interrupt delivery, the LAPIC clears the highest-priority bit
 in the IRR, sets it in the ISR, and invokes the corresponding handler. e OS signals the comple-
 tion of the handling of the interrupt via the end-of-interrupt (EOI) LAPIC register, which clears
 the highest-priority bit in the ISR. Interrupts are sent to other cores using the interrupt command
 register (ICR). Registers of the newest LAPIC interface, x2APIC, are accessed through read and
 write operations of model-specific registers (MSRs), as opposed to previous interfaces (such as
 xAPIC) that were accessed via regular load/store operations from/to a predefined MMIO area.

 6.2.2 DRIVING DEVICES THROUGH RING BUFFERS
 I/O devices, such as PCIe solid state drives (SSDs) and network controller (NICs), can deliver
 high throughput rates. For example, as of this writing, devices that deliver 10–100 Gbit/s are a
 commodity. To understand how such high-throughput devices are virtualized, it would be helpful
 to understand how they work. Overwhelmingly, these devices stream their I/O through one or
 more producer/consumer ring buffers. A ring is a memory array shared between the OS device
 driver and the associated device, as illustrated in Figure 6.4. e ring is circular in that the device
                    I/O Device Registers                            DRAM

                                                    N-1
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●

                 (Updated by OS)       Tail            6                 Target Buffer
                                                       5
                                                                         Target Buffer
                                                       4
                                                       3
                                                                         Target Buffer
              (Updated by device)     Head             2
                                                       1                 Target Buffer
                                      Base             0
              (Configured by OS)
                                     Size=N                Ring Buffer

Figure 6.4: High-throughput I/O devices typically use a ring buffer to communicate with their OS
device driver. e shaded area marks the range of DMA descriptors currently accessible to the device.
Each entry points to a DMA target buffer. e device will write incoming data into DMA target
buffers or read outgoing data from DMA target buffers, depending on the direction of the DMA.

and driver wrap around to the beginning of the array when they reach its end. e entries in
the ring are called DMA descriptors. eir exact format and content may vary between I/O
devices, but they typically specify at least the address and size of the corresponding DMA target
buffers—the memory areas used by the device DMAs to write/read incoming/outgoing data. e
descriptors also commonly contain status bits that help the driver and the device to synchronize.
       Devices must also know the direction of each requested DMA, namely, whether the data
should be transmitted from memory (into the device) or received (from the device) into memory.
e direction can be specified in the descriptor, as is typical for disk drives, or the device can
employ different rings for receive and transmit activity, as is typical for NICs. (In the latter case,
the direction is implied by the ring.) e NIC receive and transmit rings are denoted Rx and Tx,
respectively. NICs employ at least one Rx and one Tx per port (physical cable). ey may employ
multiple Rx/Tx rings per port to promote scalability, as different rings can be easily handled
concurrently by different cores.
       Upon initialization, the OS device driver allocates the rings and configures the I/O device
with the ring sizes and base locations. For each ring, the device and driver utilize a head and a
tail pointers to delimit the ring content that can be used by the device: [head,tail ). e base, size,
head, and tail registers of the device ring are accessible to the OS driver via MMIO. e device
iteratively consumes (removes) descriptors from the head, and it increments the head to point
to the next descriptor to be used subsequently. Similarly, the driver adds descriptors to the tail,
incrementing the tail to point to the entry that it will use subsequently. e Rx ring is full during
86   6. X86-64: I/O VIRTUALIZATION
 a period of I/O inactivity. e Tx ring is empty during a period of I/O inactivity. e device
 and driver may distinguish between ring emptiness and fullness—when head and tail point to
 the same location in Figure 6.4—using the aforementioned descriptor status bits; for example,
 “produced” and “consumed” bits that are set by the driver and the device, respectively.
         To illustrate, assume the OS wants to transmit two packets after a period of network inac-
 tivity. Initially, the Tx head and tail point to the same descriptor k , signifying (with status bits)
 that Tx is empty. e OS driver sets the k and k C 1 descriptors to point to the two packets, turns
 on their “produced” bits, and lets the NIC know that new packets are pending by updating the
 tail register to point to k C 2 (modulo N ). e NIC sequentially processes the packets, beginning
 at the head (k ), which is incremented until it reaches the tail (k C 2). With Tx, the head always
 “chases” the tail throughout the execution, meaning the NIC tries to send the packets as fast as
 it can.
         e device asynchronously informs its OS driver that data was transmitted or received by
 triggering an interrupt. e device coalesces interrupts when their rate is high. Upon receiving an
 interrupt, the driver of a high-throughput device handles the I/O burst. Namely, it sequentially
 iterates through and processes all the descriptors whose corresponding DMAs have completed.
 In the case of Rx, for example, processing includes handing the received packets to the TCP/IP
 stack and rearming the Rx ring with new buffers.

 6.2.3 PCIE
 As noted above, much of the advancements in hardware support for I/O virtualization re-
 volve around PCI Express (Peripheral Component Interconnect Express; officially abbreviated
 as PCIe) [141], which is a specification of a local serial bus that is standardized by the PCI Spe-
 cial Interest Group (PCI-SIG) industry consortium. Architecturally, PCIe is similar to a lossless
 network infrastructure: it consists of a layers (transaction, data link, physical); it transmits pack-
 ets over links from one node to another according to well-defined routing rules; and it has flow
 control, error detection, retransmission, and quality of service.

 Hierarchy: e topology of the PCIe fabric is arranged as a tree, as illustrated in Figure 6.5.
 (We will later see that hardware support for I/O virtualization dictates dynamic runtime changes
 in this tree.) e root of the tree is the host bridge (also shown in Figure 6.3), which channels all
 types of PCIe traffic to/from the cores/memory: PIO, MMIO, DMA, and interrupts. e host
 bridge resides in the Root Complex (RC), usually on the CPU. e edges of the tree are PCIe
 buses, and the nodes of the tree are PCIe functions. Functions are either bridges (inner nodes)
 or endpoints (leaves or root). Endpoints correspond to individual I/O channels in physical PCIe
 devices; for example, a dual-port NIC has two endpoints—one per port. A bridge connects two
 buses, and a switch aggregates two or more bridges. A bus connects one upstream node to at most
 32 downstream devices, such that each device houses up to 8 PCIe functions. Each bus consists
 of 1–32 PCIe lanes (unrelated to the hierarchy); in the current version of PCIe (v3), each lane
 delivers 985 MB/s, both upstream (toward the RC) and downstream (toward the endpoint).
                CPU Package                                                PCIe Switch

                                                                                       bus dev fun bus 3        bus dev fun
    Memory Controller                                                                   2 0 0                     3 0 0

                                                                               bus 2
                                                                                       pri sec sub                3 0 1
                                                                                        2 3 3
                       Root Complex (RC)
                                                                                                                bus dev fun
  Core                                bus dev fun       bus 1     bus dev fun          bus dev fun bus 4          4 0 0
                                       0 1 0                       1 0 0                2 1 0
                                                                                                                  4 0 1
                                      pri sec sub                 pri sec sub          pri sec sub                4 0 2
  Core           Host Bridge           0 1 5                       1 2 5                2 4 4                    … … …

                                    bus 0
                  bus dev fun                                                                                     4 0 6
                                                                                       bus dev fun                4 0 7
                   0 0 0
  Core                                                                                  2 2 0
                                      bus dev fun                                                  bus 5        bus dev fun
                                                                                       pri sec sub
                                       0 2 0                                            2 5 5                     5 0 0
                                      pri sec sub
  Core                                 0 6 6

                                                                                       bus 6                    bus dev fun
                              bus dev fun                                                                         6 0 0
      PCIe Bus
                              pri sec sub              bus dev fun

  PCIe Function               PCIe Bridge            PCIe Endpoint

Figure 6.5: PCIe tree topology example. e abbreviations “dev”, and “fun” stand for device and
function. e abbreviations “pri”, “sec”, and “sub” stand for primary, secondary, and subordinate.

Node Enumeration: Every PCIe function (node) and PCIe bus (edge) in the PCIe graph is
uniquely identified. Let N be a PCIe node in the tree. N’s identifier is a 16-bit number in the
form of bus:device.function (BDF), such that bus, device, and function consist of 8, 5, and 3
bits.¹ As can be seen in Figure 6.5, N’s bus is the number of the bus that directly connects to
N from upstream—let us denote this bus as B. N’s device is a serial number belonging to the

¹Be warned of the overloaded terms. A function number is different than a PCIe function. e former is a 3-bit index,
 whereas the latter is physical hardware, as well as the type of the node of the PCIe tree identified by a full BDF. e same
 applies to the device 5-bit number, which is different than a physical device, which serves as an aggregator of PCIe functions.
 enumeration of all the devices that are immediately reachable through B. Finally, N’s function is
 a serial number belonging to the enumeration of all the functions housed by N’s encapsulating
 device. For example, in Figure 6.5, 3:0.0 (top/right) is an endpoint PCIe function that resides
 in the first (and only) downstream device reachable through Bus 3; 3:0.1 is the second PCIe
 function in the same device; and 2:2.0 is a bridge PCIe function residing in the third device
 reachable through Bus 2.

 Edge Enumeration: Figure 6.5 shows that the PCIe graph edges (buses) are uniquely numbered
 from 0 and up. e maximal number of buses in the system is 256 (as bus has 8 bits). Recursively,
 buses that are descendants of some bus B are numerically larger than B, and buses that are ances-
 tors of B are numerically smaller. is enumeration allows every PCIe bridge G to be associated
 with three buses: primary, secondary, and subordinate. e primary and secondary are, respec-
 tively, the upstream and downstream buses that G connects. G’s subordinate is its numerically
 largest descendant bus. In follows that the numeric identifiers of all the buses that reside under
 G range from its secondary bus to its subordinate bus. For example, the buses under bridge 1:0.0
 range from 2 (secondary) to 5 (subordinate). Importantly, the primary/secondary/subordinate
 per-bridge attributes accurately describe the PCIe hierarchy and determine how PCIe packets
 are routed.

 Configuration Space: As noted in §6.2.1, on startup, the OS typically discovers the system’s I/O
 devices by using the BIOS/UEFI firmware, which provides device information via some standard
 format like ACPI tables. For PCIe devices, discovery involves the PCIe configuration space array,
 as depicted in Figure 6.6. is array is accessible to the OS via MMIO operations. Later on, when
 we virtualize the OS, we will need to simulate this array for the VM.
        e OS can find the array’s address and size in the standard “MCFG” APCI table (Fig-
 ure 6.6a).² In our example, MCFG indicates that the array should include an entry for every valid
 BDF. Since there are (216 =) 64 KB such BDFs, and since PCIe specifies that the per-BDF con-
 figuration space size is 4 KB, then the array size is (64 KB ? 4 KB =) 256 MB. e configuration
 space associated with a given BDF can be found by adding 4 KB ? BDF to the address of the
 array.
        e 4 KB configuration space of a PCIe node identified by BDF consists of three parts
 (Figure 6.6c). e first 256 bytes constitute a valid PCI (rather than PCIe) configuration space,
 for backward compatibility (PCIe superseded PCI). Of these, the first 64 bytes constitutes the
 header (Figure 6.6d), which identifies such attributes as the functional class of the device (net-
 work, storage, etc.), the vendor ID (assigned by PCI-SIG), and the device ID (assigned by the
 vendor). ese attributes allow the OS to identify the devices, associate them with appropriate
 drivers, initialize them, and make them available for general use.

     ²Running the “dmesg j grep MMCONFIG” shell command in Linux prints the line that contains the string MMCONFIG
      in the output of the OS boot process. (MMCONFIG stands for “memory-mapped configuration space”). e result is: PCI:
      MMCONFIG for domain 0000 [bus 00-ff] at [mem 0xe0000000-0xefffffff], in accordance to Figure 6.6b.

ACPI MCFG                                                                                   4 KB PCIe           64 B PCI endpoint
  Table                                          Memory                                    Config Space        Config Space Header
   start bus: 0
  end bus: 255
                                                                                                                         …
  base address:   0xEFFFFFFF
  0xE0000000                                  4 KB config space                                 PCIe
                                                                                              extended

                    256MB PCIe config space
                                              4 KB config space                                                        BAR 5
                                                                                               config
                                                                                              registers

                        array (MMIO)
                                              4 KB config space                                                          …

                                                                                                                       BAR 1
                                                                                                                       BAR 0

                                                                  256B PCIe config space
                                                     …
       …                                                                                        192 B
                                                                                              capability                 …
                                              4 KB config space                               structures
                  0xE0000000                                                                                          class ID
                                                     …                                                                device ID
                                                                                           64 B PCI config
                                                                                            space header             vendor ID

       (a)                                          (b)                                          (c)                    (d)

Figure 6.6: e PCIe configuration space on x86 is accessible via the MCFG APCI table. Sub-
figure (d) depicts the header of an endpoint. e header of a bridge is somewhat different; notably, it
specifies the bridge’s primary, secondary, and subordinate buses, thereby allowing the OS to reconstruct
the PCIe tree.

       Each endpoint can have up to six Base Address Registers (BARs), which publicize the
MMIO (or PIO) addresses to be used when the OS wishes to interact with the device—the
locations where device registers are found. For example, in the device depicted in Figure 6.4,
corresponding configuration space BARs will specify where to find the head, tail, base, and size
registers. e exact semantics of the areas pointed to by the BARs are determined by the manu-
facturers of the devices.

MSI: So far, we considered two address space types for I/O: port-mapped (PIO) and memory-
mapped (MMIO). PCIe supports a third type—for interrupts. Message Signaled Interrupts
(MSI) allow a device to send a PCIe packet whose destination is a LAPIC of a core; the third
address space is thus populated with addresses of all the system’s LAPICs. An MSI interrupt
is similar to a DMA operation, but instead of targeting the memory, it targets a LAPIC. e
MSI interrupt propagates upstream through the PCIe hierarchy until it reaches the host bridge
(Figure 6.5), which forwards it to the destination LAPIC that is encoded in the packet.
90     6. X86-64: I/O VIRTUALIZATION
       e OS configures a device to use MSI interrupts by writing the address of the target
 LAPIC and the desired interrupt vector to the Message-Address and Message-Data registers,
 which reside in the capability structures area of the configuration space (middle part of Fig-
 ure 6.6c). When firing an interrupt, the device then sends the content of Message-Data to
 Message-Address. MSI supports up to 32 interrupts per device, whereas the newer MSI-X sup-
 ports up to 2048.³
       We remark that the OS configures the PCIe configuration space using the usual PIO/M-
 MIO mechanisms—from the OS perspective, the configuration space is really just another I/O
 device.

                In summary, OSes interact with I/O devices via PIO, MMIO, DMA,
                and interrupts mediated through LAPICs. OS drivers usually drive high-
                throughput I/O devices through ring buffers, which reside in MMIO space.
                PCIe devices are arranged in a BDF tree hierarchy. e PCIe configuration
                space encodes this hierarchy, while providing (MMIO) pointers to device reg-
                isters.
          .

 6.3          VIRTUAL I/O WITHOUT HARDWARE SUPPORT
 A guest operating system does not cease to behave as an operating system merely because it runs as
 a guest. Generally speaking, it still believes that it exclusively controls all the physical I/O devices,
 and it discovers, initializes, and drives these devices exactly as described in §6.2. e problem is
 that, without explicit hardware support, the hypervisor typically cannot allow the guest to interact
 with I/O devices in this way. Consider, for example, the system’s hard drive controller. is device
 must be safely shared between the hypervisor and its guests in a manner that allows all of them
 to peacefully co-exist. But our guest is unaware of the fact that it must share, and it would not
 know how even if it did. Consequently, allowing the guest to access the disk drive directly would
 most likely result in an immediate crash and permanent data loss. A similar case can be made for
 other I/O devices.
        To avoid this problem, the hypervisor must prevent guests from accessing real devices while
 sustaining the illusion that devices can be accessed; the hypervisor must therefore “fake” I/O
 devices for its guests, denoted as virtual I/O devices. e hypervisor achieves this goal by trapping
 all the guest’s I/O-related operations and by emulating them to achieve the desired effect.

     ³MSI/MSI-X replaced the legacy IOAPIC: an interrupt controller for the entire CPU package that interacted with individual
      LAPICs. IOAPIC supported only 24 interrupts, it sometimes violated DMA/interrupt ordering, and it required dedicated
      wiring.
                                       6.3. VIRTUAL I/O WITHOUT HARDWARE SUPPORT                   91
6.3.1 I/O EMULATION (FULL VIRTUALIZATION)
In §1.5, we briefly mentioned the concept of I/O emulation, which may also be called full I/O
virtualization. Here we describe in more detail how this concept is realized. In §6.2.1, we have
noted that (1) the OS discovers and “talks” to I/O devices by using MMIO and PIO operations,
and that (2) the I/O devices respond by triggering interrupts and by reading/writing data to/from
memory via DMAs. Importantly, no other type of OS/device interaction exists. e hypervisor
can therefore support the illusion that the guest controls the devices by (1) arranging things such
that every guest’s PIO and MMIO will trap into the hypervisor, and by (2) responding to these
PIOs and MMIOs as real devices would: injecting interrupts to the guest and reading/writing
to/from its (guest-physical) memory as if performing DMAs.
       Emulating DMAs to/from guest memory is trivial for the hypervisor, because it can read
from and write to this memory as it pleases. Guest’s MMIOs are regular loads/stores from/to
guest memory pages, so the hypervisor can arrange for these memory accesses to trap by map-
ping the pages as reserved/non-present (both loads and stores trigger exits) or as read-only (only
stores trigger exits). Guest’s PIOs are privileged instructions, and the hypervisor can configure the
guest’s VMCS to trap upon them. Likewise, the hypervisor can use the VMCS to inject interrupts
to the guest. (Before VT-x and VMCSes: the hypervisor injected interrupts by directly invoking
the appropriate interrupt handler routine pointed to by the guest’s IDT, which was emulated by
the hypervisor; PIOs were replaced by hypercalls using dynamic binary translation; and MMIOs
and DMAs were emulated identically to how they are emulated with VT-x, as described above.)
       Figure 6.7 schematically illustrates the aforementioned interactions for the KVM/QEMU
hypervisor. Generally, every hosted virtual machine is encapsulated within a QEMU process,
such that different VMs reside in different processes. Internally, a QEMU process represents the
VCPUs (virtual cores) of its VM using different threads. Additionally, for every virtual device that
QEMU hands to its VM, it spawns another thread, denoted as “I/O thread”. VCPU threads have
two execution contexts: one for the guest VM and one for the host QEMU. e role of the host
VCPU context is to handle exits of the guest VCPU context. e role of the I/O thread is to handle
asynchronous activity related to the corresponding virtual device, which is not synchronously
initiated by guest VCPU contexts. For example, handling incoming network packets.
       e illustration in Figure 6.7 depicts a VM that has two VCPUs and one I/O device. e
guest VM device driver issues MMIOs/PIOs to drive the device. But the device is virtual, so
these operations are directed at ordinary, read/write-protected memory locations, triggering exits
that suspend the VM VCPU context and invoke KVM. e latter relays the events back to the
very same VCPU thread, but to its host, rather than guest, execution context. QEMU’s device
emulation layer then processes these events, using the physical resources of the system, typically
through regular system calls. e emulation layer emulates DMAs by writing/reading to/from
the guest’s I/O buffers, which are accessible to it via shared memory. It then resumes the guest
execution context via KVM, possibly injecting an interrupt to signal to the guest that I/O events
occurred.

                        QEMU I/O Thread
                  QEMU Thread—VCPU 1
              QEMU Thread—VCPU 0

     User
               Guest

                                                  shared memory
                          Device Driver                               Device Emulation

                                                                                    system calls
              KVM
                                                      exit
     Kernel

                                          resume/inject interrupt
              Linux

                       white background Guest                 gray background Hypervisor

Figure 6.7: I/O emulation in the KVM/QEMU hypervisor. e guest device driver and QEMU’s
 device emulation are operational in all VCPU threads (shown only in VCPU 0). e host execution
 context of the VCPU handles synchronous exits of the guest execution context. e I/O thread handles
 asynchronous activity. e shared memory channel corresponds to buffers that the guest posts for
 DMA.

        By utilizing the emulation technique we just described, the hypervisor can decide which set
 of virtual I/O devices to expose to the guest. Figure 6.8 lists the set of PCI devices exposed to a
 typical Linux virtual machine hosted by QEMU/KVM. e figure shows the output of the lspci
 shell utility when invoked inside the VM (lspci prints the configuration space hierarchy depicted
 in Figure 6.6). Different than a bare-metal OS, the guest’s lspci does not read the real ACPI
 tables and configuration space that were established by the real BIOS/UEFI firmware. Instead, it
 reads the content of emulated ACPI tables and configuration space, as generated by an emulated
 BIOS/UEFI. We can see that, by default, QEMU emulates the Intel 440FX host bridge controller
 as the root of the BDF hierarchy (00:0.0). In this hierarchy, we can further see that QEMU
 emulates two NICs for this VM: Intel’s 82540EM Gigabit Ethernet Controller (00:03.0), and
 Red Hat’s Virtio network device (00:04.0). Next, we discuss the emulated Intel NIC, to give one
 concrete example of how I/O emulation works for a specific device. We defer discussion about
 the other NIC to §6.3.2, where we define, motivate, and explain I/O paravirtualization.
                                        6.3. VIRTUAL I/O WITHOUT HARDWARE SUPPORT                     93
  00:00.0 Host bridge: Intel Corporation 440FX - 82441FX PMC [Natoma] (rev 02)
  00:01.0 ISA bridge: Intel Corporation 82371SB PIIX3 ISA [Natoma/Triton II]
  00:01.1 IDE interface: Intel Corporation 82371SB PIIX3 IDE [Natoma/Triton II]
  00:01.3 Bridge: Intel Corporation 82371AB/EB/MB PIIX4 ACPI (rev 03)
  00:02.0 VGA compatible controller: Device 1234:1111 (rev 02)
  00:03.0 Ethernet controller: Intel Corporation 82540EM Gigabit Ethernet
  00:04.0 Ethernet controller: Red Hat, Inc Virtio network device
  00:05.0 SCSI storage controller: Red Hat, Inc Virtio block device

Figure 6.8: Output of the lspci shell command executed within a typical Linux VM, which is running
on top of the KVM/QEMU hypervisor.

  00:03.0 Ethernet controller: Intel 82540EM Gigabit Ethernet Controller
          Flags: bus master, fast devsel, latency 0, IRQ 11
          Memory at febc0000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=128K]
          I/O ports at c000 [size=64]
          Expansion ROM at feb40000 [disabled] [size=256K]
          Kernel driver in use: e1000

Figure 6.9: Partial lspci output for the emulated Intel NIC, identifying its guest driver as e1000, and
revealing its MMIO BAR addresses (0xfebc0000) as specified in its emulated configuration space.

e1000: e 82540EM NIC corresponds to an old network controller that was launched by Intel
in 2002 [100] and has since been superseded by multiple generations of newer models. Naturally,
our physical host machine does not have this NIC (it is equipped with a newer model by a different
vendor). e NIC’s physical absence is not an issue, however, as it is emulated purely by software.
In fact, the 82540EM is so old that it predates PCIe and only supports PCI. But this too is not
a issue (regardless of PCIe being backward compatible with PCI), because QEMU exposes the
BDF hierarchy as PCI in any case. at is, the emulated 00:00.0 Intel 440FX host bridge (root
of BDF hierarchy) is a PCI- rather than PCIe-to-host bridge. Since the bridge is emulated by
software, it does not matter that the underlying physical I/O system uses the newer PCIe fabric.
       e 82540EM model of the emulated Intel NIC is not particularly special or important
in any sense. What is important is for the VM to have an appropriate driver for the hypervisor
to match with its own network emulation layer, such that these two software components would
be compatible (the two rounded rectangles in Figure 6.7). Using the lspci utility, we can print
detailed configuration space and other information of PCI devices. Figure 6.9 shows some of
this information for our emulated Intel NIC. e last line indicates that the guest kernel driver
associated with this NIC is e1000 [99]. e latter is the name of a legacy Intel driver that ships by
default with all prevalent OSes, and has been shipping with them for years. As such, all prevalent
hypervisors rely on the presence of e1000 in guest OSes to provide default networking capabilities,
utilizing it as the de-facto standard for network emulation. e e1000 driver supports the family
of Intel’s PCI/PCI-X Gigabit Ethernet NICs (the 82540EM is simply a member of this family).
       e third line in Figure 6.9 specifies the MMIO BAR address of the emulated NIC, where
its registers are found. e semantics of the registers and their exact location relative to the BAR
are determined by the specification of the NIC [101]. Table 6.1 lists some of the central registers
 used by the e1000 driver. e receive and transmit categories directly correspond to the base,
 size, head, and tail registers of the Rx and Tx rings, as described in §6.2.2. When the guest
 attempts to access a register, KVM suspends it and resumes QEMU host context, providing it
 with the register’s address and a description of the attempted operation. QEMU then responds
 appropriately based on the NIC specification. By faithfully adhering to this specification, and by
 using the same BAR, the emulation layer behaves exactly as the guest e1000 driver expects and
 produces an outcome identical to a functionally-equivalent physical NIC.

Table 6.1: Key NIC registers [101] used by the e1000 driver [99]. When added to the MMIO BAR
 specified in the configuration space, the offset provides the address of the corresponding registers.

     Category Name       Abbreviates                        Offset    Description
     receive  RDBAH      receive descriptor base address    0x02800   base address of Rx ring
              RDLEN      receive descriptor length          0x02808   Rx ring size
              RDH        receive descriptor head            0x02810   pointer to head of Rx ring
              RDT        receive descriptor tail            0x02818   pointer to tail of Rx ring
     transmit TDBAH      transmit descriptor base address   0x03800   base address of Tx ring
              TDLEN      transmit descriptor length         0x03808   Tx ring size
              TDH        transmit descriptor head           0x03810   pointer to head of Tx ring
              TDT        transmit descriptor tail           0x03818   pointer to tail of Tx ring
     other    STATUS     status                             0x00008   current device status
              ICR        interrupt cause read               0x000C0   bitmap of causes
              IMS        interrupt mask set                 0x000D0   enable interrupts
              IMC        interrupt mask clear               0x000D8   disable interrupts

        e QEMU e1000 emulation layer (file hw/net/e1000.c in the QEMU codebase) imple-
 ments the NIC registers by utilizing an array named mac_reg. According to the NIC specifica-
 tion, for example, the ICR register (which specifies the reason for the last interrupt) is cleared
 upon a read. us, when the guest reads the emulated ICR, the read operation triggers an exit,
 which transfers control to KVM, which resumes the host context of QEMU, which analyzes the
 instruction that triggered the exit and consequently invokes the mac_icr_read routine. e code
 of mac_icr_read is listed in Figure 6.10. As can be seen, the emulation layer correctly emulates
 the NIC’s specification by first saving the ICR value in a local variable, zeroing the register, and
 only then returning the previous value.

 6.3.2 I/O PARAVIRTUALIZATION
 While I/O emulation implements a correct behavior, it might induce substantial performance
 overheads, because efficient emulation was not recognized as a desirable feature when the phys-
                                             6.3. VIRTUAL I/O WITHOUT HARDWARE SUPPORT                 95

   s t a t i c u i n t 3 2 _ t mac_icr_read ( E1000State * s )
   {
           u i n t 3 2 _ t r e t = s >m a c _ r e g [ ICR ] ;
           s >m a c _ r e g [ ICR ] = 0 ;
           return ret ;
   }

Figure 6.10: e QEMU routine that emulates guest e1000 ICR read operations (simplified version).

ical device was designed. It is probably safe to assume that the original designers of the Intel
82540EM Gigabit Ethernet Controller were not aware of the possibility that this device will be
routinely virtualized, let alone that its interface would become the de-facto standard for network
virtualization. Indeed, sending/receiving a single Ethernet frame via e1000 involves multiple reg-
ister accesses, which translate to multiple exits per frame in virtualized setups.
       ere are other contributing factors to the overheads of emulation. For example, some read-
only e1000 NIC registers are frequently accessed but do not have side-effects when they are being
read. Consider the STATUS register, for example, which is accessed twice for every sent message.
STATUS reports the current status of the NIC without changing the NIC’s state. us, in prin-
ciple, the hypervisor could have supported STATUS reads that do not trigger exits, by providing
the VM with read-only permissions for this register. But this potential optimization is not pos-
sible. Because efficient virtualization was not a design goal, the NIC registers are tightly packed
in the MMIO space, such that STATUS and ICR reside on the same memory page. STATUS
must therefore be read-protected, because memory permissions work in page granularity, and
ICR must be read-protected for correctness (Figure 6.10).
       Virtualization overheads caused by inefficient interfaces of physical devices could, in prin-
ciple, be eliminated, if we redesign the devices to have virtualization-friendlier interfaces. Such a
redesign is likely impractical as far as physical devices are concerned. But it is practical for virtual
devices, which are exclusively implemented by software. is observation underlies I/O paravir-
tualization, whereby guests and hosts agree upon a (virtual) device specification to be used for I/O
emulation, with the explicit goal of minimizing overheads. Identically to baseline I/O emulation,
the guest uses a device driver that is served by a matching host emulation layer, as depicted in
Figure 6.7. e difference is that the specification of this virtual device is defined with virtual-
ization in mind, so as to minimize the number of exits. Such a device is said to be paravirtual
(rather than fully virtual), as it makes the guest “aware” that it is being virtualized: the guest
must install a special device driver that is only compatible with its hypervisor, not with any real
physical hardware.
       I/O paravirtualization offers substantial performance improvements for some workloads as
compared to I/O emulation. But there are also disadvantages. As noted, paravirtualization of-
tentimes requires that guest OS administrators install the paravirtual drivers. (Administrators of
production-critical servers usually tend to prefer not to install new software if they can help it,
 fearing that the new software is somehow incompatible with the existing software.) Paravirtual-
 ization is additionally less portable than emulation, as drivers that work for one hypervisor will
 typically not work for another. Additionally, hypervisor developers who wish to make paravirtual-
 ization available for their guest OSes will need to implement and maintain a (different) paravirtual
 device driver for every type of guest OS they choose to support.

 Virtio: e framework of paravirtual I/O devices of KVM/QEMU is called virtio [154, 168],
 offering a common guest-host interface and communication mechanism. Figure 6.11 shows some
 of the devices that are implemented using this framework, notably, network (virtio-net), block
 (virtio-blk), and character (virtio-console). As usual, each paravirtual device driver (top of the
 figure) corresponds to a matching emulation layer in the QEMU part of the hypervisor (bottom).
 Despite being paravirtual, virtio devices are exposed to guests like any other physical/emulated
 device and thus require no special treatment in terms of discovery and initialization. For example,
 in Figure 6.8, the BDF 00:04.0 is associated with a virtio-net NIC. e configuration space
 information of this NIC reveals all the data that is required in order to use this NIC, for example,
 the location of its Rx and Tx rings and their registers.
        e central construct of virtio is virtqueue, which is essentially a ring (Figure 6.4) where
 buffers are posted by the guest to be consumed by the host. Emulated devices are inefficient largely
 because every MMIO/PIO access implicitly triggers an exit. In contrast, guests that use virtqueues
 never trigger exits unless they consciously intend to do so, by invoking the virtqueue_kick
 function, to explicitly let the hypervisor know that they require service. By minimizing the number
 of kicks, guests reduce exit overheads and increase batching.
        In addition to the ring, each virtqueue is associated with two modes of execution that
 assist the guest and host to further reduce the number of interrupts and exits. e modes are
 NO_INTERRUPT and NO_NOTIFY (abbreviated names). When a guest turns on the NO_INTERRUPT
 mode, it informs the host to refrain from delivering interrupts associated with the paravirtual
 device until the guest turns off this mode. Virtio-net, for example, aggressively leverages this
 execution mode in the transmission virtqueue (Tx), because it does not typically care when the
 transmission finishes. Instead, virtio-net opts to recycle already-serviced Tx buffers just before
 posting additional buffers to be sent. Only when the virtqueue is nearly full does the guest turn
 off the NO_INTERRUPT mode, thereby enabling interrupts. is policy reduces the number of in-
 terrupts significantly.
        Symmetrically, when the host turns on the NO_NOTIFY mode, it informs the guest to refrain
 from kicking it. e host emulation side of virtio-net routinely uses this execution mode, because
 TCP traffic tends to be bursty. at is, packets and frames often show up together, in bursts. us,
 when a burst of frames is sent by the guest, the host only needs the first kick. It then knows that it
 should start processing the ring, which is done iteratively within a loop until no more frames are
 left to process. While iterating, the host needs no additional kicks. Hence, it turns NO_NOTIFY
 on until the end of the loop and thereby minimizes virtualization overheads.
                                              6.3. VIRTUAL I/O WITHOUT HARDWARE SUPPORT                                          97

  Guest Linux Kernel                                     Virtio
                                                  drivers/virtio/virtio.c

         Virtio-net                  Virtio-blk                      Virtio-console                 Virtio-balloon
    drivers/net/virtio_net.c   drivers/block/virtio_blk.c      drivers/char/virtio_console.c   drivers/virtio/virtio_balloon.c

         Virtio-net                  Virtio-blk                      Virtio-console                 Virtio-balloon
      hw/net/virtio_net.c       hw/block/virtio_blk.c            hw/char/virtio_console.c        hw/virtio/virtio_balloon.c

                                                         Virtio
  Host QEMU                                         hw/virtio/virtio.c

Figure 6.11: e virtio framework is used to implement paravirtual device drivers for various types
of I/O, including network I/O (Ethernet), block device I/O, console character device I/O, and bal-
looning. Baseline virtio implements virtqueue. e individual drivers use virtqueue according to their
needs. e device drivers shown are standard in Linux but do not typically ship with other OSes.

       Efficiently virtualizing the network is challenging, because of the staggering throughput
that modern NICs deliver, easily generating millions of packets per second, which the CPU needs
to handle. For this reason, the KVM/QEMU hypervisor makes an exception for paravirtual net-
working. In addition to virtio-net, it also supports vhost-net [166], which breaks the traditional
design of having the emulation layer entirely contained within QEMU—the userland part of
the hypervisor. Vhost-net provides the same functionality as virtio-net, but instead of forward-
ing all the I/O events to QEMU, it handles much of the packet processing in the Linux kernel.
In so doing, vhost-net nearly halves the number of context switches. Namely, virtio-net repeat-
edly context-switches between guest context and QEMU context via KVM (Figure 6.7), whereas
vhost-net usually returns to guest context directly from KVM, without going through QEMU.

Performance: We now experimentally compare I/O paravirtualization and I/O emulation, to
highlight their performance differences. Table 6.2 shows the results of running the Netperf TCP
stream benchmark [108] within a Linux VM configured to access the network via e1000 or virtio-
net (regular, not vhost). Netperf attempts to maximize throughput over a single TCP connection,
utilizing a 16 KB message size. In our experiment, the stream traffic is outgoing from Netperf
to its peer, which runs on the host system as an ordinary Linux process. (Namely, no traffic goes
through a physical NIC in this experiment—only the two competing virtual NICs are involved.)
e system is set to use a single core, which is saturated, spending 100% of its cycles on running
the benchmark.
98   6. X86-64: I/O VIRTUALIZATION
Table 6.2: Netperf TCP stream running in a Linux 3.13 VM on top of Linux/KVM (same version)
 and QEMU 2.2, equipped with e1000 or virtio-net NICs, on a Dell PowerEdge R610 host with a
 2.40GHz Xeon E5620 CPU
                               Metric                         e1000 Virtio-net Ratio
          Guest                throughput (Mbps)                 239     5,230   22x
                               exits per second               33,783     1,126 1/30x
                               interrupts per second           3,667       257 1/14x
          TCP segments         per exit                          1/9        25 225x
                               per interrupt                       1       118 118x
                               per second                      3,669    30,252    8x
                               avg. size (bytes)               8,168    21,611    3x
                               avg. processing time (cycles) 652,443    79,132 1/8x
          Ethernet frames      per second                     23,804         –     –
                               avg. size (bytes)               1,259         –     –

         By Table 6.2, virtio-net performs significantly better than e1000, delivering 22x higher
 throughput. Virtio-net’s superiority is, in fact, the result of three combined improvements. Much
 of virtio-net’s success stems from achieving its design goals of reducing the number of exits (30x
 less) and interrupts (14x less). Unsurprisingly, the main contributing factor responsible for the
 reduced overhead is the fact that, unlike e1000, virtio kicks KVM explicitly when needed, rather
 than implicitly triggering unintended exits due to legacy PIOs/MMIOs.
         Both e1000 and virtio-net drive Ethernet NICs. Consequently, their per-frame maximum
 transmission unit (MTU) is defined to be 1500 bytes. Nevertheless, the NICs support TCP seg-
 mentation offload (TSO), which allows the network stack to hand to them Tx segments of up
 to 64KB, trusting them to break down the segments into MTU-sized frames, on their own, be-
 fore transmission. e “segments per exit” metric in the table indicates that each segment requires
 nine exits to be processed with e1000. In contrast, with virtio-net, one exit is sufficient to transmit
 25 segments, demonstrating that the NO_NOTIFY virtqueue mode, which disables kicking during
 bursts of activity, is highly effective. Similarly, e1000 requires one interrupt per segment, whereas
 virtio-net leverages this single interrupt to process 118 segments. is difference indicates that
 the NO_INTERRUPT virtqueue mode, which disables interrupts when possible, is likewise effective.
         e quantity of exits and interrupts, however, tells only part of the story. ere are two
 additional factors involved in determining the measured performance. First, observe that the av-
 erage segment size of virtio-net is nearly 3x larger than that of e1000. e average segment size
 is in fact determined by the TCP/IP software stack of the guest. is stack employs a batching
 algorithm that aggregates messages, attempting to get more value from the NIC’s TSO capabil-
 ity, as larger segments translate to less cycles that the core must spend on processing the message.
                                               6.3. VIRTUAL I/O WITHOUT HARDWARE SUPPORT                               99
e profile of e1000 networking, which is much slower, discourages this sort of segment aggre-
gation. Consequently, its segments are smaller, which translates to fewer bytes transmitted per
exit/interrupt.
       e other contributing factor for the performance difference is the fact that much effort
went into optimizing the virtio-net code, as opposed to the e1000 code, which seems to exclu-
sively focus on correctness rather than performance. A striking example that demonstrates this
difference is the manner by which the TSO capability is virtualized. Both e1000 and virtio-net
(pretend to) support this capability, exposing it to the guest OS. Virtual NICs can leverage TSO
to accelerate performance in two ways: (1) if the traffic is internal to the host and does not involve
sending frames over physical Ethernet (as in our benchmarking setup), then no segmentation is
required, and it can be optimized away; and (2) if the traffic does flow through a physical NIC
to another host system, then the TSO capability of the physical NIC can be used, if available.
Wheres virtio-net employs both of these optimizations, e1000 employs neither, opting to per-
form segmentation in software at the QEMU emulation layer. Hence, we include the bottom part
of Table 6.2, which provides statistics regrading the Ethernet frames that the e1000 emulation
layer emits.

6.3.3 FRONT-ENDS AND BACK-ENDS
While this section has focused on I/O emulation and paravirtualization of the KVM/QEMU
hypervisor, all production hypervisors architect their virtual I/O stacks similarly. e stack consists
of two components. e first is a front-end, which encompasses a guest virtual device driver
and a matching hypervisor emulation layer that understands the device’s semantics and interacts
with the driver at the guest. e second component is a back-end, which is used by the front-
end to implement the functionality of the virtual device using the physical resources of the host
system. Among the two components, the front-end serves as the interface that is exposed to the
virtual machine, and the back-end serves as the underlying implementation. Importantly, the two
components are architected to be independent of each other. us, production hypervisors allow
users to compose their virtual machines from different front-ends and back-ends.⁴
       Figure 6.12 shows the emulated network front-ends and back-ends made available by
QEMU [148]. We have already mentioned e1000 and virtio-net. e rtl8139 corresponds to
an emulation of the Realtek RTL8139C(L)+ 10/100M Fast Ethernet Controller [150]. In terms
of back-ends, TAP is a virtual Ethernet network device, implemented in the kernel, that can
forward Ethernet frames to and from the process that connects to it. e Ethernet frames can
also be forwarded using a regular user-level socket, or over a Virtual Distributed Ethernet (VDE)
[174]. e MACVTAP back-end accelerates the performance of vhost-net by eliminating an ab-

⁴e terms front-end and back-end, when applied to I/O virtualization, are overloaded. ey are used differently and incon-
 sistently by different people in different contexts. e definitions presented here are consistent with the QEMU documenta-
 tion [148] and with the authoritative survey of Waldspurger and Rosenblum on I/O virtualization [178].

                         Virtio-net         Virtio-net          e1000              rlt8139

      Front-end
                          driver             driver             driver              driver
                                                                                                 Guest

                                                                                               Hypervisor
                         Vhost-net          Virtio-net         e1000              rlt8139
                         emulation          emulation         emulation          emulation

                        compatible                            compatible
      Back-end

                        MACVTAP                TAP              socket              VDE

 Figure 6.12: e QEMU network front-ends and back-ends are composable: virtual machines can
 be configured to use a certain front-end and any of its compatible back-ends.

 straction layer within the Linux kernel at the cost of losing routing flexibility (instead of going
 through a software bridge, the vhost-net traffic flows directly to a NIC) [167].
        Other device types offer different front-ends and back-ends. For example, when consid-
 ering storage, a VM may be configured to use, say, a SCSI, IDE, or paravirtual block device
 front-ends, and a local or remote file back-end.

                      In summary, hypervisors employ I/O emulation by redirecting guest MMIOs
                      and PIOs to read/write-protected memory. Emulation exposes virtual I/O
                      devices that are implemented in software but support hardware interfaces.
                      Paravirtualization improves upon emulation by favoring interfaces that min-
                      imize virtualization overheads. e downside of paravirtualization is that it
                      requires hypervisor developers to implement per-guest OS drivers, and it hin-
                      ders portability by requiring users to install hypervisor-specific software.
                  .

 6.4                  VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT
 In the beginning of §6.3, when we started the discussion about how virtual I/O is implemented,
 we ruled out the possibility to allow VMs to directly access physical devices, because they are not
 aware of the fact that they must share, which would undoubtedly result in undesirable behavior
 and possibly unrecoverable damage. is difficulty motivated device emulation and paravirtual-
 ization, which incur virtualization overheads but provide safe virtual I/O and the benefits of I/O
                                              6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT              101

                  Guest     Guest     Guest              Guest     Guest     Guest
                  VMO       VM1       VM2                VMO       VM1       VM2

                                      IO                                       IO
                          Hypervisor path                   Hypervisor        path

                       Host Hardware                      Host Hardware       IO
                                                                            device
               (a) Emulation/paravirtualization         (b) Direct device assignment

Figure 6.13: Direct device assignment exclusively dedicates an I/O device to a specific VM, improving
performance by reducing virtualization overheads at the cost of forgoing I/O interposition.

interposition outlined in §6.1. But if we are willing to forego I/O interposition and its many
advantages, there is in fact another, more performant alternative that reduces the overheads of
virtualization. Given a physical device d, the hypervisor may decide to assign the right to access
d exclusively to some specific virtual machine v, such that no other VM, and not even the hyper-
visor, are allowed access; the hypervisor can do so if it has an extra physical device that it does
not strictly need. is approach, denoted direct device assignment, is illustrated in Figure 6.13.
Seemingly, in such a setup, v can safely access d directly, since nobody else is using it. e upshot
would be better performance for v, because the overhead of virtualization would be significantly
reduced.
        Such naive device assignment may work in certain contexts, but it suffers from two serious
problems. e immediate one is lack of scalability. Extra physical I/O devices, if they exist, are
inherently limited in quantity. e number of virtual machines that a modern server can support
is much larger than the number of physical I/O devices that it can house. e second drawback
is less obvious but more severe. If v controls a device, then v can program the device to perform
DMA operations directed at any physical memory location. In other words, by assigning d to v, we
allow v to (indirectly) access the entire physical memory, including areas belonging to other VMs
or the hypervisor. erefore, by utilizing naive direct device assignment, we essentially eliminate
isolation between VMs. We thus have to trust v not to abuse its power, maliciously or mistakenly,
which is overwhelmingly unacceptable.
        Hardware support for I/O virtualization allows us to resolve the aforementioned two prob-
lems, and this section is dedicated to overviewing how. Specifically, the first part of the section
describes the hardware mechanisms that are able make direct device assignment both secure and
scalable. Security is obtained with the help of the I/O Memory Management Unit (IOMMU),
and scalability is obtained via Single-Root I/O Virtualization (SRIOV). e combination of
SRIOV and IOMMU makes device assignment a viable performant approach, leaving one last
 major source of virtualization overhead: interrupts. e second part of this section therefore de-
 scribes the hardware mechanisms that help hypervisors mitigate this overhead.

 6.4.1 IOMMU
 Recall that device drivers of the operating system initiate DMAs to asynchronously move data
 from devices into memory and vice versa, without having to otherwise involve the CPU (§6.3).
 Not so long ago, DMA operations could have only been applied to host-physical memory ad-
 dresses. In the ring buffer depicted in Figure 6.4, for example, this constraint means that the
 driver must use physical target buffers when populating the ring’s descriptors. e device then
 uses these addresses for DMA in their raw form—they do not undergo address translation.
        As noted, this DMA policy essentially means that virtual machines with assigned de-
 vices can indirectly read/write any memory location, effectively making MMU-enforced isola-
 tion meaningless. A second, less apparent problem is that such VMs can also indirectly trigger
 any interrupt vector they wish (explained below). e third problem has more of a technical
 nature. VMs do not know the (real) physical location of their DMA buffers, since they use guest-
 physical rather than host-physical addresses (Figure 5.1). Consequently, to be able to use DMAs
 of directly assigned devices, VMs must somehow become aware of the fact that their “physical”
 memory is not actually physical, and they need the hypervisor to expose to them the underlying
 host-physical addresses.
        To address all these problems, all major chip vendors introduced I/O memory management
 units (IOMMUs), notably in Intel’s Virtualization Technology for Directed I/O (VT-d) [106],
 AMD’s I/O Virtualization Technology (AMD-Vi) [11], ARM’s System Memory Management
 Unit Architecture Specification (IOMMU is called SMMU) [23], IBM POWER [93, 94], and
 Sun (later Oracle) SPARC [164]. While the IOMMU implementations differ, they have a similar
 functionality. Recall that this chapter focuses on VT-d.
        e IOMMU consists of two main components: a DMA remapping engine (DMAR) and
 an interrupt remapping engine (IR). DMAR allows DMAs to be carried out with I/O virtual
 addresses (IOVAs), which the IOMMU translates into physical addresses according to page tables
 that are set by the hypervisor. Likewise, IR translates interrupt vectors fired by devices based on
 an interrupt translation table configured by the hypervisor. IOVAs live in I/O address spaces that
 can overlap, be the same, or be completely different than host or guest address spaces.

 DMA Remapping: To simplify the explanation of DMAR, let us first consider bare metal se-
 tups, where there are only regular processes and no virtual machines. In such setups, the role the
 IOMMU plays for I/O devices is similar to the role the regular MMU plays for processes, as illus-
 trated in Figure 6.14a. Processes access the memory using virtual addresses, which are translated
 into physical addresses by the MMU. Analogously, I/O devices access the memory via DMAs
 associated with IOVAs, which are translated into physical addresses by the IOMMU. e OS
 controls how IOVAs get translated similarly to the manner by which it controls how regular virtual
 addresses get translated. Specifically, given a target memory buffer of a DMA, the OS associates
                                                             6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                       103

                                 Physical Memory          Physical Memory          Physical Memory

 Load and Store Operations
                                 PA          PA            hPA         hPA         hPA         hPA

                                                                                                         DMA Operations
                                 1D          1D           2D          1D           2D          2D
                                MMU        IOMMU         MMU        IOMMU         MMU        IOMMU

                                                                      IOVA                     IOVA
                                 VA         IOVA           gVA        (gPA)        gVA         (gVA)

                               Process    I/O device      Guest     I/O device    Guest     I/O device

                             (a) Bare metal, 1D-IOMMU   (b) Virtual, 1D-IOMMU    (c) Virtual, 2D-IOMMU

Figure 6.14: In non-virtual setups, the IOMMU is for devices what the MMU is for processes (a).
When virtual machines are involved, the usage model of the IOMMU (for facilitating direct device
assignment) depends on whether the IOMMU supports 1D or 2D page walks. With a 1D IOMMU,
the hypervisor does not expose an IOMMU to the guest, causing it to program DMAs with guest-
physical addresses (b). With a 2D IOMMU, the guest has its own IOMMU, to be programmed as it
pleases (c).

the physical address (PA) of that buffer with some IOVA. en, the OS maps the IOVA to the
PA by inserting the IOVA)PA translation into IOMMU data structures.
       Figure 6.15 depicts these structures for Intel x86-64 [106]. PCIe dictates that each DMA
will be associated with the 16-bit bus-device-function (BDF) number that uniquely identifies the
corresponding I/O device in the PCIe hierarchy (as described in §6.2.3). e DMA propagates
upstream, through the hierarchy (Figure 6.5), until it reaches the root complex (RC) where the
IOMMU resides. e IOMMU uses the 8-bit bus identifier to index the root table in order to
retrieve the physical address of the context table. It then indexes the context table using the 8-
bit concatenation of the device and function identifiers. e result is the physical location of the
root of the page table hierarchy that houses all the IOVA)PA translations of this particular I/O
device (PCIe function).
       e IOMMU walks the page table similarly to the MMU, checking for translation valid-
ity and access permissions at every level. If the translation is invalid, or the access permissions
mismatch, the IOMMU fails the translation. Similarly to how the MMU utilizes its TLB, the
IOMMU caches translations using its IOTLB. However, different than the MMU, the IOMMU
typically does not handle page faults gracefully. I/O devices usually expect their DMA target
buffers to be present and available, and they do not know how to recover otherwise. (Recall that
before IOMMUs, devices worked with physical addresses; even with IOMMUs, devices still “be-
lieve” that the DMA addresses they are given are physical.) For this reason, when the hypervisor
                 Requester Identifier               IOVA (DMA address)
                   bus    dev func       0…0       idx idx idx idx offset
                 15      8     3     0   63   48    39   30        21   12           0

                                                                        PTE   PTE
                       Root        Context
                       Entry        Entry                     PTE
                                                   PTE

                       Root        Context            Page Table Hierarchy
                       Table        Table
                                                              63                12       0
                                                                      PFN          offset
                                                                    Physical Address

Figure 6.15: IOVA translation with the Intel IOMMU.

 directly assigns a device to a virtual machine, it typically pins the entire address space of the VM
 to the physical memory, to avoid DMA page faults. In so doing, the hypervisor loses its ability to
 apply the canonical memory optimizations to the address space of the VM, as discussed in §6.1.
        Let us now consider a virtual setup with virtual machines. As of this writing, overwhelm-
 ingly, modern Intel servers support a two-dimensional (2D) MMU (see §5.1) but only one-
 dimensional (1D) IOMMU. Recall that a 2D-MMU allows the guest and hypervisor to maintain
 their own page tables, such that: (1) the guest OS page tables map guest-virtual addresses (gVAs)
 to guest-physical addresses (gPAs); (2) the hypervisor page tables map guest-physical addresses
 to host-physical addresses (hPAs); and (3) the processor makes use of the two page table levels
 for translating gVAs all the way to hPAs, as depicted in the left of Figure 6.14b. When directly
 assigning a device to a guest, the hypervisor copes with having an IOMMU that is only 1D by
 not exposing an IOMMU to the guest. e guest then believes that it must program DMA op-
 erations with physical addresses, which are in fact gPAs. To make this work, when mapping the
 address space of the guest in the IOMMU, the hypervisor uses IOVAs identical to the guest’s
 gPAs, such that the guest memory addresses and its (identical) I/O addresses point to the same
 host-physical location, as depicted in the right of Figure 6.14b.
        Not exposing an IOMMU to the guest is suboptimal in several respects. Similarly to the
 MMU, it makes sense to virtualize the IOMMU, such that guest and host would directly control
 their own page tables, and the hardware would conduct a 2D page-walk across the two levels, as
 depicted in Figure 6.14c. 2D IOMMUs allow guests to protect themselves against errant or ma-
 licious I/O devices—similarly to bare metal OSes—by mapping and unmapping the target buffer
 of each DMA right before the DMA is programmed and right after it completes. is policy is
 called strict IOMMU protection [125, 142], and it is recommended by hardware vendors and
                                            6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                 105
operating system developers [106, 109, 131, 183]. Another benefit of 2D IOMMUs is that they
help guests to use legacy devices that, for example, do not support memory addresses wider than
32 bit. Such a constraint is potentially problematic, but it can be easily resolved by programming
the IOMMU to map the relevant 32 bit-addresses to higher memory locations. A third bene-
fit of 2D IOMMUs is that they allow guests to directly assign devices to their own processes,
allowing for user-level I/O, which is lately becoming increasingly popular [98]. 2D IOMMUs
have been thus far implemented with the help of software emulation [12]. But they are already
defined by the x86-64 I/O virtualization specifications of Intel [106] and AMD [11]. As of this
writing, it seems that 2D IOMMU support can be enabled in certain Broadwell and Skylake Intel
processors [122, 186].

Interrupt Remapping: Recall that PCIe defines (MSI/MSI-X) interrupts similarly to DMA
memory writes directed at some dedicated address range, which the RC identifies as the “inter-
rupts space” (see §6.2.3). In x86, this range is 0xFEEx_xxxx (where x can be any hexadecimal
digit). Each interrupt request message is self-describing: it encodes all the information required
for the RC to handle it.
        To understand why interrupt remapping is necessitated, let us first consider how interrupt
delivery of an assigned device d, which is given to a virtual machine v, works without IR (illus-
trated in Figure 6.16). Setting the interrupt vector (“data”) and target LAPIC (“address”) that
are associated with d requires the operating system to MMIO-write these data and address into
the MSI fields of d’s configuration space. But since v is a virtual machine, its configuration space
is emulated: it is not allowed to access the physical configuration space, which is (or can be per-
ceived as) a singular device that affects the entire system. Assume that the hypervisor decided that
d’s (physical) interrupt vector is 50, and that, later, v configured this vector to be 30 via its emu-
lated configuration space (Figure 6.16a). erefore, the configuration space emulation layer of the
hypervisor records internally that v expects to get a vector of 30 from d, rather than 50. Hence-
forth, when d fires an interrupt (vector 50), the corresponding MSI message passes through the
IOMMU unchanged, because there is no IR (Figure 6.16b). It then reaches the target LAPIC,
thereby triggering an exit that invokes the hypervisor, because the latter configured v’s VMCS to
exit upon interrupts (Figure 6.16c). When awakened, the hypervisor delivers the interrupt to v
using vector 30, as indicated by v’s emulated configuration space (Figure 6.16d).
        e above interrupt delivery procedure is seemingly safe. But in fact it can be exploited by
v to arbitrarily change the physical interrupt vector delivered to the hypervisor (Figure 6.16c),
i.e., to values different than 50 [185]. Because d is directly assigned to v, the latter can program
the former to DMA-write any value (any vector) into the interrupt space, by using 0xFEEx_xxxx
as a DMA target address. Crucially, without IR, the IOMMU cannot distinguish between a
legitimate, genuine MSI interrupted fired by d and a rogue DMA that just pretends to be an
interrupt.
        Figure 6.17 demonstrates how the IR capability of the IOMMU eliminates the vul-
nerability. First, the type and format of the MSI registers in the configuration space change
       Emulated Config Space
                                                                                                           Interrupt Delivery
      MSI address MSI data
      0xFEEx.xxxx     30

  Physical Device + Config Space                IOMMU                         Hypervisor                           Guest VM
                                     MSI                        interrupt                        hypervisor
                                   interrupt        no                      VMCS configured
                                                                   50                              injects           process
      MSI address MSI data            50       IR capability,                to cause vmexit
                                                 interrupt                     on external                         interrupt 30
      0xFEEx.xxxx     50                                           vmexit                            interrupt     on vmentry
                                               pass-through                      interrupt
                                                                                                        30
               (a)                                  (b)                           (c)                                  (d)

Figure 6.16: MSI interrupt delivery without interrupt remapping support.

       Emulated Config Space
                                                                                Interrupt Delivery        Memory Reference
      MSI address MSI data
      0xFEEx.xxxx     30

  Physical Device + Config Space                IOMMU                         Hypervisor                           Guest VM
                                     MSI                        interrupt                        hypervisor
                                                IR enabled                  VMCS configured
                                   interrupt                       50                              injects           process
         MSI Registers                                                       to cause vmexit
                                                                               on external                         interrupt 30
      0xFEE 1    IRindex                           IRTA                                              interrupt     on vmentry
                                                                  vmexit         interrupt
                                                                                                        30
                (a)                                 (b)                           (c)                                  (d)

                                      IR table, up to 64K 128-bit entries
            interrupt                                  …
             format:
        1 - remappable
                                                       …
                                   source b:d.f vector 50 target LAPIC ID
                                                       …
                                                       …

Figure 6.17: MSI interrupt delivery with interrupt remapping support. (IRindex is denoted “inter-
 rupt_index” in the VT-d specification.)

 (Figure 6.17a, to be compared with Figure 6.16a). Instead of storing the physical interrupt vec-
 tor and target LAPIC, MSI registers now store an IRindex, which is an index to the IR table,
 pointed to by the IR Table Address (IRTA) register at the IOMMU. As before, the content of
 MSR registers in the physical configuration space is exclusively set by the hypervisor. When d
 fires an interrupt directed at 0xFEEx_xxxx, the IOMMU deduces the IRindex form this “ad-
 dress” and “data” (Figure 6.17b). e IOMMU then determines the target LAPIC and physical
                                           6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                 107
interrupt vector based on the associated IR table entry. e rest of the interrupt delivery flow is
identical to the flow depicted in Figure 6.16.
        In addition to the target LAPIC and interrupt vector, the IR table entry contains d’s BDF
for anti-spoofing, to indicate that d is indeed allowed to raise the interrupt associated with this
IRindex. Only after verifying the authenticity and legitimacy of the interrupt, does the IOMMU
deliver it to the hypervisor, as before. Since the target LAPIC and interrupt vector are determined
based on the IR table—which is set by the hypervisor—they cannot be forged. Although v can
still program DMAs that look like interrupts, they will only be delivered to v as the hypervisor
intended, and they will not trick the IOMMU into issuing the wrong physical interrupt vector.

6.4.2 SRIOV
With IOMMUs making direct device assignment safe, we go on to discuss how hardware sup-
port (in the PCIe and device level) additionally makes it scalable. Since (1) physical servers can
house only a small number of physical devices as compared to virtual machines, and because (2) it
is probably economically unreasonable to purchase a physical device for each VM, the PCI-SIG
standardized the SRIOV specification, which extends PCIe to support devices that can “self-
virtualize”. Namely, an SRIOV-capable I/O device can present multiple instances of itself to
software. Each instance can then be assignment to a different VM, to be used directly (and ex-
clusively) by that VM, without any software intermediary. Traditionally, it is the role of the oper-
ating system to multiplex the I/O devices. Conversely, an SRIOV device knows how to multiplex
itself at the hardware level.
        An SRIOV device is defined to have at least one Physical Function (PF) and multiple
Virtual Functions (VFs), which serve as the aforementioned device instances, as illustrated in
Figure 6.18. A PF is a standard PCIe function (defined in §6.2.3). It has a standard configura-
tion space, and the host software manages it as it would any other PCIe function. In addition
to supporting the standard operations, the PF also allows the host to allocate, deallocate, and
configure VFs. A VF is a lightweight PCIe function that implements only a subset of the com-
ponents of a standard PCIe function. For example, it does not have its own power management
capabilities and instead shares such capabilities with its PF, and it cannot (de)allocate other VFs.
Accordingly, it has a limited configuration space that presents limited capabilities. When a VF
is assigned to a virtual machine, the former provides the latter the ability to do direct I/O—the
VM can safely initiate DMAs, such that the hypervisor remains uninvolved in the I/O path. e
theoretical bound on the number of VFs that can be exposed by a single physical device is 64 K.
Current Intel and Mellanox implementations of SRIOV NICs enable up to 128 and 512 VFs per
device, respectively [105, 128].
        Using the lspci shell command, Figure 6.19 shows some of the content of the configuration
space of an X540 Intel NIC, which supports SRIOV. As can be seen, the output indeed includes
the SRIOV standard PCIe extended capability. e output further specifies the maximal num-
ber of VFs that this NIC supports (64), and the current number of allocated VFs (0). Another

                     Hypervisor                Guest                  Guest

                   PF device driver       VF device driver       VF device driver

                         PF                    VF0                    VF1

                                      Embedded Ethernet Switch
                                            SRIOV NIC

Figure 6.18: SRIOV-capable NIC in a virtualized environment.

 06:00.0 Ethernet controller: Intel Ethernet Controller 10-Gigabit X540-AT2
         Subsystem: Intel Corporation Ethernet 10G 2P X540-t Adapter
         Flags: bus master, fast devsel, latency 0
         Memory at 91c00000 (64-bit, prefetchable) [size=2M]
         Memory at 91e04000 (64-bit, prefetchable) [size=16K]
         Expansion ROM at 91e80000 [disabled] [size=512K]
         Capabilities: [70] MSI-X: Enable+ Count=64 Masked-
         Capabilities: [a0] Express Endpoint, MSI 00
         Capabilities: [150] Alternative Routing-ID Interpretation (ARI)
         Capabilities: [160] Single Root I/O Virtualization (SR-IOV)
                 Total VFs: 64, Number of VFs: 0
                 VF offset: 128, stride: 2, Device ID: 1515
                 Supported Page Size: 00000553, System Page Size: 00000001
                 Region 0: Memory at 92300000 (64-bit, non-prefetchable)
                 Region 3: Memory at 92400000 (64-bit, non-prefetchable)
         Capabilities: [1d0] Access Control Services

Figure 6.19: Partial lspci output of the Intel X540 NIC shows the SRIOV and ARI capabilities.

 relevant capability that the NIC supports is Advanced Routing-ID Interpretation (ARI) [139].
 Recall that PCIe enumerates bridges and device endpoints with a 16-bit bus:device.function
 (BDF) identifier, such that bus, device, and function consist of 8, 5, and 3 bits. e ARI capa-
 bility lets SRIOV devices support more functions at endpoints than just the eight that the BDF
 enumeration permits (3 bits). In particular, ARI allows manufacturers of SRIOV-capable devices
 to omit the endpoint’s 5-bit device identifier for this purpose. e 16-bit identifier of such end-
 points is bus.function, such that both bus, and function consist of 8 bits, thereby supporting up
 to 256 functions per endpoint.
         In §6.2.3, we described the PCIe hierarchy and its BDF enumeration. SRIOV changes
 the manner by which this enumeration is performed. Consider the enumeration depicted in
                                                        6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                                  109
Figure 6.5, and assume that we now replace the device that houses PCIe function 5:0.0 with
an SRIOV device d that supports one PF and up to 2048 VFs (similarly to the the Altera Ar-
ria 10 [10]). Further assume that d uses ARI (which requires that all its ancestors in the PCIe tree
also support ARI). Figure 6.20 highlights the differences in the BDF tree due to the change we
applied, as compared to Figure 6.5. In the example shown, 600 of the 2048 VFs of d are allocated;
the remaining VFs can be allocated later. We can see that all the rules that govern BDF enumer-
ation still apply. e difference is that the enumeration construction process (conducted by the
BIOS/UEFI, and perhaps also later by the OS while booting) queries the configuration space of
devices and, if they are SRIOV-capable, creates a “hole” in the hierarchy that is big enough to
accommodate all their possible future VF creations. A PCIe bus can connect to 256 endpoints,
so d requires reserving nine buses: eight to account for the 2048 potential VFs and another for
the single PF (PFs and VFs can reside on the same bus; the nine’s bus is needed because eight
are not enough). Consequently, Buses 5–13 are reserved for d, which means function 6:0.0 from
Figure 6.5 becomes 14:0.0 in Figure 6.20.⁵
       Figure 6.21 compares the network performance of SRIOV device assignment to that of
e1000 emulation (§6.3.1) and virtio-net paravirtualization (§6.3.2), by running Netperf stream
inside a virtual machine, which uses the three I/O models to communicate with a remote machine.
e underlying physical NIC is SRIOV-capable, and the traffic of all three I/O models eventually
flows through it. However, the e1000 and virtio-net front-ends are implemented/mediated by the
hypervisor, which uses the SRIOV-capable NIC as a back-end. In contrast, the VM in the SRIOV
experiment uses a VF, thereby keeping the hypervisor uninvolved when it interacts with its NIC
instance through the corresponding ring buffers.
       e results in Figure 6.21 indicate that using SRIOV is indeed advantageous in terms of
performance, improving the throughput of the VM by 1.31–1.78x relative to paravirtualization,
depending on the message size. e results further show that, as expected, the throughput is in-
versely proportional to the number of exits—fewer exits translate to reduced virtualization over-
heads, allowing the VM to spend additional CPU cycles to push more data into the network.

6.4.3 EXITLESS INTERRUPTS
With SRIOV and the IOMMU, the hypervisor can safely and scalably assign devices directly
to guests. But direct device assignment does not eliminate all the major sources of virtualization
overhead. Whereas it eliminates most of the exits that occur when guests “talk” to their assigned
devices (via MMIOs, for example), it does not address the overheads generated when assigned
devices “talk back” by triggering interrupts to notify guests regarding the completion of their I/O
requests. Intel VT-x (rather than VT-d) provides the hypervisor with the basic hardware support
needed to inject virtual interrupts into guests. Next, we outline this support, asses its overheads,

⁵In Linux, users can easily create and destroy VFs by writing the desired number of VFs to the sriov_numvfs file that is associated
 with the device, which is found under the /sys file system. For example, “echo 10 > /sys/class/net/eth1/device/sriov_numvfs”.
                    CPU Package                                                   PCIe Switch

                                                                                            bus dev fun bus 3           bus dev fun
        Memory Controller                                                                    2 0 0                        3 0 0

                                                                                    bus 2
                                                                                            pri sec sub                   3 0 1
                                                                                             2 3 3
                         Root Complex (RC)
                                                                                                                        bus dev fun
       Core                             bus dev fun         bus 1    bus dev fun            bus dev fun bus 4             4 0 0
                                         0 1 0                        1 0 0                  2 1 0
                                                                                                                          4 0 1
                                        pri sec sub                  pri sec sub            pri sec sub                   4 0 2
                                         0 1 13                      1 2 13                  2 4 4
       Core         Host Bridge                                                                                          … … …

                                      bus 0
                     bus dev fun                                                                                          4 0 6
                                                                                            bus dev fun                   4 0 7
                      0 0 0
       Core                                                                                  2 2 0
                                        bus dev fun                                         pri sec sub
                                         0 2 0                                               2 5 13
                                        pri sec sub                   changes in
       Core                             0 14 14                      subordinate                                    bus 5
                                                                        buses
                                                                                                                    SRIOV Device
                                                bus 14
                     the next
                                              bus dev fun                                   internal PCIe routing
                    available
                    bus is 14                  14 0 0
                                                                    bus 7                   bus 6                   bus 5
                                                                    bus     fun              bus fun                 bus fun
                                                                    7        0 VF512          6    0 VF256            5    0 PFO
                                                                    7        1 VF513          6    1 VF257            5    1 VF1
                                                                    …        …                6    2 VF258            5    2 VF2
      bus dev fun                                                   7        87 VF600        …     …                 …     …
                     PCIe Function              PCIe Bus                                     6    254 VF511          5    254 VF254
                                                                    buses 8-13               6    255 VF511          5    255 VF255
      pri sec sub       bus dev fun              bus fun
                                                                     reserved
      PCIe Bridge     PCIe Endpoint             PCIe Endpoint with ARI enabled

 Figure 6.20: e process of BDF enumeration of PCIe bridges and endpoints changes in the presence
 of SRIOV-capable devices, creating “holes” in the hierarchy to accommodate for the creation of VFs
 (compare with Figure 6.5).

 show that they are significant, and describe software—and later hardware—means to alleviate
 this problem.

 Basic VT-x Interrupt Support: Similarly to other CPU registers, the VMCS stores the value of
 the guest’s Interrupt Descriptor Table Register (IDTR, defined in 6.2.1), such that it is loaded
 upon entering guest mode and saved on exit, when the hypervisor’s IDTR is loaded instead.
                                                                         6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                                      111
                                                                                                               35
                       14             SRIOV
                                      virtio-net

                                                                                Exits per second [thousands]
                                                                 1.78x                                         30
                       12             e1000              1.77x
                                                                                                               25

   Throughput [Gbps]
                                             1.68x
                       10
                                                                                                               20
                       8            1.58x
                                                                                                               15
                       6
                            1.31x                                                                              10
                       4

                       2                                                                                       5

                       0                                                                                       0
                             256B      1KB         4KB    16KB    64KB                                              256B   1KB   4KB   16KB   64KB
                                                                          Message Size

Figure 6.21: Netperf TCP stream running in a single-VCPU Linux 4.4.2 VM served by Linux/KVM
(same version) and QEMU 2.5 on a Dell PowerEdge R420 host equipped with a 1.9 GHz Xeon E5-
2420 CPU and a 40 Gbps SRIOV-capable Mellanox ConnectX-3 NIC. Networking of the VM is
done through e1000, virtio-net (with vhost-net and MACVTAP), and a VF of the ConnectX-3. e
destination is a remote R420, which does not employ virtualization. e numbers show the ratio of
virtio-net to SRIOV.

Roughly speaking, control over all interrupts implies control over the CPU.⁶ e hypervisor needs
to maintain control, rather than surrender it to the untrusted guest, so it sets a VMCS control
bit (denoted “external-interrupt exiting”), which configures the core to exit whenever an exter-
nal interrupt fires. e chain of events that transpire when such an event occurs is depicted in
Figure 6.22.
       Assume that the guest is computing (i), but then an I/O device raises an MSI/MSI-X
interrupt (ii), causing an exit that transfers control to the hypervisor (iii). Using the “VM-exit
information” fields in the VMCS, the hypervisor figures out that the cause for the exit was an
external interrupt. It therefore handles the interrupt and acknowledges the completion of the
interrupt handling activity through the LAPIC End of Interrupt (EOI) register, as required by
the x86 specification (iv). In our example, the physical interrupt is associated with the guest, so the
hypervisor injects an appropriate virtual interrupt (possibly with a different vector) to the guest (v).
Technically, the hypervisor injects by writing to the “interruption-information” field (that resides
in the “VM-entry control” area of the VMCS) the type of the event (external interrupt) and its
vector. e actual interrupt delivery takes place within the guest during vmentry, when the guest’s
state—including its IDTR—is already loaded to the CPU, thereby allowing the guest to handle
⁶e hypervisor can regain control by using the preemption time feature of x86 virtualization, which triggers an unconditional
 exit after a configurable period of time elapses.
                        Guest                          Hypervisor                              Physical Device
               (i) compute
                                     (iii) exit                           (ii) MSI interrupt

                                                            (iv) handle interrupt (and EOI)
                                (v) inject interrupt

      (vi) handle interrupt
                                     (vii) EOI

                                                            (viii) update state
                                   (ix) resume
         (x) finish handler
      and resume compute

Figure 6.22: Chain of events when a physical device triggers an interrupt, without hardware support
 for direct interrupt delivery.

 the interrupt (vi). Shortly after, the guest acknowledges interrupt completion, which, again, results
 in an exit, because the hypervisor emulates the LAPIC for the guest (vii). e hypervisor updates
 its internal state accordingly (viii) and resumes guest execution (ix). e guest can now complete
 the handler routine and return to normal execution (x).
        To complete the description of the basic VT-x interrupt support, we note in passing that
 it is possible for the guest to be in a state whereby it is not ready to receive an interrupt, notably
 because its interrupt flag is off. In this case, the hypervisor sets the “interrupt-window exiting”
 VMCS bit, which will cause the core to trigger an exit when the guest is ready to receive interrupts
 yet again, at which point the hypervisor will be able to inject as usual.

 Assigned EOI Register: VT-x interrupt support, as described above, requires at least two exits
 per interrupt. us, when devices generate many interrupts per second, the overhead of virtualiza-
 tion can be substantial. e question is whether we can alleviate this overhead. Let us first focus
 on eliminating the exits associated with EOI. e operating system uses the LAPIC to control all
 interrupt activity (§6.2.1). To this end, the LAPIC employs multiple registers used to configure,
 block, deliver, and (notably in this context) signal EOI. If we assume that an interrupt of a phys-
 ical device can somehow be safely delivered directly to the guest without hypervisor involvement
 (discussed below), then the EOI register should correspondingly also be assigned to the guest.
 EOI assignment, however, is not possible with older LAPIC generations, because they expose all
 the LAPIC registers in a tightly packed predefined memory area that is accessed through regular
 load and store instructions. erefore, with an emulated LAPIC, providing the guest with write
 permissions to one register implies that the guest can write to all registers that reside in the same
 page, as memory protection is conducted in page granularity.
                                             6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                   113
       ankfully, the current LAPIC interface, x2APIC, exposes its registers using model specific
registers (MSRs), which are accessed through “read MSR” and “write MSR” instructions. e
CPU exits on LAPIC accesses according to an MSR bitmap controlled by the hypervisor. e
bitmap specifies the “sensitive” MSRs that cannot be accessed directly by the guest and thus trigger
exits. In contrast to other LAPIC registers, with appropriate safety measures [13], EOI can be
securely assigned to the guest.

Assigned Interrupts: Assume a guest is directly assigned with a device. By utilizing a software-
based technique called exitless interrupts (ELI) [80], it is possible to additionally securely
assign the device’s interrupts to the guest—without modifying the guest or resorting to
paravirtualization—by employing the architectural support described thus far. An assigned exit-
less interrupt does not trigger an exit. It is delivered directly to the guest without host involvement.
Consequently, ELI eliminates most of the remaining virtualization overhead.
       ELI is structured based on the assumption that in high-performance, SRIOV-based device
assignment deployments nearly all physical interrupts arriving to a given core are targeted at
the guest that runs on that core. By turning off the aforementioned VMCS “external-interrupt
exiting” control bit, ELI delivers all physical interrupts on the core to the guest running on it.
At the same time, ELI forces the guest to reroute to the hypervisor all the interrupts that are not
assigned to it, as follows. While the guest initializes and maintains its own IDT, ELI runs the
guest with a different IDT—called shadow IDT—which is prepared by the hypervisor. Just like
shadow page tables can be used to virtualize the guest MMU without any cooperation from the
guest (§4.2.3), IDT shadowing can be used to virtualize interrupt delivery. Using the trap and
emulate technique, the hypervisor monitors the updates that the guest applies to its emulated,
write-protected IDT, and it reacts accordingly so as to provide the desired effect.
       e ELI mechanism is depicted in Figure 6.23. By shadowing the guest IDT, the hypervisor
has explicit control over which handlers are invoked upon interrupts. It thus configures the shadow
IDT to (1) deliver assigned interrupts directly to the guest’s interrupt handler, and to (2) force an
exit for non-assigned interrupts by marking the corresponding IDT entries as non-present.

Performance: Figure 6.24 (left) shows the benefit of employing the ELI technique—which
encompasses EOI assignment—utilizing Netperf TCP stream (with 256 B message size),
Apache [18, 69] (HTTP server driven by ApacheBench [17]), and Memcached [70] (key-value
storage server driven by Memslap [9]) to communicate with a remote client machine via an
SRIOV-capable Emulex OneConnect 10Gbps NIC. Each of the benchmarks is executed on
bare-metal and under two virtualized setups: the SRIOV device assignment baseline, and SRIOV
supplemented with ELI. We can see that baseline SRIOV performance is considerably below
bare-metal performance: Netperf ’s VM throughput is at 60% of bare-metal throughput, Apache
is at 65%, and Memcached is at 60%. It is therefore evident that using ELI gives a significant
throughput increase over baseline SRIOV: 63%, 49%, and 66% for Netperf, Apache, and Mem-
cached, respectively. Importantly, with ELI, Netperf achieves 98% of bare-metal throughput,
                                                                                                                           Guest
                                                                             Guest IDT                                                                            Interrupt Handler

                                                                                                                          assigned interrupt
                                            physical interrupt
                                                                            Shadow IDT
                                                                                                                                            non-assigned interrupt (exit)

                                                                                                                         Hypervisor

Figure 6.23: ELI interrupt delivery flow.

                                           Netperf        Apache Memcached
                                                                                                                                                          120%

                                                                                                                           ELI’s Throughput Improvement
                                           (+63%)         (+49%)  (+66%)

                                                                                         Absolute Throughput (per sec)
      % of Bare-metal Performance

                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                    100%             5G                                                                                                   100%
                                                                 10K            160K
                                     80%             4G                                                                                                   80%
                                                                 8K             120K
                                     60%             3G
                                                                 6K                                                                                       60%
                                                                                80K                                                                                                            24
                                     40%             2G          4K
                                                                                40K                                                                       40%                             32
                                     20%             1G          2K
                                                                                                                                                                             56   48 40
                                      0%             0G          0K             0K                                                                        20%     96   80 64
                                                                                                                                                                       8872
                                            SR
                                            SR OV

                                                           SR
                                                           SR OV

                                                                          SR
                                                                          SR OV

                                                                                                                                                           0%
                                               I
                                               IO

                                                              I
                                                              IO

                                                                             I
                                                                             IO

                                                                                                                                                                 10K 20K 30K 40K 50K 60K 70K 80K
                                                  V

                                                                 V

                                                                                V
                                                     +E

                                                                 +E

                                                                                +E

                                                                                                                                                                           Interrupts/second
                                                      LI

                                                                     LI

                                                                                    LI

Figure 6.24: Left: throughput of three SRIOV benchmarks, with/without ELI, shown as percentage
 of bare-metal performance (left y axis) and in absolute terms (right y axis); numbers under the titles
 show ELI’s relative improvement over SRIOV. Right: Netperf ’s relative performance improvement
 gained with ELI as a function of interrupts per second; labels along the curve specify the NIC’s inter-
 rupt coalescing interval in microseconds. Data taken from the ELI paper [80], utilizing a single-VCPU
 Linux 2.6.35 VM served by Linux/KVM (same version) and QEMU 0.14 on an IBM System x3550
 M2 server equipped with a 2.93 GHz Xeon X5570 CPU and an Emulex OneConnect 10 Gbps NIC.

 Apache 97%, and Memcached nearly 100%. Namely, ELI all but eliminates virtualization over-
 heads.
        We now proceed to investigate the dependence of ELI’s improvement on the amount of
 interrupt coalescing done by hardware (NIC), which immediately translates to the amount of
 generated interrupts. (We note that software interrupt mitigation techniques, employed by the
 Linux kernel, are also in affect throughput the experiments.) e Emulex OneConnect NIC
 imposes a configurable cap on coalescing, allowing its users to set a time duration T , such that the
                                                       6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                                115
NIC will not fire more than one interrupt per T?s (longer T implies less interrupts). e available
coalescing cap values are: 16 ?s, 24 ?s, 32 ?s, 40 ?s, : : :, 96 ?s. Figure 6.24 (right) plots the results
of the associated experiments, such that the labels along the curve denote the corresponding
value of T . Unsurprisingly, higher interrupt rates imply higher savings due to ELI. e smallest
interrupt rate that the NIC generates for this workload is 13 K interrupts/sec (with T =96 ?s),
but even with this maximal coalescing, ELI still provides a 10% performance improvement over
baseline SRIOV. ELI additionally achieves nearly 100% of bare-metal throughput in all of the
experiments shown in Figure 6.24 (right), indicating that, when it is used, coalescing has a lesser
effect on throughput. Granularity of coalescing can therefore be made finer as needed, so as to
refrain from the increased latency that coarse coalescing induces (not shown).

6.4.4 POSTED INTERRUPTS
We have seen that the overhead of interrupts and EOIs can be substantial in virtualized en-
vironments. ELI combats this problem by using software-based interrupt and EOI assignment.
While effective, ELI has two notable drawbacks. First, it increases hypervisor complexity, not just
because of IDT shadowing, but also because of the security measures that the hypervisor must
employ [80] to prevent malicious or buggy guests from exploiting the technique. For example, the
guest might decide never to acknowledge completion of interrupts, which affects the hypervisor,
since guest and hypervisor share the physical LAPIC EOI register. e second drawback is that
ELI is inherently an all-or-nothing approach: either all interrupts go initially to the guest, which
might adversely affect, for example, the interrupt latency experienced by the hypervisor, or ELI
cannot be used.
       Unlike all other virtualization techniques discussed in this chapter, ELI, which is the prod-
uct of a fairly recent academic exercise [13, 80], has never been widely deployed—hardware sup-
port that deems it unnecessary was quick to emerge.⁷ Ideally, we would like such support to
allow the hypervisor to easily assign specific interrupts of specific devices to specific guests, and
to have all other interrupts delivered directly to the host without requiring any sophisticated soft-
ware hacks. Posted interrupts is a recently introduced mechanism that provides such support.
It divides into two components: (1) CPU posted interrupts, which correspond to IPIs, namely,
interrupts that are directly injected by the hypervisor that runs on one core to a guest that runs
on a different core without involving the hypervisor on the latter core, and (2) IOMMU posted
interrupts (denoted “VT-d posted interrupts” by Intel), which correspond to interrupts that are
delivered directly from I/O devices to guest VMs. Both components rely on Intel’s APIC virtu-
alization (APICv), which provides a “virtual APIC” for the guest, whose semantics are preserved
by the underlying hardware, rather than by the hypervisor via LAPIC emulation. Using the vir-

⁷We nevertheless include ELI in this book to motivate such hardware support, as we do not yet have performance numbers
 associated with the latter. To our knowledge, Intel processors that support functionality similar to that of ELI (“VT-d posted
 interrupts,” to be discussed shortly) have started to ship only recently, in 2016. AMD has likewise recently added similar
 functionality, called Advanced Virtual Interrupt Controller (AVIC).
 tual APIC, the hypervisor can configure guests to receive and acknowledge the completion of
 interrupts without involving the hypervisor on the guest’s core [107].

 Virtual APIC: e hypervisor configures the VMCS of the guest to point to a 4 KB memory
 area, denoted as the “virtual APIC page,” which the processor uses in order to virtualize access
 to APIC registers and track their state, and to manage virtual interrupts. e page houses all the
 registers of the guest’s virtual APIC. Recall that a physical APIC has an IRR, ISR, EOI, and
 ICR registers (their meaning and connections are described in §6.2.1). us, correspondingly,
 the processor maintains a virtual version of these registers in the virtual APIC page (vIRR, vISR,
 vEOI, vICR), at the same offsets as their physical counterparts. When a virtual register is updated,
 the hardware emulates the side-effects that would have occurred if a physical APIC register was
 updated similarly; this behavior is called “APIC-write emulation.” For example, when the guest
 acknowledges interrupt completion in its vEOI, the hardware removes the associated interrupt
 bit from the vISR and then, e.g., delivers to the guest the highest-priority pending interrupt,
 updating vIRR and vISR accordingly. Only after the APIC-write emulation is performed does
 the hardware trigger exits, if necessary. In our example, if the hypervisor configured the VMCS
 to trigger exits upon EOI updates, the vISR is updated and only then the exit takes place.
        APICv allows the hypervisor to associate a guest with a fully functioning hardware-
 supported virtual APIC, which is of course different than the physical APIC. Below, we outline
 how to trigger interrupts directed at a specific guest virtual APIC, while keeping the hypervisor
 at the target core uninvolved. e subsequent (virtual) EOI operation would likewise only affect
 this particular virtual APIC and its guest. e interrupt handling operations of the virtual APIC
 are completely decoupled from the hypervisor’s physical interrupt activity. Generally speaking,
 APICv provides an interface for compute entities (a different core, an SRIOV device) to turn on
 bits in designated virtual APIC spaces and have the system behave as if an interrupt was generated
 for the associated guest, and only for it.

 CPU Posted Interrupts: Let us describe the delivery flow of CPU posted interrupts through an
 example, which also highlights how virtual APICs work. e example is depicted in Figure 6.25
 and explained in detail in the text that follows. Let R denote the value of an interrupt vector,
 which the hypervisor on Core 1 would like to deliver directly to a guest that currently executes on
 Core 2, without causing an exit on Core 2. e hypervisor must initially update the guest’s posted
 interrupt descriptor (“PI descriptor”), which is pointed to by the guest’s VMCS (Figure 6.25a).
 Ordinarily, for correctness, hypervisor software must not modify any of the data structures pointed
 to by the VMCS while the associated guest is running. But this requirement does not apply to the
 PI descriptor, so long as it is modified using an atomic read-modify-write instruction. e format
 of the PI descriptor is specified in Table 6.3 [106] and explained next. e hypervisor uses the PI
 descriptor’s first field—the posted-interrupt requests (PIR) bitmap—to set the bit that identifies
 the interrupt vector R that the hypervisor wishes to directly deliver to the guest. In our example,
 R=30.
                                                        6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                                117

                          notification vector (NV)
                                                                               Interrupt Delivery         Memory Reference
                       triggers interrupt evaluation,
                      thus core delivers interrupt 30
   Hypervisor           to the guest without vmexit      Guest VM

     wants to
      deliver                                             processes       interrupt                  VMCS
   interrupt 30             (a)                          interrupt 30        30
                                                                                               SVI           RVI
    to the VM                                                            (c)
                                                                                              Virtual-APIC Address
     core1                                                 core2                              PI Descriptor Address
                    IPI interrupt 242                                                         PI Notification Vector
                            (b)

                          hypervisor sets bit                                 PI Descriptor                   Virtual-APIC
                         for vector 30 in PIR                                  PIR 256-bit                   vISR      vICR
                           and sends NV to                              NDST: LAPIC ID      NV: 242          vIRR      vTPR
                             target NDST                                    ON                SN             vEOI      vPPR

Figure 6.25: CPU posted interrupt illustration.

Table 6.3: e posted interrupts (PI) descriptor consists of 512 bits (64 bytes)

 Bits             Name      Description
 255:0            PIR       Post-Interrupt Requests, one bit per requested vector
 256              ON        Outstanding Notification, logically, a bitwise OR of PIR
 257              SN        Suppress Notification, of non-urgent interrupts
 271:258          -         Reserved (must be 0)
 279:272          NV        Notification Vector, doorbell to notify about pending PIR
 287:280          -         Reserved (must be 0)
 319:288          NDST      Notification Destination, a physical APIC ID
 511:320          -         Reserved (must be 0)

      ere are two additional fields in the PI descriptor that are relevant for delivering R without
causing an exit. e first is the notification destination (NDST), which holds the ID of the
destination LAPIC where R will fire (Core 2 in our example). e second is the notification
vector (NV), which holds the value of some interrupt vector, interpreted by the destination NDST
as a notification event, which triggers the direct delivery of R; the specific numerical value of
NV is selected by the hypervisor (in our example, it is 242). In other words, the NV serves as a
“doorbell,” to let the NDST core know that some other core requested that a posted interrupt
118   6. X86-64: I/O VIRTUALIZATION
 would be delivered to the guest that runs at the NDST. e hypervisor core (Core 1) sends the
 NV (242) to the NDST (Core 2) via an IPI (Figure 6.25b).
        Observe that, in addition to the PI destination, the value of NV is also stored in the VMCS
 (bottom row within the gray VMCS area in Figure 6.25). As such, Core 2 understands that it has
 special meaning, and that it is used as a doorbell for pending posted interrupts.⁸
        Importantly, if the guest is executing when the NV (242) reaches the NDST (Core 2), the
 handler of 242 is not invoked; without yet disturbing the guest, Core 2 needs to figure out what
 to do. To this end, Core 2 first appends the PIR bits into the guest’s vIRR register. In so doing, it
 effectively turns interrupts posted by remote cores into requested interrupts in the virtual APIC
 of the guest. Core 2 then “evaluates pending virtual interrupts,” which means that it applies the
 regular APIC logic with respect to the registers at the virtual APIC page. When the state of the
 virtual APIC permits it, the evaluation of pending virtual interrupts results in the direct delivery
 of an interrupt to the virtual machine.
        Technically, direct virtual interrupt delivery—of an interrupt vector R—is initiated when
 Core 2 stores R in the “requesting virtual interrupt” (RVI) 8-bits field in the VMCS. Core 2 does
 that according to rules that strictly follow those of physical APICs. First, R is selected to be the
 maximal (highest priority) bit index set in the vIRR register. en, R is assigned to RVI if no other
 interrupt vector is currently stored there, or if R’s numeric value is bigger than RVI (R’s priority
 is higher). When R resides in RVI, Core 2 evaluates whether R can actually be delivered to the
 guest, in which case it is moved to the VMCS “servicing virtual interrupt” (SVI) 8-bits field. Once
 again, the decision to deliver R is based on physical APIC rules. For example, if the guest turned
 off its (virtual) interrupts, or if it is currently serving a higher-priority (virtual) interrupt, R will
 not be delivered. When Core 2 finally assigns R to SVI and delivers R to the guest (Figure 6.25c),
 it likewise follows the semantics of physical interrupts, turning R off in vIRR, turning R on in
 vISR, and assigning the value of the highest set vIRR bit into RVI. When the guest finishes to
 handle R, it acknowledges the completion through its vEOI, prompting Core 2 to remove R from
 vISR and VSR and to initiate the evaluation procedure of pending virtual interrupts yet again.
        e hypervisor at Core 2 remains uninvolved in all of this activity. It is not notified regarding
 any of these events unless it explicitly sets VMCS bits that declare that it would like to be notified.

 IOMMU Posted Interrupts: Given that hardware support for CPU posted interrupts is avail-
 able, the task of additionally supporting IOMMU posted interrupts—which directly channel
 interrupts from assigned devices to their guests without host involvement—is straightforward.
 Figure 6.26 illustrates IOMMU posted interrupts. e figure in fact encompasses and extends
 Figure 6.17, which depicts interrupt delivery with IOMMU interrupt remapping (IR). e main
 difference between the two is that, with IOMMU posted interrupt, an IR table entry may now

  ⁸At this point, readers may wonder why NV is stored twice: in the PI descriptor as well as in the VMCS. In fact, for CPU
   posted interrupts, the NV need not reside in the PI descriptor—the hardware is indifferent [107]. e same, by the way,
   applies to NDST. e presence of NV and NDST in the PI descriptor becomes crucial for IOMMU posted interrupts, as will
   be explained later on.
                                                      6.4. VIRTUAL I/O WITH HARDWARE SUPPORT                                      119

                                                                                    Interrupt Delivery         Memory Reference

   Emulated Config Space                            notification vector (NV)
                                                 triggers interrupt evaluation,
   MSI address MSI data                         thus core delivers interrupt 30
   0xFEEx.xxxx    30                              to the guest without vmexit
                                                                                             Guest VM

                                                                                               process
Physical Device + Config Space           IOMMU                                                interrupt
                               MSI                         Notification                          30             interrupt 30
                             interrupt   IR enabled       interrupt 242                                              (e)
       MSI Registers                                                                           core1
    0xFEE 1     IRindex                    IRTA                   (d)
                                                                                                                VMCS
               (a)                       (b)
                                                                        IOMMU sets                             PI desc.
                               IR table, up to 64K 128-bit entries       bit 30 in PIR
             interrupt                          …                       and sends NV
              format:                           …                                                            PI Descriptor
         1 - remappable      source b:d.f vector 30 PI descriptor                                             PIR 256-bit
                                                                              (c)
                                                …                                                         NDST: target LAPIC ID
                                                …                                                               NV: 242

Figure 6.26: IOMMU (VT-d) posted interrupt illustration (compare with Figure 6.17).

specify the interrupt vector that the guest expects to receive when its assigned device fires an in-
terrupt (Figure 6.17a), as well as a pointer to the PI descriptor of that guest. Upon receiving the
interrupt, the IOMMU consults the associated IR table entry (Figure 6.17b). rough this entry,
the IOMMU accesses the guest’s PI descriptor, turns on the appropriate bit in the PIR (30 in
our example), and retrieves the NV (242 in our example) and NDST (Core 1’s LAPIC in our
example) that are associated with the guest (Figure 6.17c). It then delivers NV to Core 1, which
initiates the chain of events described above under CPU posted interrupts.

            In summary, the IOMMU and SRIOV allow for safe and scalable direct de-
            vice assignment. Exitless/posted interrupts additionally enable direct interrupt
            delivery, making I/O virtualization performance approach bare-metal perfor-
            mance. e downside of direct device assignment is losing I/O interposition.
            e pros and cons of the alternative virtual I/O models are summarized in
            Table 6.4.
     .
Table 6.4: Pros and cons of the three virtual I/O models
  Virtual I/O Model                         Emulation Paravirtualization Device Assignment
  Portable, no host-specific software       P               O                 P
  Interposition and memory optimizations P                  P                 O
  Performance                            worse              better            best

 6.5      ADVANCED TOPICS AND FURTHER READING
 I/O Page Faults: Recall that currently most I/O devices are unable to tolerate I/O page faults,
 which is the situation that arises when the IOMMU fails to translate the IOVA of a DMA op-
 eration. is inability means that the hypervisor cannot apply any of the canonical memory opti-
 mizations to VMs with assigned devices—memory overcommitment, demand-paging based on
 actual use, memory swapping, etc.—because the VM can use any memory address for DMAing,
 and so the corresponding VM image regions should physically reside in memory. erefore, pro-
 duction hypervisors resort to pinning the entire address space of VMs with assigned devices to
 the physical memory. In an attempt to resolve this problem, the PCI-SIG recently supplemented
 the ATS (address translation services) PCIe standard with PRI (page request interface) [140].
 ATS/PRI standardize the interaction between the I/O device, the IOMMU, and the OS, such
 that they are able to resolve I/O page faults. Roughly, with ATS/PRI, the IOMMU is able to
 tell the OS that it encountered a page fault, the OS is able to respond when the fault is resolved,
 and the device is able to wait until then. e standard permits I/O devices to cache translations in
 their own IOTLBs, and so the OS is able to tell the device to invalidate such translations when
 needed.
         e effort to utilize ATS/PRI is spearheaded by AMD’s HSA—heterogeneous system ar-
 chitecture [89]. HSA is aimed at unifying the address spaces of CPUs and on-die GPUs, enabling
 seamless page fault resolution and thereby making pinning/copying between them unnecessary
 [90, 119]. e HSA goals are making SOCs (which combine CPU and GPU cores) “easier to
 program; easier to optimize; [and provide] higher performance” [152]. GPUs process data that
 is local to the server, and they can thus be adequately served by the ATS/PRI standard—when a
 GPU experiences a page fault, the relevant GPU thread(s) can be easily suspended until the fault
 is resolved, without losing any of the data. is reasoning fails when applied to a NIC that at-
 tempts to receive incoming data, which is external to the server. If the corresponding DMA-write
 of the NIC triggers an I/O page fault, the NIC is left with no room to store the external data.
 More incoming data might arrive subsequently (at full line rate), and it too might fault. NICs
 must therefore employ some other solution to be able to tolerate I/O page faults. Such a solution
 is described by Lesokhin et al. [120]; it is already deployed in recent Mellanox InfiniBand NICs.

 Sidecores: I/O page faults allow the hypervisor to apply the canonical memory optimizations to
 images of VMs that have directly assigned devices. Still, the guest I/O that flows through these
                                                 6.5. ADVANCED TOPICS AND FURTHER READING                                121
assigned devices is, by definition, not interposable. As noted earlier, the superior performance
associated with direct device assignment comes at a cost—the hypervisor cannot observe or ma-
nipulate the guest I/O traffic, which prevents many of the benefits of I/O interposition (§6.1).
For this reason, researchers are working to develop an improved interposable virtual I/O model,
whose performance is competitive to that of direct device assignment. is model makes use of
hypervisor (side)cores that are dedicated to processing the virtual I/O of the VMs. Briefly, in
the sidecore model, VMs do not experience virtualization exits. Instead the hypervisor sidecores
poll on relevant memory locations of guest VMs, repeatedly observing the memory values and
reacting accordingly. More specifically, each VM writes its I/O requests to memory shared with
the host as is usual for the trap-and-emulate I/O model. Unusual, however, is that the VM does
not trigger an exit. Instead, the host sidecores poll the relevant memory regions and process the
request on arrival.
       e benefits of the sidecores I/O model are: (1) more cycles to the VMs, whose guest OSes
are asynchronous in nature and do not block-wait for I/O; (2) less cache pollution on the cores
of the VMs since the hypervisor I/O-handling code no longer executes on these cores; and (3) an
easily controllable, more performant scheduling of I/O threads,⁹ because, in this I/O model, I/O
threads run exclusively on sidecores and hence no longer interfere with the execution of VMs. e
combined effect of the three benefits yields a substantial performance improvement. For example,
the Elvis system—which implements paravirtual block and net devices on sidecores—is up to 3x
more performant than baseline paravirtualization and is oftentimes on par with SRIOV+ELI [83].
e sidecore approach has been successfully applied to various other tasks, including IOMMU
virtualization [12], storage virtualization [34], GPU processing [159], and rack-scale comput-
ing [116].

⁹Recall that each virtual device is implemented in a different I/O thread of the hypervisor, as depicted in Figure 6.7.
