
                                  CHAPTER                        7

Virtualization Support in ARM
           Processors
is chapter describes the current, state-of-the-art support for virtualization in modern ARM
processors. Much of this work is based on the original paper on KVM/ARM, the Linux ker-
nel virtual machine for ARM [60]. §7.1 first describes the key design principles behind ARM’s
virtualization technology. §7.2 describes the approach to CPU virtualization, the concept of the
EL2 hypervisor mode, and how the architecture relates to the Popek and Goldberg theorem.
§7.3 discusses the closely related question of MMU virtualization through nested page tables.
§7.4 discusses support for interrupt virtualization. §7.5 discusses support for timer virtualiza-
tion. §7.6 uses KVM/ARM as its case study on how to build a hypervisor explicitly designed to
assume ARM hardware support for virtualization, and contrast it with KVM x86, as discussed
in Chapter 4. §7.7 discusses some micro-architectural implications of the design, including the
performance overhead of the new architectural features. §7.8 discusses the implementation com-
plexity of KVM/ARM. §7.9 discusses improvements to the ARM virtualization support for type-
2 hypervisors such as KVM/ARM. Finally, like all chapters, we close with pointers for further
reading.

7.1     DESIGN PRINCIPLES OF VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT
        ON ARM
ARM Architecture Virtualization Extensions [39] were introduced in 2010 as part of the ARMv7
architecture to provide architectural support for virtualization. Until then, virtualization solutions
on ARM systems were based on paravirtualization and not widely used [28, 59, 91]. However,
as ARM CPUs continued to increase in performance, interest in ARM virtualization also grew.
ARM CPUs are pushing upward from mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets into tra-
ditional servers where virtualization is an important technology. Given ARM’s widespread use in
embedded systems and its business model of licensing to silicon partners who then build ARM
chips, it was important for ARM to support virtualization but in a manner that enabled its part-
ners to implement it in a cost effective manner. e central design goal of ARM Virtualization
Extensions was to make it possible to build ARM hypervisors that can run unmodified guest op-
erating systems without adding significant hardware complexity, while maintaining high levels of
performance. With the success of Intel Virtualization Technology, ARM recognized the bene-
124   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 fit of hardware virtualization support to overcome the limitation of previous ARM architectures
 not being classically virtualizable without the need for CPU paravirtualization or dynamic binary
 translation.
        ARM’s central design goal is to fully meet the requirements of the Popek and Goldberg the-
 orem, with the explicit goal that virtual machines running on top of a Virtualization Extensions-
 based hypervisor meet the following three core attributes of equivalence, safety, and performance:

 Equivalence: ARM’s architects designed the Virtualization Extensions to provide architectural
 compatibility between the virtualized hardware and the underlying hardware, including being
 backward-compatible with older generations of ARM’s ISA. However, ARM also introduced in
 ARMv7 a hardware technology for providing hardware-based security known as TrustZone. By
 design, TrustZone is not virtualized by the Virtualization Extensions. is view of equivalence is
 the same as that for Intel’s VT-x from the pragmatic point of view of applications and operating
 systems.

 Safety: ARM Virtualization Extensions also meet the safety requirement in a manner similar
 to Intel’s VT-x. rough architectural support specifically designed for virtualization, a simpler
 hypervisor can provide the same characteristics with a smaller code base. is reduces the potential
 attack surface on the hypervisor and the risk of software vulnerabilities.

 Performance: ARM benefited from the hindsight of Intel’s VT-x in its design, so that deliver-
 ing good performance was a goal from the beginning for first-generation hardware support for
 virtualization. For example, nested page tables, not part of the original x86 virtualization hard-
 ware, are standard in ARM. Furthermore, ARM went beyond Intel’s VT-x in various aspects
 of its design to provide additional hardware mechanisms to improve virtualization performance,
 especially in the presence of multicore systems which have become more commonplace.

 7.2     CPU VIRTUALIZATION
 Like Intel’s VT-x design, the architecture of the Virtualization Extensions focuses on supporting
 the existing ISA in the context of virtualization. ARM does not change the semantics of individ-
 ual instructions of the ISA, or separately address the individual aspects of the architecture limiting
 virtualization, such as the non-virtualizable instructions. Instead, the Virtualization Extensions
 introduces a new more privileged mode of execution of the processor, referred to as HYP (hyper-
 visor) mode in the ARMv7 architecture when it was first introduced, but now referred to as EL2
 since the introduction of the ARMv8 architecture.
        We first provide an overview of the ARM architecture then discuss its virtualization sup-
 port. Figure 7.1 shows the overall CPU modes on the ARM architecture, including TrustZone
 (Security Extensions). TrustZone splits the modes into two worlds, secure and non-secure, which
 are orthogonal to the CPU modes. A special mode, monitor mode, is provided to switch between
 the secure and non-secure worlds. Although ARM CPUs power up starting in the secure world,
                                                                  7.2. CPU VIRTUALIZATION        125
assuming TrustZone is implemented, ARM bootloaders typically transition to the non-secure
world at an early stage. e secure world is used for trusted computing use cases such as digital
rights management. TrustZone may appear useful for virtualization by using the secure world for
hypervisor execution, but this does not work because trap-and-emulate is not supported. ere is
no means to trap operations executed in the non-secure world to the secure world. Non-secure
software can therefore freely configure, for example, virtual memory. Any software running at the
highest non-secure privilege level therefore has access to all non-secure physical memory, making
it problematic to isolate multiple VMs running in the non-secure world. While it may be possible
to retrofit TrustZone to support virtualization, that was not the intent of TrustZone, and it would
be undesirable to exclude current uses of TrustZone in a system running hypervisors because it is
being used for virtualization support.
       Figure 7.1 shows a new CPU privilege level called EL2 introduced to support virtualization.
ARM Virtualization Extensions are centered around this new CPU privilege level (also known
as exception level), EL2, added to the existing user and kernel levels, EL0 and EL1, respectively.
Since ARM software stacks generally run in the non-secure world, EL2 was introduced as a trap-
and-emulate mechanism to support virtualization in the non-secure world. EL2 is a CPU mode
that is strictly more privileged than the other CPU modes, EL0 and EL1. Note that ARMv8 only
has one kernel mode, EL1, unlike previous ARM architecture versions that supported multiple
kernel modes as discussed in §2.5.3.
       To support VMs, software running in EL2 can configure the hardware to trap to EL2 from
EL0 or EL1 on various sensitive instructions and hardware interrupts. is configurability allows
for more flexible uses of the system. Consider three examples. First, a partitioning hypervisor that
does not support resource overcommittment may not trap on some instructions that a normal
hypervisor would trap on. Second, it may be desirable to allow a VM to use ARM debug registers
directly and therefore not trap accesses to them, but if debugging on the host was being done at
the same time, the VM should not be allowed to access them but should instead trap and their
behavior should be emulated. ird, if one wanted to just emulate a different CPU from the one
being used, it would be necessary to trap on accesses to the CPU identifier registers, but it would
not be necessary to trap on other accesses required for running a full hypervisor.

                             Non-Secure state      Secure state
                              EL0 User               EL0 User
                              EL1 Kernel             EL1 Kernel
                              EL2 Hypervisor

                                   Monitor Mode (Secure EL3)

Figure 7.1: ARM processor modes.
126   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
        To allow VMs to interact with an interface identical to that of the physical machine while
 isolating them from the rest of the system and preventing them from gaining full access to the
 hardware, a hypervisor enables the virtualization features in EL2 before switching to a VM. e
 VM will then execute normally in EL0 and EL1 until some condition is reached that requires
 intervention of the hypervisor. At this point, the hardware traps into EL2 giving control to the
 hypervisor, which can then manage the hardware and provide the required isolation across VMs.
 Once the condition is processed by the hypervisor, the CPU can be switched back into EL0 or EL1
 and the VM can resume execution. When all virtualization features are disabled in EL2, software
 running in EL1 and EL0 works just like on a system without the Virtualization Extensions where
 software running in EL1 has full access to the hardware.
        e ARM architecture allows each trap to be configured to trap directly into a VM’s EL1
 instead of going through EL2. For example, traps caused by system calls or page faults from
 EL0 can be configured to trap to a VM’s EL1 directly so that they are handled by the guest OS
 without intervention of the hypervisor. is avoids going to EL2 on each system call or page
 fault, reducing virtualization overhead. Additionally, all traps into EL2 can be disabled and a
 single non-virtualized kernel can run in EL1 and have complete control of the system.
        ARM designed the virtualization support around a separate CPU mode distinct from exist-
 ing privileged modes, because they envisioned a standalone hypervisor underneath a more com-
 plex rich OS kernel [62]. ey wanted to make it easier for silicon partners to implement the
 Virtualization Extensions, and therefore reduced the number of control registers available in EL2
 compared to EL1. For example, EL2 only has one page table base register while EL1 can make
 use of two. Arguably, by reducing the number of control registers available in EL2, the hypervisor
 implementation could be made simpler by reducing the amount of state that needed to be ma-
 nipulated. Similarly, they mandated certain bits to be set in the page table entries, because they
 did not envision a hypervisor sharing page tables with software running in user space, which is
 for example what the Linux kernel does with kernel mode.
        Compared to Intel’s VT-x, ARM Virtualization Extensions reflect a different approach
 with respect to CPU virtualization. ARM supports virtualization through a separate CPU mode,
 EL2, which is a separate and strictly more privileged CPU mode than previous user and kernel
 modes. In contrast, Intel has root and non-root mode, which are orthogonal to the CPU protec-
 tion modes. While sensitive operations on ARM trap to EL2, sensitive operations can trap from
 non-root mode to root mode while staying in the same protection level on Intel. A crucial dif-
 ference between the two hardware designs is that Intel’s root mode supports the same full range
 of user and kernel mode functionality as its non-root mode, whereas ARM’s EL2 is a strictly
 different CPU mode with its own set of features. A hypervisor using ARM’s EL2 has an arguably
 simpler set of features to use than the more complex options available with Intel’s root mode.
 More importantly, the simpler set of features of ARM’s EL2 are most likely easier for hardware
 vendors to implement than the requirement of duplicating the entire architecturally visible state
 of the processor as done with Intel’s root mode.
                                                                  7.2. CPU VIRTUALIZATION          127
       Both ARM and Intel trap into their respective EL2 and root modes, but Intel provides
specific hardware support for a VM control block which is automatically saved and restored when
switching to and from root mode using only a single instruction. is is used to automatically
save and restore guest state when switching between guest and hypervisor execution. In contrast,
ARM provides no such hardware support and any state that needs to be saved and restored must
be done explicitly in software. e absence of this hardware support in ARM reduces the hardware
complexity of implementing virtualization support, but it also provides some flexibility in what
is saved and restored in switching to and from EL2. For example, trapping to ARM’s EL2 is
potentially faster than trapping to Intel’s root mode if there is no additional state to save. On the
other hand, if much of the state in the software equivalent of a VM control block needs to be
saved and restored on each switch to the hypervisor, the hardware-supported VM control block
feature is most likely faster. Exactly what state needs to be saved and restored when switching to
and from EL2 depends on the hypervisor design and what state the hypervisor needs to use.
       Compared to the properties of Intel’s root mode, ARM’s Virtualization Extensions provide
the following properties:
   • the processor is at any point in time in exactly one CPU mode, EL2, EL1, or EL0. e actual
     transition from one mode to another is atomic, but the process of saving and restoring state
     as needed when transition from one mode to another is not atomic;
   • the CPU mode can be determined by executing the MRS instruction, which is available in
     any mode as discussed in §2.5.3. e expectation is that applications and operating systems
     will continue to run using the same CPU modes, whether within a VM or not. However,
     under this assumption, EL2 execution itself cannot be virtualized and recursive virtual ma-
     chines are not supported since a nested hypervisor can determine that it is not running in
     EL2. is is under revision though and architecture support for nested virtualization on
     ARM will become available starting with ARMv8.3 [38];
   • EL2 is designed to be used for virtualization, but it is simply a more privileged CPU mode
     and could be used for other purposes;
   • each mode has its own distinct complete linear address space defined by a distinct page table.
     EL2 has its own translation regime, which defines the registers and page table formats
     used in a given mode. However, EL1/EL0 share a translation regime so that both of their
     address spaces and page tables can be accessible in either EL1 or EL0. Only entries in the
     TLB for the currently active address space are matched as TLB entries are each tagged
     with a translation regime. Since the entries are tagged, there is no need to flush the TLB in
     transitioning between EL2 and other CPU modes; and
   • ARM has two types of interrupts—normal (IRQ) and fast (FIQ)—and two corresponding
     interrupt flags for the current mode of the processor. Software in EL1 can freely manipulate
     the interrupt flag for each type of interrupt without trapping. EL2 can configure each type
128   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
           of interrupt to either be delivered directly to EL1 or to trap to EL2. When the interrupt is
           delivered directly to EL1, the interrupt flag configured directly by EL1 controls real physical
           interrupts. When the interrupt traps to EL2, the interrupt flag configured directly by EL1
           controls virtual interrupts.

 7.2.1   VIRTUALIZATION EXTENSIONS AND THE POPEK/GOLDBERG
         THEOREM
 Recall Popek and Goldberg’s central virtualization theorem, discussed in §2.2.

              eorem 1 [143]: For any conventional third-generation computer, a virtual
              machine monitor may be constructed if the set of sensitive instructions for
              that computer is a subset of the set of privileged instructions.
       .

 e Virtualization Extensions architecture meets the criteria of the theorem, but through a sig-
 nificant departure from the original model proposed to demonstrate it. ARM pragmatically took
 a different path by introducing a new more privileged EL2 that operates below and maintains
 the existing CPU modes. is ensures backward compatibility for the ISA. Terms must therefore
 be redefined to convince oneselves that the Virtualization Extensions follow the Popek/Gold-
 berg criteria. e corresponding core Virtualization Extensions design principle can be informally
 framed as follows.

              In an architecture with an additional, separate more privileged hypervisor
              mode of execution, a VMM may be constructed if all sensitive instructions
              (according to the non-virtualizable legacy architecture) are hypervisor-mode
              privileged. When executing in non-hypervisor mode, all hypervisor-mode-
              privileged instructions are either (i) implemented by the processor, with the
              requirement that they operate exclusively on the non-hypervisor state of the
              processor, or (ii) cause a trap to the hypervisor mode.
       .

        We make two observations: (i) the theorem does not take into account whether instruc-
 tions are privileged or not, but instead only takes into consideration the orthogonal question of
 whether and how they execute in non-hypervisor mode; and (ii) only traps are required to meet the
 equivalence and safety criteria. However, reducing transitions by implementing certain sensitive
 instructions in hardware is necessary to meet the performance criteria.

 7.3         MEMORY VIRTUALIZATION
 ARM and Intel are quite similar in their support for virtualizing physical memory. Both introduce
 an additional set of page tables to translate guest to host physical addresses, although ARM ben-
                                                            7.3. MEMORY VIRTUALIZATION              129
efited from hindsight by including this feature as part of its initial virtualization support whereas
Intel did not include its equivalent Extended Page Table (EPT) support, discussed in §5.1, un-
til its second-generation virtualization hardware. Using ARM’s hardware support to virtualize
physical memory, when running a VM, the physical addresses managed by the VM are actually
Intermediate Physical Addresses (IPAs), also known as guest physical addresses (gPAs), and
need to be translated into host physical addresses (hPAs). Similarly to nested page tables on x86,
ARM provides a second set of page tables, Stage-2 page tables, which translate from gPAs to
hPAs corresponding to guest and host physical addresses, respectively. Stage-2 translation can be
completely disabled and enabled from EL2. Stage-2 page tables use ARM’s new LPAE (Large
Physical Address Extension) page table format, with subtle differences from the page tables used
by kernel mode.
        Figure 7.2 shows the complete address translation scheme. ree levels of page tables are
used for Stage-1 translation from virtual to guest physical addresses, and four levels of page tables
are used for Stage-2 translation from guest to host physical addresses. Stage-2 translation can be
entirely enabled or disabled using a bit in the Hyp Configuration Register (HCR). e base register
for the Stage-2 first-level (L1) page table is specified by the Virtualization Translation Table Base
Register (VTTBR). Both registers are only configurable from EL2.

        TTBR VA

         Stage 1        L1
                       Table               L2
                                          Table               L3
                                                             Page   GPA
       VTTBR

         Stage 2         L1
                       Table                L2
                                          Table               L3
                                                             Page                L4
                                                                                Page       PA

Figure 7.2: Stage-1 and Stage-2 page table walk on ARM using the LPAE memory long format
descriptors. e virtual address (VA) is first translated into a guest physical address (gPA) and finally
into a host physical address (hPA).
130   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 7.4     INTERRUPT VIRTUALIZATION

 ARM defines the Generic Interrupt Controller (GIC) architecture [21]. e GIC routes inter-
 rupts from devices to CPUs and CPUs query the GIC to discover the source of an interrupt.
 e GIC is especially important in multicore configurations, because it is used to generate Inter-
 Processor Interrupts (IPIs) from one CPU core to another. e GIC is split in two parts, the
 distributor and the CPU interfaces. ere is only one distributor in a system, but each CPU
 core has a GIC CPU interface. Both the CPU interfaces and the distributor are accessed over a
 Memory-Mapped interface (MMIO). e distributor is used to configure the GIC, for example,
 to set the CPU core affinity of an interrupt, to completely enable or disable interrupts on a system,
 or to send an IPI to another CPU core. e CPU interface is used to acknowledge (ACK) and to
 signal End-Of-Interrupt (EOI). For example, when a CPU core receives an interrupt, it will read
 a special register on the GIC CPU interface, which ACKs the interrupt and returns the number
 of the interrupt. e interrupt will not be raised to the CPU again before the CPU writes to the
 EOI register of the CPU interface with the value retrieved from the ACK register.
         Interrupts can be configured to trap to either EL2 or EL1. Trapping all interrupts to EL1
 and letting OS software running in EL1 handle them directly is efficient, but does not work in the
 context of VMs, because the hypervisor loses control over the hardware. Trapping all interrupts
 to EL2 ensures that the hypervisor retains control, but requires emulating virtual interrupts in
 software to signal events to VMs. is is cumbersome to manage and expensive because each step
 of interrupt and virtual interrupt processing, such as ACKing and EOIing, must go through the
 hypervisor.
         e GIC includes hardware virtualization support in the form of a virtual GIC (VGIC) so
 that receiving virtual interrupts does not need to be emulated in software by the hypervisor. e
 VGIC introduces a VGIC CPU interface as well as a corresponding hypervisor control interface
 for each CPU. VMs are configured to see the VGIC CPU interface instead of the GIC CPU
 interface. Virtual interrupts are generated by writing to special registers, the list registers, in the
 VGIC hypervisor control interface, and the VGIC CPU interface raises the virtual interrupts di-
 rectly to a VM’s kernel mode. Because the VGIC CPU interface includes support for ACK and
 EOI, these operations no longer need to trap to the hypervisor to be emulated in software, reduc-
 ing overhead for receiving interrupts on a CPU. For example, emulated virtual devices typically
 raise virtual interrupts through a software API to the hypervisor, which can leverage the VGIC
 by writing the virtual interrupt number for the emulated device into the list registers. is causes
 the VGIC to interrupt the VM directly to kernel mode and lets the guest OS ACK and EOI
 the virtual interrupt without trapping to the hypervisor. Note that the distributor must still be
 emulated in software and all accesses to the distributor by a VM must still trap to the hypervisor.
 For example, when a virtual CPU sends a virtual IPI to another virtual CPU, this will cause a
 trap to the hypervisor, which emulates the distributor access in software and programs the list
 registers on the receiving CPU’s GIC hypervisor control interface.
                                                             7.5. TIMER VIRTUALIZATION          131
       ARM’s support for virtual interrupts had no x86 counterpart until the more recent intro-
duction of Intel’s virtual APIC support [104], as discussed in Chapter 6. Similar to ARM’s sup-
port for virtual interrupts, Intel’s APIC virtualization support also allows VMs to EOI interrupts
without trapping to the hypervisor. Furthermore, the Intel virtual APIC support allows VMs to
access a number of APIC registers without trapping to the hypervisor by providing a backing
page in memory for the VM’s virtualized APIC state. While Intel has recently introduced posted
interrupts, x86 support for direct interrupt delivery, ARM has introduced a similar mechanism in
version 4.0 of the GIC architecture (GICv4) [22]. However, GICv4 is not yet available in current
ARM hardware.

7.5     TIMER VIRTUALIZATION
ARM defines the Generic Timer Architecture which includes support for timer virtualization.
Generic timers provide a counter that measures passing of time in real-time, and a timer for each
CPU, which is programmed to raise an interrupt to the CPU after a certain amount of time
has passed. Timers are likely to be used by both hypervisors and guest OSes, but to provide
isolation and retain control, the timers used by the hypervisor cannot be directly configured and
manipulated by guest OSes. Such timer accesses from a guest OS would need to trap to EL2,
incurring additional overhead for a relatively frequent operation for some workloads. Hypervisors
may also wish to virtualize VM time, which is problematic if VMs have direct access to counter
hardware.
       ARM provides virtualization support for the timers by introducing a new counter, the vir-
tual counter and a new timer, the virtual timer. A hypervisor can be configured to use physical
timers while VMs are configured to use virtual timers. VMs can then access, program, and cancel
virtual timers without causing traps to EL2. Access to the physical timer and counter from ker-
nel mode is controlled from EL2, but software running in kernel mode always has access to the
virtual timers and counters. Additionally, EL2 configures an offset register, which is subtracted
from the physical counter and returned as the value when reading the virtual counter. Note that
prior to the use of generic timers, the frequent operation of simply reading a counter is a memory
mapped operation, which would typically trap to EL2 and generate additional overhead.
       ARM’s support for virtual timers has no real x86 counterpart. e x86 world of timekeeping
consists of a myriad of timing devices available partially due to the history and legacy of the
PC platform. Modern x86 platforms typically support an 8250-series Programmable Interval
Timer (PIT) for legacy support and a Local APIC (LAPIC) timer. e Intel hardware support
for virtualization adds the VMX-Preemption timer which allows hypervisors to program an exit
from a VM independently from how other timers are programmed. e VMX-Preemption timer
was added to reduce the latency between a timer firing and the hypervisor injecting a virtual
timer interrupt. is is achieved because a hypervisor doesn’t have to handle an interrupt from
the LAPIC timer, but can directly tell from a VM exit that the preemption timer has expired.
Contrary to ARM, x86 does not support giving full control of individual timer hardware to VMs.
132   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 x86 does allow VMs to directly read the Time Stamp Counter (TSC), wheres ARM allows access
 to the virtual counter. e x86 TSC is typically higher resolution than the ARM counter, because
 the TSC is driven by the processor’s clock where the ARM counter is driven by a dedicated clock
 signal.

 7.6     KVM/ARM—A VMM BASED ON ARM VIRTUALIZATION
         EXTENSIONS
 So far, we have described the hardware extensions introduced by ARM’s Virtualization Exten-
 sions, and discussed a few architectural considerations. We now use KVM [113], the Linux-based
 Kernel Virtual Machine, as a case study of how to adapt its design for ARM from its original
 design for VT-x to create KVM/ARM, the Linux ARM hypervisor [60].
        Instead of reinventing and reimplementing complex core functionality in the hypervisor,
 and potentially introducing tricky and fatal bugs along the way, KVM/ARM builds on KVM
 and leverages existing infrastructure in the Linux kernel. While a standalone bare metal hypervi-
 sor design approach has the potential for better performance and a smaller Trusted Computing
 Base (TCB), this approach is less practical on ARM. ARM hardware is in many ways much
 more diverse than x86. Hardware components are often tightly integrated in ARM devices in
 non-standard ways by different device manufacturers. ARM hardware lacks features for hard-
 ware discovery such as a standard BIOS or a PCI bus, and there is no established mechanism for
 installing low-level software on a wide variety of ARM platforms. Linux, however, is supported
 across almost all ARM platforms and by integrating KVM/ARM with Linux, KVM/ARM is
 automatically available on any device running a recent version of the Linux kernel. is is in con-
 trast to bare metal approaches such as Xen [188], which must actively support every platform on
 which they wish to install the Xen hypervisor. For example, for every new SoC that Xen needs
 to support, the developers must implement a new serial device driver in the core Xen hypervisor.
        While KVM/ARM benefits from its integration with Linux in terms of portability and
 hardware support, a key problem that needed to be addressed is that the ARM hardware virtual-
 ization extensions were designed to support a standalone hypervisor design where the hypervisor
 is completely separate from any standard kernel functionality. In the following, we describe how
 KVM/ARM’s design makes it possible to benefit from integration with an existing kernel and at
 the same time take advantage of the hardware virtualization features.

 7.6.1 SPLIT-MODE VIRTUALIZATION
 Simply running a hypervisor entirely in ARM’s EL2 is attractive since it is the most privileged
 level. However, since KVM/ARM leverages existing kernel infrastructure such as the scheduler,
 running KVM/ARM in EL2 implies running the Linux kernel in EL2. is is problematic for
 at least two reasons. First, low-level architecture dependent code in Linux is written to work in
 kernel mode, and would not run unmodified in EL2, because EL2 is a completely different CPU
              7.6. KVM/ARM—A VMM BASED ON ARM VIRTUALIZATION EXTENSIONS                          133
mode from normal kernel mode. e significant changes required to run the kernel in EL2 would
be very unlikely to be accepted by the Linux kernel community. More importantly, to preserve
compatibility with hardware without EL2 and to run Linux as a guest OS, low-level code would
have to be written to work in both modes, potentially resulting in slow and convoluted code paths.
As a simple example, a page fault handler needs to obtain the virtual address causing the page
fault. In EL2, this address is stored in a different register than in kernel mode.
       Second, running the entire kernel in EL2 would adversely affect native performance. For
example, EL2 has its own separate address space. Whereas kernel mode uses two page table base
registers to provide the familiar 3 GB/1 GB split between user address space and kernel address
space, EL2 uses a single page table register and therefore cannot have direct access to the user
space portion of the address space. Frequently used functions to access user memory would require
the kernel to explicitly map user space data into kernel address space and subsequently perform
necessary teardown and TLB maintenance operations, resulting in poor native performance on
ARM.
       ese problems with running a Linux hypervisor using ARM EL2 do not occur for x86
hardware virtualization. x86 root mode is orthogonal to its CPU privilege modes. e entire
Linux kernel can run in root mode as a hypervisor because the same set of CPU modes available
in non-root mode are available in root mode. Nevertheless, given the widespread use of ARM and
the advantages of Linux on ARM, finding an efficient virtualization solution for ARM that can
leverage Linux and take advantage of the hardware virtualization support is of crucial importance.
       KVM/ARM introduces split-mode virtualization, a new approach to hypervisor design
that splits the core hypervisor so that it runs across different privileged CPU modes to take ad-
vantage of the specific benefits and functionality offered by each CPU mode. KVM/ARM uses
split-mode virtualization to leverage the ARM hardware virtualization support enabled by EL2,
while at the same time leveraging existing Linux kernel services running in kernel mode. Split-
mode virtualization allows KVM/ARM to be integrated with the Linux kernel without intrusive
modifications to the existing code base.
       is is done by splitting the hypervisor into two components, the lowvisor and the high-
visor, as shown in Figure 7.3. e lowvisor is designed to take advantage of the hardware virtu-
alization support available in EL2 to provide three key functions. First, the lowvisor sets up the
correct execution context by appropriate configuration of the hardware, and enforces protection
and isolation between different execution contexts. e lowvisor directly interacts with hardware
protection features and is therefore highly critical and the code base is kept to an absolute mini-
mum. Second, the lowvisor switches from a VM execution context to the host execution context
and vice-versa. e host execution context is used to run the hypervisor and the host Linux kernel.
We refer to an execution context as a world, and switching from one world to another as a world
switch, because the entire state of the system is changed. Since the lowvisor is the only compo-
nent that runs in EL2, only it can be responsible for the hardware reconfiguration necessary to
perform a world switch. ird, the lowvisor provides a virtualization trap handler, which handles
134   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS

                               Host                                   VM
                                                     QEMU
                               User                                   User
           EL0 (User)

           EL1 (Kernel)        Host               KVM                 VM
                               Kernel           Highvisor             Kernel

                                              Trap                           Trap

           EL2 (Hypervisor)                     Lowvisor

Figure 7.3: KVM/ARM system architecture.

 interrupts and exceptions that must trap to the hypervisor. All traps to the hypervisor must first
 go to the lowvisor. e lowvisor performs only the minimal amount of processing required and
 defers the bulk of the work to be done to the highvisor after a world switch to the highvisor is
 complete.
        e highvisor runs in kernel mode as part of the host Linux kernel. It can therefore di-
 rectly leverage existing Linux functionality such as the scheduler, and can make use of standard
 kernel software data structures and mechanisms to implement its functionality, such as locking
 mechanisms and memory allocation functions. is makes higher-level functionality easier to im-
 plement in the highvisor. For example, while the lowvisor provides a low-level trap-handler and
 the low-level mechanism to switch from one world to another, the highvisor handles Stage-2
 page faults from the VM and performs instruction emulation. Note that parts of the VM run in
 kernel mode, just like the highvisor, but with Stage-2 translation and trapping to EL2 enabled.
        Because the hypervisor is split across kernel mode and EL2, switching between a VM and
 the highvisor involves multiple mode transitions. A trap to the highvisor while running the VM
 will first trap to the lowvisor running in EL2. e lowvisor will then cause another trap to run
 the highvisor. Similarly, going from the highvisor to a VM requires trapping from kernel mode
 to EL2, and then switching to the VM. As a result, split-mode virtualization incurs a double
 trap cost in switching to and from the highvisor. On ARM, the only way to perform these mode
 transitions to and from EL2 is by trapping. However, it turns out that this extra trap is not a
 significant performance cost on ARM, as discussed in §7.7.
        KVM/ARM uses a memory mapped interface to share data between the highvisor and
 lowvisor as necessary. Because memory management can be complex, it leverages the highvi-
 sor’s ability to use the existing memory management subsystem in Linux to manage memory
              7.6. KVM/ARM—A VMM BASED ON ARM VIRTUALIZATION EXTENSIONS                           135
for both the highvisor and lowvisor. Managing the lowvisor’s memory involves additional chal-
lenges though, because it requires managing EL2’s separate address space. One simplistic ap-
proach would be to reuse the host kernel’s page tables and also use them in EL2 to make the
address spaces identical. is unfortunately does not work, because EL2 uses a different page
table format from kernel mode. erefore, the highvisor explicitly manages the EL2 page tables
to map any code executed in EL2 and any data structures shared between the highvisor and the
lowvisor to the same virtual addresses in EL2 and in kernel mode.

7.6.2 CPU VIRTUALIZATION
To virtualize the CPU, KVM/ARM must present an interface to the VM which is essentially
identical to the underlying real hardware CPU, while ensuring that the hypervisor remains in
control of the hardware. is involves ensuring that software running in the VM must have per-
sistent access to the same register state as software running on the physical CPU, as well as en-
suring that physical hardware state associated with the hypervisor and its host kernel is persistent
across running VMs. Register state not affecting VM isolation can simply be context switched
by saving the VM state and restoring the host state from memory when switching from a VM to
the host and vice versa. KVM/ARM configures access to all other sensitive state to trap to EL2,
so it can be emulated by the hypervisor.
       Table 7.1 shows the CPU register state visible to software running in kernel and user mode,
and KVM/ARM’s virtualization method for each register group. e lowvisor has its own ded-
icated configuration registers only for use in EL2, and is not shown in Table 7.1. KVM/ARM
context switches registers during world-switches whenever the hardware supports it, because it al-
lows the VM direct access to the hardware. For example, the VM can directly program the Stage-1
page table base register without trapping to the hypervisor, a fairly common operation in most
guest OSes. KVM/ARM performs trap and emulate on sensitive instructions and when accessing
hardware state that could affect the hypervisor or would leak information about the hardware to
the VM that violates its virtualized abstraction. For example, KVM/ARM traps if a VM executes
the WFI instruction, which causes the CPU to power down, because such an operation should
only be performed by the hypervisor to maintain control of the hardware. KVM/ARM defers
switching certain register state until absolutely necessary, which slightly improves performance
under certain workloads.
       e difference between running inside a VM in kernel or user mode and running the hy-
pervisor in kernel or user mode is determined by how the virtualization extensions have been
configured by EL2 during the world switch. A world switch from the host to a VM performs the
following actions:
  1. store all host GP registers on the EL2 stack;
  2. configure the VGIC for the VM;
  3. configure the timers for the VM;
136    7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
Table 7.1: VM and Host State on a Cortex-A15

                     Action           Nr.         State
                     Context Switch   38          General Purpose (GP) Registers
                                      26          Control Registers
                                      16          VGIC Control Registers
                                      4           VGIC List Registers
                                      2           Arch. Timer Control Registers
                                      32          64-bit VFP Registers
                                      4           32-bit VFP Control Registers
                     Trap-and-Emulate -           CP14 Trace Registers
                                      -           WFI Instructions
                                      -           SMC Instructions
                                      -           ACTLR Access
                                      -           Cache Ops. by Set/Way
                                      -           L2CTLR / L2ECTLR Registers

       4. save all host-specific configuration registers onto the EL2 stack;

       5. load the VM’s configuration registers onto the hardware, which can be done without affect-
          ing current execution, because EL2 uses its own configuration registers, separate from the
          host state;

       6. configure EL2 to trap floating-point operations for lazy context switching of floating-point
          (VFP) registers, trap interrupts, trap CPU halt instructions (WFI/WFE), trap SMC in-
          structions, trap specific configuration register accesses, and trap debug register accesses;

       7. write VM-specific IDs into shadow ID registers, defined by the ARM Virtualization Ex-
          tensions and accessed by the VM in lieu of the hardware values in the ID registers;

       8. set the Stage-2 page table base register (VTTBR) and enable Stage-2 address translation;

       9. restore all guest GP registers; and

      10. trap into either user or kernel mode.
       e CPU will stay in the VM world until an event occurs, which triggers a trap into EL2.
 Such an event can be caused by any of the traps mentioned above, a Stage-2 page fault, or a
 hardware interrupt. Since the event requires services from the highvisor, either to emulate the
 expected hardware behavior for the VM or to service a device interrupt, KVM/ARM must per-
 form another world switch back into the highvisor and its host. is entails trapping first to the
              7.6. KVM/ARM—A VMM BASED ON ARM VIRTUALIZATION EXTENSIONS                          137
lowvisor before going to the highvisor. e world switch back to the host from a VM performs
the following actions:

  1. store all VM GP registers;

  2. disable Stage-2 translation;

  3. configure EL2 to not trap any register access or instructions;

  4. save all VM-specific configuration registers;

  5. load the host’s configuration registers onto the hardware;

  6. configure the timers for the host;

  7. save VM-specific VGIC state;

  8. restore all host GP registers; and

  9. trap into kernel mode.

7.6.3 MEMORY VIRTUALIZATION
As discussed in §7.3, ARM provides Stage-2 page tables to translate guest to host physical ad-
dresses. KVM/ARM provides memory virtualization by enabling Stage-2 translation for all mem-
ory accesses when running in a VM. Stage-2 translation can only be configured in EL2, and its use
is completely transparent to the VM. e highvisor manages the Stage-2 translation page tables
to only allow access to memory specifically allocated for a VM; other accesses will cause Stage-2
page faults which trap to the hypervisor. is mechanism ensures that a VM cannot access mem-
ory belonging to the hypervisor or other VMs, including any sensitive data. Stage-2 translation is
disabled when running in the highvisor and lowvisor because the highvisor has full control of the
complete system and directly manages the host physical addresses. When the hypervisor performs
a world switch to a VM, it enables Stage-2 translation and configures the Stage-2 page table base
register accordingly. Although both the highvisor and VMs share the same CPU modes, Stage-2
translations ensure that the highvisor is protected from any access by the VMs.
       KVM/ARM uses split-mode virtualization to leverage existing kernel memory allocation,
page reference counting, and page table manipulation code. KVM/ARM handles Stage-2 page
faults by considering the gPA of the fault, and if that address belongs to normal memory in the
VM memory map, KVM/ARM allocates a page for the VM by simply calling an existing kernel
function, such as get_user_pages, and maps the allocated page to the VM in the Stage-2 page
tables. In comparison, a bare metal hypervisor would be forced to either statically allocate memory
to VMs or write an entire new memory allocation subsystem.
138   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 7.6.4 I/O VIRTUALIZATION
 KVM/ARM leverages existing QEMU and Virtio [154] user space device emulation to provide
 I/O virtualization. At a hardware level, all I/O mechanisms on the ARM architecture are based on
 load/store operations to MMIO device regions. With the exception of devices directly assigned to
 VMs, all hardware MMIO regions are inaccessible from VMs. KVM/ARM uses Stage-2 trans-
 lations to ensure that physical devices cannot be accessed directly from VMs. Any access outside
 of RAM regions allocated for the VM will trap to the hypervisor, which can route the access
 to a specific emulated device in QEMU based on the fault address. is is somewhat different
 from x86, which uses x86-specific hardware instructions such as inl and outl for port I/O op-
 erations in addition to MMIO. Chapter 6 provides a more in-depth discussion regarding I/O
 virtualization in general.

 7.6.5 INTERRUPT VIRTUALIZATION
 KVM/ARM leverages its tight integration with Linux to reuse existing device drivers and related
 functionality, including handling interrupts. When running in a VM, KVM/ARM configures the
 CPU to trap all hardware interrupts to EL2. On each interrupt, it performs a world switch to the
 highvisor and the host handles the interrupt, so that the hypervisor remains in complete control
 of hardware resources. When running in the host and the highvisor, interrupts trap directly to
 kernel mode, avoiding the overhead of going through EL2. In both cases, all hardware interrupt
 processing is done in the host by reusing Linux’s existing interrupt handling functionality.
        However, VMs must receive notifications in the form of virtual interrupts from emulated
 devices and multicore guest OSes must be able to send virtual IPIs from one virtual core to
 another. KVM/ARM uses the VGIC to inject virtual interrupts into VMs to reduce the number of
 traps to EL2. As described in §7.4, virtual interrupts are raised to virtual CPUs by programming
 the list registers in the VGIC hypervisor CPU control interface. KVM/ARM configures the
 Stage-2 page tables to prevent VMs from accessing the control interface and to allow access only
 to the VGIC virtual CPU interface, ensuring that only the hypervisor can program the control
 interface and that the VM can access the VGIC virtual CPU interface directly. However, guest
 OSes will still attempt to access a GIC distributor to configure the GIC and to send IPIs from
 one virtual core to another. Such accesses will trap to the hypervisor and the hypervisor must
 emulate the distributor.
        KVM/ARM introduces the virtual distributor, a software model of the GIC distributor as
 part of the highvisor. e virtual distributor exposes an interface to user space, so emulated devices
 in user space can raise virtual interrupts to the virtual distributor, and exposes an MMIO interface
 to the VM identical to that of the physical GIC distributor. e virtual distributor keeps internal
 software state about the state of each interrupt and uses this state whenever a VM is scheduled,
 to program the list registers to inject virtual interrupts. For example, if virtual CPU0 sends an IPI
 to virtual CPU1, the distributor will program the list registers for virtual CPU1 to raise a virtual
 IPI interrupt the next time virtual CPU1 runs.
              7.6. KVM/ARM—A VMM BASED ON ARM VIRTUALIZATION EXTENSIONS                              139
       Ideally, the virtual distributor only accesses the hardware list registers when necessary, since
device MMIO operations are typically significantly slower than cached memory accesses. A com-
plete context switch of the list registers is required when scheduling a different VM to run on a
physical core, but not necessarily required when simply switching between a VM and the hyper-
visor. For example, if there are no pending virtual interrupts, it is not necessary to access any of
the list registers. Note that once the hypervisor writes a virtual interrupt to a list register when
switching to a VM, it must also read the list register back when switching back to the hypervisor,
because the list register describes the state of the virtual interrupt and indicates, for example, if
the VM has ACKed the virtual interrupt. e initial unoptimized version of KVM/ARM uses a
simplified approach which completely context switches all VGIC state including the list registers
on each world switch.

7.6.6 TIMER VIRTUALIZATION
Reading counters and programming timers are frequent operations in many OSes for process
scheduling and to regularly poll device state. For example, Linux reads a counter to determine if a
process has expired its time slice, and programs timers to ensure that processes don’t exceed their
allowed time slices. Application workloads also often leverage timers for various reasons. Trapping
to the hypervisor for each such operation is likely to incur noticeable performance overheads, and
allowing a VM direct access to the time-keeping hardware typically implies giving up timing
control of the hardware resources as VMs can disable timers and control the CPU for extended
periods of time.
       KVM/ARM leverages ARM’s hardware virtualization features of the generic timers to al-
low VMs direct access to reading counters and programming timers without trapping to EL2
while at the same time ensuring the hypervisor remains in control of the hardware. Since access
to the physical timers is controlled using EL2, any software controlling EL2 mode has access to
the physical timers. KVM/ARM maintains hardware control by using the physical timers in the
hypervisor and disallowing access to physical timers from the VM. e Linux kernel running as a
guest OS only accesses the virtual timer and can therefore directly access timer hardware without
trapping to the hypervisor.
       Unfortunately, due to architectural limitations, the virtual timers cannot directly raise vir-
tual interrupts, but always raise hardware interrupts, which trap to the hypervisor. KVM/ARM
detects when a VM virtual timer expires, and injects a corresponding virtual interrupt to the VM,
performing all hardware ACK and EOI operations in the highvisor. e hardware only provides
a single virtual timer per physical CPU, and multiple virtual CPUs may be multiplexed across
this single hardware instance. To support virtual timers in this scenario, KVM/ARM detects
unexpired timers when a VM traps to the hypervisor and leverages existing OS functionality to
program a software timer at the time when the virtual timer would have otherwise fired, had the
VM been left running. When such a software timer fires, a callback function is executed, which
raises a virtual timer interrupt to the VM using the virtual distributor described above.
140   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 7.7     PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENTS
 We present some experimental results that quantify the performance of ARM virtualization by
 comparing the performance of both x86 and ARM implementations of KVM on multicore hard-
 ware. ARM measurements were obtained using an Insignal Arndale board [97] with a dual core
 1.7 GHz Cortex A-15 CPU on a Samsung Exynos 5250 SoC. is is the first and most widely
 used commercially available development board based on the Cortex A-15, the first ARM CPU
 with hardware virtualization support. Onboard 100 Mb Ethernet is provided via the USB bus
 and an external 120 GB Samsung 840 series SSD drive was connected to the Arndale board via
 eSATA. x86 measurements were obtained using both a low-power mobile laptop platform and
 an industry standard server platform. e laptop platform was a 2011 MacBook Air with a dual
 core 1.8 GHz Core i7-2677M CPU, an internal Samsung SM256C 256 GB SSD drive, and an
 Apple 100 Mb USB Ethernet adapter. e server platform was a dedicated OVH SP 3 server
 with a dual core 3.4 GHz Intel Xeon E3 1245v2 CPU, two physical SSD drives of which only
 one was used, and 1 Gb Ethernet dropped down to connect to a 100 Mb network infrastructure.
        To provide comparable measurements, the software environments across all hardware plat-
 forms were kept the same as much as possible. Both the host and guest VMs on all platforms were
 Ubuntu version 12.10. e mainline Linux 3.10 kernel was used for the experiments, with patches
 for huge page support applied on top of the source tree. Since the experiments were performed
 on a number of different platforms, the kernel configurations had to be slightly different, but
 all common features were configured similarly across all platforms. In particular, Virtio drivers
 were used in the guest VMs on both ARM and x86. QEMU version v1.5.0 was used for the
 measurements. All systems were configured with a maximum of 1.5 GB of RAM available to the
 respective guest VM or host being tested. Furthermore, all multicore measurements were done
 using two physical cores and guest VMs with two virtual CPUs, and single-core measurements
 were configured with SMP disabled in the kernel configuration of both the guest and host system;
 hyperthreading was disabled on the x86 platforms. CPU frequency scaling was disabled to ensure
 that native and virtualized performance was measured at the same clock rate on each platform.
        Table 7.2 presents various micro-architectural costs of virtualization using KVM/ARM
 on ARM and KVM x86 on x86. e measurements were obtained using custom small guest
 OSes [57, 112] with some bugfix patches applied. Code for both KVM/ARM and KVM x86
 was instrumented to read the cycle counter at specific points along critical paths to more accu-
 rately determine where overhead time was spent. Measurements are shown in cycles instead of
 time to provide a useful comparison across platforms with different CPU frequencies. We show
 two numbers for the ARM platform where possible, with and without VGIC and virtual timers
 support.
        Hypercall is the cost of two world switches, going from the VM to the host and immediately
 back again without doing any work in the host. KVM/ARM takes three to four times as many
 cycles for this operation vs. KVM x86 due to two main factors. First, saving and restoring VGIC
 state to use virtual interrupts is quite expensive on ARM. e ARM without VGIC/vtimers
                                                     7.7. PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENTS                 141
Table 7.2: Micro-architectural cycle counts

         Micro Test     ARM     ARM no VGIC/vtimers x86 Laptop x86 Server
         Hypercall        5.326                2,270      1,336      1,638
         Trap                27                   27        632        821
         IPI             14,366              32,951      17,138     21,177
         EOI+ACK            427              13,726       2,043      2,305

measurement does not include the cost of saving and restoring VGIC state, showing that this
accounts for over half of the cost of a world switch on ARM. Second, x86 provides hardware
support to save and restore state on the world switch, which is much faster. ARM requires software
to explicitly save and restore state, which provides greater flexibility, but higher costs.
       Trap is the cost of switching the hardware mode from the VM into the respective CPU
mode for running the hypervisor, EL2 on ARM and root mode on x86. ARM is much faster than
x86 because it only needs to manipulate two registers to perform this trap, whereas the cost of a
trap on x86 is roughly the same as the cost of a world switch because the same amount of state
is saved by the hardware in both cases. e trap cost on ARM is a very small part of the world
switch costs, indicating that the double trap incurred by split-mode virtualization on ARM does
not add much overhead.
       at is not to say that the cost of split-mode virtualization is necessarily small, as the dou-
ble trap is a small part of the overall hypercall cost. ere are three other more substantial costs
involved. First, because the host OS and the VM both run in EL1 and ARM hardware does not
provide any features to distinguish between the host OS running in EL1 and the VM running in
EL1, software running in EL2 must context switch all the EL1 system register state between the
VM guest OS and the type-2 hypervisor host OS, incurring added cost of saving and restoring
EL1 register state. Second, because the host OS runs in EL1 and needs full access to the hard-
ware, the hypervisor must disable traps to EL2 and Stage-2 translation from EL2 while switching
from the VM to the hypervisor, and enable them when switching back to the VM again. ird,
because the type-2 hypervisor runs in EL1 but needs to access VM control register state such
as the VGIC state, which can only be accessed from EL2, there is additional overhead to read
and write the VM control register state in EL2. e type-2 hypervisor can either jump back and
forth between EL1 and EL2 to access the control register state when needed, or it can copy the
full register state to memory while it is still in EL2, return to the host OS in EL1 and read and
write the memory copy of the VM control state, and then finally copy the state from memory
back to the EL2 control registers when the hypervisor is running in EL2 again. Both methods
incur much overhead, but jumping back and forward between EL1 and EL2 makes the software
implementation complicated and difficult to maintain. erefore, the KVM/ARM implementa-
142   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 tion currently takes the second approach of reading and writing all VM control registers in EL2
 during each transition between the VM and the hypervisor.
        IPI is the cost of issuing an IPI to another virtual CPU core when both virtual cores are
 running on separate physical cores and both are actively running inside the VM. IPI measures
 time starting from sending an IPI until the other virtual core responds and completes the IPI.
 It involves multiple world switches and sending and receiving a hardware IPI. Despite its higher
 world switch cost, ARM is faster than x86 because the underlying hardware IPI on x86 is expen-
 sive, x86 APIC MMIO operations require KVM x86 to perform instruction decoding not needed
 on ARM, and completing an interrupt on x86 is more expensive. ARM without VGIC/vtimers is
 significantly slower than with VGIC/vtimers even though it has lower world switch costs because
 sending, EOIing and ACKing interrupts trap to the hypervisor and are handled by QEMU in
 user space.
        EOI+ACK is the cost of completing a virtual interrupt on both platforms. It includes both
 interrupt acknowledgment and completion on ARM, but only completion on the x86 platform.
 ARM requires an additional operation, the acknowledgment, to the interrupt controller to deter-
 mine the source of the interrupt. x86 does not have the same requirement because the source is
 directly indicated by the interrupt descriptor table entry at the time when the interrupt is raised.
 However, the operation is roughly 5 times faster on ARM than x86 because there is no need
 to trap to the hypervisor on ARM because of VGIC support for both operations. On x86, the
 EOI operation must be emulated and therefore causes a trap to the hypervisor. is operation is
 required for every virtual interrupt including both virtual IPIs and interrupts from virtual devices.

 7.8       IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY
 We compare the code complexity of KVM/ARM to its KVM x86 counterpart in Linux 3.10
 using cloc [61] to count lines of code (LOC). KVM/ARM is 5,812 LOC, counting just the
 architecture-specific code added to Linux to implement it, of which the lowvisor is a mere 718
 LOC. As a conservative comparison, KVM x86 is 25,367 LOC, excluding guest performance
 monitoring support, not yet supported by KVM/ARM, and 3,311 LOC required for AMD
 support. ese numbers do not include KVM’s architecture-generic code, 7,071 LOC, which
 is shared by all systems. Table 7.3 shows a breakdown of the total hypervisor architecture-specific
 code into its major components.
        By inspecting the code we notice the striking additional complexity in the x86 implemen-
 tation is mainly due to the five following reasons.

      1. Since EPT was not supported in earlier hardware versions, KVM x86 must support shadow
         page tables.

      2. e hardware virtualization support has evolved over time, requiring software to condition-
         ally check for support for a large number of features such as EPT.
                                                  7.9. ARCHITECTURE IMPROVEMENTS              143
Table 7.3: Code Complexity in Lines of Code (LOC)

                   Component               KVM ARM KVM x86 (Intel)
                   Core CPU                     2,493       16,177
                   Page Fault Handling            738        3,410
                   Interrupts                   1,057        1,978
                   Timers                         180          573
                   Other                        1,344        1,288
                   Architecture-specific        5,812       25,367

  3. A number of operations require software decoding of instructions on the x86 platform.
     KVM/ARM’s out-of-tree MMIO instruction decode implementation was much simpler,
     only 462 LOC.

  4. e various paging modes on x86 requires more software logic to handle page faults.

  5. x86 requires more software logic to support interrupts and timers than ARM, which pro-
     vides VGIC/vtimers hardware support that reduces software complexity.

      KVM/ARM’s LOC is less than partially complete bare-metal microvisors written for
EL2 [173], with the lowvisor LOC almost an order of magnitude smaller. Unlike standalone
hypervisors, KVM/ARM’s code complexity is so small because lots of functionality simply does
not have to be implemented as it is already provided by Linux. Table 7.3 does not include other
non-hypervisor architecture-specific Linux code, such as basic bootstrapping, which is signifi-
cantly more code. Porting a standalone hypervisor such as Xen from x86 to ARM is much more
complicated because all of the ARM code for basic system functionality needs to be written from
scratch. In contrast, since Linux is dominant on ARM, KVM/ARM just leverages existing Linux
ARM support to run on every platform supported by Linux.

7.9     ARCHITECTURE IMPROVEMENTS
Building on the experiences of the developers of KVM/ARM, a set of improvements have been
made to the ARM architecture to avoid the need for split-mode virtualization for type-2 hypervi-
sors such as KVM/ARM. ese improvements are the Virtualization Host Extensions (VHE),
which are now part of a new revision of the ARM 64-bit architecture, ARMv8.1 [40]. VHE
allows running an OS designed to run in EL1 to run in EL2 without substantial modification
to the OS source code. We show how this allows KVM/ARM and its Linux host kernel to run
entirely in EL2 without substantial modifications to Linux.
       VHE is provided through the addition of a new control bit, the E2H bit, which is set at
system boot when installing a type-2 hypervisor that uses VHE. If the bit is not set, ARMv8.1
144   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 behaves the same as ARMv8 in terms of hardware virtualization support, preserving backward
 compatibility with existing hypervisors. When the bit is set, VHE enables three main features.
        First, VHE expands EL2, adding additional physical register state to the CPU, such that
 any register and functionality available in EL1 is also available in EL2. For example, EL1 has
 two registers, TTBR0_EL1 and TTBR1_EL1, the first used to lookup the page tables for virtual
 addresses (VAs) in the lower VA range, and the second in the upper VA range. is provides
 a convenient and efficient method for splitting the VA space between userspace and the kernel.
 However, without VHE, EL2 only has one page table base register, TTBR0_EL2, making it
 problematic to support the split VA space of EL1 when running in EL2. With VHE, EL2 gets
 a second page table base register, TTBR1_EL2, making it possible to support split VA space in
 EL2 in the same way as provided in EL1. is enables a type-2 hypervisor integrated with a host
 OS to support a split VA space in EL2, which is necessary to run the host OS in EL2 so it can
 manage the VA space between userspace and the kernel.
        Second, VHE provides a mechanism to access the extra EL2 register state transparently.
 Simply providing extra EL2 registers is not sufficient to run unmodified OSes in EL2, be-
 cause existing OSes are written to access EL1 registers. For example, Linux is written to use
 TTBR1_EL1, which does not affect the translation system running in EL2. Providing the addi-
 tional register TTBR1_EL2 would still require modifying Linux to use the TTBR1_EL2 instead
 of the TTBR1_EL1 when running in EL2 vs. EL1, respectively. To avoid forcing OS vendors
 to add this extra level of complexity to the software, VHE allows unmodified software to execute
 in EL2 and transparently access EL2 registers using the EL1 register access function instruction
 encodings. For example, current OS software reads the TTBR1_EL1 register with the instruc-
 tion mrs x1, ttbr1_el1. With VHE, the software still executes the same instruction, but the
 hardware actually accesses the TTBR1_EL2 register. As long as the E2H bit is set, accesses to
 EL1 registers performed in EL2, actually access EL2 registers, thereby transparently rewriting
 register accesses to EL2, as described above. A new set of special instructions are added to access
 the EL1 registers in EL2, which the hypervisor can use to switch between VMs, which will run
 in EL1. For example, if the hypervisor wishes to access the guest’s TTBR1_EL1, it will use the
 instruction mrs x1, ttb1_el21.
        ird, VHE expands the memory translation capabilities of EL2. In ARMv8, EL2 and
 EL1 use different page table formats so that software written to run in EL1 must be modified to
 run in EL2. In ARMv8.1, the EL2 page table format is now compatible with the EL1 format
 when the E2H bit is set. As a result, an OS that was previously run in EL1 can now run in EL2
 without being modified because it can use the same EL1 page table format.
        Figure 7.4 shows how type-1 and type-2 hypervisors map to the architecture with VHE.
 Type-1 hypervisors such as Xen, which can be designed explicitly to run in EL2 already without
 any additional support, do not set the E2H bit introduced with VHE, and EL2 behaves exactly
 as in ARMv8. Type-2 hypervisors such as KVM/ARM set the E2H bit when the system boots,
 and the host OS kernel runs exclusively in EL2, and never in EL1. e type-2 hypervisor kernel
                                                    7.9. ARCHITECTURE IMPROVEMENTS             145

                               Type 1: E2H Bit Clear   Type 2: E2H Bit Set

                EL0 (User)                             Apps
                                       VM                               VM
                                                       syscalls
                EL1 (Kernel)                           and traps

                EL2 (Hypervisor)   Xen Hypervisor       Host Kernel and KVM

Figure 7.4: Virtualization Host Extensions (VHE).

can run unmodified in EL2, because VHE provides an equivalent EL2 register for every EL1
register and transparently rewrites EL1 register accesses from EL2 to EL2 register accesses, and
because the page table formats between EL1 and EL2 are now compatible. Transitions from host
userspace to host kernel happen directly from EL0 to EL2, for example to handle a system call,
as indicated by the arrows in Figure 7.4. Transitions from the VM to the hypervisor now happen
without having to context switch EL1 state, because EL1 is not used by the hypervisor.
        ARMv8.1 differs from the x86 approach in two key ways. First, ARMv8.1 introduces more
additional hardware state so that a VM running in EL1 does not need to save a substantial amount
of state before switching to running the hypervisor in EL2 because the EL2 state is separate and
backed by additional hardware registers. is minimizes the cost of VM to hypervisor transitions
because trapping from EL1 to EL2 does not require saving and restoring state beyond general
purpose registers to and from memory. In contrast, recall that the x86 approach adds CPU vir-
tualization support by adding root and non-root mode as orthogonal concepts from the CPU
privilege modes, but does not introduce additional hardware register state like ARM. As a result,
switching between root and non-root modes requires transferring state between hardware regis-
ters and memory. e cost of this is ameliorated by implementing the state transfer in hardware,
but while this avoids the need for additional instruction fetch and decode, accessing memory is
still expected to be more expensive than having extra hardware register state. Second, ARMv8.1
preserves the RISC-style approach of allowing software more fine-grained control over which
state needs to be switched for which purposes instead of fixing this in hardware, potentially mak-
ing it possible to build hypervisors with lower overhead, compared to x86.
        A type-2 hypervisor originally designed for ARMv8 must be modified to benefit from
VHE. A patch set has been developed to add VHE support to KVM/ARM. is involves rewrit-
ing parts of the code to allow run-time adaptations of the hypervisor, such that the same kernel
binary can run on both legacy ARMv8 hardware and benefit from VHE-enabled ARMv8.1 hard-
ware. It is unfortunate that the ARM hardware support for type-2 hypervisors was not included
in the original version of the virtualization extensions, because the KVM/ARM implementation
now has to support both legacy ARMv8 virtualization support using split-mode virtualization
and VHE in ARMv8.1 To make matters worse, this has to be a runtime decision, because the
146   7. VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT IN ARM PROCESSORS
 same kernel binary must be able to run across both ARMv8 and ARMv8.1 server hardware, both
 of which are in active production and development, and the code path is in the hot path of the hy-
 pervisor. e code to support VHE has been developed using ARM software models as ARMv8.1
 hardware is not yet available, so it remains to be seen what performance gains will be achieved in
 practice with VHE.

 7.10 FURTHER READING
 Full-system virtualization of the ARM architecture is relatively new compared to x86. e earliest
 study of ARM hardware virtualization support was based on a software simulator and a simple
 hypervisor without SMP support, but due to the lack of hardware or a cycle-accurate simulator,
 no real performance evaluation was possible [173]. KVM/ARM was the first full-system virtu-
 alization ARM solution to use ARM hardware virtualization support and is described in further
 detail in [60]. In addition to KVM/ARM, a newer version of Xen targeting servers [188] has been
 developed using ARM hardware virtualization support. Because Xen is a bare metal hypervisor
 that does not leverage kernel functionality, it can be architected to run entirely in EL2 rather
 than using split-mode virtualization. At the same time, this requires a substantial commercial
 engineering effort. Porting Xen from x86 to ARM is difficult in part because all ARM-related
 code must be written from scratch. Even after getting Xen to work on one ARM platform, it
 must be manually ported to each different ARM device that Xen wants to support.
        Various other approaches have considered different hypervisor structures. Microkernel ap-
 proaches for hypervisors [75, 161] have been used to reduce the hypervisor TCB and run other
 hypervisor services in user mode. ese approaches differ both in design and rationale from split-
 mode virtualization, which splits hypervisor functionality across privileged modes to leverage vir-
 tualization hardware support.
