
                                  CHAPTER                       8

       Comparing ARM and x86
       Virtualization Performance
is chapter presents a comparison of ARM and x86 virtualization performance on multicore
server hardware, including measurements of two popular open-source ARM and x86 hypervi-
sors, KVM and Xen. ese hypervisors are useful to compare given their popularity and their
different design choices. is work is based on a measurement study published in 2016 using
state-of-the-art hardware for that time [58]. §8.1 first provides background regarding the current
design of KVM and Xen. §8.2 describes the experimental setup used to measure ARM and x86
virtualization performance. §8.3 presents measurements of hypervisor performance based on run-
ning microbenchmarks to analyze low-level behavior. §8.4 presents measurements of hypervisor
performance based on running application workloads to quantify performance for real applica-
tions running in VMs. Finally, like all chapters, we close with pointers for further reading.

8.1     KVM AND XEN OVERVIEW
To measure ARM and x86 virtualization performance, we used the widely used KVM and Xen
hypervisor implementations to provide a realistic measure of performance in real software. We
present a brief review of KVM and Xen based on their current implementations so the reader can
more easily understand the subsequent performance results. Both KVM and Xen now make use of
hardware virtualization support on both ARM and x86. Recall that Xen is a type-1 hypervisor that
is a separate standalone software component which runs directly on the hardware and provides a
virtual machine abstraction to VMs running on top of the hypervisor. KVM is a type-2 hypervisor
that runs an existing operating system on the hardware and run both VMs and applications on
top of the OS.
       An advantage of type-2 hypervisors over type-1 hypervisors is the reuse of existing OS code,
specifically device drivers for a wide range of available hardware. Traditionally, a type-1 hypervisor
suffers from having to reimplement device drivers for all supported hardware. However, Xen
avoids this by only implementing a minimal amount of hardware support directly in the hypervisor
and running a special privileged VM, dom0, which runs an existing OS such as Linux, leveraging
all the existing device drivers for that OS. Xen then arbitrates I/O between normal VMs and
dom0 such that dom0 can perform I/O using existing device drivers on behalf of other VMs.
       Transitions from a VM to the hypervisor occur whenever the hypervisor exercises system
control, such as processing interrupts or I/O. e hypervisor transitions back to the VM once it
148   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
 has completed its work managing the hardware, letting workloads in VMs continue executing.
 e cost of such transitions is pure overhead and can add significant latency in communication
 between the hypervisor and the VM. A primary goal in designing both hypervisor software and
 hardware support for virtualization is to reduce the frequency and cost of transitions as much as
 possible.
        As discussed in Chapter 6, VMs can run guest OSes with standard device drivers for I/O,
 but because they do not have direct access to hardware, the hypervisor would need to emulate
 real I/O devices in software resulting in frequent transitions between the VM and the hypervisor,
 making each interaction with the emulated device an order of magnitude slower than communi-
 cating with real hardware. Alternatively, direct passthrough of I/O from a VM to the real I/O
 devices can be done using device assignment, but this requires more expensive hardware sup-
 port and complicates VM migration. Instead, the most common approach is paravirtual I/O in
 which custom device drivers are used in VMs for virtual devices supported by the hypervisor,
 and the interface between the VM device driver and the virtual device is specifically designed
 to optimize interactions between the VM and the hypervisor and facilitate fast I/O. KVM uses
 an implementation of the Virtio [154] protocol for disk and networking support, and Xen uses
 its own implementation referred to simply as Xen PV. In KVM, the virtual device backend is
 implemented in the host OS, while in Xen it is implemented in the dom0 kernel. A key poten-
 tial performance advantage for KVM is that the virtual device implementation in the KVM host
 kernel has full access to all of the machine’s hardware resources, including VM memory, while
 the Xen virtual device implementation lives in a separate VM, dom0, which only has access to
 memory and hardware resources specifically allocated to it by the Xen hypervisor. On the other
 hand, Xen provides a stronger isolation between the virtual device implementation and the VM.
        e differences between Xen and KVM affect how they use hardware virtualization support
 on x86 vs. ARM. On x86, running Linux in root mode does not require any changes to Linux, so
 both KVM and Xen map equally well to the x86 architecture by running the hypervisor in root
 mode. Root mode does not limit nor change how CPU privilege levels are used. On ARM, while
 KVM uses split-mode virtualization across EL1 and EL2 as discussed in Chapter 7, Xen as a
 type-1 hypervisor design maps easily to the ARM architecture, running the entire hypervisor in
 EL2 and running VM userspace and VM kernel in EL0 and EL1, respectively. KVM only runs
 the minimal set of hypervisor functionality in EL2 to be able to switch between VMs and the
 host and emulates all virtual devices in the host OS running in EL1 and EL0. When a KVM VM
 performs I/O it involves trapping to EL2, switching to host EL1, and handling the I/O request in
 the host. Xen only emulates the GIC in EL2 and offloads all other I/O handling to dom0, which,
 like any other VM, runs its kernel in EL1. When a Xen VM performs I/O, it involves trapping
 to the hypervisor, signaling dom0, scheduling dom0, and handling the I/O request in dom0.
                                                            8.2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN         149
8.2     EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
To evaluate the performance of ARM and x86 virtualization, both microbenchmarks and real
application workloads were run on server hardware available as part of the Utah CloudLab [52].
ARMv8.1 hardware is not yet available at the time of this writing, so ARMv8 hardware was used.
ARM measurements were done using HP Moonshot m400 servers, each equipped with a 64-bit
ARMv8-A 2.4 GHz Applied Micro Atlas SoC with 8 physical CPU cores. Each m400 node in
the cloud infrastructure is equipped with 64 GB of RAM, a 120 GB SATA3 SSD for storage,
and a Dual-port Mellanox ConnectX-3 10GbE NIC. x86 measurements were done using Dell
PowerEdge r320 servers, each equipped with a 64-bit Xeon 2.1 GHz ES-2450 with 8 physical
CPU cores. Hyperthreading was disabled on the r320 nodes to provide a similar hardware config-
uration to the ARM servers. Each r320 node in the cloud infrastructure is equipped with 16 GB
of RAM, a 4x500 GB 7200 RPM SATA RAID5 HD for storage, and a Dual-port Mellanox
MX354A 10GbE NIC. All servers are connected via 10 GbE, and the interconnecting network
switch [87] easily handles multiple sets of nodes communicating with full 10 Gb bandwidth such
that experiments involving networking between two nodes can be considered isolated and unaf-
fected by other traffic in the system. Using 10 Gb Ethernet was important, as many benchmarks
were unaffected by virtualization when run over 1 Gb Ethernet, because the network itself became
the bottleneck.
       To provide comparable measurements, software environments across all hardware platforms
and all hypervisors were kept the same as much as possible. KVM in Linux 4.0-rc4 with QEMU
2.2.0 and Xen 4.5.0 were used, which were the most recent stable versions of these hypervisors
available at the time of the measurements. KVM was configured with its standard VHOST net-
working feature, allowing data handling to occur in the kernel instead of userspace, and with
cache=none for its block storage devices. is is a commonly used I/O configuration for real
KVM deployments that allows the guest access to the disk write cache, but disallows further
memory caching that would sacrifice data persistence for additional performance gains. Xen was
configured with its in-kernel block and network backend drivers to provide best performance
and reflect the most commonly used I/O configuration for Xen deployments. All hosts and VMs
used Ubuntu 14.04 [121] with the same Linux 4.0-rc4 kernel and software configuration for all
machines. A few patches were applied to support the various hardware configurations, such as
adding support for the APM X-Gene PCI bus for the HP m400 servers. All VMs used paravir-
tualized I/O, typical of cloud infrastructure deployments such as Amazon EC2, instead of device
passthrough, due to the absence of an IOMMU in the test environment used.
       Benchmarks were run both natively on the hosts and in VMs. Each physical or virtual
machine instance used for running benchmarks was configured as a 4-way SMP with 12 GB of
RAM to provide a common basis for comparison. is involved three configurations: (1) running
natively on Linux capped at 4 cores and 12 GB RAM; (2) running in a VM using KVM with
8 cores and 16 GB RAM with the VM capped at 4 virtual CPUs (VCPUs) and 12 GB RAM;
and (3) running in a VM using Xen with dom0, the privileged domain used by Xen with direct
150   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
 hardware access, capped at 4 cores and 4 GB RAM and the VM capped at 4 VCPUs and 12 GB
 RAM. Because KVM configures the total hardware available while Xen configures the hardware
 dedicated to dom0, the configuration parameters are different. e effect nevertheless is the same,
 which is to leave the hypervisor with 4 cores and 4 GB RAM to use outside of what is used by the
 VM. Multicore configurations were used to reflect real-world server deployments. e memory
 limit was used to ensure a fair comparison across all hardware configurations given the RAM
 available on the x86 servers and the need to also provide RAM for use by the hypervisor when
 running VMs. For benchmarks that involve clients interfacing with the server, the clients were
 run natively on Linux and configured to use the full hardware available.
        To improve measurement precision and mimic recommended configuration best prac-
 tices [187], each VCPU was pinned to a specific physical CPU (PCPU) and generally no other
 work was scheduled on that PCPU. In KVM, all of the host’s device interrupts and processes were
 assigned to run on a specific set of PCPUs and each VCPU was pinned to a dedicated PCPU
 from a separate set of PCPUs. In Xen, dom0 was configured to run on a set of PCPUs while domU
 was run on a separate set of PCPUs. Each VCPU of both dom0 and domU was pinned to its own
 PCPU.

 8.3     MICROBENCHMARK RESULTS
 We present measurements for seven microbenchmarks that quantify various low-level aspects of
 hypervisor performance, as listed in Table 8.1. Some of these measurements are similar to those
 presented in Chapter 7, but are done with commercial 64-bit server hardware instead of devel-
 opment boards, providing a more realistic comparison of server virtualization performance. A
 primary performance cost in running in a VM is how much time must be spent outside the VM,
 which is time not spent running the workload in the VM and therefore is virtualization over-
 head compared to native execution. erefore, the microbenchmarks are designed to measure
 time spent handling a trap from the VM to the hypervisor, including time spent on transition-
 ing between the VM and the hypervisor, time spent processing interrupts, time spent switch-
 ing between VMs, and latency added to I/O. Table 8.2 presents the results from running these
 microbenchmarks on both ARM and x86 server hardware. Measurements are shown in cycles
 instead of time to provide a useful comparison across server hardware with different CPU fre-
 quencies. Measurements were obtained using cycle counters and ARM hardware timer counters
 to ensure consistency across multiple CPUs, and instruction barriers were used before and after
 taking timestamps to avoid out-of-order execution or pipelining from skewing our measurements.
        e Hypercall microbenchmark shows that transitioning from a VM to the hypervisor on
 ARM can be significantly faster than x86, as shown by the Xen ARM measurement, which takes
 less than a third of the cycles that Xen or KVM on x86 take. e ARM architecture provides
 a separate CPU mode with its own register bank to run an isolated type-1 hypervisor like Xen.
 Transitioning from a VM to a type-1 hypervisor requires little more than context switching the
 general purpose registers as running the two separate execution contexts, VM and the hypervisor,
                                                       8.3. MICROBENCHMARK RESULTS               151
Table 8.1: Microbenchmarks
 Name                        Description
 Hypercall                   Transition from VM to hypervisor and return to VM without doing
                             any work in the hypervisor. Measures bidirectional base transition
                             cost of hypervisor operations.
 Interrupt Controller Trap   Trap from VM to emulated interrupt controller then return to VM.
                             Measures a frequent operation for many device drivers and baseline
                             for accessing I/O devices emulated in the hypervisor.
 Virtual IPI                 Issue a virtual IPI from a VCPU to another VCPU running on a
                             different PCPU, both PCPUs executing VM code. Measures time
                             between sending the virtual IPI until the receiving VCPU handles
                             it, a frequent operation in multicore OSes that affects many work-
                             loads.
 Virtual IRQ Completion      VM acknowledging and completing a virtual interrupt. Measures a
                             frequent operation that happens for every injected virtual interrupt.
 VM Switch                   Switching from one VM to another on the same physical core.
                             Measures a central cost when oversubscribing physical CPUs.
 I/O Latency Out             Measures latency between a driver in the VM signaling the virtual
                             I/O device in the hypervisor and the virtual I/O device receiving
                             the signal. For KVM, this involves trapping to the host kernel. For
                             Xen, this involves trapping to Xen then raising a virtual interrupt to
                             Dom0.
 I/O Latency In              Measures latency between the virtual I/O device in the hypervisor
                             signaling the VM and the VM receiving the corresponding virtual
                             interrupt. For KVM, this involves signaling the VCPU thread and
                             injecting a virtual interrupt for the Virtio device. For Xen, this in-
                             volves trapping to Xen then raising a virtual interrupt to DomU.

is supported by the separate ARM hardware state for EL2. While ARM implements additional
register state to support the different execution context of the hypervisor, x86 transitions from a
VM to the hypervisor by switching from non-root to root mode which requires context switching
the entire CPU register state to the VMCS in memory, which is much more expensive even with
hardware support.
       However, the Hypercall microbenchmark also shows that transitioning from a VM to the
hypervisor on ARM is more than an order of magnitude more expensive for type-2 hypervisors
152   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
Table 8.2: Microbenchmark measurements (cycle counts)

                                                    ARM                    x86
              Microbenchmark
                                                KVM    Xen          KVM          Xen
              Hypercall                          6,500    376        1,300        1,228
              Interrupt Controller Trap          7,370  1,356        2,384        1,734
              Virtual IPI                       11,557  5,978        5,230        5,562
              Virtual IRQ Completion                71     71        1,556        1,464
              VM Switch                         10,387  8,799        4,812       10,534
              I/O Latency Out                    6,024 16,491          560       11,262
              I/O Latency In                    13,872 15,650       18,923       10,050

 like KVM than for type-1 hypervisors like Xen. is is because although all VM traps are handled
 in EL2, a type-2 hypervisor is integrated with a host kernel and both run in EL1. is results in
 four additional sources of overhead. First, transitioning from the VM to the hypervisor involves
 not only trapping to EL2, but also returning to the host OS in EL1, incurring a double trap cost.
 Second, because the host OS and the VM both run in EL1 and ARM hardware does not provide
 any features to distinguish between the host OS running in EL1 and the VM running in EL1,
 software running in EL2 must context switch all the EL1 system register state between the VM
 guest OS and the type-2 hypervisor host OS, incurring added cost of saving and restoring EL1
 register state. ird, because the host OS runs in EL1 and needs full access to the hardware, the
 hypervisor must disable traps to EL2 and Stage-2 translation from EL2 while switching from the
 VM to the hypervisor, and enable them when switching back to the VM again. Fourth, because
 the type-2 hypervisor runs in EL1 but needs to access VM control register state such as the VGIC
 state, which can only be accessed from EL2, there is additional overhead to read and write the
 VM control register state in EL2. e type-2 hypervisor can either jump back and forth between
 EL1 and EL2 to access the control register state when needed, or it can copy the full register
 state to memory while it is still in EL2, return to the host OS in EL1 and read and write the
 memory copy of the VM control state, and then finally copy the state from memory back to the
 EL2 control registers when the hypervisor is running in EL2 again. Both methods incur much
 overhead, but jumping back and forward between EL1 and EL2 makes the software implementa-
 tion complicated and difficult to maintain. erefore, the KVM/ARM implementation currently
 takes the second approach of reading and writing all VM control registers in EL2 during each
 transition between the VM and the hypervisor.
         While the cost of the trap between CPU modes itself is not very high as shown in Chapter 7,
 these measurements show that there is a substantial cost associated with saving and restoring reg-
 ister state to switch between EL2 and the host in EL1. Table 8.3 provides a breakdown of the cost
 of context switching the relevant register state when performing the Hypercall microbenchmark
                                                        8.3. MICROBENCHMARK RESULTS              153
Table 8.3: KVM/ARM Hypercall analysis (cycle counts)

                       Register State                  Save        Restore
                       GP Regs                               152       184
                       FP Regs                               282       310
                       EL1 System Regs                       230       511
                       VGIC Regs                           3,250       181
                       Timer Regs                            104       106
                       EL2 Config Regs                        92       107
                       EL2 Virtual Memory Regs                92       107

measurement on KVM/ARM. Context switching consists of saving register state to memory and
restoring the new context’s state from memory to registers. e cost of saving and restoring this
state accounts for almost all of the Hypercall time, indicating that context switching state is the
primary cost due to KVM/ARM’s design, not the cost of extra traps. Unlike Xen ARM which
only incurs the relatively small cost of saving and restoring the general-purpose (GP) registers,
KVM/ARM saves and restores much more register state at much higher cost. Note that for ARM,
the overall cost of saving register state, when transitioning from a VM to the hypervisor, is much
more expensive than restoring it, when returning back to the VM from the hypervisor, due to the
cost of reading the VGIC register state.
       Unlike on ARM, both x86 hypervisors spend a similar amount of time transitioning from
the VM to the hypervisor. Since both KVM and Xen leverage the same x86 hardware mech-
anism for transitioning between VM and hypervisor, they have similar performance. Both x86
hypervisors run in root mode and run their VMs in non-root mode, and switching between the
two modes involves switching a substantial portion of the CPU register state to the VMCS in
memory. Switching this state to memory is fast on x86, because it is performed by hardware in
the context of a trap or as a result of executing a single instruction. In contrast, ARM provides
a separate CPU mode for the hypervisor with separate registers, and ARM only needs to switch
state to memory when running a different execution context in EL1. ARM can be much faster,
as in the case of Xen ARM which does its hypervisor work in EL2 and does not need to context
switch much register state, or it can be much slower, as in the case of KVM/ARM which context
switches more register state without the benefit of hardware support like x86.
       e large difference between Xen ARM and KVM/ARM in the cost of transitioning be-
tween the VM and hypervisor, as shown by the Hypercall measurement, results in Xen ARM be-
ing significantly faster at handling interrupt related traps, because Xen ARM emulates the ARM
GIC interrupt controller directly in the hypervisor running in EL2. In contrast, KVM/ARM
emulates the GIC in the part of the hypervisor running in EL1. erefore, operations such as
accessing registers in the emulated GIC, sending virtual IPIs, and receiving virtual interrupts are
154   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
 much faster on Xen ARM than KVM/ARM. is is shown in Table 8.2 in the measurements
 for the Interrupt Controller trap and Virtual IPI microbenchmarks, in which Xen ARM is faster
 than KVM/ARM by roughly the same difference as for the Hypercall microbenchmark.
        However, Table 8.2 shows that for the remaining microbenchmarks, Xen ARM does not
 enjoy a large performance advantage over KVM/ARM and in fact does worse for some of the mi-
 crobenchmarks. e reasons for this differ from one microbenchmark to another: For the Virtual
 IRQ Completion microbenchmark, both KVM/ARM and Xen ARM are very fast because the
 ARM hardware includes support for completing interrupts directly in the VM without trapping
 to the hypervisor. e microbenchmark runs much faster on ARM than x86 because the latter
 has to trap to the hypervisor. More recently, vAPIC support has been added to x86 with similar
 functionality to avoid the need to trap to the hypervisor so that newer x86 hardware with vAPIC
 support should perform more comparably to ARM [104].
        For the VM Switch microbenchmark, Xen ARM is only slightly faster than KVM/ARM
 because both hypervisor implementations have to context switch the state between the VM being
 switched out and the one being switched in. Unlike the Hypercall microbenchmark where only
 KVM/ARM needed to context switch EL1 state and per VM EL2 state, in this case both KVM
 and Xen ARM need to do this, and Xen ARM therefore does not directly benefit from its faster
 VM-to-hypervisor transition. Xen ARM is still slightly faster than KVM, however, because to
 switch between VMs, Xen ARM simply traps to EL2 and performs a single context switch of
 the EL1 state, while KVM/ARM must switch the EL1 state from the VM to the host OS and
 then again from the host OS to the new VM. Finally, KVM/ARM also has to disable and enable
 traps and Stage-2 translation on each transition, which Xen ARM does not have to do.
        For the I/O Latency microbenchmarks, a surprising result is that Xen ARM is slower than
 KVM/ARM in both directions. ese microbenchmarks measure the time from when a network
 I/O event is initiated by a sender until the receiver is notified, not including additional time spent
 transferring data. I/O latency is an especially important metric for real-time sensitive operations
 and many networking applications. e key insight to understanding the results is to see that
 Xen ARM does not benefit from its faster VM-to-hypervisor transition mechanism in this case
 because Xen ARM must switch between two separate VMs, dom0 and a domU, to process network
 I/O. Type-1 hypervisors only implement a limited set of functionality in the hypervisor directly,
 namely scheduling, memory management, the interrupt controller, and timers for Xen ARM.
 All other functionality, for example network and storage drivers are implemented in the special
 privileged VM, dom0. erefore, a VM performing I/O has to communicate with dom0 and not
 just the Xen hypervisor, which means not just trapping to EL2, but also going to EL1 to run
 dom0.
        I/O Latency Out is much worse on Xen ARM than KVM/ARM. When KVM/ARM
 sends a network packet, it traps to the hypervisor, which involves context switching the EL1
 state, and then the host OS instance directly sends the data on the physical network. Xen ARM,
 on the other hand, must trap from the VM to the hypervisor, which then signals a different VM,
                                                  8.4. APPLICATION BENCHMARK RESULTS                 155
dom0, and dom0 then sends the data on the physical network. is signaling between VMs on
Xen is slow for two main reasons. First, because the VM and dom0 run on different physical
CPUs, Xen must send a physical IPI from the CPU running the VM to the CPU running dom0.
Second, Xen actually switches from dom0 to a special VM, called the idle domain, when dom0 is
idling and waiting for I/O. us, when Xen signals dom0 to perform I/O on behalf of a VM, it
must perform a VM switch from the idle domain to dom0. Changing the configuration of Xen
to pinning both the VM and dom0 to the same physical CPU or not specifying any pinning at
all resulted in similar or worse results than reported in Table 8.2, so the qualitative results are not
specific to this configuration.
       It is interesting to note that KVM x86 is much faster than everything else on I/O Latency
Out. KVM on both ARM and x86 involve the same control path of transitioning from the VM
to the hypervisor. While the path is conceptually similar to half of the path for the Hypercall
microbenchmark, the result for the I/O Latency Out microbenchmark is not 50% of the Hy-
percall cost on either platform. e reason is that for KVM x86, transitioning from the VM to
the hypervisor accounts for around only 40% of the Hypercall cost, and transitioning from the
hypervisor to the VM accounts for most of the rest (a few cycles are spent handling the noop
hypercall in the hypervisor). On ARM, it is much more expensive to transition from the VM
to the hypervisor than from the hypervisor to the VM, because reading back the VGIC state is
expensive, as shown in Table 8.3.
       I/O Latency In behaves more similarly between Xen ARM and KVM/ARM, because both
hypervisors perform similar low-level operations. Xen traps from dom0 running in EL1 to the
hypervisor running in EL2 and signals the receiving VM, the reverse of the procedure described
above, thereby sending a physical IPI and switching from the idle domain to the receiving VM
in EL1. For KVM/ARM, the Linux host OS receives the network packet and wakes up the
idle VM’s VCPU thread and signals the CPU running the VCPU thread, thereby sending a
physical IPI, and the VCPU thread then traps to EL2, switches the EL1 state from the host OS
to the VM, and switches to the VM in EL1. e end result is that the cost is similar across both
hypervisors, with KVM being slightly faster. While KVM/ARM is slower on I/O Latency In
than I/O Latency Out because it performs more work on the incoming path, Xen has similar
performance on both Latency I/O In and Latency I/O Out because it performs comparable low-
level operations for both microbenchmarks.

8.4     APPLICATION BENCHMARK RESULTS
We next present measurements of a number of real application benchmark workloads to quantify
how well the ARM virtualization extensions support different hypervisor software designs in the
context of more realistic workloads. Table 8.4 lists the application workloads used, which include
a mix of widely-used CPU and I/O intensive benchmark workloads. For workloads involving a
client and a server, the client ran on a dedicated machine and the server ran on the configuration
being measured, ensuring that the client was never saturated during any of our experiments. ese
156   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
Table 8.4: Application benchmarks

  Benchmark        Description
  Kernbench        Kernel compilation by compiling the Linux 3.17.0 kernel using the allnoconfig
                   for ARM using GCC 4.8.2.
  Hackbench        hackbench [132] using unix domain sockets and 100 process groups running
                   with 500 loops.
  SPECjvm2008      SPECjvm2008 [160] 2008 benchmark running several real life applications
                   and benchmarks specifically chosen to benchmark the performance of the Java
                   Runtime Environment. 15.02 release of the Linaro AArch64 port of Open-
                   JDK was used run the benchmark.
  Netperf          netperf v2.6.0 starting netserver on the server and running with its default
                   parameters on the client in three modes: TCP_STREAM, TCP_MAERTS,
                   and TCP_RR, measuring throughput transferring data from client to server,
                   throughput transferring data from server to client, and latency, respectively.
  Apache           Apache v2.4.7 Web server running ApacheBench v2.3 on the remote/local
                   client, which measures the number of handled requests per second serving the
                   index file of the GCC 4.4 manual using 100 concurrent requests.
  Memcached        memcached v1.4.14 using the memtier benchmark v1.2.3 with its default
                   parameters.
  MySql            MySQL v14.14 (distrib 5.5.41) running the SysBench v.0.4.12 OLTP bench-
                   mark using the default configuration with 200 parallel transactions.

 workloads were run natively and on both KVM and Xen on both ARM and x86, the latter to
 provide a baseline comparison. Table 8.5 shows the raw results for executing the workloads on
 both ARM and x86 servers.
       Given the differences in hardware platforms, we focus not on measuring absolute perfor-
 mance, but rather the relative performance differences between virtualized and native execution
 on each platform. Figure 8.1 shows the performance overhead of KVM and Xen on ARM and
 x86 compared to native execution on the respective platform. All numbers are normalized to 1
 for native performance, so that lower numbers represent better performance. Unfortunately, the
 Apache benchmark could not run on Xen x86 because it caused a kernel panic in dom0. is
 problem was reported to the Xen developer community and it apparently was due to a Mellanox
 network driver bug exposed by Xen’s I/O model.
       Figure 8.1 shows that the application performance on KVM and Xen on ARM and x86 does
 not appear well correlated with their respective performance on the microbenchmarks shown in
                                              8.4. APPLICATION BENCHMARK RESULTS             157
Table 8.5: Application benchmark raw performance

               Name                        CPU     Native KVM      Xen
               Kernbench (s)               ARM       49.11   50.49   49.83
                                           x86       28.91   27.12   27.56
               Hackbench (s)               ARM       15.65   17.38   16.55
                                           x86        6.04    6.66    6.57
               SPECjvm2008 (ops/min)       ARM       62.43   61.69   61.91
                                           x86      140.76 140.64 141.80
               TCP_RR (trans/s)            ARM      23,911 11.591 10,253
                                           x86      21,089 11,490    7,661
               TCP_STREAM (Mb/s)           ARM       5,924   5,603   1,662
                                           x86       9,174   9,287   2,353
               TCP_MAERTS (Mb/s)           ARM       6,051   6,059   3,778
                                           x86       9,148   8,817   5,948
               Apache (trans/s)            ARM       6,526   4,846   3,539
                                           x86      10,585   9,170    N/A
               Memcached (ops/s)           ARM     110,865 87,811 84,118
                                           x86     263,302 170,359 226,403
               MySQL (s)                   ARM       13.72   15.76   15.02
                                           x86        7.21    9.08    8.75

Table 8.2. Xen ARM has by far the lowest VM to hypervisor transition costs and the best perfor-
mance for most of the microbenchmarks, yet its performance lags behind KVM/ARM on many
of the application benchmarks. KVM ARM substantially outperforms Xen ARM on the vari-
ous netperf benchmarks, TCP_STREAM, TCP_MAERTS, and TCP_RR, as well as Apache
and Memcached, and performs only slightly worse on the rest of the application benchmarks.
Xen ARM also does generally worse than KVM x86. Clearly, the differences in microbenchmark
performance do not result in the same differences in real application performance.
       Xen ARM achieves its biggest performance gain vs. KVM/ARM on Hackbench. Hack-
bench involves running lots of threads that are sleeping and waking up, requiring frequent IPIs
for rescheduling. Xen ARM performs virtual IPIs much faster than KVM/ARM, roughly a factor
of two. Despite this microbenchmark performance advantage on a workload performing frequent
virtual IPIs, the resulting difference in Hackbench performance overhead is small, only 5% of
native performance. Overall, across CPU-intensive workloads such as Kernbench, Hackbench,
and SPECjvm, the performance differences among the different hypervisors across different ar-
chitectures is small.
158   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
                                                       3.56 3.90          2.06 2.33 2.75
      2.00
                  KVM ARM                Xen ARM
      1.80
                  KVM x86                Xen x86
      1.60

      1.40

      1.20

      1.00

      0.80

      0.60

      0.40

      0.20

      0.00
                  h

                               ch

                                             08

                                                        M

                                                                     TS

                                                                               RR

                                                                                                e

                                                                                                           d

                                                                                                                    ql
                                                                                            ch
              nc

                                                                                                            e

                                                                                                                yS
                                                      A
                           en

                                                                                                         ch
                                          20

                                                                   ER

                                                                           P_

                                                                                           pa
             be

                                                    RE

                                                                                                                M
                          kb

                                                                                                     ca
                                         m

                                                                                      A
                                                                 A
         em

                                                                          TC

                                                                                                    em
                                     jv
                      ac

                                                  ST

                                                              M
                                    EC
       K

                      H

                                                            P_

                                                                                                M
                                               P_
                               SP

                                                         TC
                                             TC

Figure 8.1: Application benchmark performance normalized to native execution.

        Figure 8.1 shows that the largest differences in performance are for the I/O-intensive work-
 loads. We first take a closer look at the netperf results. Netperf TCP_RR is an I/O latency bench-
 mark, which sends a 1 byte packet from a client to the Netperf server running in the VM, and
 the Netperf server sends the packet back to the client, and the process is repeated for 10 s. For
 the netperf TCP_RR benchmark, both hypervisors show high overhead compared to native per-
 formance, but Xen is noticeably worse than KVM. Taking a closer look at KVM/ARM vs. Xen
 ARM, there are two main reasons why Xen performs worse. First, Xen’s I/O latency is higher than
 KVM’s as measured and explained by the I/O Latency In and Out microbenchmarks in §8.3. Sec-
 ond, Xen does not support zero-copy I/O, but must map a shared page between dom0 and the
 VM using Xen’s grant tables, a generic mechanism for memory sharing between domains. Xen
 must copy data between the memory buffer used for DMA in dom0 and the granted memory
 buffer from the VM. Each data copy incurs more than 3 ?s of additional latency because of the
 complexities of establishing and utilizing the shared page via the grant table mechanism across
 VMs, even though only a single byte of data needs to be copied.
                                                8.4. APPLICATION BENCHMARK RESULTS                159
       Although Xen ARM can transition between the VM and hypervisor more quickly than
KVM, Xen cannot utilize this advantage for the TCP_RR workload, because Xen must engage
dom0 to perform I/O on behalf of the VM, which results in several VM switches between idle
domains and dom0 or domU, and because Xen must perform expensive page mapping operations to
copy data between the VM and dom0. is is a direct consequence of Xen’s software architecture
and I/O model based on domains and a strict I/O isolation policy. Xen ends up spending so much
time communicating between the VM and dom0 that it completely dwarfs its low Hypercall cost
for the TCP_RR workload and ends up having more overhead than KVM/ARM, due to Xen’s
software architecture and I/O model in particular.
       e hypervisor software architecture is also a dominant factor in other aspects of the netperf
results. For the netperf TCP_STREAM benchmark, KVM has almost no overhead for x86 and
ARM while Xen has more than 250% overhead. e reason for this large difference in perfor-
mance is again due to Xen’s lack of zero-copy I/O support, in this case particularly on the network
receive path. e netperf TCP_STREAM benchmark sends large quantities of data from a client
to the netperf server in the VM. Xen’s dom0, running Linux with the physical network device
driver, cannot configure the network device to DMA the data directly into guest buffers, because
dom0 does not have access to the VM’s memory. When Xen receives data, it must configure the
network device to DMA the data into a dom0 kernel memory buffer, signal the VM for incoming
data, let Xen configure a shared memory buffer, and finally copy the incoming data from the dom0
kernel buffer into the virtual device’s shared buffer. KVM, on the other hand, has full access to
the VM’s memory and maintains shared memory buffers in the Virtio rings [154], such that the
network device can DMA the data directly into a guest-visible buffer, resulting in significantly
less overhead.
       Furthermore, previous work [156] and discussions with the Xen maintainers confirm that
supporting zero copy on x86 is problematic for Xen given its I/O model because doing so re-
quires signaling all physical CPUs to locally invalidate TLBs when removing grant table entries
for shared pages, which proved more expensive than simply copying the data [92]. As a result,
previous efforts to support zero copy on Xen x86 were abandoned. Xen ARM lacks the same zero
copy support because the dom0 network backend driver uses the same code as on x86. Whether
zero copy support for Xen can be implemented efficiently on ARM, which has hardware support
for broadcasted TLB invalidate requests across multiple PCPUs, remains to be investigated.
       For the netperf TCP_MAERTS benchmark, Xen also has substantially higher overhead
than KVM. e benchmark measures the network transmit path from the VM, the converse of
the TCP_STREAM benchmark which measured the network receive path to the VM. It turns
out that the Xen performance problem is due to a regression in Linux introduced in Linux v4.0-
rc1 in an attempt to fight bufferbloat, and has not yet been fixed beyond manually tuning the
Linux TCP configuration in the guest OS [123]. Using an earlier version of Linux or tuning
the TCP configuration in the guest using sysfs significantly reduced the overhead of Xen on the
TCP_MAERTS benchmark.
160   8. COMPARING ARM AND X86 VIRTUALIZATION PERFORMANCE
        Other than the netperf workloads, the application workloads with the highest overhead
 were Apache and Memcached. e performance bottleneck for KVM and Xen on ARM was due
 to network interrupt processing and delivery of virtual interrupts. Delivery of virtual interrupts is
 more expensive than handling physical IRQs on bare-metal, because it requires switching from
 the VM to the hypervisor and injecting a virtual interrupt to the VM and switching back to
 the VM. Additionally, Xen and KVM both handle all virtual interrupts using a single VCPU,
 which, combined with the additional virtual interrupt delivery cost, fully utilizes the underlying
 PCPU. If changes are made so that virtual interrupts are distributed across multiple VCPUs,
 KVM performance overhead dropped from 35% to 14% on Apache and from 26% to 8% on
 Memcached, while the Xen performance overhead dropped from 84% to 16% on Apache and
 from 32% to 9% on Memcached.
        In summary, while the VM-to-hypervisor transition cost for a type-1 hypervisor like Xen
 is much lower on ARM than for a type-2 hypervisor like KVM, this difference is not easily ob-
 served for the application workloads. e reason is that type-1 hypervisors typically only support
 CPU, memory, and interrupt virtualization directly in the hypervisors. CPU and memory virtu-
 alization has been highly optimized directly in hardware and, ignoring one-time page fault costs
 at startup, is performed largely without the hypervisor’s involvement. at leaves only interrupt
 virtualization, which is indeed much faster for type-1 hypervisor on ARM, confirmed by the In-
 terrupt Controller Trap and Virtual IPI microbenchmarks shown in §8.3. While this contributes
 to Xen’s slightly better Hackbench performance, the resulting application performance benefit
 overall is modest.
        However, when VMs perform I/O operations such as sending or receiving network data,
 type-1 hypervisors like Xen typically offload such handling to separate VMs to avoid having to
 re-implement all device drivers for the supported hardware and to avoid running a full driver and
 emulation stack directly in the type-1 hypervisor, which would significantly increase the Trusted
 Computing Base and increase the attack surface of the hypervisor. Switching to a different VM to
 perform I/O on behalf of the VM has very similar costs on ARM compared to a type-2 hypervisor
 approach of switching to the host on KVM. Additionally, KVM on ARM benefits from the hy-
 pervisor having privileged access to all physical resources, including the VM’s memory, and from
 being directly integrated with the host OS, allowing for optimized physical interrupt handling,
 scheduling, and processing paths in some situations.
        Despite the inability of both KVM and Xen to leverage the potential fast path of trapping
 from a VM running in EL1 to the hypervisor in EL2 without the need to run additional hypervi-
 sor functionality in EL1, our measurements show that both KVM and Xen on ARM can provide
 virtualization overhead similar to, and in some cases better than, their respective x86 counterparts.
 Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter 7, the introduction of ARM VHE could make it possible
 for KVM to better leverage the fast path of trapping to EL2 only by running all of KVM in EL2,
 resulting in further performance improvements for KVM on ARM.
                                                                8.5. FURTHER READING        161
8.5     FURTHER READING
Much work has been done on analyzing the performance of x86 virtualization. For example,
Heo and Taheri [86] analyze the performance of various latency-sensitive workloads on VMware
vSphere on x86, Buell et al. [41] investigate the performance of both complex computation-
intensive as well as latency-sensitive workloads on VMware vSphere on multicore systems, and
Bhargava et al. [35] finds that two-level TLB misses can be very expensive for any hypervisor
using either Intel’s or AMD’s hardware support for virtualization.
       Relatively fewer studies have been done on the performance of ARM virtualization, with
most focused on ARMv7 development hardware [60, 79, 133, 149]. Since ARM virtualization
support is more recent, little work has been done comparing x86 and ARM virtualization perfor-
mance. e work reported here is based on the first in-depth measurement study of x86 vs. ARM
virtualization [58].
