
                Authors’ Biographies

EDOUARD BUGNION
Edouard Bugnion is a Professor in the School of Computer and Communication Sciences at
EPFL in Lausanne, Switzerland. His areas of interest include operating systems, datacenter in-
frastructure (systems and networking), and computer architecture.
       Before joining EPFL, Edouard spent 18 years in the U.S., where he studied at Stanford
and co-founded two startups: VMware and Nuova Systems (acquired by Cisco). At VMware
from 1998–2005, he played many roles including CTO. At Nuova/Cisco from 2005–2011, he
helped build the core engineering team and became the VP/CTO of Cisco’s Server, Access, and
Virtualization Technology Group, a group that brought to market the Unified Computing System
(UCS) platform for virtualized datacenters.
       Together with his colleagues, Bugnion received the ACM Software System Award for
VMware 1.0 in 2009. His paper on Disco received a Best Paper Award at SOSP ’97 and was
entered into the ACM SIGOPS Hall of Fame Award. At EPFL, he received the OSDI 2014
Best Paper Award for his work on the IX dataplane operating system. Bugnion has a Dipl.Eng.
degree from ETH Zurich, an M.Sc. and a Ph.D. from Stanford University, all in computer sci-
ence.

JASON NIEH
Jason Nieh is a Professor of Computer Science at Columbia University. He has made research
contributions in software systems across a broad range of areas, including operating systems, vir-
tualization, thin-client computing, cloud computing, mobile computing, multimedia, web tech-
nologies, and performance evaluation. Technologies he developed are now widely used in An-
droid, Linux, and other major operating system platforms. Honors for his research work include
the Sigma Xi Young Investigator Award, awarded once every two years in the physical sciences and
engineering, a National Science Foundation CAREER Award, a Department of Energy Early
Career Award, five IBM Faculty Awards and two IBM Shared University Research Awards,
six Google Research Awards, and various best paper awards, including those from MobiCom,
SIGCSE, SIGMETRICS, and SOSP. A dedicated teacher, he received the Distinguished Fac-
ulty Teaching Award from the Columbia Engineering School Alumni Association for his innova-
tions in teaching operating systems and for introducing virtualization as a pedagogical tool. Nieh
earned his B.S. from MIT and his M.S. and Ph.D. from Stanford University, all in electrical
engineering.
182   AUTHORS’ BIOGRAPHIES
 DAN TSAFRIR
 Dan Tsafrir is an Associate Professor at the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology. His re-
 search interests are focused on practical aspects of operating systems, hardware-software inter-
 actions, virtualization, security, and performance evaluation. Some of his research contributions
 were deployed in Linux and KVM. His work was featured in the Communications of the ACM
 research highlights section. He received the USENIX FAST best paper award, the IBM Pat
 Goldberg memorial best paper award (twice), the HiPEAC paper award (twice), the Klein re-
 search prize, the Henri Gutwirth award for outstanding research, and research/faculty awards
 from Google, IBM, Intel, Mellanox, and VMware. Tsafrir earned his B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
 from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, all in computing science (B.Sc. also in math). Before
 joining the Technion, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Cen-
 ter, New York, in the the Advanced Operating Systems Group (K42) and the BlueGene System
 Software Group.
