                                              Definition of terms

Definition of terms

Instruction   The instruction name is the assembly code for the instruction. Multiple instructions or
              multiple variants of the same instruction may be joined into the same line. Instructions
              with and without a V prefix to the name may not be listed separately because they
              have the same values, even if the V prefix version has more operands.

Operands      Operands can be different types of registers, memory, or immediate constants. Ab-
              breviations used in the tables are: i = immediate constant, r = any general purpose
              register, r32 = 32-bit register, etc., mm = 64 bit mmx register, x or xmm = 128 bit xmm
              register, y = 256 bit ymm register, z = 512 bit zmm register, v = any vector register, sr
              = segment register, m = any memory operand including indirect operands, m64
              means 64-bit memory operand, etc.

Latency       The latency of an instruction is the delay that the instruction generates in a depen-
              dency chain. The measurement unit is clock cycles. Where the clock frequency is var-
              ied dynamically, the figures refer to the core clock frequency. The numbers listed are
              minimum values. Cache misses, misalignment, and exceptions may increase the
              clock counts considerably. Floating point operands are presumed to be normal num-
              bers. Subnormal numbers, NAN's and infinity may increase the latencies by possibly
              more than 100 clock cycles on many processors, except in move, shuffle and Boolean
              instructions. Floating point overflow, underflow, subnormal or NAN results may give
              similar delays in some processors. A missing value in the table means that the value
              has not been measured or that it cannot be measured in a meaningful way.

              Some processors have a pipelined execution unit that is smaller than the largest regis-
              ter size so that different parts of the operand are calculated at different times. As-
              sume, for example, that we have a long depencency chain of 128-bit vector instruc-
              tions running in a fully pipelined 64-bit execution unit with a latency of 4. The lower 64
              bits of each operation will be calculated at times 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, etc. And the upper 64
              bits of each operation will be calculated at times 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, etc. as shown in the
              figure below. If we look at one 128-bit instruction in isolation, the latency will be 5. But
              if we look at a long chain of 128-bit instructions, the total latency will be 4 clock cycles
              per instruction plus one extra clock cycle in the end. The latency in this case is listed
              as 4 in the tables because this is the value it adds to a dependency chain.

Reciprocal    The throughput is the maximum number of instructions of the same kind that can be
throughput    executed per clock cycle when the operands of each instruction are independent of
              the preceding instructions. The values listed are the reciprocals of the throughputs,
              i.e. the average number of clock cycles per instruction when the instructions are not
              part of a limiting dependency chain. For example, a reciprocal throughput of 2 for
              FMUL means that a new FMUL instruction can start executing 2 clock cycles after a
              previous FMUL. A reciprocal throughput of 0.33 for ADD means that the execution
              units can handle 3 integer additions per clock cycle.
              The reason for listing the reciprocal values is that this makes comparisons between la-
              tency and throughput easier. The reciprocal throughput is also called issue latency.
              The values listed are for a single thread or a single core. A missing value in the table
              means that the value has not been measured.

                                              Definition of terms

μops          Uop or μop is an abbreviation for micro-operation. Processors with out-of-order cores
              are capable of splitting complex instructions into μops. For example, a read-modify in-
              struction may be split into a read-μop and a modify-μop. The number of μops that an
              instruction generates is important when certain bottlenecks in the pipeline limit the
              number of μops per clock cycle.

Execution     The execution core of a microprocessor has several execution units. Each execution
unit          unit can handle a particular category of μops, for example floating point additions. The
              information about which execution unit a particular μop goes to can be useful for two
              purposes. Firstly, two μops cannot execute simultaneously if they need the same exe-
              cution unit. And secondly, some processors have a latency of an extra clock cycle
              when the result of a μop executing in one execution unit is needed as input for a μop
              in another execution unit.

Execution     The execution units are clustered around a few execution ports on most Intel proces-
port          sors. Each μop passes through an execution port to get to the right execution unit. An
              execution port can be a bottleneck because it can handle only one μop at a time. Two
              μops cannot execute simultaneously if they need the same execution port, even if
              they are going to different execution units.

Instruction   This indicates which instruction set an instruction belongs to. The instruction is only
set           available in processors that support this instruction set. The most important instruction
              sets are listed on the next page. Availability in processors prior to 80386 does not ap-
              ply for 32-bit and 64-bit operands. Availability in the MMX instruction set does not ap-
              ply to 128-bit packed integer instructions, which require SSE2. Availability in the SSE
              instruction set does not apply to double precision floating point instructions, which re-
              quire SSE2.
              32-bit instructions are available in 80386 and later. 64-bit instructions in general pur-
              pose registers are available only under 64-bit operating systems. Instructions that use
              XMM registers (SSE and later), YMM registers (AVX and later), and ZMM registers
              (AVX512 and later) are only available under operating systems that support these reg-
              ister sets.

How the values were measured
The values in the tables are measured with the use of my own test programs, which are available
from www.agner.org/optimize/testp.zip
The time unit for all measurements is CPU clock cycles. It is attempted to obtain the highest clock
frequency if the clock frequency is varying with the workload. Many Intel processors have a perfor-
mance counter named "core clock cycles". This counter gives measurements that are independent
of the varying clock frequency. Where no "core clock cycles" counter is available, the "time stamp
counter" is used (RDTSC instruction). In cases where this gives inconsistent results (e.g. in AMD
Bobcat) it is necessary to make the processor boost the clock frequency by executing a large num-
ber of instructions (> 1 million) or turn off the power-saving features in the BIOS setup.
Instruction throughputs are measured with a long sequence of instructions of the same kind, where
subsequent instructions use different registers in order to avoid dependence of each instruction on
the previous one. The input registers are cleared in the cases where it is impossible to use different
registers. The test code is carefully constructed in each case to make sure that no other bottleneck is
limiting the throughput than the one that is being measured.
Instruction latencies are measured in a long dependency chain of identical instructions where the
output of each instruction is used as input for the next instruction.
The sequence of instructions should be long, but not so long that it doesn't fit into the level-1 code
cache. A typical length is 100 instructions of the same type. This sequence is repeated in a loop if a
larger number of instructions is desired.

                                               Definition of terms

It is not possible to measure the latency of a memory read or write instruction with software methods.
It is only possible to measure the combined latency of a memory write followed by a memory read
from the same address. What is measured here is not actually the cache access time, because in
most cases the microprocessor is smart enough to make a "store forwarding" directly from the write
unit to the read unit rather than waiting for the data to go to the cache and back again. The latency
of this store forwarding process is arbitrarily divided into a write latency and a read latency in the ta-
bles. But in fact, the only value that makes sense to performance optimization is the sum of the write
time and the read time.
A similar problem occurs where the input and the output of an instruction use different types of regis-
ters. For example, the MOVD instruction can transfer data between general purpose registers and
XMM vector registers. The value that can be measured is the combined latency of data transfer from
one type of registers to another type and back again (A → B → A). The division of this latency be-
tween the A → B latency and the B → A latency is sometimes obvious, sometimes based on guess-
work, µop counts, indirect evidence, or triangular sequences such as A → B → Memory → A. In
many cases, however, the division of the total latency between A → B latency and B → A latency is
arbitrary. However, what cannot be measured cannot matter for performance optimization. What
counts is the sum of the A → B latency and the B → A latency, not the individual terms.
The µop counts are usually measured with the use of the performance monitor counters (PMCs) that
are built into modern microprocessors. The PMCs for VIA processors are undocumented, and the in-
terpretation of these PMCs is based on experimentation.
The execution ports and execution units that are used by each instruction or µop are detected in dif-
ferent ways depending on the particular microprocessor. Some microprocessors have PMCs that
can give this information directly. In other cases it is necessary to obtain this information indirectly by
testing whether a particular instruction or µop can execute simultaneously with another instruction/
µop that is known to go to a particular execution port or execution unit. On some processors, there is
a delay for transmitting data from one execution unit (or cluster of execution units) to another. This
delay can be used for detecting whether two different instructions/µops are using the same or differ-
ent execution units.

