
Preface

About This Book
This book is part of a multivolume work entitled the AMD64 Architecture Programmer’s Manual. This
table lists each volume and its order number.

                                         Title                                Order No.

           Volume 1: Application Programming                               24592

           Volume 2: System Programming                                    24593

           Volume 3: General-Purpose and System Instructions               24594

           Volume 4: 128-Bit, 256-Bit, and 512-Bit Media Instructions      26568

           Volume 5: 64-Bit Media and x87 Floating-Point Instructions      26569

Audience
This volume is intended for programmers writing application programs, compilers, or assemblers. It
assumes prior experience in microprocessor programming, although it does not assume prior
experience with the legacy x86 or AMD64 microprocessor architecture.
This volume describes the AMD64 architecture’s resources and functions that are accessible to
application software, including memory, registers, instructions, operands, I/O facilities, and
application-software aspects of control transfers (including interrupts and exceptions) and
performance optimization.
System-programming topics—including the use of instructions running at a current privilege level
(CPL) of 0 (most-privileged)—are described in Volume 2. Details about each instruction are described
in Volumes 3, 4, and 5.

Organization
This volume begins with an overview of the architecture and its memory organization and is followed
by chapters that describe the four application-programming models available in the AMD64
architecture:
•   General-Purpose Programming—This model uses the integer general-purpose registers (GPRs).
    The chapter describing it also describes the basic application environment for exceptions, control
    transfers, I/O, and memory optimization that applies to all other application-programming models.

•     Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) Programming—This model uses the SSE (ZMM/YMM/XMM)
      registers and supports integer and floating-point operations on vector (packed) and scalar data
      types.
•     Multimedia Extensions (MMX™) Programming—This model uses the 64-bit MMX registers and
      supports integer and floating-point operations on vector (packed) and scalar data types.
•     x87 Floating-Point Programming—This model uses the 80-bit x87 registers and supports floating-
      point operations on scalar data types.
The index at the end of this volume cross-references topics within the volume. For other topics relating
to the AMD64 architecture, see the tables of contents and indexes of the other volumes.

Conventions and Definitions
The following section Notational Conventions describes notational conventions used in this volume
and in the remaining volumes of this AMD64 Architecture Programmer’s Manual. This is followed by
a Definitions section which lists a number of terms used in the manual along with their technical
definitions. Some of these definitions assume knowledge of the legacy x86 architecture. See Related
Documents for further information about the legacy x86 architecture. Finally, the Registers section
lists the registers which are a part of the application programming model.

Notational Conventions
#GP(0)
   An instruction exception—in this example, a general-protection exception with error code of 0.
1011b
   A binary value—in this example, a 4-bit value.
F0EA_0B02h
   A hexadecimal value. Underscore characters may be inserted to improve readability.
128
      Numbers without an alpha suffix are decimal unless the context indicates otherwise.
7:4
      A bit range, from bit 7 to 4, inclusive. The high-order bit is shown first. Commas may be inserted
      to indicate gaps.
CR0–CR4
  A register range, from register CR0 through CR4, inclusive, with the low-order register first.
CR0[PE], CR0.PE
  Notation for referring to a field within a register—in this case, the PE field of the CR0 register.

CR0[PE] = 1, CR0.PE = 1
  The PE field of the CR0 register is set (contains the value 1).
EFER[LME] = 0, EFER.LME = 0
   The LME field of the EFER register is cleared (contains a value of 0).
DS:SI
   A far pointer or logical address. The real address or segment descriptor specified by the segment
   register (DS in this example) is combined with the offset contained in the second register (SI in this
   example) to form a real or virtual address.
RFLAGS[13:12]
  A field within a register identified by its bit range. In this example, corresponding to the IOPL
  field.

Definitions
128-bit media instructions
   Instructions that operate on the various 128-bit vector data types. Supported within both the legacy
   SSE and extended SSE instruction sets.
256-bit media instructions
   Instructions that operate on the various 256-bit vector data types. Supported within the extended
   SSE instruction set.
512-bit media instructions
   Instructions that operate on the various 512-bit vector data types. Supported within the AVX512
   instructions sets.
64-bit media instructions
   Instructions that operate on the 64-bit vector data types. These are primarily a combination of
   MMX and 3DNow!™ instruction sets and their extensions, with some additional instructions from
   the SSE1 and SSE2 instruction sets.
16-bit mode
   Legacy mode or compatibility mode in which a 16-bit address size is active. See legacy mode and
   compatibility mode.
32-bit mode
   Legacy mode or compatibility mode in which a 32-bit address size is active. See legacy mode and
   compatibility mode.
64-bit mode
   A submode of long mode. In 64-bit mode, the default address size is 64 bits and new features, such
   as register extensions, are supported for system and application software.

absolute
   Said of a displacement that references the base of a code segment rather than an instruction pointer.
   Contrast with relative.
AES
  Advance Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm acceleration instructions; part of Streaming SIMD
  Extensions (SSE).
ASID
   Address space identifier.
AVX
  Extension of the SSE instruction set supporting 128- and 256-bit vector (packed) operands. See
  Streaming SIMD Extensions.
AVX2
  Extension of the AVX instruction subset that adds more support for 256-bit vector (mostly packed
  integer) operands and a few new SIMD instructions. See Streaming SIMD Extensions.
AVX512
  Extension of the AVX instruction subset that adds support for 512-bit vector operands, masking,
  and other features.
biased exponent
    The sum of a floating-point value’s exponent and a constant bias for a particular floating-point data
    type. The bias makes the range of the biased exponent always positive, which allows reciprocation
    without overflow.
byte
   Eight bits.
clear
    To write a bit value of 0. Compare set.
compatibility mode
   A submode of long mode. In compatibility mode, the default address size is 32 bits, and legacy 16-
   bit and 32-bit applications run without modification.
commit
   To irreversibly write, in program order, an instruction’s result to software-visible storage, such as a
   register (including flags), the data cache, an internal write buffer, or memory.
CPL
  Current privilege level.

direct
    Referencing a memory location whose address is included in the instruction’s syntax as an
    immediate operand. The address may be an absolute or relative address. Compare indirect.
dirty data
    Data held in the processor’s caches or internal buffers that is more recent than the copy held in
    main memory.
displacement
    A signed value that is added to the base of a segment (absolute addressing) or an instruction pointer
    (relative addressing). Same as offset.
doubleword
   Two words, or four bytes, or 32 bits.
double quadword
   Eight words, or 16 bytes, or 128 bits. Also called octword.
effective address size
    The address size for the current instruction after accounting for the default address size and any
    address-size override prefix.
effective operand size
    The operand size for the current instruction after accounting for the default operand size and any
    operand-size override prefix.
element
   See vector.
EVEX
  An instruction encoding escape prefix that opens a new extended instruction encoding space,
  specifies a 512-bit operand size, and provides access to additional registers. See VEX.
exception
   An abnormal condition that occurs as the result of executing an instruction. The processor’s
   response to an exception depends on the type of the exception. For all exceptions except SSE
   floating-point exceptions and x87 floating-point exceptions, control is transferred to the handler
   (or service routine) for that exception, as defined by the exception’s vector. For floating-point
   exceptions defined by the IEEE 754 standard, there are both masked and unmasked responses.
   When unmasked, the exception handler is called, and when masked, a default response is provided
   instead of calling the handler.

extended SSE
    Enhanced set of SIMD instructions supporting 256-bit and 512-bit vector data types and allowing
    the specification of up to four operands. A subset of the Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE).
    Includes the AVX, AVX2, FMA, FMA4, XOP, and AVX512 instructions. Compare legacy SSE.
flush
    An often ambiguous term meaning (1) writeback, if modified, and invalidate, as in “flush the cache
    line,” or (2) invalidate, as in “flush the pipeline,” or (3) change a value, as in “flush to zero.”
FMA4
  Fused Multiply Add, four operand. Part of the extended SSE instruction set.
FMA
  Fused Multiply Add. Part of the extended SSE instruction set.
GDT
  Global descriptor table.
GIF
   Global interrupt flag.
IDT
   Interrupt descriptor table.
IGN
   Ignored. Value written is ignored by hardware. Value returned on a read is indeterminate. See
   reserved.
indirect
    Referencing a memory location whose address is in a register or other memory location. The
    address may be an absolute or relative address. Compare direct.
IRB
   The virtual-8086 mode interrupt-redirection bitmap.
IST
   The long-mode interrupt-stack table.
IVT
   The real-address mode interrupt-vector table.
LDT
  Local descriptor table.

legacy x86
    The legacy x86 architecture. See Related Documents for descriptions of the legacy x86
    architecture.
legacy mode
    An operating mode of the AMD64 architecture in which existing 16-bit and 32-bit applications and
    operating systems run without modification. A processor implementation of the AMD64
    architecture can run in either long mode or legacy mode. Legacy mode has three submodes, real
    mode, protected mode, and virtual-8086 mode.
legacy SSE
    A subset of the Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) composed of the SSE1, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
    SSE4.1, SSE4.2, and SSE4A instruction sets. Compare extended SSE.
LIP
      Linear Instruction Pointer. LIP = (CS.base + rIP).
long mode
   An operating mode unique to the AMD64 architecture. A processor implementation of the
   AMD64 architecture can run in either long mode or legacy mode. Long mode has two submodes,
   64-bit mode and compatibility mode.
lsb
      Least-significant bit.
LSB
  Least-significant byte.
main memory
   Physical memory, such as RAM and ROM (but not cache memory) that is installed in a particular
   computer system.
mask
   (1) A control bit that prevents the occurrence of a floating-point exception from invoking an
   exception-handling routine. (2) A field of bits used for a control purpose.
MBZ
  Must be zero. If software attempts to set an MBZ bit to 1, a general-protection exception (#GP)
  occurs. See reserved.
memory
  Unless otherwise specified, main memory.
msb
   Most-significant bit.

MSB
  Most-significant byte.
multimedia instructions
   Those instructions that operate simultaneously on multiple elements within a vector data type.
   Comprises the 512-bit media instructions, 256-bit media instructions, 128-bit media instructions,
   and 64-bit media instructions.
octword
   Same as double quadword.
offset
    Same as displacement.
overflow
   The condition in which a floating-point number is larger in magnitude than the largest, finite,
   positive or negative number that can be represented in the data-type format being used.
packed
   See vector.
PAE
  Physical-address extensions.
physical memory
   Actual memory, consisting of main memory and cache.
probe
   A check for an address in a processor’s caches or internal buffers. External probes originate
   outside the processor, and internal probes originate within the processor.
procedure stack
   A portion of a stack segment in memory that is used to link procedures. Also known as a program
   stack.
program stack
   See procedure stack.
protected mode
    A submode of legacy mode.
quadword
   Four words, or eight bytes, or 64 bits.

RAZ
  Read as zero. Value returned on a read is always zero (0) regardless of what was previously
  written. (See reserved)
real-address mode
    See real mode.
real mode
    A short name for real-address mode, a submode of legacy mode.
relative
    Referencing with a displacement (also called offset) from an instruction pointer rather than the
    base of a code segment. Contrast with absolute.
reserved
    Fields marked as reserved may be used at some future time.
    To preserve compatibility with future processors, reserved fields require special handling when
    read or written by software. Software must not depend on the state of a reserved field (unless
    qualified as RAZ), nor upon the ability of such fields to return a previously written state.
    If a field is marked reserved without qualification, software must not change the state of that field;
    it must reload that field with the same value returned from a prior read.
    Reserved fields may be qualified as IGN, MBZ, RAZ, or SBZ (see definitions).
REX
  An instruction encoding prefix that specifies a 64-bit operand size and provides access to
  additional registers.
RIP-relative addressing
   Addressing relative to the 64-bit RIP instruction pointer.
SBZ
  Should be zero. An attempt by software to set an SBZ bit to 1 results in undefined behavior. See
  reserved.
scalar
    An atomic value existing independently of any specification of location, direction, etc., as opposed
    to vectors.
set
      To write a bit value of 1. Compare clear.
shadow stack
   A shadow stack is a separate, protected stack that is conceptually parallel to the procedure stack
   and used only by the shadow stack feature.

SIB
   A byte following an instruction opcode that specifies address calculation based on scale (S), index
   (I), and base (B).
SIMD
   Single instruction, multiple data. See vector.
Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE)
    Instructions that operate on scalar or vector (packed) integer and floating point numbers. The SSE
    instruction set comprises the legacy SSE and extended SSE instruction sets.
SSE1
   Original SSE instruction set. Includes instructions that operate on vector operands in both the
   MMX and the XMM registers.
SSE2
   Extensions to the SSE instruction set.
SSE3
   Further extensions to the SSE instruction set.
SSSE3
   Further extensions to the SSE instruction set.
SSE4.1
   Further extensions to the SSE instruction set.
SSE4.2
   Further extensions to the SSE instruction set.
SSE4A
   A minor extension to the SSE instruction set adding the instructions EXTRQ, INSERTQ,
   MOVNTSS, and MOVNTSD.
sticky bit
    A bit that is set or cleared by hardware and that remains in that state until explicitly changed by
    software.
TOP
  The x87 top-of-stack pointer.
TSS
   Task-state segment.

underflow
   The condition in which a floating-point number is smaller in magnitude than the smallest nonzero,
   positive or negative number that can be represented in the data-type format being used.
vector
   (1) A set of integer or floating-point values, called elements, that are packed into a single operand.
   Most of the media instructions support vectors as operands. Vectors are also called packed or
   SIMD (single-instruction multiple-data) operands.
   (2) An index into an interrupt descriptor table (IDT), used to access exception handlers. Compare
   exception.
VEX
  An instruction encoding escape prefix that opens a new extended instruction encoding space,
  specifies a 64-bit operand size, and provides access to additional registers. See XOP prefix.
virtual-8086 mode
    A submode of legacy mode.
VMCB
  Virtual machine control block.
VMM
  Virtual machine monitor.
word
   Two bytes, or 16 bits.
XOP instructions
  Part of the extended SSE instruction set using the XOP prefix. See Streaming SIMD Extensions.
XOP prefix
  Extended instruction identifier prefix, used by XOP instructions allowing the specification of up to
  four operands and 128 or 256-bit operand widths.

Registers
In the following list of registers, the names are used to refer either to a given register or to the contents
of that register:
AH–DH
  The high 8-bit AH, BH, CH, and DH registers. Compare AL–DL.
AL–DL
  The low 8-bit AL, BL, CL, and DL registers. Compare AH–DH.

AL–r15B
  The low 8-bit AL, BL, CL, DL, SIL, DIL, BPL, SPL, and R8B–R15B registers, available in 64-bit
  mode.
BP
      Base pointer register.
CRn
  Control register number n.
CS
      Code segment register.
eAX–eSP
  The 16-bit AX, BX, CX, DX, DI, SI, BP, and SP registers or the 32-bit EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX,
  EDI, ESI, EBP, and ESP registers. Compare rAX–rSP.
EFER
   Extended features enable register.
eFLAGS
   16-bit or 32-bit flags register. Compare rFLAGS.
EFLAGS
   32-bit (extended) flags register.
eIP
      16-bit or 32-bit instruction-pointer register. Compare rIP.
EIP
      32-bit (extended) instruction-pointer register.
FLAGS
  16-bit flags register.
GDTR
  Global descriptor table register.
GPRs
  General-purpose registers. For the 16-bit data size, these are AX, BX, CX, DX, DI, SI, BP, and SP.
  For the 32-bit data size, these are EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, EDI, ESI, EBP, and ESP. For the 64-bit
  data size, these include RAX, RBX, RCX, RDX, RDI, RSI, RBP, RSP, and R8–R15.
IDTR
   Interrupt descriptor table register.

IP
     16-bit instruction-pointer register.
k0–k7
   Set of eight 64-bit registers used primarily for masking in the AVX512 instruction sets.
LDTR
  Local descriptor table register.
MSR
  Model-specific register.
r8–r15
   The 8-bit R8B–R15B registers, or the 16-bit R8W–R15W registers, or the 32-bit R8D–R15D
   registers, or the 64-bit R8–R15 registers.
rAX–rSP
   The 16-bit AX, BX, CX, DX, DI, SI, BP, and SP registers, or the 32-bit EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX,
   EDI, ESI, EBP, and ESP registers, or the 64-bit RAX, RBX, RCX, RDX, RDI, RSI, RBP, and RSP
   registers. Replace the placeholder r with nothing for 16-bit size, “E” for 32-bit size, or “R” for 64-
   bit size.
RAX
  64-bit version of the EAX register.
RBP
  64-bit version of the EBP register.
RBX
  64-bit version of the EBX register.
RCX
  64-bit version of the ECX register.
RDI
  64-bit version of the EDI register.
RDX
  64-bit version of the EDX register.
rFLAGS
   16-bit, 32-bit, or 64-bit flags register. Compare RFLAGS.
RFLAGS
  64-bit flags register. Compare rFLAGS.

rIP
      16-bit, 32-bit, or 64-bit instruction-pointer register. Compare RIP.
RIP
   64-bit instruction-pointer register.
RSI
   64-bit version of the ESI register.
RSP
   64-bit version of the ESP register.
SP
      Stack pointer register.
SS
      Stack segment register.
SSP
   Shadow-stack pointer register.
TPR
  Task priority register (CR8), a new register introduced in the AMD64 architecture to speed
  interrupt management.
TR
      Task register.
XMM
  Set of 8 (in SSE), 16 (in AVX) or 32 (in AVX512) 128-bit registers used by SSE instruction sets.
  The XMM registers are the low half of the corresponding 256-bit YMM registers, and the bottom
  quarter of the corresponding 512-bit ZMM registers.
YMM
  Set of 16 (in AVX) or 32 (in AVX512) 256-bit registers used by extended SSE instructions sets.
  The YMM registers are the low half of the corresponding 512-bit ZMM registers.
ZMM
  Set of 32 512-bit registers used by the AVX512 instruction sets.

Endian Order
The x86 and AMD64 architectures address memory using little-endian byte-ordering. Multibyte
values are stored with their least-significant byte at the lowest byte address, and they are illustrated
with their least significant byte at the right side. Strings are illustrated in reverse order, because the
addresses of their bytes increase from right to left.

Related Documents
•   Peter Abel, IBM PC Assembly Language and Programming, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
    1995.
•   Rakesh Agarwal, 80x86 Architecture & Programming: Volume II, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ, 1991.
•   AMD data sheets and application notes for particular hardware implementations of the AMD64
    architecture.
•   AMD, Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 15h Processors, order number 47414.
•   AMD, AMD-K6® MMX™ Enhanced Processor Multimedia Technology, Sunnyvale, CA, 2000.
•   AMD, 3DNow!™ Technology Manual, Sunnyvale, CA, 2000.
•   AMD, AMD Extensions to the 3DNow!™ and MMX™ Instruction Sets, Sunnyvale, CA, 2000.
•   Don Anderson and Tom Shanley, Pentium® Processor System Architecture, Addison-Wesley, New
    York, 1995.
•   Nabajyoti Barkakati and Randall Hyde, Microsoft Macro Assembler Bible, Sams, Carmel, Indiana,
    1992.
•   Barry B. Brey, 8086/8088, 80286, 80386, and 80486 Assembly Language Programming,
    Macmillan Publishing Co., New York, 1994.
•   Barry B. Brey, Programming the 80286, 80386, 80486, and Pentium Based Personal Computer,
    Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995.
•   Ralf Brown and Jim Kyle, PC Interrupts, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1994.
•   Penn Brumm and Don Brumm, 80386/80486 Assembly Language Programming, Windcrest
    McGraw-Hill, 1993.
•   Geoff Chappell, DOS Internals, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1994.
•   Chips and Technologies, Inc. Super386 DX Programmer’s Reference Manual, Chips and
    Technologies, Inc., San Jose, 1992.
•   John Crawford and Patrick Gelsinger, Programming the 80386, Sybex, San Francisco, 1987.
•   Cyrix Corporation, 5x86 Processor BIOS Writer's Guide, Cyrix Corporation, Richardson, TX,
    1995.
•   Cyrix Corporation, M1 Processor Data Book, Cyrix Corporation, Richardson, TX, 1996.
•   Cyrix Corporation, MX Processor MMX Extension Opcode Table, Cyrix Corporation, Richardson,
    TX, 1996.
•   Cyrix Corporation, MX Processor Data Book, Cyrix Corporation, Richardson, TX, 1997.
•   Ray Duncan, Extending DOS: A Programmer's Guide to Protected-Mode DOS, Addison Wesley,
    NY, 1991.
•   William B. Giles, Assembly Language Programming for the Intel 80xxx Family, Macmillan, New
    York, 1991.
•   Frank van Gilluwe, The Undocumented PC, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1994.

•   John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson, Computer Architecture, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
    San Mateo, CA, 1996.
•   Thom Hogan, The Programmer’s PC Sourcebook, Microsoft Press, Redmond, WA, 1991.
•   Hal Katircioglu, Inside the 486, Pentium®, and Pentium Pro, Peer-to-Peer Communications,
    Menlo Park, CA, 1997.
•   IBM Corporation, 486SLC Microprocessor Data Sheet, IBM Corporation, Essex Junction, VT,
    1993.
•   IBM Corporation, 486SLC2 Microprocessor Data Sheet, IBM Corporation, Essex Junction, VT,
    1993.
•   IBM Corporation, 80486DX2 Processor Floating Point Instructions, IBM Corporation, Essex
    Junction, VT, 1995.
•   IBM Corporation, 80486DX2 Processor BIOS Writer's Guide, IBM Corporation, Essex Junction,
    VT, 1995.
•   IBM Corporation, Blue Lightning 486DX2 Data Book, IBM Corporation, Essex Junction, VT,
    1994.
•   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE Standard for Binary Floating-Point
    Arithmetic, ANSI/IEEE Std 754-1985.
•   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE Standard for Radix-Independent Floating-
    Point Arithmetic, ANSI/IEEE Std 854-1987.
•   Muhammad Ali Mazidi and Janice Gillispie Mazidi, 80X86 IBM PC and Compatible Computers,
    Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1997.
•   Hans-Peter Messmer, The Indispensable Pentium Book, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1995.
•   Karen Miller, An Assembly Language Introduction to Computer Architecture: Using the Intel
    Pentium®, Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.
•   Stephen Morse, Eric Isaacson, and Douglas Albert, The 80386/387 Architecture, John Wiley &
    Sons, New York, 1987.
•   NexGen Inc., Nx586 Processor Data Book, NexGen Inc., Milpitas, CA, 1993.
•   NexGen Inc., Nx686 Processor Data Book, NexGen Inc., Milpitas, CA, 1994.
•   Bipin Patwardhan, Introduction to the Streaming SIMD Extensions in the Pentium® III,
    www.x86.org/articles/sse_pt1/ simd1.htm, June, 2000.
•   Peter Norton, Peter Aitken, and Richard Wilton, PC Programmer’s Bible, Microsoft® Press,
    Redmond, WA, 1993.
•   PharLap 386|ASM Reference Manual, Pharlap, Cambridge MA, 1993.
•   PharLap TNT DOS-Extender Reference Manual, Pharlap, Cambridge MA, 1995.
•   Sen-Cuo Ro and Sheau-Chuen Her, i386/i486 Advanced Programming, Van Nostrand Reinhold,
    New York, 1993.
•   Jeffrey P. Royer, Introduction to Protected Mode Programming, course materials for an onsite
    class, 1992.

•   Tom Shanley, Protected Mode System Architecture, Addison Wesley, NY, 1996.
•   SGS-Thomson Corporation, 80486DX Processor SMM Programming Manual, SGS-Thomson
    Corporation, 1995.
•   Walter A. Triebel, The 80386DX Microprocessor, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1992.
•   John Wharton, The Complete x86, MicroDesign Resources, Sebastopol, California, 1994.
•   Web sites and newsgroups:
    - www.amd.com
    - news.comp.arch
    - news.comp.lang.asm.x86
    - news.intel.microprocessors
    - news.microsoft

