
This chapter describes the memory characteristics that apply to application software in the various
operating modes of the AMD64 architecture. These characteristics apply to all instructions in the
architecture. Several additional system-level details about memory and cache management are
described in Volume 2.

2.1          Memory Organization
2.1.1 Virtual Memory
Virtual memory consists of the entire address space available to programs. It is a large linear-address
space that is translated by a combination of hardware and operating-system software to a smaller
physical-address space, parts of which are located in memory and parts on disk or other external
storage media.
Figure 2-1 on page 10 shows how the virtual-memory space is treated in the two submodes of long
mode:
•   64-bit mode—This mode uses a flat segmentation model of virtual memory. The 64-bit virtual-
    memory space is treated as a single, flat (unsegmented) address space. Program addresses access
    locations that can be anywhere in the linear 64-bit address space. The operating system can use
    separate selectors for code, stack, and data segments for memory-protection purposes, but the base
    address of all these segments is always 0. (For an exception to this general rule, see “FS and GS as
    Base of Address Calculation” on page 17.)
•   Compatibility mode—This mode uses a protected, multi-segment model of virtual memory, just as
    in legacy protected mode. The 32-bit virtual-memory space is treated as a segmented set of address
    spaces for code, stack, and data segments, each with its own base address and protection
    parameters. A segmented space is specified by adding a segment selector to an address.

                                         64-Bit Mode
                                 (Flat Segmentation Model)

                                                      264 - 1

                                                                                   Legacy and Compatibility Mode
                                                                                       (Multi-Segment Model)

                                                                                                          232 - 1
                                                                                               code
                                                                Code Segment (CS) Base

                                                                                               stack
                                                                Stack Segment (SS) Base
              Base Address for                                                                 data
                 All Segments                         0         Data Segment (DS) Base                    0

Figure 2-1. Virtual-Memory Segmentation

Operating systems have used segmented memory as a method to isolate programs from the data they
used, in an effort to increase the reliability of systems running multiple programs simultaneously.
However, most modern operating systems do not use the segmentation features available in the legacy
x86 architecture. Instead, these operating systems handle segmentation functions entirely in software.
For this reason, the AMD64 architecture dispenses with most of the legacy segmentation functions in
64-bit mode. This allows 64-bit operating systems to be coded more simply, and it supports more
efficient management of multi-tasking environments than is possible in the legacy x86 architecture.

2.1.2 Segment Registers
Segment registers hold the selectors used to access memory segments. Figure 2-2 on page 11 shows
the application-visible portion of the segment registers. In legacy and compatibility modes, all
segment registers are accessible to software. In 64-bit mode, only the CS, FS, and GS segments are
recognized by the processor, and software can use the FS and GS segment-base registers as base
registers for address calculation, as described in “FS and GS as Base of Address Calculation” on
page 17. For references to the DS, ES, or SS segments in 64-bit mode, the processor assumes that the
base for each of these segments is zero, neither their segment limit nor attributes are checked, and the
processor simply checks that all such addresses are in canonical form, as described in “64-Bit
Canonical Addresses” on page 15.

                                 Legacy Mode and              64-Bit
                                Compatibility Mode            Mode

                                       CS                       CS
                                                         (Attributes only)

                                       DS                    ignored

                                       ES                    ignored

                                       FS                       FS
                                                             (Base only)

                                       GS                       GS
                                                             (Base only)

                                       SS                    ignored
                                  15          0         15                   0

Figure 2-2. Segment Registers

For details on segmentation and the segment registers, see “Segmented Virtual Memory” in Volume 2.

2.1.3 Physical Memory
Physical memory is the installed memory (excluding cache memory) in a particular computer system
that can be accessed through the processor’s bus interface. The maximum size of the physical memory
space is determined by the number of address bits on the bus interface. In a virtual-memory system, the
large virtual-address space (also called linear-address space) is translated to a smaller physical-
address space by a combination of segmentation and paging hardware and software.
Segmentation is illustrated in Figure 2-1 on page 10. Paging is a mechanism for translating linear
(virtual) addresses into fixed-size blocks called pages, which the operating system can move, as
needed, between memory and external storage media (typically disk). The AMD64 architecture
supports an expanded version of the legacy x86 paging mechanism, one that is able to translate the full
64-bit virtual-address space into the physical-address space supported by the particular
implementation.

2.1.4 Memory Management
Memory management strategies translate addresses generated by programs into addresses in physical
memory using segmentation and/or paging. Memory management is not visible to application
programs. It is handled by the operating system and processor hardware. The following description
gives a very brief overview of these functions. Details are given in “System-Management
Instructions” in Volume 2.

2.1.4.1 Long-Mode Memory Management
Figure 2-3 shows the flow, from top to bottom, of memory management functions performed in the
two submodes of long mode.

                       64-Bit Mode                                               Compatibility Mode
        63                                       0               15              0    31                        0
                  Virtual (Linear) Address                            Selector             Effective Address

                                                                                     Segmentation

                                                            63                              32 31                        0
                                                                           0                        Virtual Address

                          Paging                                                           Paging

             51                              0                   51                                                 0
                      Physical Address                                               Physical Address

Figure 2-3. Long-Mode Memory Management

In 64-bit mode, programs generate virtual (linear) addresses that can be up to 64 bits in size. The
virtual addresses are passed to the long-mode paging function, which generates physical addresses that
can be up to 52 bits in size. (Specific implementations of the architecture can support smaller virtual-
address and physical-address sizes.)
In compatibility mode, legacy 16-bit and 32-bit applications run using legacy x86 protected-mode
segmentation semantics. The 16-bit or 32-bit effective addresses generated by programs are combined
with their segments to produce 32-bit virtual (linear) addresses that are zero-extended to a maximum
of 64 bits. The paging that follows is the same long-mode paging function used in 64-bit mode. It
translates the virtual addresses into physical addresses. The combination of segment selector and
effective address is also called a logical address or far pointer. The virtual address is also called the
linear address.

2.1.4.2 Legacy-Mode Memory Management
Figure 2-4 on page 13 shows the memory-management functions performed in the three submodes of
legacy mode.

                               Protected Mode                          Virtual-8086 Mode                         Real Mode
           15              0    31                        0       15              0 15          0   15              0 15            0
                Selector         Effective Address (EA)                Selector            EA            Selector           EA

                               Segmentation                                Segmentation                         Segmentation

                      31                           0                      19               0                19                  0
                               Linear Address                              Linear Address                       Linear Address

                                     Paging                                       Paging

                      31                           0              31                            0   31              19              0
                           Physical Address (PA)                       Physical Address (PA)                0              PA

Figure 2-4. Legacy-Mode Memory Management

The memory-management functions differ, depending on the submode, as follows:
•   Protected Mode—Protected mode supports 16-bit and 32-bit programs with table-based memory
    segmentation, paging, and privilege-checking. The segmentation function takes 32-bit effective
    addresses and 16-bit segment selectors and produces 32-bit linear addresses into one of 16K
    memory segments, each of which can be up to 4GB in size. Paging is optional. The 32-bit physical
    addresses are either produced by the paging function or the linear addresses are used without
    modification as physical addresses.
•   Virtual-8086 Mode—Virtual-8086 mode supports 16-bit programs running as tasks under
    protected mode. 20-bit linear addresses are formed in the same way as in real mode, but they can
    optionally be translated through the paging function to form 32-bit physical addresses that access
    up to 4GB of memory space.
•   Real Mode—Real mode supports 16-bit programs using register-based shift-and-add
    segmentation, but it does not support paging. Sixteen-bit effective addresses are zero-extended and
    added to a 16-bit segment-base address that is left-shifted four bits, producing a 20-bit linear
    address. The linear address is zero-extended to a 32-bit physical address that can access up to 1MB
    of memory space.

2.2          Memory Addressing
2.2.1 Byte Ordering
Instructions and data are stored in memory in little-endian byte order. Little-endian ordering places the
least-significant byte of the instruction or data item at the lowest memory address and the most-
significant byte at the highest memory address.
Figure 2-5 shows a generalization of little-endian memory and register images of a quadword data
type. The least-significant byte is at the lowest address in memory and at the right-most byte location
of the register image.

                                 Quadword in Memory         byte 7       07h      High (most-significant)

                                                            byte 6       06h

                                                            byte 5       05h

                                                            byte 4       04h

                                                            byte 3       03h

                                                            byte 2       02h

                                                            byte 1       01h

                                                            byte 0       00h      Low (least-significant)

                  High (most-significant)                                                       Low (least-significant)

                                            Quadword in General-Purpose Register
                       byte 7      byte 6   byte 5     byte 4        byte 3    byte 2       byte 1          byte 0
                  63                                                                                                 0

Figure 2-5. Byte Ordering

Figure 2-6 on page 15 shows the memory image of a 10-byte instruction. Instructions are byte data
types. They are read from memory one byte at a time, starting with the least-significant byte (lowest
address). For example, the following instruction specifies the 64-bit instruction MOV RAX,
1122334455667788 instruction that consists of the following ten bytes:
       48 B8 8877665544332211

48 is a REX instruction prefix that specifies a 64-bit operand size, B8 is the opcode that—together
with the REX prefix—specifies the 64-bit RAX destination register, and 8877665544332211 is the 8-
byte immediate value to be moved, where 88 represents the eighth (least-significant) byte and 11
represents the first (most-significant) byte. In memory, the REX prefix byte (48) would be stored at the
lowest address, and the first immediate byte (11) would be stored at the highest instruction address.

                                                    11    09h     High (most-significant)

                                                    22    08h

                                                    33    07h

                                                    44    06h

                                                    55    05h

                                                    66    04h

                                                    77    03h

                                                    88    02h

                                                   B8     01h

                                                    48    00h     Low (least-significant)

Figure 2-6. Example of 10-Byte Instruction in Memory

2.2.2 64-Bit Canonical Addresses
Long mode defines 64 bits of virtual address, but implementations of the AMD64 architecture may
support fewer bits of virtual address. Although implementations might not use all 64 bits of the virtual
address, they check bits 63 through the most-significant implemented bit to see if those bits are all
zeros or all ones. An address that complies with this property is said to be in canonical address form. If
a virtual-memory reference is not in canonical form, the implementation causes a general-protection
exception or stack fault.

2.2.3 Effective Addresses
Programs provide effective addresses to the hardware prior to segmentation and paging translations.
Long-mode effective addresses are a maximum of 64 bits wide, as shown in Figure 2-3 on page 12.
Programs running in compatibility mode generate (by default) 32-bit effective addresses, which the
hardware zero-extends to 64 bits. Legacy-mode effective addresses, with no address-size override, are
32 or 16 bits wide, as shown in Figure 2-4 on page 13. These sizes can be overridden with an address-
size instruction prefix, as described in “Instruction Prefixes” on page 76.
There are five methods for generating effective addresses, depending on the specific instruction
encoding:
•   Absolute Addresses—These addresses are given as displacements (or offsets) from the base
    address of a data segment. They point directly to a memory location in the data segment.
•   Instruction-Relative Addresses—These addresses are given as displacements (or offsets) from the
    current instruction pointer (IP), also called the program counter (PC). They are generated by
    control-transfer instructions. A displacement in the instruction encoding, or one read from

     memory, serves as an offset from the address that follows the transfer. See “RIP-Relative
     Addressing” on page 18 for details about RIP-relative addressing in 64-bit mode.
•    Indexed Register-Indirect Addresses—These addresses are calculated off a base address contained
     in a general-purpose register specified by the instruction (base). Different encodings allow offsets
     from this base using a signed displacement or using the sum of the displacement and a scaled index
     value. Instruction encodings may utilize up to ten bytes—the ModRM byte, the optional SIB
     (scale, index, base) byte and a variable length displacement—to specify the values to be used in the
     effective address calculation. The base and index values are contained in general-purpose registers
     specified by the SIB byte. The scale and displacement values are specified directly in the
     instruction encoding. Figure 2-7 shows the components of the address calculation. The resultant
     effective address is added to the data-segment base address to form a linear address, as described in
     “Segmented Virtual Memory” in Volume 2. “Instruction Formats” in Volume 3 gives further
     details on specifying this form of address.

                              Base                  Index                        Displacement

                                                      * Scale by 1, 2, 4, or 8

                                                      +

                                               Effective Address

Figure 2-7. Complex Address Calculation (Protected Mode)

•    Stack Addresses—PUSH, POP, CALL, RET, IRET, and INT instructions implicitly use the stack
     pointer, which contains the address of the procedure stack. See “Stack Operation” on page 19 for
     details about the size of the stack pointer.
•    String Addresses—String instructions generate sequential addresses using the rDI and rSI registers,
     as described in “Implicit Uses of GPRs” on page 30.
In 64-bit mode, with no address-size override, the size of effective-address calculations is 64 bits. An
effective-address calculation uses 64-bit base and index registers and sign-extends displacements to 64
bits. Due to the flat address space in 64-bit mode, virtual addresses are equal to effective addresses.
(For an exception to this general rule, see “FS and GS as Base of Address Calculation” on page 17.)

2.2.3.1 Long-Mode Zero-Extension of 16-Bit and 32-Bit Addresses
In long mode, all 16-bit and 32-bit address calculations are zero-extended to form 64-bit addresses.
Address calculations are first truncated to the effective-address size of the current mode (64-bit mode
or compatibility mode), as overridden by any address-size prefix. The result is then zero-extended to
the full 64-bit address width.

Because of this, 16-bit and 32-bit applications running in compatibility mode can access only the low
4GB of the long-mode virtual-address space. Likewise, a 32-bit address generated in 64-bit mode can
access only the low 4GB of the long-mode virtual-address space.

2.2.3.2 Displacements and Immediates
In general, the maximum size of address displacements and immediate operands is 32 bits. They can
be 8, 16, or 32 bits in size, depending on the instruction or, for displacements, the effective address
size. In 64-bit mode, displacements are sign-extended to 64 bits during use, but their actual size (for
value representation) remains a maximum of 32 bits. The same is true for immediates in 64-bit mode,
when the operand size is 64 bits. However, support is provided in 64-bit mode for some 64-bit
displacement and immediate forms of the MOV instruction.

2.2.3.3 FS and GS as Base of Address Calculation
In 64-bit mode, the FS and GS segment-base registers (unlike the DS, ES, and SS segment-base
registers) can be used as non-zero data-segment base registers for address calculations, as described in
“Segmented Virtual Memory” in Volume 2. 64-bit mode assumes all other data-segment registers (DS,
ES, and SS) have a base address of 0.

2.2.4 Address-Size Prefix
The default address size of an instruction is determined by the default-size (D) bit and long-mode (L)
bit in the current code-segment descriptor (for details, see “Segmented Virtual Memory” in Volume 2).
Application software can override the default address size in any operating mode by using the 67h
address-size instruction prefix byte. The address-size prefix allows mixing 32-bit and 64-bit addresses
on an instruction-by-instruction basis.
Table 2-1 on page 18 shows the effects of using the address-size prefix in all operating modes. In 64-
bit mode, the default address size is 64 bits. The address size can be overridden to 32 bits. 16-bit
addresses are not supported in 64-bit mode. In compatibility and legacy modes, the address-size prefix
works the same as in the legacy x86 architecture.

Table 2-1. Address-Size Prefixes
                                                                                      Address-
                                                         Default          Effective  Size Prefix
                        Operating Mode                   Address        Address Size
                                                        Size (Bits)        (Bits)      (67h)1
                                                                                     Required?
                                                                             64           no
                             64-Bit Mode                     64
                                                                             32          yes
                                                                             32           no
              Long Mode                                      32
                                                                             16          yes
                             Compatibility Mode
                                                                             32          yes
                                                             16
                                                                             16           no
                                                                             32           no
              Legacy Mode                                    32
                                                                             16          yes
              (Protected, Virtual-8086, or Real
              Mode)                                                          32          yes
                                                             16
                                                                             16           no
              Note:
                 1. “No” indicates that the default address size is used.

2.2.5 RIP-Relative Addressing
RIP-relative addressing—that is, addressing relative to the 64-bit instruction pointer (also called
program counter)—is available in 64-bit mode. The effective address is formed by adding the
displacement to the 64-bit RIP of the next instruction.
In the legacy x86 architecture, addressing relative to the instruction pointer (IP or EIP) is available
only in control-transfer instructions. In the 64-bit mode, any instruction that uses ModRM addressing
(see “ModRM and SIB Bytes” in Volume 3) can use RIP-relative addressing. The feature is
particularly useful for addressing data in position-independent code and for code that addresses global
data.
Programs usually have many references to data, especially global data, that are not register-based. To
load such a program, the loader typically selects a location for the program in memory and then adjusts
the program’s references to global data based on the load location. RIP-relative addressing of data
makes this adjustment unnecessary.

2.2.5.1 Range of RIP-Relative Addressing
Without RIP-relative addressing, instructions encoded with a ModRM byte address memory relative
to zero. With RIP-relative addressing, instructions with a ModRM byte can address memory relative to
the 64-bit RIP using a signed 32-bit displacement. This provides an offset range of 2 GBytes from the
RIP.

2.2.5.2 Effect of Address-Size Prefix on RIP-Relative Addressing
RIP-relative addressing is enabled by 64-bit mode, not by a 64-bit address-size. Conversely, use of the
address-size prefix does not disable RIP-relative addressing. The effect of the address-size prefix is to
truncate and zero-extend the computed effective address to 32 bits, like any other addressing mode.

2.2.5.3 Encoding
For details on instruction encoding of RIP-relative addressing, see in “Encoding for RIP-Relative
Addressing” in Volume 3.

2.3          Pointers
Pointers are variables that contain addresses rather than data. They are used by instructions to
reference memory. Instructions access data using near and far pointers. Stack pointers locate the
current stack.

2.3.1 Near and Far Pointers
Near pointers contain only an effective address, which is used as an offset into the current segment. Far
pointers contain both an effective address and a segment selector that specifies one of several
segments. Figure 2-8 illustrates the two types of pointers.

                                  Near Pointer                        Far Pointer

                               Effective Address (EA)      Selector    Effective Address (EA)

Figure 2-8. Near and Far Pointers

In 64-bit mode, the AMD64 architecture supports only the flat-memory model in which there is only
one data segment, so the effective address is used as the virtual (linear) address and far pointers are not
needed. In compatibility mode and legacy protected mode, the AMD64 architecture supports multiple
memory segments, so effective addresses can be combined with segment selectors to form far pointers,
and the terms logical address (segment selector and effective address) and far pointer are synonyms.
Near pointers can also be used in compatibility mode and legacy mode.

2.4          Stack Operation
A procedure stack (also known as a ‘program stack’) is a portion of a stack segment in memory that is
used to link procedures. Software conventions typically define stacks using a stack frame, which
consists of two registers—a stack-frame base pointer (rBP) and a stack pointer (rSP)—as shown in
Figure 2-9 on page 20. These stack pointers can be either near pointers or far pointers.

The stack-segment (SS) register, points to the base address of the current stack segment. The stack
pointers contain offsets from the base address of the current stack segment. All instructions that
address memory using the rBP or rSP registers cause the processor to access the current stack segment.

                       Stack Frame Before Procedure Call                   Stack Frame After Procedure Call

        Stack-Frame Base Pointer (rBP)
                                                             Stack-Frame Base Pointer (rBP)
                and Stack Pointer (rSP)                                                           passed data
                                                                         Stack Pointer (rSP)

      Stack-Segment (SS) Base Address                      Stack-Segment (SS) Base Address

Figure 2-9. Stack Pointer Mechanism

In typical APIs, the stack-frame base pointer and the stack pointer point to the same location before a
procedure call (the top-of-stack of the prior stack frame). After data is pushed onto the procedure
stack, the stack-frame base pointer remains where it was and the stack pointer advances downward to
the address below the pushed data, where it becomes the new top-of-stack.
In legacy and compatibility modes, the default stack pointer size is 16 bits (SP) or 32 bits (ESP),
depending on the default-size (B) bit in the stack-segment descriptor, and multiple stacks can be
maintained in separate stack segments. In 64-bit mode, stack pointers are always 64 bits wide (RSP).
Further application-programming details on the procedure stack mechanism are described in “Control
Transfers” on page 80. System-programming details on the stack segments are described in
“Segmented Virtual Memory” in Volume 2.
A shadow stack is a separate, protected stack that is conceptually parallel to the procedure stack and
used only by the shadow stack feature. When enabled by system software, the shadow stack feature
provides, in a manner that is transparent to application software, protection against a class of computer
exploit known as 'return oriented programming'. System-programming details on the shadow stack
feature are described in “Shadow Stacks” in Volume 2.

2.5            Instruction Pointer
The instruction pointer is used in conjunction with the code-segment (CS) register to locate the next
instruction in memory. The instruction-pointer register contains the displacement (offset)—from the
base address of the current CS segment, or from address 0 in 64-bit mode—to the next instruction to be
executed. The pointer is incremented sequentially, except for branch instructions, as described in
“Control Transfers” on page 80.

In legacy and compatibility modes, the instruction pointer is a 16-bit (IP) or 32-bit (EIP) register. In
64-bit mode, the instruction pointer is extended to a 64-bit (RIP) register to support 64-bit offsets. The
case-sensitive acronym, rIP, is used to refer to any of these three instruction-pointer sizes, depending
on the software context.
Figure 2-10 on page 21 shows the relationship between RIP, EIP, and IP. The 64-bit RIP can be used
for RIP-relative addressing, as described in “RIP-Relative Addressing” on page 18.

                                                                      IP

                                                               EIP               rIP
                                                   RIP
                             63                    32 31                   0

Figure 2-10.     Instruction Pointer (rIP) Register

The contents of the rIP are not directly readable by software. However, the rIP is pushed onto the stack
by a call instruction.
The memory model described in this chapter is used by all of the programming environments that
make up the AMD64 architecture. The next four chapters of this volume describe the application
programming environments, which include:
•   General-purpose programming (Chapter 3 on page 23).
•   Streaming SIMD extensions used in media and scientific programming (Chapter 4 on page 111).
•   64-bit media programming (Chapter 5 on page 239).
•   x87 floating-point programming (Chapter 6 on page 285).

