
This chapter describes the 64-bit media programming model. This model includes all instructions that
access the MMX™ registers, including the MMX and 3DNow!™ instructions. Subsequent extensions,
part of the Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE), added new instructions that also utilize MMX registers.
The 64-bit media instructions perform integer and floating-point operations primarily on vector
operands (a few of the instructions take scalar operands). The MMX integer operations produce
signed, unsigned, and/or saturating results. The 3DNow! floating-point operations take single-
precision operands and produce saturating results without generating floating-point exceptions. The
instructions that take vector operands can speed up certain types of procedures by significant factors,
depending on data-element size and the regularity and locality of data accesses to memory.
The term 64-bit is used in two different contexts within the AMD64 architecture: the 64-bit media
instructions, described in this chapter, and the 64-bit operating mode, described in “64-Bit Mode” on
page 7.

5.1          Origins
The 64-bit media instructions were introduced in the following extensions to the legacy x86
architecture:
•   MMX. The original MMX programming model defined eight 64-bit MMX registers and a number
    of vector instructions that operate on packed integers held in the MMX registers or sourced from
    memory. This subset was subsequently extended.
•   3DNow!. Added vector floating-point instructions, most of which take vector operands in MMX
    registers or memory locations. This instruction set was subsequently extended.
•   SSE. The original Steaming SIMD Extensions (SSE1) and the subsequent SSE2 added instructions
    that perform conversions between operands in the 64-bit MMX registers and other registers.
For details on the extension-set origin of each instruction, see “Instruction Subsets vs. CPUID Feature
Sets” in Volume 3.

5.2          Compatibility
64-bit media instructions can be executed in any of the architecture’s operating modes. Existing MMX
and 3DNow! binary programs run in legacy and compatibility modes without modification. The
support provided by the AMD64 architecture for such binaries is identical to that provided by legacy
x86 architectures.
To run in 64-bit mode, 64-bit media programs must be recompiled. The recompilation has no side
effects on such programs, other than to make available the extended general-purpose registers and 64-
bit virtual address space.

The MMX and 3DNow! instructions introduce no additional registers, status bits, or other processor
state to the legacy x86 architecture. Instead, they use the x87 floating-point registers that have long
been a part of most x86 architectures. Because of this, 64-bit media procedures require no special
operating-system support or exception handlers. When state-saves are required between procedures,
the same instructions that system software uses to save and restore x87 floating-point state also save
and restore the 64-bit media-programming state.
AMD no longer recommends the use of 3DNow! instructions, which have been superceded by their
more efficient 128-bit media counterparts. Relevant recommendations are provided below and in the
AMD64 Programmer’s Manual Volume 5: 64-Bit Media and x87 Floating-Point Instructions.

5.3          Capabilities
The 64-bit media instructions are designed to support multimedia and communication applications
that operate on vectors of small-sized data elements. For example, 8-bit and 16-bit integer data
elements are commonly used for pixel information in graphics applications, and 16-bit integer data
elements are used for audio sampling. The 64-bit media instructions allow multiple data elements like
these to be packed into single 64-bit vector operands located in an MMX register or in memory. The
instructions operate in parallel on each of the elements in these vectors. For example, 8-bit integer data
can be packed in vectors of eight elements in a single 64-bit register, so that a single instruction can
operated on all eight byte elements simultaneously.
Typical applications of the 64-bit media integer instructions include music synthesis, speech synthesis,
speech recognition, audio and video compression (encoding) and decompression (decoding), 2D and
3D graphics (including 3D texture mapping), and streaming video. Typical applications of the 64-bit
media floating-point instructions include digital signal processing (DSP) kernels and front-end 3D
graphics algorithms, such as geometry, clipping, and lighting.
These types of applications are referred to as media applications. Such applications commonly use
small data elements in repetitive loops, in which the typical operations are inherently parallel. In 256-
color video applications, for example, 8-bit operands in 64-bit MMX registers can be used to compute
transformations on eight pixels per instruction.

5.3.1 Parallel Operations
Most of the 64-bit media instructions perform parallel operations on vectors of operands. Vector
operations are also called packed or SIMD (single-instruction, multiple-data) operations. They take
operands consisting of multiple elements and operate on all elements in parallel. Figure 5-1 on
page 241 shows an example of an integer operation on two vectors, each containing 16-bit (word)
elements. There are also 64-bit media instructions that operate on vectors of byte or doubleword
elements.

                              operand 1                             operand 2
                         63                      0            63                0

                                            op       op   op       op

                                       63            result             0

Figure 5-1. Parallel Integer Operations on Elements of Vectors

5.3.2 Data Conversion and Reordering
The 64-bit media instructions support conversions of various integer data types to floating-point data
types, and vice versa.
There are also instructions that reorder vector-element ordering or the bit-width of vector elements.
For example, the unpack instructions take two vector operands and interleave their low or high
elements. Figure 5-2 on page 242 shows an unpack operation (PUNPCKLWD) that interleaves low-
order elements of each source operand. If each element of operand 2 has the value zero, the operation
zero-extends each element of operand 1 to twice its original width. This may be useful, for example,
prior to an arithmetic operation in which the data-conversion result must be paired with another source
operand containing vector elements that are twice the width of the pre-conversion (half-size) elements.
There are also pack instructions that convert each element of 2x size in a pair of vectors to elements of
1x size, with saturation at maximum and minimum values.

                                      operand 1                     operand 2
                                 63               0            63               0

                                             63       result        0

Figure 5-2. Unpack and Interleave Operation

Figure 5-3 shows a shuffle operation (PSHUFW), in which one of the operands provides vector data,
and an immediate byte provides shuffle control for up to 256 permutations of the data.

                                      operand 1                     operand 2
                                 63               0            63               0

                                             63       result        0

Figure 5-3. Shuffle Operation (1 of 256)

5.3.3 Matrix Operations
Media applications often multiply and accumulate vector and matrix data. In 3D graphics applications,
for example, objects are typically represented by triangles, each of whose vertices are located in 3D
space by a matrix of coordinate values, and matrix transforms are performed to simulate object
movement.
The 64-bit media integer and floating-point instructions can perform several types of matrix-vector or
matrix-matrix operations, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and accumulation. The integer

instructions can also perform multiply-accumulate operations. Efficient matrix multiplication is
further supported with instructions that can first transpose the elements of matrix rows and columns.
These transpositions can make subsequent accesses to memory or cache more efficient when
performing arithmetic matrix operations.
Figure 5-4 shows a vector multiply-add instruction (PMADDWD) that multiplies vectors of 16-bit
integer elements to yield intermediate results of 32-bit elements, which are then summed pair-wise to
yield two 32-bit elements.

                                        operand 1                         operand 2
                                  63                    0            63                   0

                                             *          *            *        *

                                       127                                            0

                                                        +            +

                                                   63       result        0

Figure 5-4. Multiply-Add Operation

The operation shown in Figure 5-4 can be used together with transpose and vector-add operations (see
“Addition” on page 262) to accumulate dot product results (also called inner or scalar products),
which are used in many media algorithms.

5.3.4 Saturation
Several of the 64-bit media integer instructions and most of the 64-bit media floating-point
instructions produce vector results in which each element saturates independently of the other
elements in the result vector. Such results are clamped (limited) to the maximum or minimum value
representable by the destination data type when the true result exceeds that maximum or minimum
representable value.
Saturation avoids the need for code that tests for potential overflow or underflow. Saturating data is
useful for representing physical-world data, such as sound and color. It is used, for example, when
combining values for pixel coloring.

5.3.5 Branch Removal
Branching is a time-consuming operation that, unlike most 64-bit media vector operations, does not
exhibit parallel behavior (there is only one branch target, not multiple targets, per branch instruction).
In many media applications, a branch involves selecting between only a few (often only two) cases.
Such branches can be replaced with 64-bit media vector compare and vector logical instructions that
simulate predicated execution or conditional moves.
Figure 5-5 shows an example of a non-branching sequence that implements a two-way multiplexer—
one that is equivalent to the ternary operator “?:” in C and C++. The comparable code sequence is
explained in “Compare and Write Mask” on page 267.
The sequence in Figure 5-5 begins with a vector compare instruction that compares the elements of
two source operands in parallel and produces a mask vector containing elements of all 1s or 0s. This
mask vector is ANDed with one source operand and ANDed-Not with the other source operand to
isolate the desired elements of both operands. These results are then ORed to select the relevant
elements from each operand. A similar branch-removal operation can be done using floating-point
source operands.

                                        operand 1                                   operand 2
                                 63                        0              63                         0
                                   a3    a2    a1     a0                   b3        b2   b1    b0

                                                           Compare

                                                    FFFF 0000 0000 FFFF

                                              And                              And-Not

                                   a3 0000 0000 a0                        0000 b2         b1 0000

                                                                    Or

                                                    a3         b2    b1        a0

Figure 5-5. Branch-Removal Sequence

5.3.6 Floating-Point (3DNow!™) Vector Operations
Floating-point vector instructions using the MMX registers were introduced by AMD with the
3DNow! technology. These instructions take 64-bit vector operands consisting of two 32-bit single-
precision floating-point numbers, shown as FP single in Figure 5-6.

                                  63     32 31           0           63       32 31         0
                                   FP single FP single                FP single FP single

                                                      op             op

                                                  FP single FP single
                                                 63          32 31        0

Figure 5-6. Floating-Point (3DNow!™ Instruction) Operations

The AMD64 architecture’s 3DNow! floating-point instructions provide a unique advantage over
legacy x87 floating-point instructions: They allow integer and floating-point instructions to be
intermixed in the same procedure, using only the MMX registers. This avoids the need to switch
between integer MMX procedures and x87 floating-point procedures—a switch that may involve
time-consuming state saves and restores—while at the same time leaving the YMM/XMM register
resources free for other applications.
The 3DNow! instructions allow applications such as 3D graphics to accelerate front-end geometry,
clipping, and lighting calculations. Picture and pixel data are typically integer data types, although
both integer and floating-point instructions are often required to operate completely on the data. For
example, software can change the viewing perspective of a 3D scene through transformation matrices
by using floating-point instructions in the same procedure that contains integer operations on other
aspects of the graphics data.
3DNow! programs typically perform better than x87 floating-point code, because the MMX register
file is flat rather than stack-oriented and because 3DNow! instructions can operate on twice as many
operands as x87 floating-point instructions. This ability to operate in parallel on twice as many
floating-point values in the same register space often makes it possible to remove local temporary
variables in 3DNow! code that would otherwise be needed in x87 floating-point code.

5.4          Registers
5.4.1 MMX™ Registers
Eight 64-bit MMX registers, mmx0–mmx7, support the 64-bit media instructions. Figure 5-7 shows
these registers. They can hold operands for both vector and scalar operations on integer (MMX) and
floating-point (3DNow!) data types.

                                              MMXTM Registers
                           63                                           0

                                                   mmx0

                                                   mmx1

                                                   mmx2

                                                   mmx3

                                                   mmx4

                                                   mmx5

                                                   mmx6

                                                   mmx7

Figure 5-7.    64-Bit Media Registers

The MMX registers are mapped onto the low 64 bits of the 80-bit x87 floating-point physical data
registers, FPR0–FPR7, described in Section 6.2. “Registers” on page 286. However, the x87 stack
register structure, ST(0)–ST(7), is not used by MMX instructions. The x87 tag bits, top-of-stack
pointer (TOP), and high bits of the 80-bit FPR registers are changed when 64-bit media instructions
are executed. For details about the x87-related actions performed by hardware during execution of 64-
bit media instructions, see “Actions Taken on Executing 64-Bit Media Instructions” on page 278.

5.4.2 Other Registers
Some 64-bit media instructions that perform data transfer, data conversion or data reordering
operations (“Data Transfer” on page 256, “Data Conversion” on page 257, and “Data Conversion” on
page 271) can access operands in the general-purpose registers (GPRs) or XMM registers. When
addressing GPRs or YMM/XMM registers in 64-bit mode, the REX instruction prefix can be used to
access the extended GPRs or YMM/XMM registers, as described in “REX Prefixes” on page 79. For a
description of the GPR registers, see “Registers” on page 23. For a description of the YMM/XMM
registers, see Section 4.2.1. “SSE Registers” on page 113.

5.5          Operands
Operands for a 64-bit media instruction are either referenced by the instruction's opcode or included as
an immediate value in the instruction encoding. Depending on the instruction, referenced operands can
be located in registers or memory. The data types of these operands include vector and scalar integer,
and vector floating-point.

5.5.1 Data Types
Figure 5-8 on page 248 shows the register images of the 64-bit media data types. These data types can
be interpreted by instruction syntax and/or the software context as one of the following types of
values:
•   Vector (packed) single-precision (32-bit) floating-point numbers.
•   Vector (packed) signed (two's-complement) integers.
•   Vector (packed) unsigned integers.
•   Scalar signed (two's-complement) integers.
•   Scalar unsigned integers.
Hardware does not check or enforce the data types for instructions. Software is responsible for
ensuring that each operand for an instruction is of the correct data type. Software can interpret the data
types in ways other than those shown in Figure 5-8 on page 248—such as bit fields or fractional
numbers—but the 64-bit media instructions do not directly support such interpretations and software
must handle them entirely on its own.

                               Vector (Packed) Single-Precision Floating-Point

                   ss    exp               significand              ss    exp               significand
                   63            54                                 31           22                                 0

                                           Vector (Packed) Signed Integers
                   ss               doubleword                      ss               doubleword
                   ss      word             ss      word            ss      word             ss      word
                   ss   byte ss byte ss byte ss byte ss byte ss byte ss byte ss byte
                   63          55          47           39          31          23           15          7          0

                                       Vector (Packed) Unsigned Integers

                                    doubleword                                       doubleword

                           word                     word                    word                     word

                        byte        byte         byte        byte        byte        byte         byte       byte
                   63          55          47           39          31          23           15          7          0

                                                        Signed Integers
                   s                                         quadword
                   63                                               s                doubleword
                                                                    31                       s       word
                                                                                            15           s   byte
                                                                                                         7          0

                                                    Unsigned Integers

                                                             quadword
                   63                                                                doubleword
                                                                    31                               word
                                                                                            15               byte
                                                                                                         7

                                                                                                                    0

Figure 5-8. 64-Bit Media Data Types

5.5.2 Operand Sizes and Overrides
Operand sizes for 64-bit media instructions are determined by instruction opcodes. Some of these
opcodes include an operand-size override prefix, but this prefix acts in a special way to modify the
opcode and is considered an integral part of the opcode. The general use of the 66h operand-size
override prefix described in “Instruction Prefixes” on page 76 does not apply to 64-bit media
instructions.
For details on the use of operand-size override prefixes in 64-bit media instructions, see the opcodes in
“64-Bit Media Instruction Reference” in Volume 5.

5.5.3 Operand Addressing
Depending on the 64-bit media instruction, referenced operands may be in registers or memory.

5.5.3.1 Register Operands
Most 64-bit media instructions can access source and destination operands located in MMX registers.
A few of these instructions access the XMM or GPR registers. When addressing GPR or XMM
registers in 64-bit mode, the REX instruction prefix can be used to access the extended GPR or XMM
registers, as described in “Instruction Prefixes” on page 275.
The 64-bit media instructions do not access the rFLAGS register, and none of the bits in that register
are affected by execution of the 64-bit media instructions.

5.5.3.2 Memory Operands
Most 64-bit media instructions can read memory for source operands, and a few of the instructions can
write results to memory. “Memory Addressing” on page 14, describes the general methods and
conditions for addressing memory operands.

5.5.3.3 Immediate Operands
Immediate operands are used in certain data-conversion and vector-shift instructions. Such
instructions take 8-bit immediates, which provide control for the operation.

5.5.3.4 I/O Ports
I/O ports in the I/O address space cannot be directly addressed by 64-bit media instructions, and
although memory-mapped I/O ports can be addressed by such instructions, doing so may produce
unpredictable results, depending on the hardware implementation of the architecture. See the data
sheet or software-optimization documentation for particular hardware implementations.

5.5.4 Data Alignment
Those 64-bit media instructions that access a 128-bit operand in memory incur a general-protection
exception (#GP) if the operand is not aligned to a 16-byte boundary. These instructions include:
•   CVTPD2PI—Convert Packed Double-Precision Floating-Point to Packed Doubleword Integers.

•   CVTTPD2PI—Convert Packed Double-Precision Floating-Point to Packed Doubleword Integers,
    Truncated.
•   FXRSTOR—Restore XMM, MMX, and x87 State.
•   FXSAVE—Save XMM, MMX, and x87 State.
For other 64-bit media instructions, the architecture does not impose data-alignment requirements for
accessing 64-bit media data in memory. Specifically, operands in physical memory do not need to be
stored at addresses that are even multiples of the operand size in bytes. However, the consequence of
storing operands at unaligned locations is that accesses to those operands may require more processor
and bus cycles than for aligned accesses. See “Data Alignment” on page 43 for details.

5.5.5 Integer Data Types
Most of the MMX instructions support operations on the integer data types shown in Figure 5-8 on
page 248. These instructions are summarized in “Instruction Summary—Integer Instructions” on
page 253. The characteristics of these data types are described below.

5.5.5.1 Sign
Many of the 64-bit media instructions have variants for operating on signed or unsigned integers. For
signed integers, the sign bit is the most-significant bit—bit 7 for a byte, bit 15 for a word, bit 31 for a
doubleword, or bit 63 for a quadword. Arithmetic instructions that are not specifically named as
unsigned perform signed two’s-complement arithmetic.

5.5.5.2 Maximum and Minimum Representable Values
Table 5-1 shows the range of representable values for the integer data types.

Table 5-1. Range of Values in 64-Bit Media Integer Data Types
      Data-Type Interpretation                Byte           Word         Doubleword          Quadword
Unsigned              Base-2 (exact)       0 to +28  –1          16
                                                           0 to +2 –1             32
                                                                           0 to +2 –1         0 to +264–1
integers              Base-10 (approx.)     0 to 255       0 to 65,535   0 to 4.29 * 109    0 to 1.84 * 1019
                                                             –215 to
                      Base-2 (exact)      –27 to +(27–1)                 –231 to +(231–1)   –263 to +(263–1)
                                                            +(215–1)
                  1
Signed integers
                                                           –32,768 to     –2.14 * 109 to      –9.22 * 1018
                      Base-10 (approx.)   –128 to +127
                                                            +32,767        +2.14 * 109      to +9.22 * 1018

5.5.5.3 Saturation
Saturating (also called limiting or clamping) instructions limit the value of a result to the maximum or
minimum value representable by the destination data type. Saturating versions of integer vector-
arithmetic instructions operate on byte-sized and word-sized elements. These instructions—for
example, PADDSx, PADDUSx, PSUBSx, and PSUBUSx—saturate signed or unsigned data
independently for each element in a vector when the element reaches its maximum or minimum
representable value. Saturation avoids overflow or underflow errors.

The examples in Table 5-2 on page 251 illustrate saturating and non-saturating results with word
operands. Saturation for other data-type sizes follows similar rules. Once saturated, the saturated value
is treated like any other value of its type. For example, if 0001h is subtracted from the saturated value,
7FFFh, the result is 7FFEh.

Table 5-2. Saturation Examples
                                   Non-Saturated
                                                         Saturated           Saturated
                  Operation       Infinitely Precise
                                                       Signed Result      Unsigned Result
                                        Result
                7000h + 2000h           9000h              7FFFh               9000h
                7000h + 7000h           E000h              7FFFh               E000h
                F000h + F000h          1E000h              E000h               FFFFh
                9000h + 9000h          12000h               8000h              FFFFh
                7FFFh + 0100h           80FFh              7FFFh               80FFh
                7FFFh + FF00h          17EFFh              7EFFh               FFFFh

Arithmetic instructions not specifically designated as saturating perform non-saturating, two’s-
complement arithmetic.

5.5.5.4 Rounding
There is a rounding version of the integer vector-multiply instruction, PMULHRW, that multiplies
pairs of signed-integer word elements and then adds 8000h to the lower word of the doubleword result,
thus rounding the high-order word which is returned as the result.

5.5.5.5 Other Fixed-Point Operands
The architecture provides specific support only for integer fixed-point operands—those in which an
implied binary point is located to the right of bit 0. Nevertheless, software may use fixed-point
operands in which the implied binary point is located in any position. In such cases, software is
responsible for managing the interpretation of such implied binary points, as well as any redundant
sign bits that may occur during multiplication.

5.5.6 Floating-Point Data Types
All 64-bit media 3DNow! instructions, except PFRCP and PFRSQRT, take 64-bit vector operands.
They operate in parallel on two single-precision (32-bit) floating-point values contained in those
vectors.
Figure 5-9 shows the format of the vector operands. The characteristics of the single-precision
floating-point data types are described below. The 64-bit floating-point media instructions are
summarized in “Instruction Summary—Floating-Point Instructions” on page 270.

       63 62    55 54                                      32 31 30         23 22                                     0

           Biased                Significand                           Biased                  Significand
       S Exponent                                                S Exponent
                               (also Fraction)                                               (also Fraction)

                                                                                                S = Sign Bit
                                                                                                S = Sign Bit

Figure 5-9.      64-Bit Floating-Point (3DNow!™) Vector Operand

5.5.6.1 Single-Precision Format
The single-precision floating-point format supported by 64-bit media instructions is the same format
as the normalized IEEE 754 single-precision format. This format includes a sign bit, an 8-bit biased
exponent, and a 23-bit significand with one hidden integer bit for a total of 24 bits in the significand.
The hidden integer bit is assumed to have a value of 1, and the significand field is also the fraction. The
bias of the exponent is 127. However, the 3DNow! format does not support other aspects of the IEEE
754 standard, such as multiple rounding modes, representation of numbers other than normalized
numbers, and floating-point exceptions.

5.5.6.2 Range of Representable Values and Saturation
Table 5-3 shows the range of representable values for 64-bit media floating-point data. Table 5-4
shows the exponent ranges. The largest representable positive normal number has an exponent of FEh
and a significand of 7FFFFFh, with a numerical value of 2127 * (2 – 2–23). The smallest representable
negative normal number has an exponent of 01h and a significand of 000000h, with a numerical value
of 2–126.

Table 5-3. Range of Values in 64-Bit Media Floating-Point Data Types
          Data-Type Interpretation                        Doubleword                                Quadword
                        Base-2 (exact)            2–126   to 2   127
                                                                       * (2 – 2 –23
                                                                                      )    Two single-precision floating-
      Floating-point
                        Base-10 (approx.)        1.17 * 10–38     to +3.40 * 10       38        point doublewords

Table 5-4. 64-Bit Floating-Point Exponent Ranges
                Biased Exponent                                         Description
                        FFh                                            Unsupported1
                        00h                                                 Zero
               Note:
                  1. Unsupported numbers can be used as source operands but produce undefined
                     results.

Table 5-4. 64-Bit Floating-Point Exponent Ranges (continued)
              Biased Exponent                              Description
                 00h<x<FFh                                   Normal
                    01h                      2 (1–127)   lowest possible exponent
                    FEh                     2 (254–127)   largest possible exponent
             Note:
                1. Unsupported numbers can be used as source operands but produce undefined
                   results.

Results that, after rounding, overflow above the maximum-representable positive or negative number
are saturated (limited or clamped) at the maximum positive or negative number. Results that
underflow below the minimum-representable positive or negative number are treated as zero.

5.5.6.3 Floating-Point Rounding
In contrast to the IEEE standard, which requires four rounding modes, the 64-bit media floating-point
instructions support only one rounding mode, depending on the instruction. All such instructions use
round-to-nearest, except certain floating-point-to-integer conversion instructions (“Data Conversion”
on page 271) which use round-to-zero.

5.5.6.4 No Support for Infinities, NaNs, and Denormals
64-bit media floating-point instructions support only normalized numbers. They do not support
infinity, NaN, and denormalized number representations. Operations on such numbers produce
undefined results, and no exceptions are generated. If all source operands are normalized numbers,
these instructions never produce infinities, NaNs, or denormalized numbers as results.
This aspect of 64-bit media floating-point operations does not comply with the IEEE 754 standard.
Software must use only normalized operands and ensure that computations remain within valid
normalized-number ranges.

5.5.6.5 No Support for Floating-Point Exceptions
The 64-bit media floating-point instructions do not generate floating-point exceptions. Software must
ensure that in-range operands are provided to these instructions.

5.6          Instruction Summary—Integer Instructions
This section summarizes the functions of the integer (MMX and a few SSE and SSE2) instructions in
the 64-bit media instruction subset. These include integer instructions that use an MMX register for
source or destination and data-conversion instructions that convert from integers to floating-point
formats. For a summary of the floating-point instructions in the 64-bit media instruction subset,
including data-conversion instructions that convert from floating-point to integer formats, see
“Instruction Summary—Floating-Point Instructions” on page 270.

The instructions are organized here by functional group—such as data-transfer, vector arithmetic, and
so on. Software running at any privilege level can use any of these instructions, if the CPUID
instruction reports support for the instructions (see “Feature Detection” on page 276). More detail on
individual instructions is given in the alphabetically organized “64-Bit Media Instruction Reference”
in Volume 5.

5.6.1 Syntax
Each instruction has a mnemonic syntax used by assemblers to specify the operation and the operands
to be used for source and destination (result) data. The majority of 64-bit media integer instructions
have the following syntax:
       MNEMONIC mmx1, mmx2/mem64

Figure 5-10 on page 254 shows an example of the mnemonic syntax for a packed add bytes (PADDB)
instruction.

                                                  PADDB mmx1, mmx2/mem64

                                     Mnemonic

                           First Source Operand
                        and Destination Operand

                         Second Source Operand

Figure 5-10.      Mnemonic Syntax for Typical Instruction

This example shows the PADDB mnemonic followed by two operands, a 64-bit MMX register
operand and another 64-bit MMX register or 64-bit memory operand. In most instructions that take
two operands, the first (left-most) operand is both a source operand and the destination operand. The
second (right-most) operand serves only as a source. Some instructions can have one or more prefixes
that modify default properties, as described in “Instruction Prefixes” on page 275.

5.6.1.1 Mnemonics
The following characters are used as prefixes in the mnemonics of integer instructions:
•   CVT—Convert
•   CVTT—Convert with truncation
•   P—Packed (vector)
•   PACK—Pack elements of 2x data size to 1x data size
•   PUNPCK—Unpack and interleave elements

In addition to the above prefix characters, the following characters are used elsewhere in the
mnemonics of integer instructions:
•   B—Byte
•   D—Doubleword
•   DQ—Double quadword
•   ID—Integer doubleword
•   IW—Integer word
•   PD—Packed double-precision floating-point
•   PI—Packed integer
•   PS—Packed single-precision floating-point
•   Q—Quadword
•   S—Signed
•   SS—Signed saturation
•   U—Unsigned
•   US—Unsigned saturation
•   W—Word
•   x—One or more variable characters in the mnemonic
For example, the mnemonic for the instruction that packs four words into eight unsigned bytes is
PACKUSWB. In this mnemonic, the PACK designates 2x-to-1x conversion of vector elements, the US
designates unsigned results with saturation, and the WB designates vector elements of the source as
words and those of the result as bytes.

5.6.2 Exit Media State
The exit media state instructions are used to isolate the use of processor resources between 64-bit
media instructions and x87 floating-point instructions.
•   EMMS—Exit Media State
•   FEMMS—Fast Exit Media State
These instructions initialize the contents of the x87 floating-point stack registers—called clearing the
MMX state. Software should execute one of these instructions before leaving a 64-bit media
procedure.
The EMMS and FEMMS instructions both clear the MMX state, as described in “Mixing Media Code
with x87 Code” on page 280. The instructions differ in one respect: FEMMS leaves the data in the x87
stack registers undefined. By contrast, EMMS leaves the data in each such register as it was defined by
the last x87 or 64-bit media instruction that wrote to the register. The FEMMS instruction is supported
for backward-compatibility. Software that must be compatible with both AMD and non-AMD
processors should use the EMMS instruction.

5.6.3 Data Transfer
The data-transfer instructions copy operands between a 32-bit or 64-bit memory location, an MMX
register, an XMM register, or a GPR. The MOV mnemonic, which stands for move, is a misnomer. A
copy function is actually performed instead of a move.
Move
•   MOVD—Move Doubleword
•   MOVQ—Move Quadword
•   MOVDQ2Q—Move Double Quadword to Quadword
•   MOVQ2DQ—Move Quadword to Double Quadword
The MOVD instruction copies a 32-bit or 64-bit value from a general-purpose register (GPR) or
memory location to an MMX register, or from an MMX register to a GPR or memory location. If the
source operand is 32 bits and the destination operand is 64 bits, the source is zero-extended to 64 bits
in the destination. If the source is 64 bits and the destination is 32 bits, only the low-order 32 bits of the
source are copied to the destination.
The MOVQ instruction copies a 64-bit value from an MMX register or 64-bit memory location to
another MMX register, or from an MMX register to another MMX register or 64-bit memory location.
The MOVDQ2Q instruction copies the low-order 64-bit value in an XMM register to an MMX
register.
The MOVQ2DQ instruction copies a 64-bit value from an MMX register to the low-order 64 bits of an
XMM register, with zero-extension to 128 bits.
The MOVD and MOVQ instructions—along with the PUNPCKx instructions—are often among the
most frequently used instructions in 64-bit media procedures (both integer and floating-point). The
move instructions are similar to the assignment operator in high-level languages.

5.6.3.1 Move Non-Temporal
The move non-temporal instructions are called streaming-store instructions. They minimize pollution
of the cache. The assumption is that the data they reference will be used only once, and is therefore not
subject to cache-related overhead such as write-allocation. For further information, see “Memory
Optimization” on page 98.
•   MOVNTQ—Move Non-temporal Quadword
•   MASKMOVQ—Mask Move Quadword
The MOVNTQ instruction stores a 64-bit MMX register value into a 64-bit memory location. The
MASKMOVQ instruction stores bytes from the first operand, as selected by the mask value (most-
significant bit of each byte) in the second operand, to a memory location specified in the rDI and DS
registers. The first operand is an MMX register, and the second operand is another MMX register. The

size of the store is determined by the effective address size. Figure 5-11 on page 257 shows the
MASKMOVQ operation.

                                         operand 1                    operand 2
                                63                      0      63                    0

                                                                    . . . . . .
                               select
                                        . . . . . .
                                                      select

                                                                     store address       rDI
                                            memory

Figure 5-11. MASKMOVQ Move Mask Operation

The MOVNTQ and MASKMOVQ instructions use weakly-ordered, write-combining buffering of
write data and they minimize cache pollution. The exact method by which cache pollution is
minimized depends on the hardware implementation of the instruction. For further information, see
“Memory Optimization” on page 98.
A typical case benefitting from streaming stores occurs when data written by the processor is never
read by the processor, such as data written to a graphics frame buffer. MASKMOVQ is useful for the
handling of end cases in block copies and block fills based on streaming stores.
Move Mask
•   PMOVMSKB—Packed Move Mask Byte
The PMOVMSKB instruction moves the most-significant bit of each byte in an MMX register to the
low-order byte of a 32-bit or 64-bit general-purpose register, with zero-extension. It is useful for
extracting bits from a mask, or extracting zero-point values from quantized data such as signal
samples, resulting in a byte that can be used for data-dependent branching.

5.6.4 Data Conversion
The integer data-conversion instructions convert operands from integer formats to floating-point
formats. They take 64-bit integer source operands. For data-conversion instructions that take 32-bit
and 64-bit floating-point source operands, see “Data Conversion” on page 271. For data-conversion

instructions that take 128-bit source operands, see “Data Conversion” on page 154 and “Data
Conversion” on page 189.

5.6.4.1 Convert Integer to Floating-Point
These instructions convert integer data types into floating-point data types.
•   CVTPI2PS—Convert Packed Doubleword Integers to Packed Single-Precision Floating-Point
•   CVTPI2PD—Convert Packed Doubleword Integers to Packed Double-Precision Floating-Point
•   PI2FW—Packed Integer To Floating-Point Word Conversion
•   PI2FD—Packed Integer to Floating-Point Doubleword Conversion
The CVTPI2Px instructions convert two 32-bit signed integer values in the second operand (an MMX
register or 64-bit memory location) to two single-precision (CVTPI2PS) or double-precision
(CVTPI2PD) floating-point values. The instructions then write the converted values into the low-order
64 bits of an XMM register (CVTPI2PS) or the full 128 bits of an XMM register (CVTPI2PD). The
CVTPI2PS instruction does not modify the high-order 64 bits of the XMM register.
The PI2Fx instructions are 3DNow! instructions. They convert two 16-bit (PI2FW) or 32-bit (PI2FD)
signed integer values in the second operand to two single-precision floating-point values. The
instructions then write the converted values into the destination. If a PI2FD conversion produces an
inexact value, the value is truncated (rounded toward zero).

5.6.5 Data Reordering
The integer data-reordering instructions pack, unpack, interleave, extract, insert, shuffle, and swap the
elements of vector operands.

5.6.5.1 Pack with Saturation
These instructions pack 2x-sized data types into 1x-sized data types, thus halving the precision of each
element in a vector operand.
•   PACKSSDW—Pack with Saturation Signed Doubleword to Word
•   PACKSSWB—Pack with Saturation Signed Word to Byte
•   PACKUSWB—Pack with Saturation Signed Word to Unsigned Byte
The PACKSSDW instruction converts each 32-bit signed integer in its two source operands (an MMX
register or 64-bit memory location and another MMX register) into a 16-bit signed integer and packs
the converted values into the destination MMX register. The PACKSSWB instruction does the
analogous operation between word elements in the source vectors and byte elements in the destination
vector. The PACKUSWB instruction does the same as PACKSSWB except that it converts word
integers into unsigned (rather than signed) bytes.
Figure 5-12 on page 259 shows an example of a PACKSSDW instruction. The operation merges
vector elements of 2x size (doubleword-size) into vector elements of 1x size (word-size), thus
reducing the precision of the vector-element data types. Any results that would otherwise overflow or

underflow are saturated (clamped) at the maximum or minimum representable value, respectively, as
described in “Saturation” on page 250.

                                       operand 1                     operand 2
                                  63               0            63               0

                                              63       result        0

Figure 5-12. PACKSSDW Pack Operation

Conversion from higher-to-lower precision may be needed, for example, after an arithmetic operation
which requires the higher-precision format to prevent possible overflow, but which requires the lower-
precision format for a subsequent operation.

5.6.5.2 Unpack and Interleave
These instructions interleave vector elements from the high or low half of two source operands. They
can be used to double the precision of operands.
•   PUNPCKHBW—Unpack and Interleave High Bytes
•   PUNPCKHWD—Unpack and Interleave High Words
•   PUNPCKHDQ—Unpack and Interleave High Doublewords
•   PUNPCKLBW—Unpack and Interleave Low Bytes
•   PUNPCKLWD—Unpack and Interleave Low Words
•   PUNPCKLDQ—Unpack and Interleave Low Doublewords
The PUNPCKHBW instruction unpacks the four high-order bytes from its two source operands and
interleaves them into the bytes in the destination operand. The bytes in the low-order half of the source
operand are ignored. The PUNPCKHWD and PUNPCKHDQ instructions perform analogous
operations for words and doublewords in the source operands, packing them into interleaved words
and interleaved doublewords in the destination operand.
The PUNPCKLBW, PUNPCKLWD, and PUNPCKLDQ instructions are analogous to their high-
element counterparts except that they take elements from the low doubleword of each source vector

and ignore elements in the high doubleword. If the source operand for PUNPCKLx instructions is in
memory, only the low 32 bits of the operand are loaded.
Figure 5-13 on page 260 shows an example of the PUNPCKLWD instruction. The elements are taken
from the low half of the source operands. In this register image, elements from operand2 are placed to
the left of elements from operand1.

                                       operand 1                     operand 2
                                  63               0            63               0

                                              63       result        0

Figure 5-13. PUNPCKLWD Unpack and Interleave Operation

If one of the two source operands is a vector consisting of all zero-valued elements, the unpack
instructions perform the function of expanding vector elements of 1x size into vector elements of 2x
size (for example, word-size to doubleword-size). If both source operands are of identical value, the
unpack instructions can perform the function of duplicating adjacent elements in a vector.
The PUNPCKx instructions—along with MOVD and MOVQ—are among the most frequently used
instructions in 64-bit media procedures (both integer and floating-point).

5.6.5.3 Extract and Insert
These instructions copy a word element from a vector, in a manner specified by an immediate operand.
•   PEXTRW—Packed Extract Word
•   PINSRW—Packed Insert Word
The PEXTRW instruction extracts a 16-bit value from an MMX register, as selected by the immediate-
byte operand, and writes it to the low-order word of a 32-bit or 64-bit general-purpose register, with
zero-extension to 32 or 64 bits. PEXTRW is useful for loading computed values, such as table-lookup
indices, into general-purpose registers where the values can be used for addressing tables in memory.
The PINSRW instruction inserts a 16-bit value from a the low-order word of a 32-bit or 64-bit general
purpose register or a 16-bit memory location into an MMX register. The location in the destination

register is selected by the immediate-byte operand. The other words in the destination register operand
are not modified.

5.6.5.4 Shuffle and Swap
These instructions reorder the elements of a vector.
•   PSHUFW—Packed Shuffle Words
•   PSWAPD—Packed Swap Doubleword
The PSHUFW instruction moves any one of the four words in its second operand (an MMX register or
64-bit memory location) to specified word locations in its first operand (another MMX register). The
ordering of the shuffle can occur in any of 256 possible ways, as specified by the immediate-byte
operand. Figure 5-14 shows one of the 256 possible shuffle operations. PSHUFW is useful, for
example, in color imaging when computing alpha saturation of RGB values. In this case, PSHUFW
can replicate an alpha value in a register so that parallel comparisons with three RGB values can be
performed.

                                       operand 1                     operand 2
                                  63               0            63               0

                                              63       result        0

Figure 5-14.      PSHUFW Shuffle Operation

The PSWAPD instruction swaps (reverses) the order of two 32-bit values in the second operand and
writes each swapped value in the corresponding doubleword of the destination. Figure 5-15 shows a
swap operation. PSWAPD is useful, for example, in complex-number multiplication in which the
elements of one source operand must be swapped (see “Accumulation” on page 272 for details).
PSWAPD supports independent source and result operands so that it can also perform a load function.

                                        operand 1                     operand 2
                                   63               0            63               0

                                               63       result        0

Figure 5-15. PSWAPD Swap Operation

5.6.6 Arithmetic
The integer vector-arithmetic instructions perform an arithmetic operation on the elements of two
source vectors. Arithmetic instructions that are not specifically named as unsigned perform signed
two’s-complement arithmetic.
Addition
•   PADDB—Packed Add Bytes
•   PADDW—Packed Add Words
•   PADDD—Packed Add Doublewords
•   PADDQ—Packed Add Quadwords
•   PADDSB—Packed Add with Saturation Bytes
•   PADDSW—Packed Add with Saturation Words
•   PADDUSB—Packed Add Unsigned with Saturation Bytes
•   PADDUSW—Packed Add Unsigned with Saturation Words
The PADDB, PADDW, PADDD, and PADDQ instructions add each 8-bit (PADDB), 16-bit
(PADDW), 32-bit (PADDD), or 64-bit (PADDQ) integer element in the second operand to the
corresponding, same-sized integer element in the first operand. The instructions then write the integer
result of each addition to the corresponding, same-sized element of the destination. These instructions
operate on both signed and unsigned integers. However, if the result overflows, only the low-order
byte, word, doubleword, or quadword of each result is written to the destination. The PADDD
instruction can be used together with PMADDWD (page 264) to implement dot products.
The PADDSB and PADDSW instructions perform additions analogous to the PADDB and PADDW
instructions, except with saturation. For each result in the destination, if the result is larger than the

largest, or smaller than the smallest, representable 8-bit (PADDSB) or 16-bit (PADDSW) signed
integer, the result is saturated to the largest or smallest representable value, respectively.
The PADDUSB and PADDUSW instructions perform saturating additions analogous to the PADDSB
and PADDSW instructions, except on unsigned integer elements.
Subtraction
•   PSUBB—Packed Subtract Bytes
•   PSUBW—Packed Subtract Words
•   PSUBD—Packed Subtract Doublewords
•   PSUBQ—Packed Subtract Quadword
•   PSUBSB—Packed Subtract with Saturation Bytes
•   PSUBSW—Packed Subtract with Saturation Words
•   PSUBUSB—Packed Subtract Unsigned and Saturate Bytes
•   PSUBUSW—Packed Subtract Unsigned and Saturate Words
The subtraction instructions perform operations analogous to the addition instructions.
The PSUBB, PSUBW, PSUBD, and PSUBQ instructions subtract each 8-bit (PSUBB), 16-bit
(PSUBW), 32-bit (PSUBD), or 64-bit (PSUBQ) integer element in the second operand from the
corresponding, same-sized integer element in the first operand. The instructions then write the integer
result of each subtraction to the corresponding, same-sized element of the destination. These
instructions operate on both signed and unsigned integers. However, if the result underflows, only the
low-order byte, word, doubleword, or quadword of each result is written to the destination.
The PSUBSB and PSUBSW instructions perform subtractions analogous to the PSUBB and PSUBW
instructions, except with saturation. For each result in the destination, if the result is larger than the
largest, or smaller than the smallest, representable 8-bit (PSUBSB) or 16-bit (PSUBSW) signed
integer, the result is saturated to the largest or smallest representable value, respectively.
The PSUBUSB and PSUBUSW instructions perform saturating subtractions analogous to the
PSUBSB and PSUBSW instructions, except on unsigned integer elements.
Multiplication
•   PMULHW—Packed Multiply High Signed Word
•   PMULLW—Packed Multiply Low Signed Word
•   PMULHRW—Packed Multiply High Rounded Word
•   PMULHUW—Packed Multiply High Unsigned Word
•   PMULUDQ—Packed Multiply Unsigned Doubleword and Store Quadword
The PMULHW instruction multiplies each 16-bit signed integer value in first operand by the
corresponding 16-bit integer in the second operand, producing a 32-bit intermediate result. The
instruction then writes the high-order 16 bits of the 32-bit intermediate result of each multiplication to

the corresponding word of the destination. The PMULLW instruction performs the same
multiplication as PMULHW but writes the low-order 16 bits of the 32-bit intermediate result to the
corresponding word of the destination.
The PMULHRW instruction performs the same multiplication as PMULHW but with rounding. After
the multiplication, PMULHRW adds 8000h to the lower word of the doubleword result, thus rounding
the high-order word which is returned as the result.
The PMULHUW instruction performs the same multiplication as PMULHW but on unsigned
operands. The instruction is useful in 3D rasterization, which operates on unsigned pixel values.
The PMULUDQ instruction, unlike the other PMULx instructions, preserves the full precision of the
result. It multiplies 32-bit unsigned integer values in the first and second operands and writes the full
64-bit result to the destination.
See “Shift” on page 266 for shift instructions that can be used to perform multiplication and division
by powers of 2.
Multiply-Add
•   PMADDWD—Packed Multiply Words and Add Doublewords
The PMADDWD instruction multiplies each 16-bit signed value in the first operand by the
corresponding 16-bit signed value in the second operand. The instruction then adds the adjacent 32-bit
intermediate results of each multiplication, and writes the 32-bit result of each addition into the
corresponding doubleword of the destination. PMADDWD thus performs two signed (16  16  32) 
(16  16  32) multiply-adds in parallel. Figure 5-16 shows the PMADDWD operation.
The only case in which overflow can occur is when all four of the 16-bit source operands used to
produce a 32-bit multiply-add result have the value 8000h. In this case, the result returned is
8000_0000h, because the maximum negative 16-bit value of 8000h multiplied by itself equals
4000_0000h, and 4000_0000h added to 4000_0000h equals 8000_0000h. The result of multiplying
two negative numbers should be a positive number, but 8000_0000h is the maximum possible 32-bit
negative number rather than a positive number.

                                        operand 1                       operand 2
                                  63                  0            63                   0

                                             *        *            *        *

                                       127                                          0

                                                      +            +

                                                 63       result        0

Figure 5-16. PMADDWD Multiply-Add Operation

PMADDWD can be used with one source operand (for example, a coefficient) taken from memory
and the other source operand (for example, the data to be multiplied by that coefficient) taken from an
MMX register. The instruction can also be used together with the PADDD instruction (page 262) to
compute dot products, such as those required for finite impulse response (FIR) filters, one of the
commonly used DSP algorithms. Scaling can be done, before or after the multiply, using a vector-shift
instruction (page 266).
For floating-point multiplication operations, see the PFMUL instruction on page 272. For floating-
point accumulation operations, see the PFACC, PFNACC, and PFPNACC instructions on page 272.
Average
•   PAVGB—Packed Average Unsigned Bytes
•   PAVGW—Packed Average Unsigned Words
•   PAVGUSB—Packed Average Unsigned Packed Bytes
The PAVGx instructions compute the rounded average of each unsigned 8-bit (PAVGB) or 16-bit
(PAVGW) integer value in the first operand and the corresponding, same-sized unsigned integer in the
second operand. The instructions then write each average in the corresponding, same-sized element of
the destination. The rounded average is computed by adding each pair of operands, adding 1 to the
temporary sum, and then right-shifting the temporary sum by one bit.

The PAVGB instruction is useful for MPEG decoding, in which motion compensation performs many
byte-averaging operations between and within macroblocks. In addition to speeding up these
operations, PAVGB can free up registers and make it possible to unroll the averaging loops.
The PAVGUSB instruction (a 3DNow! instruction) performs a function identical to the PAVGB
instruction, described on page 265, although the two instructions have different opcodes.
Sum of Absolute Differences
•   PSADBW—Packed Sum of Absolute Differences of Bytes into a Word
The PSADBW instruction computes the absolute values of the differences of corresponding 8-bit
signed integer values in the first and second operands. The instruction then sums the differences and
writes an unsigned 16-bit integer result in the low-order word of the destination. The remaining bytes
in the destination are cleared to all 0s.
Sums of absolute differences are used to compute the L1 norm in motion-estimation algorithms for
video compression.

5.6.7 Shift
The vector-shift instructions are useful for scaling vector elements to higher or lower precision,
packing and unpacking vector elements, and multiplying and dividing vector elements by powers of 2.
Left Logical Shift
•   PSLLW—Packed Shift Left Logical Words
•   PSLLD—Packed Shift Left Logical Doublewords
•   PSLLQ—Packed Shift Left Logical Quadwords
The PSLLx instructions left-shift each of the 16-bit (PSLLW), 32-bit (PSLLD), or 64-bit (PSLLQ)
values in the first operand by the number of bits specified in the second operand. The instructions then
write each shifted value into the corresponding, same-sized element of the destination. The first and
second operands are either an MMX register and another MMX register or 64-bit memory location, or
an MMX register and an immediate-byte value. The low-order bits that are emptied by the shift
operation are cleared to 0.
In integer arithmetic, left logical shifts effectively multiply unsigned operands by positive powers of 2.
Right Logical Shift
•   PSRLW—Packed Shift Right Logical Words
•   PSRLD—Packed Shift Right Logical Doublewords
•   PSRLQ—Packed Shift Right Logical Quadwords
The PSRLx instructions right-shift each of the 16-bit (PSRLW), 32-bit (PSRLD), or 64-bit (PSRLQ)
values in the first operand by the number of bits specified in the second operand. The instructions then
write each shifted value into the corresponding, same-sized element of the destination. The first and

second operands are either an MMX register and another MMX register or 64-bit memory location, or
an MMX register and an immediate-byte value. The high-order bits that are emptied by the shift
operation are cleared to 0. In integer arithmetic, right logical shifts effectively divide unsigned
operands or positive signed operands by positive powers of 2.
PSRLQ can be used to move the high 32 bits of an MMX register to the low 32 bits of the register.
Right Arithmetic Shift
•   PSRAW—Packed Shift Right Arithmetic Words
•   PSRAD—Packed Shift Right Arithmetic Doublewords
The PSRAx instructions right-shifts each of the 16-bit (PSRAW) or 32-bit (PSRAD) values in the first
operand by the number of bits specified in the second operand. The instructions then write each shifted
value into the corresponding, same-sized element of the destination. The high-order bits that are
emptied by the shift operation are filled with the sign bit of the initial value.
In integer arithmetic, right arithmetic shifts effectively divide signed operands by positive powers of 2.

5.6.8 Compare
The integer vector-compare instructions compare two operands, and they either write a mask or they
write the maximum or minimum value.
Compare and Write Mask
•   PCMPEQB—Packed Compare Equal Bytes
•   PCMPEQW—Packed Compare Equal Words
•   PCMPEQD—Packed Compare Equal Doublewords
•   PCMPGTB—Packed Compare Greater Than Signed Bytes
•   PCMPGTW—Packed Compare Greater Than Signed Words
•   PCMPGTD—Packed Compare Greater Than Signed Doublewords
The PCMPEQx and PCMPGTx instructions compare corresponding bytes, words, or doubleword in
the first and second operands. The instructions then write a mask of all 1s or 0s for each compare into
the corresponding, same-sized element of the destination.
For the PCMPEQx instructions, if the compared values are equal, the result mask is all 1s. If the values
are not equal, the result mask is all 0s. For the PCMPGTx instructions, if the signed value in the first
operand is greater than the signed value in the second operand, the result mask is all 1s. If the value in
the first operand is less than or equal to the value in the second operand, the result mask is all 0s.
PCMPEQx can be used to set the bits in an MMX register to all 1s by specifying the same register for
both operands.
By specifying the same register for both operands, PCMPEQx can be used to set the bits in an MMX
register to all 1s.

Figure 5-5 on page 244 shows an example of a non-branching sequence that implements a two-way
multiplexer—one that is equivalent to the following sequence of ternary operators in C or C++:
r0 = a0 > b0 ? a0 : b0
r1 = a1 > b1 ? a1 : b1
r2 = a2 > b2 ? a2 : b2
r3 = a3 > b3 ? a3 : b3

Assuming mmx0 contains a, and mmx1 contains b, the above C sequence can be implemented with the
following assembler sequence:
MOVQ          mmx3, mmx0
PCMPGTW       mmx3, mmx2     ; a > b ? 0xffff : 0
PAND          mmx0, mmx3     ; a > b ? a: 0
PANDN         mmx3, mmx1     ; a > b > 0 : b
POR           mmx0, mmx3     ; r = a > b ? a: b

In the above sequence, PCMPGTW, PAND, PANDN, and POR operate, in parallel, on all four
elements of the vectors.
Compare and Write Minimum or Maximum
•   PMAXUB—Packed Maximum Unsigned Bytes
•   PMINUB—Packed Minimum Unsigned Bytes
•   PMAXSW—Packed Maximum Signed Words
•   PMINSW—Packed Minimum Signed Words
The PMAXUB and PMINUB instructions compare each of the 8-bit unsigned integer values in the
first operand with the corresponding 8-bit unsigned integer values in the second operand. The
instructions then write the maximum (PMAXUB) or minimum (PMINUB) of the two values for each
comparison into the corresponding byte of the destination.
The PMAXSW and PMINSW instructions perform operations analogous to the PMAXUB and
PMINUB instructions, except on 16-bit signed integer values.

5.6.9 Logical
The vector-logic instructions perform Boolean logic operations, including AND, OR, and exclusive
OR.
And
•   PAND—Packed Logical Bitwise AND
•   PANDN—Packed Logical Bitwise AND NOT
The PAND instruction performs a bitwise logical AND of the values in the first and second operands
and writes the result to the destination.

The PANDN instruction inverts the first operand (creating a one’s complement of the operand), ANDs
it with the second operand, and writes the result to the destination, and writes the result to the
destination. Table 5-5 shows an example.

Table 5-5. Example PANDN Bit Values
                                   Operand1 Bit                              PANDN
                Operand1 Bit                           Operand2 Bit
                                    (Inverted)                              Result Bit
                      1                   0                  1                  0
                      1                   0                  0                  0
                      0                   1                  1                  1
                      0                   1                  0                  0

PAND can be used with the value 7FFFFFFF7FFFFFFFh to compute the absolute value of the
elements of a 64-bit media floating-point vector operand. This method is equivalent to the x87 FABS
(floating-point absolute value) instruction.
Or
•    POR—Packed Logical Bitwise OR
The POR instruction performs a bitwise logical OR of the values in the first and second operands and
writes the result to the destination.
Exclusive Or
•    PXOR—Packed Logical Bitwise Exclusive OR
The PXOR instruction performs a bitwise logical exclusive OR of the values in the first and second
operands and writes the result to the destination. PXOR can be used to clear all bits in an MMX
register by specifying the same register for both operands. PXOR can also used with the value
8000000080000000h to change the sign bits of the elements of a 64-bit media floating-point vector
operand. This method is equivalent to the x87 floating-point change sign (FCHS) instruction.

5.6.10 Save and Restore State
These instructions save and restore the processor state for 64-bit media instructions.
Save and Restore 64-Bit Media and x87 State
•    FSAVE—Save x87 and MMX State
•    FNSAVE—Save No-Wait x87 and MMX State
•    FRSTOR—Restore x87 and MMX State
These instructions save and restore the entire processor state for x87 floating-point instructions and
64-bit media instructions. The instructions save and restore either 94 or 108 bytes of data, depending
on the effective operand size.

Assemblers issue FSAVE as an FWAIT instruction followed by an FNSAVE instruction. Thus, FSAVE
(but not FNSAVE) reports pending unmasked x87 floating-point exceptions before saving the state.
After saving the state, the processor initializes the x87 state by performing the equivalent of an FINIT
instruction.
Save and Restore 128-Bit, 64-Bit, and x87 State
•   FXSAVE—Save XMM, MMX, and x87 State
•   FXRSTOR—Restore XMM, MMX, and x87 State
The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions save and restore the entire 512-byte processor state for 128-
bit media instructions, 64-bit media instructions, and x87 floating-point instructions. The architecture
supports two memory formats for FXSAVE and FXRSTOR, a 512-byte 32-bit legacy format and a
512-byte 64-bit format. Selection of the 32-bit or 64-bit format is determined by the effective operand
size for the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions. For details on the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR
Instructions, see the “64-bit Media Instruction Reference” in Volume 5.
FXSAVE and FXRSTOR execute faster than FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR. However, unlike
FSAVE and FNSAVE, FXSAVE does not initialize the x87 state, and like FNSAVE it does not report
pending unmasked x87 floating-point exceptions. For details, see “Saving and Restoring State” on
page 280.

5.7          Instruction Summary—Floating-Point Instructions
This section summarizes the functions of the floating-point (3DNow! and a few SSE and SSE2)
instructions in the 64-bit media instruction subset. These include floating-point instructions that use an
MMX register for source or destination and data-conversion instructions that convert from floating-
point to integers formats. For a summary of the integer instructions in the 64-bit media instruction
subset, including data-conversion instructions that convert from integer to floating-point formats, see
“Instruction Summary—Integer Instructions” on page 253.
For a summary of the 128-bit media floating-point instructions, see “Instruction Summary—Floating-
Point Instructions” on page 183. For a summary of the x87 floating-point instructions, see Section 6.4.
“Instruction Summary” on page 310.
The instructions are organized here by functional group—such as data-transfer, vector arithmetic, and
so on. Software running at any privilege level can use any of these instructions, if the CPUID
instruction reports support for the instructions (see “Feature Detection” on page 276). More detail on
individual instructions is given in the alphabetically organized “64-Bit Media Instruction Reference”
in Volume 5.

5.7.1 Syntax
The 64-bit media floating-point instructions have the same syntax rules as those for the 64-bit media
integer instructions, described in “Syntax” on page 254, except that the mnemonics of most floating-
point instructions begin with the following prefix:

•   PF—Packed floating-point

5.7.2 Data Conversion
These data-conversion instructions convert operands from floating-point to integer formats. The
instructions take 32-bit or 64-bit floating-point source operands. For data-conversion instructions that
take 64-bit integer source operands, see “Data Conversion” on page 257. For data-conversion
instructions that take 128-bit source operands, see “Data Conversion” on page 154 and “Data
Conversion” on page 189.
Convert Floating-Point to Integer
•   CVTPS2PI—Convert Packed Single-Precision Floating-Point to Packed Doubleword Integers
•   CVTTPS2PI—Convert Packed Single-Precision Floating-Point to Packed Doubleword Integers,
    Truncated
•   CVTPD2PI—Convert Packed Double-Precision Floating-Point to Packed Doubleword Integers
•   CVTTPD2PI—Convert Packed Double-Precision Floating-Point to Packed Doubleword Integers,
    Truncated
•   PF2IW—Packed Floating-Point to Integer Word Conversion
•   PF2ID—Packed Floating-Point to Integer Doubleword Conversion
The CVTPS2PI and CVTTPS2PI instructions convert two single-precision (32-bit) floating-point
values in the second operand (the low-order 64 bits of an XMM register or a 64-bit memory location)
to two 32-bit signed integers, and write the converted values into the first operand (an MMX register).
For the CVTPS2PI instruction, if the conversion result is an inexact value, the value is rounded as
specified in the rounding control (RC) field of the MXCSR register (“MXCSR Register” on page 115),
but for the CVTTPS2PI instruction such a result is truncated (rounded toward zero).
The CVTPD2PI and CVTTPD2PI instructions perform conversions analogous to CVTPS2PI and
CVTTPS2PI but for two double-precision (64-bit) floating-point values.
The 3DNow! PF2IW instruction converts two single-precision floating-point values in the second
operand (an MMX register or a 64-bit memory location) to two 16-bit signed integer values, sign-
extended to 32-bits, and writes the converted values into the first operand (an MMX register). The
3DNow! PF2ID instruction converts two single-precision floating-point values in the second operand
to two 32-bit signed integer values, and writes the converted values into the first operand. If the result
of either conversion is an inexact value, the value is truncated (rounded toward zero).
As described in “Floating-Point Data Types” on page 251, PF2IW and PF2ID do not fully comply with
the IEEE-754 standard. Conversion of some source operands of the C type float (IEEE-754 single-
precision)—specifically NaNs, infinities, and denormals—are not supported. Attempts to convert such
source operands produce undefined results, and no exceptions are generated.

5.7.3 Arithmetic
The floating-point vector-arithmetic instructions perform an arithmetic operation on two floating-
point operands. For a description of 3DNow! instruction saturation on overflow and underflow
conditions, see “Floating-Point Data Types” on page 251.
Addition
•   PFADD—Packed Floating-Point Add
The PFADD instruction adds each single-precision floating-point value in the first operand (an MMX
register) to the corresponding single-precision floating-point value in the second operand (an MMX
register or 64-bit memory location). The instruction then writes the result of each addition into the
corresponding doubleword of the destination.
Subtraction
•   PFSUB—Packed Floating-Point Subtract
•   PFSUBR—Packed Floating-Point Subtract Reverse
The PFSUB instruction subtracts each single-precision floating-point value in the second operand
from the corresponding single-precision floating-point value in the first operand. The instruction then
writes the result of each subtraction into the corresponding quadword of the destination.
The PFSUBR instruction performs a subtraction that is the reverse of the PFSUB instruction. It
subtracts each value in the first operand from the corresponding value in the second operand. The
provision of both the PFSUB and PFSUBR instructions allows software to choose which source
operand to overwrite during a subtraction.
Multiplication
•   PFMUL—Packed Floating-Point Multiply
The PFMUL instruction multiplies each of the two single-precision floating-point values in the first
operand by the corresponding single-precision floating-point value in the second operand and writes
the result of each multiplication into the corresponding doubleword of the destination.
Division
For a description of floating-point division techniques, see “Reciprocal Estimation” on page 273.
Division is equivalent to multiplication of the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.
Accumulation
•   PFACC—Packed Floating-Point Accumulate
•   PFNACC—Packed Floating-Point Negative Accumulate
•   PFPNACC—Packed Floating-Point Positive-Negative Accumulate
The PFACC instruction adds the two single-precision floating-point values in the first operand and
writes the result into the low-order word of the destination, and it adds the two single-precision values

in the second operand and writes the result into the high-order word of the destination. Figure 5-17
illustrates the operation.

                                       operand 1                     operand 2
                                  63               0            63               0

                                               +                     +

                                              63       result        0

Figure 5-17. PFACC Accumulate Operation

The PFNACC instruction subtracts the first operand’s high-order single-precision floating-point value
from its low-order single-precision floating-point value and writes the result into the low-order
doubleword of the destination, and it subtracts the second operand’s high-order single-precision
floating-point value from its low-order single-precision floating-point value and writes the result into
the high-order doubleword of the destination.
The PFPNACC instruction subtracts the first operand’s high-order single-precision floating-point
value from its low-order single-precision floating-point value and writes the result into the low-order
doubleword of the destination, and it adds the two single-precision values in the second operand and
writes the result into the high-order doubleword of the destination.
PFPNACC is useful in complex-number multiplication, in which mixed positive-negative
accumulation must be performed. Assuming that complex numbers are represented as two-element
vectors (one element is the real part, the other element is the imaginary part), there is a need to swap
the elements of one source operand to perform the multiplication, and there is a need for mixed
positive-negative accumulation to complete the parallel computation of real and imaginary results.
The PSWAPD instruction can swap elements of one source operand and the PFPNACC instruction can
perform the mixed positive-negative accumulation to complete the computation.
Reciprocal Estimation
•   PFRCP—Packed Floating-Point Reciprocal Approximation
•   PFRCPIT1—Packed Floating-Point Reciprocal, Iteration 1
•   PFRCPIT2—Packed Floating-Point Reciprocal or Reciprocal Square Root, Iteration 2

The PFRCP instruction computes the approximate reciprocal of the single-precision floating-point
value in the low-order 32 bits of the second operand and writes the result into both doublewords of the
first operand.
The PFRCPIT1 instruction performs the first intermediate step in the Newton-Raphson iteration to
refine the reciprocal approximation produced by the PFRCP instruction. The first operand contains the
input to a previous PFRCP instruction, and the second operand contains the result of the same PFRCP
instruction.
The PFRCPIT2 instruction performs the second and final step in the Newton-Raphson iteration to
refine the reciprocal approximation produced by the PFRCP instruction or the reciprocal square-root
approximation produced by the PFSQRT instructions. The first operand contains the result of a
previous PFRCPIT1 or PFRSQIT1 instruction, and the second operand contains the result of a PFRCP
or PFRSQRT instruction.
The PFRCP instruction can be used together with the PFRCPIT1 and PFRCPIT2 instructions to
increase the accuracy of a single-precision significand.
Reciprocal Square Root
•   PFRSQRT—Packed Floating-Point Reciprocal Square Root Approximation
•   PFRSQIT1—Packed Floating-Point Reciprocal Square Root, Iteration 1
The PFRSQRT instruction computes the approximate reciprocal square root of the single-precision
floating-point value in the low-order 32 bits of the second operand and writes the result into each
doubleword of the first operand. The second operand is a single-precision floating-point value with a
24-bit significand. The result written to the first operand is accurate to 15 bits. Negative operands are
treated as positive operands for purposes of reciprocal square-root computation, with the sign of the
result the same as the sign of the source operand.
The PFRSQIT1 instruction performs the first step in the Newton-Raphson iteration to refine the
reciprocal square-root approximation produced by the PFSQRT instruction. The first operand contains
the input to a previous PFRSQRT instruction, and the second operand contains the square of the result
of the same PFRSQRT instruction.
The PFRSQRT instruction can be used together with the PFRSQIT1 instruction and the PFRCPIT2
instruction (described in “Reciprocal Estimation” on page 273) to increase the accuracy of a single-
precision significand.

5.7.4 Compare
The floating-point vector-compare instructions compare two operands, and they either write a mask or
they write the maximum or minimum value.
Compare and Write Mask
•   PFCMPEQ—Packed Floating-Point Compare Equal
•   PFCMPGT—Packed Floating-Point Compare Greater Than

•   PFCMPGE—Packed Floating-Point Compare Greater or Equal
The PFCMPx instructions compare each of the two single-precision floating-point values in the first
operand with the corresponding single-precision floating-point value in the second operand. The
instructions then write the result of each comparison into the corresponding doubleword of the
destination. If the comparison test (equal, greater than, greater or equal) is true, the result is a mask of
all 1s. If the comparison test is false, the result is a mask of all 0s.
Compare and Write Minimum or Maximum
•   PFMAX—Packed Floating-Point Maximum
•   PFMIN—Packed Floating-Point Minimum
The PFMAX and PFMIN instructions compare each of the two single-precision floating-point values
in the first operand with the corresponding single-precision floating-point value in the second operand.
The instructions then write the maximum (PFMAX) or minimum (PFMIN) of the two values for each
comparison into the corresponding doubleword of the destination.
The PFMIN and PFMAX instructions are useful for clamping, such as color clamping in 3D geometry
and rasterization. They can also be used to avoid branching.

5.8           Instruction Effects on Flags
The 64-bit media instructions do not read or write any flags in the rFLAGS register, nor do they write
any exception-status flags in the x87 status-word register, nor is their execution dependent on any
mask bits in the x87 control-word register. The only x87 state affected by the 64-bit media instructions
is described in “Actions Taken on Executing 64-Bit Media Instructions” on page 278.

5.9           Instruction Prefixes
Instruction prefixes, in general, are described in “Instruction Prefixes” on page 76. The following
restrictions apply to the use of instruction prefixes with 64-bit media instructions.

5.9.1 Supported Prefixes
The following prefixes can be used with 64-bit media instructions:
•   Address-Size Override—The 67h prefix affects only operands in memory. The prefix is ignored by
    all other 64-bit media instructions.
•   Operand-Size Override—The 66h prefix is used to form the opcodes of certain 64-bit media
    instructions. The prefix is ignored by all other 64-bit media instructions.
•   Segment Overrides—The 2Eh (CS), 36h (SS), 3Eh (DS), 26h (ES), 64h (FS), and 65h (GS)
    prefixes affect only operands in memory. In 64-bit mode, the contents of the CS, DS, ES, SS
    segment registers are ignored.

•   REP—The F2 and F3h prefixes do not function as repeat prefixes for 64-bit media instructions.
    Instead, they are used to form the opcodes of certain 64-bit media instructions. The prefixes are
    ignored by all other 64-bit media instructions.
•   REX—The REX prefixes affect operands that reference a GPR or XMM register when running in
    64-bit mode. It allows access to the full 64-bit width of any of the 16 extended GPRs and to any of
    the 16 extended XMM registers. The REX prefix also affects the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR
    instructions, in which it selects between two types of 512-byte memory-image format, as described
    in “Media and x87 Processor State” in Volume 2. The prefix is ignored by all other 64-bit media
    instructions.

5.9.2 Special-Use and Reserved Prefixes
The following prefixes are used as opcode bytes in some 64-bit media instructions and are reserved in
all other 64-bit media instructions:
•   Operand-Size Override—The 66h prefix.
•   REP—The F2 and F3h prefixes.

5.9.3 Prefixes That Cause Exceptions
The following prefixes cause an exception:
•   LOCK—The F0h prefix causes an invalid-opcode exception when used with 64-bit media
    instructions.

5.10         Feature Detection
Before executing 64-bit media instructions, software should determine whether the processor supports
the technology by executing the CPUID instruction. “Feature Detection” on page 80 describes how
software uses the CPUID instruction to detect feature support. For full support of the 64-bit media
instructions documented here, the following features require detection:
•   MMX instructions, indicated by bit 23 of CPUID function 1 and function 8000_0001h.
•   3DNow! instructions, indicated by bit 31 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
•   MMX extensions, indicated by bit 22 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
•   3DNow! extensions, indicated by bit 30 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
•   SSE instructions, indicated by bit 25 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
•   SSE2 instruction extensions, indicated by bit 26 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
•   SSE3 instruction extensions, indicated by bit 0 of CPUID function 0000_0001h.
•   SSE4A instruction extensions, indicated by bit 6 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
Software may also wish to check for the following support, because the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR
instructions execute faster than FSAVE and FRSTOR:
•   FXSAVE and FXRSTOR, indicated by bit 24 of CPUID function 1 and function 8000_0001h.

Software that runs in long mode should also check for the following support:
•   Long Mode, indicated by bit 29 of CPUID function 8000_0001h.
See “CPUID” in Volume 3 for details on the CPUID instruction and Appendix D of that volume for
information on detemining support for specific instruction subsets.
If the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions are to be used, the operating system must support these
instructions by having set CR4.OSFXSR = 1. If the MMX floating-point-to-integer data-conversion
instructions (CVTPS2PI, CVTTPS2PI, CVTPD2PI, or CVTTPD2PI) are used, the operating system
must support the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions and SIMD floating-point exceptions (by
having set CR4.OSXMMEXCPT = 1). For details, see “System-Control Registers” in Volume 2.

5.11         Exceptions
64-bit media instructions can generate two types of exceptions:
•   General-Purpose Exceptions, described below in “General-Purpose Exceptions”
•   x87 Floating-Point Exceptions (#MF), described in “x87 Floating-Point Exceptions (#MF)” on
    page 278
All exceptions that occur while executing 64-bit media instructions can be handled by legacy
exception handlers used for general-purpose instructions and x87 floating-point instructions.

5.11.1 General-Purpose Exceptions
The sections below list exceptions generated and not generated by general-purpose instructions. For a
summary of the general-purpose exception mechanism, see “Interrupts and Exceptions” on page 91.
For details about each exception and its potential causes, see “Exceptions and Interrupts” in Volume 2.

5.11.1.1 Exceptions Generated
The 64-bit media instructions can generate the following general-purpose exceptions:
•   #DB—Debug Exception (Vector 1)
•   #UD—Invalid-Opcode Exception (Vector 6)
•   #DF—Double-Fault Exception (Vector 8)
•   #SS—Stack Exception (Vector 12)
•   #GP—General-Protection Exception (Vector 13)
•   #PF—Page-Fault Exception (Vector 14)
•   #MF—x87 Floating-Point Exception-Pending (Vector 16)
•   #AC—Alignment-Check Exception (Vector 17)
•   #MC—Machine-Check Exception (Vector 18)
•   #XF—SIMD Floating-Point Exception (Vector 19)—Only by the CVTPS2PI, CVTTPS2PI,
    CVTPD2PI, and CVTTPD2PI instructions.

An invalid-opcode exception (#UD) can occur if a required CPUID feature flag is not set (see “Feature
Detection” on page 276), or if an attempt is made to execute a 64-bit media instruction and the
operating system has set the floating-point software-emulation (EM) bit in control register 0 to 1
(CR0.EM = 1).
For details on the system control-register bits, see “System-Control Registers” in Volume 2. For
details on the machine-check mechanism, see “Machine Check Mechanism” in Volume 2.
For details on #MF exceptions, see “x87 Floating-Point Exceptions (#MF)” on page 278.

5.11.1.2 Exceptions Not Generated
The 64-bit media instructions do not generate the following general-purpose exceptions:
•   #DE—Divide-By-Zero-Error Exception (Vector 0)
•   Non-Maskable-Interrupt Exception (Vector 2)
•   #BP—Breakpoint Exception (Vector 3)
•   #OF—Overflow Exception (Vector 4)
•   #BR—Bound-Range Exception (Vector 5)
•   #NM—Device-Not-Available Exception (Vector 7)
•   Coprocessor-Segment-Overrun Exception (Vector 9)
•   #TS—Invalid-TSS Exception (Vector 10)
•   #NP—Segment-Not-Present Exception (Vector 11)
For details on all general-purpose exceptions, see “Exceptions and Interrupts” in Volume 2.

5.11.2 x87 Floating-Point Exceptions (#MF)
The 64-bit media instructions do not generate x87 floating-point (#MF) exceptions as a consequence
of their own computations. However, an #MF exception can occur during the execution of a 64-bit
media instruction, due to a prior x87 floating-point instruction. Specifically, if an unmasked x87
floating-point exception is pending at the instruction boundary of the next 64-bit media instruction, the
processor asserts the FERR# output signal. For details about the x87 floating-point exceptions and the
FERR# output signal, see Section 6.8.4. “x87 Floating-Point Exception Causes” on page 329.

5.12         Actions Taken on Executing 64-Bit Media Instructions
The MMX registers are mapped onto the low 64 bits of the 80-bit x87 floating-point physical registers,
FPR0–FPR7, described in Section 6.2. “Registers” on page 286. The MMX instructions do not use the
x87 stack-addressing mechanism. However, 64-bit media instructions write certain values in the x87
top-of-stack pointer, tag bits, and high bits of the FPR0–FPR7 data registers.
Specifically, the processor performs the following x87-related actions atomically with the execution of
64-bit media instructions:

•   Top-Of-Stack Pointer (TOP)—The processor clears the x87 top-of-stack pointer (bits 13–11 in the
    x87 status word register) to all 0s during the execution of every 64-bit media instruction, causing it
    to point to the mmx0 register.
•   Tag Bits—During the execution of every 64-bit media instruction, except the EMMS and FEMMS
    instructions, the processor changes the tag state for all eight MMX registers to full, as described
    below. In the case of EMMS and FEMMS, the processor changes the tag state for all eight MMX
    registers to empty, thus initializing the stack for an x87 floating-point procedure.
•   Bits 79:64—During the execution of every 64-bit media instruction that writes a result to an MMX
    register, the processor writes the result data to a 64-bit MMX register (the low 64 bits of the
    associated 80-bit x87 floating-point physical register) and sets the exponent and sign bits (the high
    16 bits of the associated 80-bit x87 floating-point physical register) to all 1s. In the x87
    environment, the effect of setting the high 16 bits to all 1s indicates that the contents of the low 64
    bits are not finite numbers. Such a designation prevents an x87 floating-point instruction from
    interpreting the data as a finite x87 floating-point number.
The rest of the x87 floating-point processor state—the entire x87 control-word register, the remaining
fields of the status-word register, and the error pointers (instruction pointer, data pointer, and last
opcode register)—is not affected by the execution of 64-bit media instructions.
The 2-bit tag fields defined by the x87 architecture for each x87 data register, and stored in the x87 tag-
word register (also called the floating-point tag word, or FTW), characterize the contents of the MMX
registers. The tag bits are visible to software only after an FSAVE or FNSAVE (but not FXSAVE)
instruction, as described in “Media and x87 Processor State” in Volume 2. Internally, however, the
processor maintains only a one-bit representation of each 2-bit tag field. This single bit indicates
whether the associated register is empty or full. Table 5-6 on page 279 shows the mapping between the
1-bit internal tag—which is referred to in this chapter by its empty or full state—and the 2-bit
architectural tag.

Table 5-6. Mapping Between Internal and Software-Visible Tag Bits
                                  Architectural State
                                                                                  Internal State1
                             State                       Binary Value
               Valid                                           00
               Zero                                            01
                                                                                      Full (0)
               Special
                                                               10
               (NaN, infinity, denormal)2
               Empty                                           11                    Empty (1)
               Note:
                  1. For a more detailed description of this mapping, see “Deriving FSAVE Tag Field
                     from FXSAVE Tag Field” in Volume 2.
                  2. The 64-bit media floating point (3DNow!™) instructions do not support NaNs, infin-
                     ities, and denormals.

When the processor executes an FSAVE or FNSAVE (but not FXSAVE) instruction, it changes the
internal 1-bit tag state to its 2-bit architectural tag by reading the data in all 80 bits of the physical data

registers and using the mapping in Table 5-6. For example, if the value in the high 16 bits of the 80-bit
physical register indicate a NaN, the two tag bits for that register are changed to a binary value of 10
before the x87 status word is written to memory.
The tag bits have no effect on the execution of 64-bit media instructions or their interpretation of the
contents of the MMX registers. However, the converse is not true: execution of 64-bit media
instructions that write to an MMX register alter the tag bits and thus may affect execution of
subsequent x87 floating-point instructions.
For a more detailed description of the mapping shown in Table 5-6, see “Deriving FSAVE Tag Field
from FXSAVE Tag Field” in Volume 2 and its accompanying text.

5.13         Mixing Media Code with x87 Code
5.13.1 Mixing Code
Software may freely mix 64-bit media instructions (integer or floating-point) with 128-bit media
instructions (integer or floating-point) and general-purpose instructions in a single procedure.
However, before transitioning from a 64-bit media procedure—or a 128-bit media procedure that
accesses an MMX™ register—to an x87 procedure, or to software that may eventually branch to an
x87 procedure, software should clear the MMX state, as described immediately below.

5.13.2 Clearing MMX™ State
Software should separate 64-bit media procedures, 128-bit media procedures, or dynamic link libraries
(DLLs) that access MMX registers from x87 floating-point procedures or DLLs by clearing the MMX
state with the EMMS or FEMMS instruction before leaving a 64-bit media procedure, as described in
“Exit Media State” on page 255.
The 64-bit media instructions and x87 floating-point instructions interpret the contents of their aliased
MMX and x87 registers differently. Because of this, software should not exchange register data
between 64-bit media and x87 floating-point procedures, or use conditional branches at the end of
loops that might jump to code of the other type. Software must not rely on the contents of the aliased
MMX and x87 registers across such code-type transitions. If a transition to an x87 procedure occurs
from a 64-bit media procedure that does not clear the MMX state, the x87 stack may overflow.

5.14         State-Saving
5.14.1 Saving and Restoring State
In general, system software should save and restore MMX™ and x87 state between task switches or
other interventions in the execution of 64-bit media procedures. Virtually all modern operating
systems running on x86 processors implement preemptive multitasking that handle saving and
restoring of state across task switches, independent of hardware task-switch support.

No changes are needed to the x87 register-saving performed by 32-bit operating systems, exception
handlers, or device drivers. The same support provided in a 32-bit operating system’s device-not-
available (#NM) exception handler by any of the x87-register save/restore instructions described
below also supports saving and restoring the MMX registers.
However, application procedures are also free to save and restore MMX and x87 state at any time they
deem useful.

5.14.2 State-Saving Instructions
Software running at any privilege level may save and restore 64-bit media and x87 state by executing
the FSAVE, FNSAVE, or FXSAVE instruction. Alternatively, software may use move instructions for
saving only the contents of the MMX registers, rather than the complete 64-bit media and x87 state.
For example, when saving MMX register values, use eight MOVQ instructions.

5.14.2.1 FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR Instructions
The FSAVE, FNSAVE, and FRSTOR instructions are described in “Save and Restore 64-Bit Media
and x87 State” on page 269. After saving state with FSAVE or FNSAVE, the tag bits for all MMX and
x87 registers are changed to empty and thus available for a new procedure. Thus, FSAVE and
FNSAVE also perform the state-clearing function of EMMS or FEMMS.

5.14.2.2 FXSAVE and FXRSTOR Instructions
The FSAVE, FNSAVE, and FRSTOR instructions are described in “Save and Restore 128-Bit, 64-Bit,
and x87 State” on page 270. The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions execute faster than
FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR because they do not save and restore the x87 error pointers (described
in Section 6.2.5. “Pointers and Opcode State” on page 295) except in the relatively rare cases in which
the exception-summary (ES) bit in the x87 status word (register image for FXSAVE, memory image
for FXRSTOR) is set to 1, indicating that an unmasked x87 exception has occurred.
Unlike FSAVE and FNSAVE, however, FXSAVE does not alter the tag bits (thus, it does not perform
the state-clearing function of EMMS or FEMMS). The state of the saved MMX and x87 registers is
retained, thus indicating that the registers may still be valid (or whatever other value the tag bits
indicated prior to the save). To invalidate the contents of the MMX and x87 registers after FXSAVE,
software must explicitly execute an FINIT instruction. Also, FXSAVE (like FNSAVE) and FXRSTOR
do not check for pending unmasked x87 floating-point exceptions. An FWAIT instruction can be used
for this purpose.
For details about the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR memory formats, see “Media and x87 Processor State”
in Volume 2.

5.15         Performance Considerations
In addition to typical code optimization techniques, such as those affecting loops and the inlining of
function calls, the following considerations may help improve the performance of application
programs written with 64-bit media instructions.
These are implementation-independent performance considerations. Other considerations depend on
the hardware implementation. For information about such implementation-dependent considerations
and for more information about application performance in general, see the data sheets and the
software-optimization guides relating to particular hardware implementations.

5.15.1 Use Small Operand Sizes
The performance advantages available with 64-bit media operations is to some extent a function of the
data sizes operated upon. The smaller the data size, the more data elements that can be packed into
single 64-bit vectors. The parallelism of computation increases as the number of elements per vector
increases.

5.15.2 Reorganize Data for Parallel Operations
Much of the performance benefit from the 64-bit media instructions comes from the parallelism
inherent in vector operations. It can be advantageous to reorganize data before performing arithmetic
operations so that its layout after reorganization maximizes the parallelism of the arithmetic
operations.
The speed of memory access is particularly important for certain types of computation, such as
graphics rendering, that depend on the regularity and locality of data-memory accesses. For example,
in matrix operations, performance is high when operating on the rows of the matrix, because row bytes
are contiguous in memory, but lower when operating on the columns of the matrix, because column
bytes are not contiguous in memory and accessing them can result in cache misses. To improve
performance for operations on such columns, the matrix should first be transposed. Such
transpositions can, for example, be done using a sequence of unpacking or shuffle instructions.

5.15.3 Remove Branches
Branch can be replaced with 64-bit media instructions that simulate predicated execution or
conditional moves, as described in “Branch Removal” on page 244. Where possible, break long
dependency chains into several shorter dependency chains which can be executed in parallel. This is
especially important for floating-point instructions because of their longer latencies.

5.15.4 Align Data
Data alignment is particularly important for performance when data written by one instruction is read
by a subsequent instruction soon after the write, or when accessing streaming (non-temporal) data—
data that will not be reused and therefore should not be cached. These cases may occur frequently in
64-bit media procedures.

Accesses to data stored at unaligned locations may benefit from on-the-fly software alignment or from
repetition of data at different alignment boundaries, as required by different loops that process the data.

5.15.5 Organize Data for Cacheability
Pack small data structures into cache-line-size blocks. Organize frequently accessed constants and
coefficients into cache-line-size blocks and prefetch them. Procedures that access data arranged in
memory-bus-sized blocks, or memory-burst-sized blocks, can make optimum use of the available
memory bandwidth.
For data that will be used only once in a procedure, consider using non-cacheable memory. Accesses to
such memory are not burdened by the overhead of cache protocols.

5.15.6 Prefetch Data
Media applications typically operate on large data sets. Because of this, they make intensive use of the
memory bus. Memory latency can be substantially reduced—especially for data that will be used only
once—by prefetching such data into various levels of the cache hierarchy. Software can use the
PREFETCHx instructions very effectively in such cases, as described in “Cache and Memory
Management” on page 71.
Some of the best places to use prefetch instructions are inside loops that process large amounts of data.
If the loop goes through less than one cache line of data per iteration, partially unroll the loop to obtain
multiple iterations of the loop within a cache line. Try to use virtually all of the prefetched data. This
usually requires unit-stride memory accesses—those in which all accesses are to contiguous memory
locations.

5.15.7 Retain Intermediate Results in MMX™ Registers
Keep intermediate results in the MMX registers as much as possible, especially if the intermediate
results are used shortly after they have been produced. Avoid spilling intermediate results to memory
and reusing them shortly thereafter.

