Foreword

I started my professional career in 1982, working in a microprocessor software department,
and focused for years on the 8051 as this microcontroller architecture wasdduring the
1990sdthe engine for all types of embedded applications. Over decades, I was part of a
booming embedded industry that created a wide spectrum of processor architectures. During
this time, the microcontroller market became extremely fragmented with numerous silicon
vendors and technologies. Some years ago, every embedded application was created from
scratch with no software reuse and ground-up training for engineers to cope with the project
challenges.
But over the years, microcontroller systems became increasingly complex and demanded even
higher performance to fulfil the wishes for more features and convenient operations. Often
these systems are also price sensitive and therefore increasingly microcontroller systems are
designed as single-chip designs based on high performance 32-bit processors, which are
dominant today. Meanwhile, cost pressure and challenging software development require
standardization, while, at the same time, a diverse I/O connectivity requires a range of devices.
To solve these challenges, the embedded industry has established the ARMÒ CortexÒ-M
processor series as the de-facto standard microcontroller architecture. These processors are
licensed to more than 200 companies that produce devices ranging from standard
microcontrollers to domain-specific sensors to complete radio communication systems for
the Internet of Things.
To support a wide range of applications ARM launched multiple processors that implement
the Cortex-M architecture. At the low-end of the spectrum, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0+
is available for applications that were previously dominated by 8-bit microcontrollers. It is
no surprise that these processors are today widely used for low-cost devices.
With the availability of even more capable microcontrollers, software development for these
devices has become increasingly complex. Use of real-time operating systems is rapidly
becoming an industry best practice and the use of prebuilt middleware as well as software
reuse is gaining importance for productive software engineering. Combining software
building blocks often poses a problem for developers, but industry standards are a great way

Foreword

to reduce system development costs and speed up time-to-market. And the Cortex-M
processor architecture along with the CMSIS software programming standard is the basis
for this hardware and software standardization.
Joseph’s book, The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors,
gives you the foundation for designing and creating applications for all devices that are
based on ARM Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0+ processors. I recommend this reading for
practical every embedded engineer as it gives you in-depth ground-up knowledge for your
day-to-day work.
                                                                           Reinhard Keil
                                                             Director of MCU Tools, ARM

