                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 1

Introduction
1.1 Welcome to the World of Embedded Processors
1.1.1 Where Are the Processors Used?

If you are new to microcontrollers or ARMÒ processors, first I would like to give you a
very warm welcome.
Processors are used in majority of electronic products. For example, your mobile phones,
televisions, washing machines, cars, bank card (smartcards), and even simple devices like
the remote control for your radio can have processors inside. In most cases, these
processors are placed inside in chips called microcontrollers. In modern microcontrollers,
the chip also contains the essential elements like memory systems and interface hardware
(often called peripherals). There are many different types of microcontrollers; they can be
available with different processors, memory sizes, and peripherals inside, and can be
available in different packages (Figure 1.1).
Large numbers of microcontrollers are designed for general purpose, which means they
can be used in wide range of applications. Sometimes processors are used in chips that are

                                          NXP LPC1114
                                                                                  Freescale Kine?s KL03
                                          (Cortex-M0)
                                                                                      (Cortex-M0+)

                                             NXP LPC1343
                                             (Cortex-M3)

                                                    Figure 1.1
                        Microcontrollers are available in wide range of physical packages.
The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00001-1
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

designed for specialized purposes and for particular products, and they are often referred
as Application-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs).
There are also chips designed to perform particular functions, but are offered for wide
range of products. In such case, these chips are called Application Specific Standard
Products (ASSPs).
In some chip product designs, the chip could be referred to as System-on-a-Chip (SoC).
The term SoC is somewhat vague and can ranged from very complex application
processor designs for mobile computing (e.g., A smart phone’s application processor chip
can contain a number of processors), to very low-power designs like smart sensors.
In most of these products, processors are used because the ability to control the system
using software to enable powerful features to be created. In some cases some of these
chips can contain multiple processors.
The ARM CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ (pronounced as Cortex-M0 “plus”) processors
are used in microcontrollers, ASICs and ASSPs, SoC, etc. In some cases, these
processors might also be used in subsystems as part of complex SoC devices. In the rest
of this book, we will be focusing on the microcontroller products. But the overall
programming knowledge and software development techniques are similar for all these
devices.

1.1.2 Processor, CPU, Core, Microprocessor, and All These Names

If you have been studying computer science or computer engineering in the 1980s, you
possibly recall that processors are often referred as Central Processing Units (CPUs).
Typically the term CPU is referred to the main processor chip used in a computer, and
usually in form of a physical chip product, which requires external memory chips. The
term CPU is still used frequently today, but the word “Central” might no longer be
relevant to a number of systems because many systems contain multiple processors. As a
result, we normally just refer the processing unit as a “processor.”
Some of the terminologies that are commonly used:
•   Processor core/CPU coredtypically refer to the processor inside a microcontroller
    product or chip product, excluding the memory system, peripherals, and other system
    support components (e.g., power management, clock generation circuits). In some
    articles the word “core” might also refer to the part inside a processor that handles the
    software execution, excluding the interrupt controller and debug support hardware.
•   Microprocessorda chip device containing processor(s), which is designed primarily to
    handle computational tasks, and can also handle control tasks. The system designers
    typically need to add memory and potentially additional peripheral hardwares to build a

    complete system with microprocessors. The terms “Microprocessor” and “CPU” can be
    interchangeable in some contexts (if referring to a chip device).
•   Microcontrollerda chip device containing processor(s), which is designed to handle
    control and computational tasks. This chip typically contains a memory system (e.g.,
    flash memory for program ROM and Static Random Access Memory (SRAM), and a
    number of peripherals).

1.1.3 Programming on Embedded Systems

For those of you who have been doing programming on a Personal Computer (PC), or
programming for Apps (Applications for mobile platforms), you may find that
programming on microcontroller devices is very different from what you have learnt
before. Typically, we called these systems built on microcontrollers as “Embedded
System,” which means they blended into the products, and are sort of hidden (apart from
the user interface).
Most embedded systems have the following characteristics compared to traditional
computing platforms:
•   Many embedded systems have very small memory footprint (e.g., 16 KB of program
    memory based on flash memory technologies, and 8 KB of SRAM for data).
•   Many embedded systems have very simple user interface (e.g., a few buttons and just a
    few LEDs, or a simple LCD display).
•   In most simple microcontroller-based systems there are no file systems, and if a
    microcontroller application require a storage device like SD card interface, the software
    developer need to add an SD card interface device driver (potentially supplied by the
    microcontroller vendor), and need to add software for file system support (you can get
    file system middleware from third parties).
•   Many of the embedded systems do not have any Operating System (OS). We sometimes
    called these systems as “bare-metal.” In these systems there is only one application, and
    potentially a number of interrupt-driven processes.
•   Some of these systems have OS developed specially for embedded systems, such as
    Real-Time Operating System (RTOS). These OS have very small memory footprints
    and need very low processing overhead. But at the same time, some of these OS might
    only able to provide task scheduling and basic task management features.
•   You still need your personal computer (or MAC/workstation) to do the software
    development. Since the embedded systems are very small and have limited capabilities,
    the software development environments are running on your PC/MAC/workstation. You
    will need tools to transfer the developed program code to the microcontrollers. In many
    cases, the process is referred as flash memory programming because many
    microcontrollers use flash memories for program storage. Many microcontroller software

    development environments come with built-in support for flash programming, but you
    might also need an adaptor to hook up the microcontroller to the PC/MAC/workstation.
For many readers, this is a completely different world compared to the type of software
development they have been doing previously. But at the same time this can be fascinating.
You will be able to see and control the details of many low-level operations. For example,
when you execute a simple “printf(“Hello world!\n”); ” statement in a C program, you will
be able to control how the message is sent to the user interface (e.g., LCD module),
whereas all these details are hidden in other high-level programming environments.

1.1.4 What Type of Skills Do I Need to Start Learning Microcontroller
      Programming?

In this book, I assumed that you already know a bit of C programming. Some experiences
of using any microcontrollers will certainly help a lot.
Knowledge on electronic engineering areas like digital interface circuits can help you to
understand some of the examples in this book and enable you to start creating your own
electronics projects. It is possible to create your own microcontroller boards, but this often
requires more design experience. To make the learning process easier, for beginners, or
people who are not familiar with electronic engineering should consider starting off with
off-the-shelve microcontroller development boards. They are ready to use and this will
save a lot of time in debugging hardware issues.

1.2 Understanding Different Types of Processors
1.2.1 Why We Need Various Types of Processors

There are a lot of different types of processors in the world. Even in the ARMÒ processor
product ranges there are different processor series for different applications. For example,
if you need to design a server, you need to have processors that can deliver very high data
processing performance, and can run at fairly high speed clock speed to provide the
performance required. But if you are developing battery-powered gadgets such as wearable
devices, often the application do not necessarily need very high performance, but the
battery life is much more important so the processor and the rest of the system need to
have very low power and therefore different type of processors are required.
In many applications, just having high performance is not enough. For example, in a
processor for smart phone it is also necessary additional features in the processor such as
virtual memory support for feature rich OS.
Unfortunately for chip designers, they cannot break the rule of physics. The higher
performance needed, more things need to be done in parallel and so more transistors are

                              Cost
                                          Features

                                                             Compu?ng
                                                              Servers

                                                            Performance
                                                    Smart
                                                   Phones
                                     Microcontrollers
                                                                  Power

                                          Figure 1.2
                                Trade-off in processor designs.

needed in the designs. And when the clock frequency goes up, the dynamic power again
increases. The same applies to adding more features. The increase of silicon size also
increases the production cost (Figure 1.2).
As a result of the tradeoffs, we need to have different types of processors for different
applications. Based on the technical requirements of the applications, chip designers need
to select the right processor for the project, and sometimes need to compromise between
various requirements to create designs that fit the targeted applications. Fortunately, there
are many different types of processors available on the market, in addition to different
performance points and sizes, some of them also have special feature to fit certain
markets. For example, ARM provides a wide range of processors that are designed to suite
most of the target applications very well by providing the right balance between
performances, features, and power.

1.2.2 Overview of the ARM Processor Families

Over the years, ARM had developed many processors (Figure 1.3). For many readers who
are not familiar with ARM processors, it can be slightly confusing. To understand this
better, let us step back a little bit and look at what were offered a few years back.
ARM has been designing processors for over 20 years. Most of the processors designed by
ARM are 32 bit, and in last few years ARM also have been developing processors that
support a mixed 32-bit and 64-bit architecture.
The ARM7TDMIÒ processor is the first key ARM processor that was widely deployed in
the market. It is very energy efficient, and provides high code density using an innovative
operation state that support 16-bit instruction set called ThumbÒ. As a result, it was used
in a number of second generation mobile phones and a number of microcontroller
products. Since then, ARM has continuously developed new processors, and hence the
ARM9/9E processor family and ARM11 processor family are developed, when even
higher performance and more features.

                                                                        Cortex-A72
                                                                                             High-end
                                  ARM Cortex                                                Application
      Performance,                processors                        Cortex-A57              processors
      functionality
                                                                                      Cortex-A17
                                                           Cortex-A15       Cortex-A12
                                                    Cortex-A9
                                                                            Cortex-A53
                                            Cortex-A8
                                                                      Cortex-A7
                                                         Cortex-A5
                                                                                     High performance
                                                                    Cortex-R7
                                                                                     Real-time systems
                       ARM11                                    Cortex-R5
                       series
                                               Cortex-R4
                                                                            Cortex-M7
                      ARM9E                                Cortex-M4
                      series         Cortex-M3
                                                                                       Microcontroller
             ARM7TDMI                                            Cortex-M0+             applications
                                                    Cortex-M0
                                      Cortex-M1

                        2003         2005         2009       2012           Future

                                              Figure 1.3
                                Overview of the ARM processor family.

In around 2003, ARM realized that it needs to diversify the processor products to address
different technical requirements in different markets. As a result, three product profiles are
defined, and the CortexÒ processor brand name is created for the naming of these new
processors:
Cortex-A processorsdThese are Application processors, which are designed to provide
high performance and include features to support advanced operation systems (e.g.,
Android, Linux, Windows, iOS). These processors typically have longer processor pipeline
and can run at relatively high clock frequency (e.g., over 1 GHz). In terms of features,
these processors have Memory Management Unit (MMU) to support virtual memory
addressing required by advanced OS, optional enhanced Java support, and a secure
program execution environment called TrustZoneÒ.
The Cortex-A processors are typically used in mobile phone, mobile computing devices
(e.g., tablets), television, and some of the energy efficient servers.
While the Cortex-A processors have high performance, the processor is not designed to
provide rapid response time to hardware events (i.e., real-time requirements). As a result, a

different profile of high-performance processors is needed, and they are the Cortex-R
processors.
Cortex-R processorsdThese are Real-Time, high performance processors that are very
good at data crunching, can run at fairly high clock speed (e.g., 500 MHz to 1 GHz range),
and at the same time can be very responsive to hardware events. They have cache
memories as well as Tightly Coupled Memories, which enable deterministic behavior for
interrupt handling. The Cortex-R processors are also designed with additional features to
enable much higher system reliability such as Error Correction Code (ECC) support for
memory systems and dual-core lock-step feature (i.e., redundant core logic for error
detection).
The Cortex-R processors can be found in hard disk drive controllers, wireless baseband
controllers/modem, specialized microcontrollers such as automotive and industrial
controllers.
While the Cortex-R processors can be very good at high-performance microcontroller
applications, they are quite complex designs and can consume fair amount of power.
Therefore, another group of processors are need for the very low-power embedded
products, and they are the Cortex-M processors.
Cortex-M ProcessorsdThe Cortex-M Processors are designed for main stream
microcontroller market where the processing requirement is less critical, but need to be
very low power. Most of the Cortex-M Processors are designed with a fairly short pipeline,
for example, two stage in the Cortex-M0þ processor and three stages in Cortex-M0,
Cortex-M3, and the Cortex-M4 Processors. The Cortex-M7 processor has a longer
pipeline (six stages) due to higher performance requirement, but still the pipeline is a lot
shorter than the designs of high-end application processors. As a result of the shorter
pipeline and low power optimizations in the design, the maximum clock frequencies for
these processors are slower than Cortex-R and Cortex-A processors, but this is rarely a
problem because even a 100 MHz Cortex-M-based microcontroller can do a lot of work.
The Cortex-M processors are designed to provide very quick and deterministic interrupt
responses. To achieve this, the processor’s execution control part is closely coupled with a
built-in interrupt controller called Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC). The NVIC
provides powerful and yet easy-to-use interrupt’s management. In general, the Cortex-M
processors are very easy to use, with almost everything can be programmed in C.
Due to their low power, fairly high performance, and ease of use benefits, the Cortex-M
processors are selected by most major microcontroller vendors in their flagship
microcontroller products. The Cortex-M processors are also used in some of the sensors,
wireless communication chipsets, mixed signal ASICs/ASSPs, and even used as controller
in some of the subsystems in complex application processors/SoC products.

In addition to the Cortex processor families, ARM also has processors specially designed
for security-sensitive products, which included temper-resistance features. These
processors are the SecurCoreÒ series. For example, the SC000Ô , one of the SecurCore is
designed based on the Cortex-M0 processor (same instruction set, and uses NVIC for
interrupt management). The SecurCore products can be found in SIM cards, banking/
payment systems, and even some electronic ID cards.

1.2.3 Blurring the Boundaries

In some ways, the term microcontroller can be a bit vague. Some of the microcontrollers
are based on application processors such as ARM926EJ-S, one of the processor in the
ARM9E processor family. In last few years, some of the microcontroller vendors starting
to produce microcontroller products based on the ARM Cortex-A processors
(e.g., Freescale Vybrid, Atmel SAMA5D3), and ARM Cortex-R processors (e.g., Texas
Instruments TMS570, Spansion Traveo Family).
At the same time, the Cortex-M processors are also being used in many complex SoC
devices as power management controller, I/O subsystem controller, etc.
In the next generation of Cortex-R processor based on the ARMv8-R architecture, the
architecture definition also allows the processor to incorporate a MMU so that it can be
used with a full feature OS like Linux or Android, and at the same time handle real-time
tasks based on a virtualization mechanism.

1.2.4 ARM Cortex-M Processor Series

There are a number of processors in the Cortex-M processor family, as shown in Table 1.1.
If we look at the instruction set in a bit more details (Figure 1.4), we can see that the
Cortex-M0, Cortex-M0þ, and Cortex-M1 processors only support a small instruction set
(56 instructions). Most of these instructions are 16 bit, thus provide a very good code
densitydwhich means it need a smaller program memory require for the same task
compared to many architecture.
The instruction set of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are fairly simple. But if
an application task involves complex data processing, then potentially a long sequence of
instructions is needed to accomplish the operations in the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor
because of the simple instruction set. In those cases, it might be better to use the
Cortex-M3 processor because the Cortex-M3 processor supports a number of extra
instructions (mostly 32 bit) that supports the following:
•   More memory addressing modes
•   Larger immediate data in the 32-bit instructions

Table 1.1: The CortexÒ-M Processor family

    Processor         Descriptions
    Cortex-M0         The smallest ARMÒ processordonly approximately 12000a logic gates at minimum
                      configuration. It is very low power and energy efficient.
    Cortex-M0+        The most energy efficient ARM processordit has a similar size as the Cortex-M0
                      processor, but with additional system level and debug features (all optional), and have
                      higher energy efficiency than the Cortex-M0 processor design. It supports the same
                      instruction set as the Cortex-M0 processor.
    Cortex-M1         It is a small processor design optimized for field programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
                      applications. It has the same instruction set and architecture as in the Cortex-M0
                      processor, but has FPGA specific memory system features.
    Cortex-M3         When compared to the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, the Cortex-M3 has a
                      much more powerful instruction set, and its memory system is designed to provide
                      higher processing throughput (e.g., use of Harvard bus architecture). It also has more
                      system level and debug features, but at a cost of larger silicon area (minimum gate
                      count is about 40000 gates) and slightly lower energy efficiency. In general, the energy
                      efficiency of the Cortex-M3 processor is still a lot better than many traditional 8-bit
                      and 16-bit microcontroller devices because the performance is substantially higher.
                      The Cortex-M3 processor is very popular in the 32-bit microcontroller market.
    Cortex-M4         The Cortex-M4 processor contains all the features of the Cortex-M3 processor, but
                      with additional instructions to support DSP applications and have an option to
                      include a floating point unit (FPU). It has the same system level and debug features as
                      the Cortex-M3 processor.
    Cortex-M7         It is a high performance processor designed to cover application spaces where the
                      existing Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4 processors cannot reach. Its instruction set is a
                      superset of the Cortex-M4 processor, for example, supporting both single and double
                      precision floating point calculations. It also has many advanced features, which are
                      usually find in high-end processors such as caches and branch predictions.
a
  The exact gate count of a processor depends on many factors such as the semiconductor process library used, the chip
design tool used, the design optimization options, signal routing constraints, etc.

•     Longer branch and conditional branch ranges
•     Additional branch instructions
•     Hardware divide instructions
•     Multiply accumulate (MAC) instructions
•     Bit field processing instructions
•     Saturation adjustment instructions
As a result, the Cortex-M3 processor can handle complicate data processing quicker.
The code size might be similar to Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor because although
fewer number of instructions are required to perform the same operations, and these
powerful instructions are mostly 32 bit instead of 16 bit. These 32-bit instructions also
enable the Cortex-M3 processor to utilize the registers in the register bank better.
In some applications, however, you might need to perform some DSP operations such as
filtering, signal transformations (e.g., Fast Fourier Transform), etc. In these applications,

         VSEL               VCVTA            VCVTN                VCVTP        VCVTM       VMAXNM     VMINNM                         Cortex-M7 FPU
                                                                                                                                  (single and double
     VRINTR                VRINTA           VRINTN                VRINTP       VRINTM       VRINTX     VRINTY
                                                                                                                               precision floaƟng point)
                                                                                                                                       Cortex-M4 FPU
                                                                                                                                        (single precision
         VABS               VADD                VCMP              VCMPE         VCVT        VCVTR          VDIV   VLDM      VLDR
                                                                                                                                         floaƟng point)
        VMLA                VMLS                VMOV               VMRS         VMSR        VMUL           VNEG   VNMLA     VMMLS          VFNMA

     VNMUL                  VPOP             VPUSH                VSQRT         VSTM        VSTR           VSUB   VFMA      VFMS           VFNMS

     QDADD                  QADD            QADD16                QADD8        SADD16       SADD8     UADD16       UADD8    UHADD16          UHADD8

     QDSUB                  QSUB            QSUB16                QSUB8        SSUB16       SSUB8      USUB16      USUB8    UHSUB16          UHSUB8

                                                                                                                  SHADD16    SHADD8         SHSUB16
         ADC                 ADD                 ADR               AND          ASR           B            BIC
                                                                                                                    PKH       SEL            SHSUB8
         BFC                 BFI                 CLZ               CDP         CLREX         CMN           CMP
                                                                                                                   SMULTT    SMULTB         UQADD16
  CBNZ          CBZ          DBG                 EOR               LDR          LDRH        LDRB           LDRD
                                                                                                                   SMULBT    SMULBB         UQSUB16
     LDMIA                 LDMDB                 LDRT             LDRHT        LDRBT        LDRSH      LDRSB
                                                                                                                   SMLATT    SMLATB          UQADD8
     LDRSBT                LDRSHT               LDREX             LDREXB       LDREXH        LSL           LSR
                                                                                                                   SMLABT    SMLABB          UQSUB8
         LDC                 MCR                 MRC               MCRR         MRRC         PLD           PLI
                                                                                                                  SMLALTT   SMLALTB          SMMUL
         MOV               MOVW                 MOVT               MUL          MVN          MLS           MLA
                                                                                                                  SMLALBT   SMLALBB         SMULWT
         NOP                PUSH                 POP               ORR          ORN         PLDW           RBIT
                                                                                                                   USADA8    USAD8          SMULWB
  ADC          ADD    ADR          BKPT   BLX          BIC         REV         REV16        REVSH          ROR
                                                                                                                    QSAX      QASX           SMLAD
  AND          ASR     B            BX    CPS          CMN         RSB          RRX          SBC           SEV
                                                                                                                   UQSAX     UQASX           SMLSD
         BL                 MRS                 MSR                SUB          STC         UBFX           SBFX
                                                                                                                    UASX      SASX           SMLALD
         DSB                DMB                  ISB                STR         STRD        UDIV           SDIV
                                                                                                                    USAX      SSAX           SMLSLD
  CMP          EOR    LDR          LDRH   LDRB         LDM         STRB         STRH        UMULL      SMULL
                                                                                                                   UHASX     SHASX           SMUAD
                      LSL          LSB    MOV          NOP        STMIA        STMDB        UMLAL      SMLAL
                                                                                                                   UHSAX     SHSAX           SMUSD
  REV                              MUL    MVN          ORR         STREX       STREXB       UXTB           SXTB
                                                                                                                   UXTAB     SXTAB           SMLAWT
  PUSH         POP    ROR          RSB    SEV          SVC        STREXH        STRT        USAT           SSAT
                                                                                                                   UXTAH     SXTAH          SMLAWB
  SBC           STR   STRH         STRB   STM          SUB        STRHT        STRBT        UXTH           SXTH
                                                                                                                  UXTAB16   SXTAB16          SMMLA
  SXTB         UXTB   SXTH         UXTH   TST          YIELD       TBB          TBH          WFI           WFE
                                                                                                                   UXTB16    SXTB16          SMMLS
  WFE            Cortex-M0/M0+/M1
               WFI                                                  TST         TEQ          YIELD    IT
                                                                                                                   USAT16    SSAT16          UMAAL
                     (ARMv6-M)
  16-bit instrucƟons                                           32-bit instrucƟons       Cortex-M3 (ARMv7-M)         Cortex-M4 (ARMv7E-M)

                                                                      Figure 1.4
                                                 Instruction set of the CortexÒ-M processor family.

you might want to use the Cortex-M4 processor because the Cortex-M4 processor added
another group of instructions targeted for these applicationsdthese included Single
Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) operations and saturated arithmetic instructions. The
internal data path of the processor is also redesigned to enable single cycle MAC
operations.
The Cortex-M4 processor also has an optional floating point unit that support IEEE-754
single precision floating point calculations. It does not mean that you cannot perform
floating point processing in the Cortex-M0, Cortex-M0þ, or other processors without the
floating point unit. If you are using these processors for floating point operations, the

compiler will insert runtime library functions to handle the floating point calculation using
software, which can take much longer to do and need additional code size overhead.
For applications that demand very high data-processing requirements, or if double
precision floating point calculation is needed, then the Cortex-M7 processor might be the
best choice. It is designed to provide very high data-processing performance, but use the
same programmer’s model and a superset of the instruction set as Cortex-M4 processor.
To decide which processor to use in a project, you need to understand the processing
requirements of the application. Some general guideline is shown in Table 1.2.
Please note that you might also need to consider the differences of the system-level
features and performance when selecting the right Cortex-M processor. An overview of the
comparison is shown in Table 1.3 and a comparison of the performance is shown in
Table 1.4. Please note that the Cortex-M processors are very configurable and the exact
features can be customized by the chip designers and vary among different devices.
In general, the ARM Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are both very suitable for
ultra-low power applications, and because the instruction set and programmer’s model are
relatively simple, and the architecture is very C-friendly, they are also very suitable for
beginners. For example, there is no need to learn a lot of tool chain-specific keywords or
data types to get the application to work on a Cortex-M microcontroller, unlike many 8-bit
or 16-bit architectures.
Table 1.2: The applications for various CortexÒ-M Processors

 Processor                     Applications
 Cortex-M0, Cortex-M0+         General data processing and I/O control tasks.
 processors                    Ultra low power applications.
                               Upgrade/replacement for 8-bit/16-bit microcontrollers.
                               Low-cost ASICs, ASSPs
 Cortex-M1                     Field Programmable Gate Array(FPGA) applications with small to
                               medium data processing complexity. (For high-complexity data
                               processing there are FPGAs with built-in Cortex-A processors such as
                               Xilinx Zynq-7000 and some of the Altera Arria V SoCs and Cyclone V
                               SoCs).
 Cortex-M3                     Feature-rich/high-performance/low-power microcontrollers.
                               Light-weight DSP applications.
 Cortex-M4                     Feature-rich/high-performance/low-power microcontrollers.
                               DSP applications.
                               Applications with frequent single precision floating point operations.
 Cortex-M7                     Feature-rich/very high performance power microcontrollers.
                               DSP applications.
                               Applications with frequent single or double precision floating point
                               operations.

Table 1.3: An overview of the system level and debug features
                                        for various CortexÒ-M Processors

    Features          Cortex-M0      Cortex-M0þ   Cortex-M1      Cortex-M3   Cortex-M4    Cortex-M7
    Number of         1e32           1e32         1, 8, 16, 32   1e240       1e240        1e240
    interrupts
    Interrupt         4              4            4              8e256       8e256        8e256
    priority levels
    FPU               -              -            -              -           Optional     Optional (single
                                                                             (single      precision/single þ
                                                                             precision)   double precision)
    OS support        Y              Y            Optional       Y           Y            Y
    Memory            -              Optional     -              Optional    Optional     Optional
    Protection
    unit
    Cache             -              -            -              -           -            Optional
    Debug             Optional       Optional     Optional       Optional    Optional     Yes
    Instruction       -              Optional     -              Optional    Optional     Optional ETM
    trace                            MTB                         ETM         ETM
    Other trace       -              -            -              Optional    Optional     Optional

Table 1.4: Performance of various CortexÒ-M Processors with commonly used benchmarks

    Features                         Cortex-M0    Cortex-M0þ         Cortex-M3    Cortex-M4       Cortex-M7
    Dhrystone 2.1 (per MHz)          0.9          0.95               1.25         1.25            2.14
    CoreMark 1.0 (per MHz)           2.33         2.46               3.34         3.40            5.01

1.2.5 Quick Glance on the ARM Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processor

The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors:
•      Are 32-bit Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) processor, based on an architec-
       ture specification called ARMv6-M Architecture. The bus interface and internal data
       paths are 32-bit width.
•      Have 16 32-bit registers in the register bank (r0 to r15). However, some of these regis-
       ters have special purposes (e.g., R15 is the Program Counter, R14 is a register called
       Link Register, and R13 is the Stack Pointer).
•      The instruction set is a subset of the Thumb Instruction Set Architecture. Most of the
       instructions are 16 bit to provide very high code density.
•      Support up to 4 GB of address space. The address space is architecturally divided into a
       number of regions.
•      Based on Von Neumann bus architecture (although arguably the Cortex-M0þ processor
       have a hybrid bus architecture because of an optional separate bus interface for fast
       peripheral register accesses, see section 4.3.2 Single Cycle I/O Interface in Chapter 4).

•   Designed for low-power applications, including architectural support for sleep modes
    and have various low power features at the design/implementation level.
•   Includes an interrupt controller called NVIC. The NVIC provides very flexible and
    powerful interrupt management.
•   The system bus interface is pipelined, based on a bus protocol called Advanced High-
    performance Bus (AHBÔ ) Lite. The bus interface supports transfers of 8-bit, 16-bit, and
    32-bit data, and also allows wait states to be inserted. The Cortex-M0þ processor also
    have an optional bus interface (Single Cycle I/O interface, see section 4.3.2) for high-
    speed peripheral registers, which is separated from the main system bus.
•   Support various features for the OS (Operating System) implementation such as a
    system tick timer, shadowed stack pointer, and dedicated exceptions for OS operations.
•   Includes various debug features to enable software developers to create applications
    efficiently.
•   Designed to be very easy to use. Almost everything can be programmed in C and in
    most cases no need for special C language extension for data types or interrupt handling
    support.
•   Provide good performance in most general data processing and I/O control applications.
The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors do not include any memory and have only
got one built-in timer which is primarily for OS operations. Therefore a chip designer
needs to add additional components in the chip design themselves.

1.2.6 From Cortex-M0 Processor to Cortex-M0þ Processor

The ARM Cortex-M0 processor was released in 2009. It was a ground-breaking product
because it is the first product that demonstrated it is possible to cramp a 32-bit processor
into the silicon footprint similar to an 8-bit or 16-bit processors, while still able to make
the design usable and provide excellent energy efficiency and a decent performance for a
32-bit processor.
Although the Cortex-M0 processor is a lot smaller than the Cortex-M3 processor (which
was released in 2005), it maintains a number of key advantages as in Cortex-M3
processor:
•   Flexible interrupt management using a built-in interrupt controller called NVIC
•   OS support features including a timer hardware called SysTick (System Tick timer) and
    exception types dedicated to OS operations
•   High code density
•   Low power support such as sleep modes
•   Integrated debug support
•   Easy to use (almost everything programmable in plain C language)

The Cortex-M0 processor has been a very successful product, and was the fastest licensed
ARM processor in 2009.1 After the Cortex-M0 processor is released, the designers in
ARM have received additional feedback from customers, microcontroller users and chip
designers, and ARM decided that there is an opportunity for an enhanced version for the
Cortex-M0 processor, which was subsequently called the Cortex-M0þ processor.
The Cortex-M0þ processor supports all the features available in the Cortex-M0 processor,
but additional features were added to make it more powerful (these are all configurable by
the chip designers):
•     Unprivileged execution level and Memory Protection Unit (MPU)dthis feature is
      available in other ARM processors such as the Cortex-M3 processor. It allows an OS to
      execute some of the application tasks with an unprivileged level so that the OS can
      impose memory access restrictions. For example, the unprivileged software cannot
      access critical system registers in the processors like NVIC registers, and memory
      access permissions can be managed by the MPU. In this way, a system can be made
      more robust because a misbehaving unprivileged task cannot corrupt critical data used
      by the OS kernel and other tasks.
•     Vector Table relocationdagain, this is a feature already existing in the Cortex-M3
      processor. By default, the vector table is defined as the start of the memory (address
      0x00000000). The Vector Table Offset Register allows the vector table to be defined in
      other memory locations such as a different program memory location or in SRAM. This
      is very useful for microcontroller devices, which might have separated vector table for
      boot process and user applications.
•     Single Cycle I/O interfacedthis is a separate bus interface specifically added to allow
      frequently accessed I/O registers to be read/write in a single cycle. Without this feature,
      a load/store operation needs to go through the pipelined system bus, which needs two
      clock cycles per access. This feature enables microcontrollers or embedded system to
      have higher I/O performance, as well as higher energy efficiency in I/O intensive
      operations.
Internally to the processor design, there are also some significant changes. Instead of using
a three-stage pipeline as in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M3 processors, the Cortex-M0þ
processor is designed with a two-stage pipeline. This reduces the number of flip-flops in
the processor, and hence reduces the dynamic power, and provides slightly higher
performance at the same time because the branch penalty is reduced by one clock cycle.
In the Cortex-M0þ processor pipeline, as shown in Figure 1.5, a small part of the
instruction decoding operations is carried out as soon as the instruction enters the

1
    Cortex-M0 ProcessordFastest Licensing ARM Processor (http://www.arm.com/about/newsroom/26419.php).

                   Pipeline                 Cortex-M0+
                    stage                    Processor                    Pipeline             Main
                                                                           stage            instruction
                                                                                              decode
               Program Memory
Address                                                         Instruction Buffer
              (e.g. flash memory)

                                                                          Control
                                                                         Pipeline                            Execution
                                                   Pre-decode            Registers                             logic

                                                    Address
                                                   generation

                          Clock

                 Instruction #N     Fetch           Decode              Execute

                                                                Fetch             Decode           Execute
                Instruction #N+1
                                      Pre-decode                                     Main decode

                                            Figure 1.5
                    Two-stage Pipeline in the ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0þ Processor.
processor bus interface. The rest of the instruction decoding is combined with the
execution stage.
Adding decode logic to the instruction fetch stage do have some impact to the timing of
the design. However, the balance between predecode and main decode logic was selected
carefully to minimize the impact to the achievable maximum clock frequency. In addition,
most of the low-power microcontrollers run at fairly low clock frequency in comparison to
the maximum processor speed. Therefore this is not a problem to most of the silicon
designs.
In some cases, the power consumption of the processor is reduced by 30% when
comparing between Cortex-M0 processor and the Cortex-M0þ Processor. However, at the
system level, the difference would be much smaller because most of the power could be
consumed by the memory system.
In order to reduce system-level power, additional optimizations have been implemented to
reduce the program memory accesses:
First, by shortening the processor to a two-stage pipeline design, the branch shadow of the
processor is reduced. In a pipeline processor, when a branch instruction is executed, the

                                        Figure 1.6
         Power wastage reduction by reducing branch shadow. Image courtesy of ARMÒ.

instructions following the branch instruction would have been fetched by the processor.
These instructions fetched are called branch shadow (Figure 1.6), and they are discarded
by the processor and hence a long branch-shadow means wasting more energy.
Secondly, when a branch operation takes place and if the branch target instruction
occupies only the second half of a 32-bit memory space (as shown in Figure 1.7), the
instruction fetch is carried out as a 16-bit transfer. In this way, the program memory can
switch off half of the byte lanes to reduce power.
The amount of power reduction by these techniques depends on how often branch
operations are carried out in the application code.
Finally, in linear code execution, the program fetches are handled as 32-bit accesses. Since
most of the instructions are 16-bit, each instruction fetch can provide up to two
instructions. This means that the processor bus can be in idle state half of the time if there

                                          Figure 1.7
         Power wastage reduction by fetching branch target with minimum transfer size.
                                   Image courtesy of ARMÒ.

                       HTRANS    NSEQ    IDLE          NSEQ    IDLE
                                                                               AHB
                        HADDR    a4                    a6                     access

                       HRDATA           i4        i5          i6        i7

                         Fetch    i3         i4         i5         i6           CPU
                                                                             pipeline
                       Execute    i2         i3         i4         i5

                                         Figure 1.8
          Program fetch power reduction by fetching up to two instructions at a time.
                                   Image courtesy of ARMÒ.

is no data access instruction executed (Figure 1.8). Chip designers can utilize this
characteristic to reduce the power consumption in the program memory (e.g., flash
memory).
Another important enhancement in the Cortex-M0þ processor is the adding of a feature
called Micro Trace Buffer (MTB). This unit enables low-cost instruction trace, which is
very useful during software development, for example, helping to investigate the reason
for a software failure. The details of the MTB are covered in Chapter 13 and appendix E.
The Cortex-M0þ processor have additional enhancements when compared to the
Cortex-M0 processor in terms of chip design aspects (most of these are invisible to
microcontroller users). For example, a hardware interface was added to allow the startup
sequence of the processor to be delayed, which is useful for many SoC designs with
multiple processors.
Today, many microcontroller vendors already started offering microcontroller products
based on the Cortex-M0þ processors.

1.2.7 Applications of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processor

The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are used in a wide range of products.
Microcontrollers
The most common usage is microcontrollers. Many Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
microcontrollers are low-cost devices and are designed for low-power applications. They
can be used in applications including computer peripherals and accessories, toys, white
goods, industrial and HVAC (heating, ventilating, and air conditioning) controls, home
automation, etc.
When comparing the microcontrollers based on the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors to traditional 8-bit and 16-bit microcontroller products, the Cortex-M

microcontrollers allow embedded products to be built with more features, more
sophisticated user interface, due to support of larger address space, powerful interrupt
control, and higher performance.
The better performance and small size also bring the benefit of higher energy efficiency.
For example, for the same processing task, you can finish the processing quicker and allow
the system to stay in sleep modes longer.
Another advantage of using ARM Cortex-M processors for microcontroller applications is
that they are very easy to use. Therefore it is very appealing to many microcontroller
vendors as product support and educating the users can be challenging for some other
processor architectures.
ASICs and ASSPs
Another important group of applications for the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors
are ASICs and ASSPs. For example, there are a number of touch screen controllers,
sensors, wireless controllers, Power Management ICs (PMIC), and smart battery
controllers designed based on the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processors.
In these applications, the low gate count advantage of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors allow high performance processing capability to be included in chip designs
that traditionally only allow 8-bit or simple 16-bit processors to be used.
System on Chips
For complex SoC, the designs are often divided into a main application processor system
and a number of subsystems for: I/O controls, communication protocol processing, and
system management. In some cases, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor can be
used in part of the subsystems to off-load some activities from the main application
processor, and to allow small amount of processing be carried out while the main
processor is in standby mode (e.g., in battery powered products). It might also be used as a
System Control Processor (SCP) for boot sequence management and power management.

1.3 What Is Inside a Microcontroller
1.3.1 Typical Elements Inside a Microcontroller

There can be many components inside a basic microcontroller. For example, a simplified
block diagram is shown in Figure 1.9:
In the diagram there are a lot of acronyms. They are explained in Table 1.5.
As shown in Figure 1.9, there can be a lot of components in a microcontroller (not to
mention other complex interfaces like Ethernet, USB, etc.). In some microcontrollers you

                                              Crystal                RTC
                           PLL
                                            Oscillator(s)                         Timer
  Processor
                         Voltage         Manufacturing              Power
                        regulator         Test support            Management

                                                                                  PWM
              Main System Bus infrastructure                         System
                                                                     Control
                                                       Bus
 Flash                                                Bridge
                   SRAM             Boot ROM                        Watchdog       ADC
Memory
                                                                     Timer
                                                                                               System analog
                                                                                               components
                                       Peripheral Bus Infrastructure
                                                                                               Digital Peripherals

                                                                                               Analogue / Mixed
 UART              GPIO               SPI                   I2C            I2S   DAC
                                                                                               Signal Peripherals

                                                                                               Digital logic
                                                     I/O Pads
                                                                                               Memories

                                                           Figure 1.9
                                                    A simple microcontroller.

Table 1.5: Typical components in a microcontroller

Item               Descriptions
ROM                Read Only MemorydNonvolatile memory storage for program code.
Flash              A special type of ROM, which can be reprogrammed many times, typically for storing
memory             program code.
SRAM               Static Random Access Memorydfor data storage (volatile)
PLL                Phase Lock Loopda device to generate programmable clock frequency based on a
                   reference clock.
RTC                Real Time Clockda low power timer for counting seconds (typically runs on a low power
                   oscillator), and in some cases also for minutes, hours and calendar functions.
GPIO               General Purpose Input/Outputda peripheral with parallel data interface to control
                   external devices and to read back external signals status.
UART               Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitterda peripheral to handle data transfers in a
                   simple serial data protocol.
I2C                Inter-Integrated Circuitda peripheral to handle data transfers in a serial data protocol.
                   Unlike UART, a clock signal is required and can provide higher data rate.
SPI                Serial Peripheral Interfacedanother serial communication interface for off-chip
                   peripherals.
I2S                Inter-IC Soundda serial data communication interface specifically for audio information.
PWM                Pulse Width Modulatorda peripheral to output waveform with programmable duty cycle.
ADC                Analog to Digital Converterda peripheral to convert analog signal-level information into
                   digital form.
DAC                Digital to Analog Converterda peripheral to convert data values into analog signal level.
Watchdog           A programmable timer device for ensuring the processor is running program. When
timer              enabled, the program running needs to update the watchdog timer within a certain time
                   gap. If the program crashed, the watchdog timed out and this can be used to trigger a
                   reset or a critical interrupt event.

may also find Direct Memory Access (DMA) controller and hardware accelerators for
cryptography functions.
One important thing to understand is that different microcontrollers are designed with
different peripherals, different memory maps, and different system level details even when
they are using the same processor. For example, the peripherals in a CortexÒ-M0-based
microcontroller from chip vendor “A” can have completely different peripheral
programmer’s model (e.g., peripheral register definitions) from another Cortex-M0-based
microcontroller from chip vendor “B,” even though on paper they could have the same
peripheral features.

1.3.2 Characteristics of Processors for Microcontroller Applications

In general, different types of microcontrollers can have different technical requirements on
the processor. Obviously there are different performance requirements (that is why
different ARMÒ processors are developed), but there are a number of general requirements
that are common to many applications:
Low powerdmany microcontroller products are used in battery power applications. For
example, indoor cordless phones, remote controls, health monitoring devices, alarm
clocks, calculators, etc. Even for many other electronic products low power is becoming
an essential requirement. As a result, the processors used in many microcontroller products
need to be low power.
Fast interrupt responsedIn many applications it is required that the processor response
to hardware events very quickly. This is managed through the interrupt mechanism. When
an interrupt request (IRQ) is raised, for example, from a peripheral, the processor will
suspend the current task and execute an Interrupt Service Routine (ISR). Once the ISR is
completed, the processor can resume the interrupted task. The latency from the time the
hardware IRQ is raised to the time the ISR started executing is commonly known as
interrupt latency, typically measured in terms of number clock cycles. Ideally, the shorter
the interrupt latency the better, but a designer creating a system should also consider the
execution time required for the ISR to response to the request.
High code densitydA processor with high code density means that for the same
processing task, the size required for the program code is smaller. This enables an
application to be squeezed into a microcontroller with a small program memory (typically
flash memory) to reduce cost and power consumption. However, the exact code size also
depends on the compilation tool being used and the compilation options. When the code
compilation is optimized for high performance, the code size can increase substantially
because of optimization techniques like loop unrolling.

DebugdDebug features are very important during software development. For example,
the program execution could go wrong and the debug features enable the software
developers to understand what had happened that caused the failure.
OS supportdMany applications require the use of embedded operating systems such as
Real Time OS. In order to enable these OS to run efficiently, it is highly desirable to have
built-in OS support in the processor.
Ease of usedAn easy-to-use processor enables software developers to create applications
quickly. Ideally, the processor architecture need to work efficiently with code generated by
high-level programming environment, and the software developers do not need to use a lot
of architecture-specific C language extensions to create the applications, which can take
time for a software developer to learn.
High software portability and reusabilitydAnother issue with architecture-specific C
language extensions is that they are not always portable. For example, whether it is
possible to port the application from a microcontroller from chip vendor “A” to a different
microcontroller from chip vendor “B” can potentially be an issue. It is also nice to be able
to reuse software source codes between different projects to save time.
Upgrade and downgrade pathdIn some cases, you might want to upgrade the
microcontroller to a different one when adding more features to creating a new products in
a product family. In this case, the ease of switching to a more power processor is beneficial.
The same approach can be used when creating a low cost variant of the product.
Tool chain supportdThis is highly desirable to have a wide range of development tools
available for the processor used in microcontroller products. This is because the
microcontrollers are used by large number of embedded software developers around the
world and they can have different preference on the tools.
Low costdAlthough the microcontroller devices are getting cheaper and cheaper, product
designers keep looking for the lowest cost microcontroller product that can meet the
technical requirements. So the processor used need to be small (to reduce silicon area),
which can help reduce the chip cost.
For many microcontroller vendors, the ARM Cortex-M processors satisfied most of these
requirements. Therefore the ARM Cortex-M processors have been very successful in the
modern microcontroller market. In 2014, the ARM market share in the microcontroller
market is 26%2 (data from ARM Q4 2014 Roadshow Slides), and more than 2.9 billions3
of Cortex-M-based devices are shipped in 2013.

2
    Data from http://ir.arm.com/phoenix.zhtml?c¼197211&p¼irol-presentations.
3
    Information from http://www.tomshardware.co.uk/m7-arm-cortex-m4-iot,news-48918.html.

1.3.3 Silicon Technologies

Beside the components we already covered, we should also be aware that the silicon chips
are basically formed by many transistors (from millions to many billions) on the chips.
These transistors are connected in various ways to form logic gates, memories, and analog
circuits.
The transistor designs are dependent on the semiconductor technologies. Most of the
microcontrollers are designed with CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor),
although some other technologies like Bi-polar CMOS could be used. There many
different types of CMOS processes, for example, you might have heard of 90 nm low
power (LP) process, 65 nm processes, etc. These classifications are based on the channel
length of the transistor geometry. The smaller the geometry value, the smaller the
transistor is and the faster it can switch. Although in general moving to smaller transistor
can reduce dynamic power, it can also significantly increase the leakage power.
Other challenges of moving to smaller transistor technologies are that there might not be
matching flash memories technologies available, and some of the analog block might not
be suitable for such advanced semiconductor processes. As a result, it is common for
microcontrollers to be lagging behind high-end SoC designs in terms of deploying latest
semiconductor technologies.

1.4 There is Something About ARMÒ.
1.4.1 Do ARM Make Chips?

This is possibly one of the most common questions from beginnersdwhere can I buy an
ARM microcontroller?
Sorry folks, ARM does not manufacture or sell chip products.4 In some occasions, ARM
do design test chips for R&D (for testing of latest low-power technologies) or for system-
level verification purposes. But ARM does not sell these chips as product.
ARM make money using a business model called Intellectual Properties (IP) licensing.
When a chip vendor wanted to create a chip, they need to license the processor design,
and pay a license fee to ARM. Then their chip designers can access to designs of the
ARM processors they have licensed, and integrate that into their chip designs. In most
cases, when the chip vendor starts selling the chip products, they need to pay ARM a
royal fee.

4
    Apart from the canteen in ARM headquarter in Cambridge, which usually sell fish and chips on Friday
    lunch time.

1.4.2 What Else Does ARM Make?

In addition to the processor, ARM also provide various IP including the following:
•   Bus infrastructure components based on AMBAÒ (Advanced Microcontroller Bus
    Architecture) technology.
•   Memory controller including DDR, static memory controllers (i.e., ARM CoreLinkÔ
    product range.
•   Peripherals such as UART, SPI, GPIO, Timers, and system components such as DMA
    controller.
•   Graphic processors (e.g., MaliÔ GPU products), display processor, and video engine.
•   Debug components for complex SoC (CoreSightÔ product range).
•   Physical IP (Intellectual Properties) including cell libraries for many semiconductor
    processes, memories and I/O pads (ArtisanÒ product range).
•   Software development tools including compilers, debugger, debug, and trace adopters.
•   Development boards for ARM-based microcontroller (under KeilÒ brand) and FPGA
    boards.
Some of the microcontrollers contain multiple ARM IP products such as processor, bus
infrastructure components, peripherals, memory controllers, and physical IP.

1.4.3 Why Do Not Chip Vendors Do Their Own Processor Designs?

The investment to develop a processor is quite large. This is particularly true for complex
processors, which requires huge amount of effort in verification. And for a microcontroller
product range to be successful, a microcontroller vendor will need to have multiple
processors to support different performance requirements in different applications.
In addition to the cost to create the processors, the microcontroller also need to have
development tools such as C compilers, debuggers, and middlewares like RTOS. Typically,
a chip design company will need to outsource part of these works because it is difficult to
build up multiple development teams to cover everything.
By using ARM processors, the microcontroller vendors can save a large fortune in the
development cost, and can rely on the ARM ecosystem to gain access to the development
tools from various providers. And since many software developers know about ARM
processors, they can gain customer base easily.
And when a microcontroller vendor needs to expand the product range by moving to a
higher performance microcontroller, they can license a higher performance processor from
ARM, and there is no need for them to do the R&D to create a new processor product for
the new market.

There is a disadvantage of course: while a company can gain access to high-quality ARM
processors by licensing them, other companies can also license the same ARM processors
and built competitive products. So these companies need to work hard to make sure that
their products have high-quality peripherals, low-power designs, and comprehensive
software solutions in order to compete.

1.4.4 What is Special About the ARM Ecosystem?

What makes the ARM architecture special compared to proprietary architectures? Aside
from the processor technology, the ecosystem surrounding ARM product development
plays a very important role.
As well as working directly with the microcontroller vendors that offer ARM processor-
based devices, ARM works closely with vendors in the ecosystem that provide support for
those devices. These include vendors providing compilers, middleware, operating systems,
development tools vendors, training and design services companies, distributors, academic
researchers, and so on.
The ARM ecosystem allows a lot more choices. Apart from choice of microcontroller
devices from different vendors, you also have more choices on software tools. For
example, you can get development tools from KeilÒ, IAR Systems, TASKING,
Atollic, Rowley Associates, GNU C compiler, etc. As a result, software developers have
much better freedom in project development. Examples of using some of these compiler
products are covered in Chapters 14e18.
ARM also invests in various open-source projects to help open-source communities to
develop software on ARM platforms. The combined effort of all these parties not only
makes the ARM products better, it also results in a lot more choices of hardware and
software solutions.
The ARM ecosystem also enables better knowledge sharing, which helps developers
to build products on ARM microcontrollers quicker, and more effectively. Aside from
many Internet resources available, you can also find expert advices on Web-based
technical forums from ARM (some links are shown at the end of this chapter),
ARM microcontroller vendors and others. Regular ARM microcontroller training
courses are also organized by microcontroller vendors, distributors, or other training
service providers. The open nature of the ARM ecosystem also enables healthy
competitions. As a result users are getting high-quality products at competitive prices
(Figure 1.10).

                            Silicon
                           partners
                                           Design
            EDA tool                                             Choices
                                          services &
            vendors                                               More choices of microcontrollers
                                           training
                                                                  More choice on development tools
                                                                  More development boards
                                                                  More open source project support
                                                                  More OS support
                                                  Software &      More middleware and software solutions
   Researchers,
    academics
                             ARM                  middleware
                                                   vendors
                                                                 Knowledge sharing
                                                                  Resources on the Internet
                                                                  Large user community
                                                                  Technical forums
           Open source                                            Seminars and webinars (many free)
           communities
                                          Distributors
                                                                  Strong supports
                          Development
                          tools vendors

                                                         Users

                         ARM ecosystem

                                               Figure 1.10
                                          The ARMÒ ecosystem.

1.5 Resources on Using ARMÒ Processors and ARM Microcontrollers
1.5.1 On the ARM Web Pages

The main ARM Web page (www.arm.com) provides easy access to general product
information. Detail documentation can be found in a section of ARM Web page called
Info Center (http://infocenter.arm.com/). This page contains various specifications,
application notes, knowledge articles, etc. Table 1.6 lists some of the reference documents
about the details of the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors.
The Info Center also has a number of application notes that can be useful for
microcontroller software developers (Table 1.7).
For readers who are interested in the details of integrating Cortex-M processors into SoC
designs or FPGA, the document listed in Table 1.8 might be useful.
One important part of the ARM Web site is the ARM Connected Community (http://
community.arm.com). The ARM Connected Community Web page (Figure 1.11) provides
wide range of resources, and is also contributed by a global network of companies aligned
to provide a complete solution, from design to manufacture and end use, for products
based on the ARM architecture. There is also user forums, and places for individuals to
post their articles and blogs about their views on ARM technologies.

Table 1.6: Reference ARMÒ document on the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors

    Document                                                                                          Reference
    ARMv6-M architecture reference manual                                                             1
    This is the specification of the architecture on which Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors
    are based. It contains detailed information about the instruction set, architecture-defined
    behaviors, etc. This document can be accessed via the ARM Web site after a simple
    registration process.
    Cortex-M0 devices Generic user Guide                                                              2
    This is a user guide written for software developers using the Cortex-M0 processor. It provides
    information on the programmer’s model, details on using core peripherals such as NVIC, and
    general information about the instruction set.
    Cortex-M0þ devices Generic user Guide                                                             3
    This is a user guide written for software developers using the Cortex-M0þ processor. It
    provides information on the programmer’s model, details on using core peripherals such as
    NVIC, and general information about the instruction set.
    Cortex-M0 technical reference manual                                                              4
    This is a specification of the Cortex-M0 processor product. It contains implementation-
    specific information such as instruction timing and some of the interface information (target
    for silicon designers).
    Cortex-M0þ technical reference manual                                                             5
    This is a specification of the Cortex-M0þ processor product. It contains implementation-
    specific information such as instruction timing and some of the interface information (target
    for silicon designers).
    Procedure call Standard for the ARM architecture                                                  6
    This document specifies how software code should work in procedure calls. This information
    is often needed for software projects with mixed assembly and C languages.

Table 1.7: ARMÒ Application Notes that can be useful for microcontroller software developers

    Document                                                                                          Reference
    AN237dMigrating from 8051 to Cortex microcontrollers                                              7
    AN321dARM Cortex-M programming Guide to memory Barrier instructions                               8

Joining the ARM Connected Community is easy; details are on the ARM Web site
http://community.arm.com.

1.5.2 Resources from Microcontroller Vendors

The documentation and resources from the microcontroller vendors is essential in
embedded software development. Typically you can find the following:
•      Reference manuals for the microcontroller chips. They provide the programmer’s model
       of the peripherals, memory maps, and other information needed for software
       development.

Table 1.8: ARMÒ document that can be useful for System-on-a-Chip (SoC) or Field
                      Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) designers

Document                                                                                        Reference
AMBAÒ 3 AHB-Lite protocol specification                                                         11
This is the specification for the AHB (Advanced High-performance Bus) Lite protocol, an on-
chip bus protocol used on the bus interfaces of the CortexÒ-M processors. AMBA (advanced
Microcontroller bus architecture) is a collection of on-chip bus protocols developed by ARM
and is used by many IC design companies.
AMBA 3 APB protocol specification                                                               12
This is the specification for the APB (advanced Peripheral bus) Lite protocol, an on-chip bus
protocol used for connecting peripherals to the internal bus system, and to connect debug
components to the Cortex-M processors. APB is part of the AMBA specification.
CoreSightÔ technical introduction                                                               13
An introductory guide for silicon/FPGA designers who want to understand the basics of the
CoreSight debug architecture. The debug system for the Cortex-M processors is based on the
CoreSight debug architecture.

                                         Figure 1.11
                           The ARMÒ connected community home page.

•   Data sheets of the microcontrollers. They contain the information on package, pin
    layout, operation conditions (e.g., temperature), voltage and current characteristics, and
    other information you may need when designing the PCB.
•   Application notes. These contain examples of using the peripherals or features on the
    microcontrollers, or information on handling specific task (e.g., flash programming).
You might also find additional resources on development kits, and additional firmware
libraries.

1.5.3 Resources from Tool Vendors

Very often the software development tools vendors also provide lots of useful information.
In addition to tool chain manuals (e.g., compiler, linker), you can also find application
notes. For example, on the KeilÒ Web site (http://www.keil.com/appnotes/list/arm.htm),
you can find various tutorials of using Keil MDK-ARM with Cortex-M development kits,
as well as some application notes that cover some general programming information.

1.5.4 Other Resources

On social media web sites like YouTube (e.g., https://www.youtube.com/user/ARMflix),
you can also find various tutorials on using Cortex-M-based products such as an
introduction to microcontroller products and software tools.
There are plenty of software vendors that provide software products like RTOS for
Cortex-M processors. Often these companies also provide useful documentation on their
Web sites that shows how to use their products as well as general design guidelines.
Do not forget the distributor that provides you with the microcontroller chips can also be a
useful source of information.
