                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 2

Technical Overview
2.1 What are the Cortex®-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors?
The ARMÒ Cortex-M0 processor and Cortex-M0þ processors are both 32-bit processors.
Their internal registers in the register banks, data paths, and the bus interfaces are all 32
bit. Both of them have a single main system bus interface, therefore they are considered as
Von Neumann bus architecture.
The Cortex-M0þ processor has an optional single cycle I/O interface that is primarily for
faster peripheral I/O register accesses. Therefore, it is possible to say the Cortex-M0þ
processor has limited Harvard bus architecture capability as instruction access and I/O
register accesses could be carried out at the same time, but it is important to understand
that although there can be two bus interfaces, the memory space is shared (unified) and
therefore the extra bus interface does not bring additional addressable memory space.
The key characteristics of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are as follows:
Processor pipeline
• The Cortex-M0 processor has a three-stage pipeline (fetch, decode, and execute)
• The Cortex-M0þ processor has a two-stage pipeline (fetch þ predecode, decode þ
    execute)
Instruction set
• The instruction set is based on ThumbÒ Instruction Set Architecture (ISA). Only a
    subset of the Thumb ISA is used (56 of them). Most of the instructions are 16 bit in
    size, only a few of them are 32 bit.
• In general, the Cortex-M processors are classified as Reduced Instruction Set
    Computing although they have instructions of different sizes.
• Support optional single cycle 32 bit ? 32 bit multiply, or a smaller multicycle multi-
    plier for designs that need small silicon area.
Memory addressing
• 32-bit addressing supporting up to 4 GB of memory space
• The system bus interface is based on an on-chip bus protocol called AHB-Lite,
    supporting 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit data transfers
• The AHB-Lite protocol is pipelined, support high operation frequency for the system.
    Peripherals can be connected to a simpler bus based on APB protocol (Advanced
    Peripheral Bus) via an AHB to APB bus bridge.

The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00002-3
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Interrupt Handling
• The processors include a built-in interrupt controller called the Nested Vectored Interrupt
    Controller (NVIC). This unit handles interrupt prioritization and masking functions. It
    supports up to 32 interrupt requests from various peripherals (chip design dependent), an
    additional Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI) input, and also support a number of system
    exceptions.
• Each of the interrupts can be set to one of the four programmable priority levels. NMI
    has a fixed priority level.
Operating Systems (OS) support
• Two system exception types (SVCall and PendSV) are included to support OS operations.
• An optional 24-bit hardware timer called SysTick (System Tick Timer) is also included
    for periodic OS time keeping.
• The Cortex-M0þ processor support privileged and unprivileged execution level
    (optional to chip designers). This allows OS to run some of the application tasks with
    unprivileged execution level and impose memory access restrictions to these tasks.
• The Cortex-M0þ processor has an optional Memory Protection Unit (MPU) to allow
    OS to define memory access permission for application tasks during run time.
Low Power support
• Architecturally two sleep modes are defined as normal sleep and deep sleep. The exact
    behaviors in these sleep modes are device specific (depends on which chip you are
    using). Chip designers can also add device specific power saving mode control registers
    to expand the number of sleep modes or to allow the sleep mode behavior for each part
    of the chip to be defined.
• Sleep mode can be entered using WFI (Wait for Interrupt) or WFE (Wait for Event)
    instructions, or using a feature called Sleep-on-Exit to allow the processor to enter sleep
    automatically.
• Additional hardware level supports to enable chip designers to create better power
    reductions based on the sleep mode features, for example, the Wake-up Interrupt
    Controller (WIC).
Debug
• The debug system is based on the ARM CoreSightÔ Debug Architecture. It is a scalable
    debug architecture that can support simple-single processor designs to complex multi-
    processor designs.
• A debug interface that can either be based on JTAG protocol (4 or five pins), or Serial
    Wire Debug protocol (2 pins). The debug interface allows software developers to access
    debug features of the processors.
• Support up to four hardware breakpoints, two data watchpoints, and unlimited software
    breakpoint using BKPT (breakpoint) instruction.
• Support basic program execution profiling using a feature called Program Counter (PC)
    Sampling via the debug connection.

•       The Cortex-M0þ Processor has an optional feature called Micro Trace Buffer (MTB),
        this provide instruction trace.
The Cortex-M Processors are configurable designs. They are delivered to chip designers in
form of Verilog source code files with a number of parameters that chip designers can
select. In this way, chip designers can omit some of the features that are unnecessary for
their projects to save power and reduce silicon area. As a result, you can find
microcontrollers based on the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor with different number
of supported interrupts, and Cortex-M0þ processor with and without the optional MPU.
During the design process (Figure 2.1), the processor is integrated with the rest of the
system and converted to a design composed of logic gates and then transistors layout using
chip design tools. The timing characteristics like maximum clock frequency are defined at
these stages based on the semiconductor process selected for the project and various
design constraints. In addition, the exact maximum speed and power consumption of the
Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor on different products can also be different from
each other.

    module mux (
     input wire A,
     input wire B,
     input wire Sel,
     output wire Y
     )
    assign Y = (Sel) ? B : A;
    endmodule
          Verilog code                  Logic gate netlist                     Transistor layout
                                            Figure 2.1
                                   Simplified chip design flow.

2.2 Block Diagrams
A simplified block diagram of the CortexÒ-M0 processor is shown in Figure 2.2.
The processor core contains the register banks, ALU, data path, and control logic. It is a
three-stage pipeline design with fetch stage, decode stage, and execution stage. The
register bank has sixteen 32-bit registers. A few of the registers in the register bank have
special usages (e.g., PC). The rest are available for general data processing.
The NVIC accepts up to 32 interrupt request signals and a NMI input. It contains the
functionality required for comparing priority between interrupt requests and current
priority level so that nested interrupts can be handled automatically. If an interrupt is
accepted, the NVIC communicates with the processor so that the processor can execute the
correct interrupt handler.

                        Power management interface

                                Wakeup                                         JTAG /
                                Interrupt                                    Serial-Wire    Connection
                                Controller                                     Debug       to debugger
                                  (WIC)                                       Interface

  Interrupt                      Nested
requests and                     Vector
                                                     Processor           Debug
    NMI                         Interrupt
                                                        core           subsystem
                                Controller
                                 (NVIC)

                                                 Internal Bus System

                Processor                        AHB LITE
                 System                         bus interface
               (Integration                          unit
                              Cortex-M0
                  layer)
                              Processor                          Bus Interface

                                                 Memory and
                                                 Peripherals
                                               Figure 2.2
                       A simplified block diagram of the CortexÒ-M0 Processor.

The WIC is an optional unit. In low-power applications, the microcontroller can enter
standby state with most parts of the processor powered down. Under this situation, the
WIC can perform the function of interrupt masking while the NVIC and the processor
core are inactive. When an interrupt request is detected, the WIC informs the power
management to power up the system so that the NVIC and the processor core can then
handle the rest of the interrupt processing.
The debug subsystem contains various functional blocks to handle debug control, program
breakpoints, and data watchpoints. When a debug event occurs, it can put the processor
core in a halted state so that embedded developers can examine the status of the processor
at that point.
The internal bus system, data path in the processor core, and the AHB-Lite bus interface
are all 32-bit wide. AHB-Lite is an on-chip bus protocol used in many ARMÒ processors.
This bus protocol is part of the AMBAÒ (Advanced Microcontroller Bus Architecture)
specification, which is a bus architecture developed by ARM and widely used in the IC
design industry.

The JTAG or Serial Wire interface units provide access to the bus system and debugging
functionalities. The JTAG protocol is a popular 4-pin (5-pin if including a reset signal)
communication protocol commonly used for IC and PCB testing. The Serial Wire protocol
is a newer communication protocol that only requires two wires, but it can handle the same
debug functionalities as JTAG. As illustrated in the block diagrams (Figures 2.2 and 2.3),
the debug interface module is separated from the processor design. This is required in the
CoreSightÔ Debug Architecture where multiple processors can share the same debug
connections. There are a number of additional signals for multiprocessor debug support not
shown in the diagrams.
The Cortex-M0þ processor is very similar (as shown in Figure 2.3) to Cortex-M0
processor. The only addition is the adding of the optional MPU, single cycle I/O interface
bus and the interface for the MTB. The processor core internal design is also changed to a
two-stage pipeline arrangement.

                                 Power
                              management Single Cycle
                               interface I/O interface   AHB     SRAM

                                 Wakeup                  Micro Trace             JTAG /
                                 Interrupt               Buffer (MTB)          Serial-Wire          Connection
                                 Controller                                      Debug             to debugger
                                   (WIC)                                        Interface
                                                               Trace
                                                             Interface

  Interrupt                       Nested
requests and                      Vector
                                                Processor core             Debug
    NMI                          Interrupt
                                                                         subsystem
                                 Controller
                                  (NVIC)
                                                    MPU

                                                 Internal Bus System

                Processor                         AHB LITE                    Single Cycle
                 System                          bus interface                I/O interface
               (Integration                           unit                         unit
                              Cortex-M0+
                  layer)
                               Processor                         Bus Interface

                                                 Memory and                  Fast peripherals
                                                 Peripherals
                                               Figure 2.3
                      A simplified block diagram of the CortexÒ-M0þ processor.

The MPU is a programmable device used to define access permission of the memory map.
In some of the applications where an OS is used, application tasks can be executed with
an unprivileged execution level with restrict memory access defined by the MPU, which is
programmed by the OS.
The single cycle I/O interface provides another bus interface with faster access compared to
the AHB-Lite system bus (pipelined operation). The MTB is used to provide instruction trace.
In both Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, a number of components in the
processors are optional. For example, the debug support, MPU and the WIC are all
optional. Some other components like the NVIC are configurable: allowing chip designers
to define the features available, for example, the number of interrupt requests (IRQ).

2.3 Typical Systems
As you can see from the block diagrams, the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors do
not contain memories and peripherals. Chip designers need to add these components to the
designs. As a result, different Cortex-M processor-based microcontrollers can have
different memory sizes, address map, peripherals, interrupt assignment, etc.
In a simple microcontroller design based on a Cortex-M processor, the design would
consist of the following:
•   A memory for program code storage, usually a Read-Only-Memory (ROM) component,
    or reprogrammable memory technologies such as flash memory.
•   A readewrite memory for data (including variables, stack, etc.), usually based on Static
    Random Access Memory (SRAM).
•   Various types of peripherals.
•   Bus infrastructure components for joining the processor to all the memories and
    peripherals.
In some cases, there can also be a separate ROM device with boot code to boot up the
microcontroller before the program in the user flash is executed. This is typically called
boot ROM or boot loader.
For a simple design with Cortex-M0 processor, the design could look like the one shown
in Figure 2.4.
A typical design based on the Cortex-M0 processor might partition the bus system into
two parts, which are as follows:
•   System bus connected to the memories including ROM, flash memory (for user program
    storage), the SRAM, a few number of peripherals, and a bus bridge to the peripheral
    bus system.

    Interrupts
    (IRQs, NMI)
                        Processor
                                                                                                   Digital logic

                                             System bus (AHB Lite)                                 Memories

                                                     High Speed         Bus                        Digital Peripherals
                       Flash                                           Bridge
           Boot ROM                    SRAM          Peripherals
                      Memory                                                                       Analogue / Mixed
                                                     (e.g. GPIO)
                                                                                                   Signal Peripherals
                                    IRQs
                                                                            Peripheral bus (APB)

               UART        SPI             Timers                    DAC           ADC                Other
                                                                                                    peripherals

    IRQs
                                                     I/O pads

                                             Figure 2.4
                           A simple system with the CortexÒ-M0 Processor.

•      The peripherals are connected to the peripheral bus, which might have a different oper-
       ating frequency compared to the system bus.
It is quite common for some of the peripherals to be connected to a separated peripheral
bus, which is linked to the main system bus via a bus bridge. This bus protocol for the
peripheral bus is typically based on APB, which is a bus protocol defined in the AMBAÒ.
The uses of a separated APB peripheral bus are as follows:
•      Allows lower hardware cost because the APB protocol (non-pipelined operations) is
       simpler than AHB-Lite (pipelined operations)
•      Allows the peripheral bus to run at a different clock frequency than the main system bus
•      Avoids large combinational logic in the bus infrastructure for the main system bus,
       which could become the bottle neck in terms of getting to get high operating frequency.
       Many peripherals might present in a microcontroller designs and the bus fabric for pe-
       ripherals can become quite large.
Another group of important connections are the interruptsdA number of peripherals can
generate interrupt requests, including the General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) modules.
In most microcontroller designs, external devices connected to certain GPIO pins can
generate interrupt request to the processor via some additional conditioning and
synchronization logic.

                     Single Cycle I/O
  High Speed         interface bus
  Peripherals
  (e.g. GPIO)

     IRQs       Interrupts        Processor      Trace
                (IRQs, NMI)                                                                         Digital logic
                                               interface

                                                           System bus (AHB Lite)                    Memories

                                              MTB                       Bus                         Digital Peripherals
                                Flash                                  Bridge
            Boot ROM
                               Memory                                                               Analogue / Mixed
                                              SRAM                                                  Signal Peripherals

      IRQs                                                                   Peripheral bus (APB)

                   UART                 SPI     Timers             DAC              ADC                Other
                                                                                                     peripherals

                                                I/O pads

                                                 Figure 2.5
                              A simple system with the CortexÒ-M0þ Processor.

For a system based on the Cortex-M0þ processor, the system design can be very similar,
like the one shown in Figure 2.5.
In this design, the high-speed peripherals are moved to the single cycle I/O interface bus
for faster I/O performance, and the MTB is added between the AHB-Lite system bus and
the SRAM for support instruction trace capture.
Potentially the processor might not be the only component in the system that can generate
bus transactions. In many microcontroller products, there is also a component called Direct
Memory Access (DMA) controller. Once programmed, the DMA controller can carry out
memory accesses on requests from peripherals without processor intervention (Figure 2.6)
The DMA controller can perform data transfers between memory and peripherals, or
between memories (e.g., to accelerate memory copy). This is commonly needed for
microcontrollers with high bandwidth communication interface like Ethernet or USB.
However, it can also benefit some low-power applications, for example, by avoiding
waking up the processor from sleep mode to collect small amount of data from
peripherals.

                       Single Cycle I/O
    High Speed         interface bus
    Peripherals
    (e.g. GPIO)                                                                   Configuration
                                                                     DMA            Registers
                  Interrupts        Processor           Trace      Controller
                  (IRQs, NMI)                                                                        Digital logic
                                                      interface

                  System bus (AHB Lite)                                                              Memories

                                                      MTB                        Bus                 Digital Peripherals
                                  Flash                                         Bridge
            Boot ROM
                                 Memory                                                              Analogue / Mixed
                                                      SRAM                                           Signal Peripherals

                                           Peripheral bus (APB)

                     UART                 SPI            Timers            DAC              ADC         Other
                                                                                                      peripherals

                                                        I/O pads

                                               Figure 2.6
                     A system with the CortexÒ-M0þ Processor and a DMA Controller.

2.4 What Is ARMv6-M Architecture?
Both the CortexÒ-M0 processor and Cortex-M0þ processor are based on the ARMv6-M
architecture. In ARMÒ processors, the term architecture can refer to the following two
areas:
•    Architecture: ISA (Instruction Set Architecture), programmer’s model (what the soft-
     ware sees) and debug methodology (what the debugger sees). The ARMv6-M is one of
     the architectures available.
•    Microarchitecture: implementation-specific details such as interface signals, instruction
     execution timing, pipeline stages. Microarchitecture is processor design-specific. For
     example, the Cortex-M0 processor has a three-stage pipeline microarchitecture.
Various versions of the ARM Architecture exist for different ARM processors released
over the years. For example, the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4 processors are both
implementations of ARMv7-M Architecture. An ISA can be implemented with various
implementations of microarchitecture, for example, different number of pipeline stages,
different type of bus interface protocol, etc.

The details of the ARMv6-M architecture are documented in the ARMv6-M Architecture
Reference Manual (also known as ARMv6-M ARM). This document covers the
following:
•   Instruction set details
•   Programmer’s model
•   Exception model
•   Memory model
•   Debug architecture
This document can be obtained from ARM after a simple registration process. However,
for general programming, it is not necessary to have the full architecture reference manual.
ARM provides alternate documents for software developers called Cortex-M0/M0þ/M3/
M4/M7 Devices Generic User Guides. This can be found in the ARM Web site:
http://infocenter.arm.com.
    / Cortex-M series processors
      / Cortex-M0/M0þ/M3/M4/M7
         / Revision number
             / Cortex-M0/M0þ/M3/M4/M7 Devices Generic User Guide
Some of the microarchitecture information such as instruction execution timing
information can be found in the Technical Reference Manuals of the Cortex-M processors,
which can be found on the ARM Web site. Other microarchitecture information like the
processor interface details are documented in other Cortex-M product documentation
which is normally accessible only by silicon chip designers.
Theoretically, a software developer does not necessarily need to know anything about the
microarchitecture to develop software for the Cortex-M products. But in some cases,
knowing some of the microarchitecture details could help. This is particularly true for
optimizing software or even C compilers for best performance.

2.5 Software Portability Between Cortex®-M Processors
The Cortex-M0, Cortex-M0þ, and Cortex-M1 Processors are based on the ARMv6-M
Architecture, whereas the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and the Cortex-M7 Processors are based
on the ARMv7-M Architecture. As shown in Figure 1.4, they have different instruction set
support.
The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors have the exact same instruction set and
similar programmer’s model (Cortex-M0þ Processor have optional support for

      FPGA optimized

        Cortex-M1                                                 Upward                              Upward
                                                                 compatible                          compatible

    FPGA          ASIC           Upward
  prototyping    migration      compatible
                                               Cortex-M3                           Cortex-M4                              Cortex-M7
                                                                       Easy                                Easy
                                                                     software                            software
       Cortex-M0+                                                     porting                             porting
       Cortex-M0
                                         High performance, feature         High performance, low power                Excellent performance, full
                                          rich and ultra low power          microcontrollers with DSP                feature microcontrollers with
    Ultra low power and                        microcontrollers                capability and single                  DSP capability and single/
           low cost                                                           precision floating point              double precision floating point
     microcontrollers,
     mixed signal SoC

         ARMv6-M                                ARMv7-M                           ARMv7E-M                                 ARMv7E-M
        Architecture                           Architecture                       Architecture                             Architecture

                                                  Figure 2.7
                             Compatibility between different CortexÒ-M Processors.

unprivileged execution level and MPU, whereas Cortex-M0 processor does not). However,
they have different physical characteristics like instruction timing and have different
system features.
The Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4 Processors are based on the ARMv7-M architecture and its
ThumbÒ-2 instruction set is a superset of the instruction set used in ARMv6-M. The
programmer’s model is also similar to ARMv6-M. As a result, in most cases software
developed for the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ can run on the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4
Processors without changes, assuming the system has same memory maps and peripherals.
The Cortex-M7 processor supports all instructions available in the Cortex-M4 processor,
and optionally supports double precision floating point instructions.
The similarity between the Cortex-M processors provides various benefits. First, it
provides better software portability. In most cases, C programs can be transferred between
these processors without changes. And binary images from Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M1
processors can run on a Cortex-M3 processor due to its upward compatibility
(Figure 2.7).
The second benefit is that the similarities between Cortex-M processors allow development
tool chains to support multiple processors easily. Apart from similarities on instruction set
and programmer’s model, the debug architecture is also similar.
The consistency of instruction set and programmer’s model also make it easier for
embedded programmers to migrate between different products and projects without facing
a sharp learning curve.

2.6 The Advantages of the ARM® Cortex®-M0
    and Cortex-M0+ Processor
2.6.1 Low Power and Energy Efficiency

One of the key targets of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors is low power. The
result is that the Cortex-M0 processor consumes only 12.5 mW/MHz with 90 nm
semiconductor process, or 66 mW/MHz with 180 nm semiconductor process. For the
Cortex-M0þ processor, the energy efficiency is even betterdonly 9.8 mW/MHz with
90 nm semiconductor process, or 50 mW/MHz with 180 nm semiconductor process. This is
very low-power consumption for a 32-bit processor. How was this target achieved?
In order to lower the power consumption, ARM had put a lot of effort into various areas to
ensure the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors could reach their low-power target.
These areas included the following:
•   Small gate count
•   High efficiency
•   Low-power features (e.g., sleep modes)
•   Logic cell enhancement
Let us take a look at these areas one by one.

Small Gate Count
The Cortex-M0/M0þ processor’s small gate count characteristic directly reduces the active
current and leakage current of the processor. During the development of these processors,
various design techniques, and optimizations were used to make the circuit size as small
as possible. Each part of the design was carefully developed and reviewed to ensure the
circuit size is small (it is just a bit like writing an application program in assembly to
achieve the best optimization). This allows the gate count to be 12k gates at minimum
configuration. In practice, the gate count would be higher when including more features.
This is about the same size or smaller than typical 16-bit microprocessors, while having
more than double the system performance.

High efficiency
By having a highly efficient architecture, embedded system designers can develop their
products so that they can operate at a lower clock frequency while still being able to
provide the required performance, reducing the active electric current of the products. This
advantage can be used in conjunction with the sleep mode features in the Cortex-M0/M0þ
processor so that an embedded system can stay in low-power mode more often to reduce
the average power consumption without losing performance.

Sleep Modes and Low-Power Features
The Cortex-M processors have a number of low-power features to allow designers to
create very low-power applications. First, the processors have two architectural-defined
sleep modes “Sleep” and “Deep sleep.” In normal designs, the number of sleep modes can
be further expanded using device-specific power control registers.
The sleep modes can be entered using special instructionsd“WFE” and “WFI,” or via
“Sleep-on-Exit” feature, which causes the processor to run only when an interrupt service
require servicing.
Various hardware level features also allow chip designers to fully utilize their low-power
capability of the design. For example, the Cortex-M processors support a unique feature
called the WIC, which allows most parts of the processor system to be powered down
while still allowing interrupt events to be detected, and allow the systems to resume
operation almost instantaneously when required. This greatly reduces the leakage current
(static power consumption) of the system during sleep.
In addition, the design of the Cortex-M0 processor is also carefully developed so that some
parts of the processor like the debug system can be switched off when it is not required.

Logic Cell Enhancements
In recent years there have been enhancements in logic cell designs. Apart from pushing
logic gate designs to smaller transistor size, the Physical IP (Intellectual Property) division
in ARM has also been working hard to find innovative ways to reduce power consumption
in embedded systems. One of the major developments is the introduction of Ultra Low
Leakage (ULL) logic cell library. The first ULL cell library is developed with 0.18 um
process. Apart from reducing the leakage current, the new cell library also supports special
state retention cells that can hold state information while the rest of the system is powered
down. ARM also works with leading EDA tools vendors to allow chip vendors to make
use of these new technologies in their chip designs.

2.6.2 High Code Density

Since most of the instructions are only 16-bit in size, the Cortex-M processors have very
high code density. This enables an application to be squeezed into a microcontroller with a
smaller flash memory. By doing that a designer can use a cheaper microcontroller for the
application, and in some cases reduce the power consumption because the flash memory
required is smaller.
The smaller flash memory size requirement can also bring additional benefit such as lower
electromagnetic interference due to lower power, and smaller silicon package.

2.6.3 Low Interrupt Latency and Deterministic Behavior

In many microcontroller applications, low interrupt latency is an essential requirement. The
interrupt latency of the Cortex-M0 processor is only 16 clock cycles and the Cortex-M0þ
processor has an interrupt latency of 15 cycles. These latency figures include the stacking
of a certain number of registers to the stack, so the Interrupt Service Routines (ISRs) can
start working immediately without additional software overhead to save register states.
The NVIC also automatically handle the prioritization and locating of the ISR starting
addresses via a vector table, so there is no software overhead for identifying which IRQ to
serve, or to branch to the correct ISR. When combining with good program execution
efficiency, the overall interrupt responsiveness is much better than many 8-bit and 16-bit
microcontrollers.
Another key characteristic in this aspect is the deterministic behavior; when an interrupt
arrive, the interrupt latency remain constant and is independent of what instruction the
processor is executing. The only factor that affects interrupt latency is the memory wait states.

2.6.4 Ease of Use

When compared to other processors, including many 32-bit processors, the ARM Cortex
microcontrollers are much easier to use. Most of the software code for the ARM Cortex
microcontrollers can be written in C, allowing shorter software development time as well as
improving software portability. Even if a software developer decided to use assembly code,
the instruction set is fairly easy to understand. Furthermore, since the programmer’s model
is very similar to ARM7TDMIÔ , for those people who are familiar with ARM processors
already, it will not take long for them to become familiar with the Cortex microcontrollers.
To make software development easier, ARM also defines a set of API (Application
Programming Interface) as part of the CMSIS-CORE (Cortex Microcontroller Software
Interface Standard) software framework. These APIs defines a consistent way to access the
processor peripherals including NVIC. The CMSIS projects also included a free DSP
library for all the Cortex-M Processors, a set of APIs for RTOS, and additional solutions
to make software development easier.
To make it even better, the Cortex-M-based microcontrollers and the CMSIS-CORE
software framework are supported by wide range of easy-to-use development suites.

2.6.5 System-Level Features and OS Support Features

The Cortex-M Processors are designed to support wide range of applications. As a result,
there is a range of system-level features including low-power support and flexible interrupt
management with NVIC. Some of the system-level features are at hardware level and

invisible to software developers. For example, one of these important system-level features
is the optional single cycle I/O interface bus on the Cortex-M0þ processor. This provides
higher performance in I/O operations as well as enabling better energy efficiency in I/O
intensive applications.
Many of the system features are shared between multiple Cortex-M processors. For
example, the Cortex-M0þ processor allows the vector table to be relocated to allow better
flexibility in the memory map of the microcontroller devices. This feature is also available
in the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4 Processors.
In addition, the Cortex-M Processors are designed to support various types of embedded
OS efficiently. A number of features are included to support OS such as a system tick
timer called SysTick, and banked stack pointer for efficient process stack management.
These OS features are available in all the Cortex-M Processors.

2.6.6 Comprehensive Debug Features

A number of features are also available to make software development and troubleshooting
easier. In addition to standard debug features like halting, single stepping, reset,
breakpoints, and watchpoints, the Cortex-M Processors also allow the debugger to access
to the memory space even when the processor is running. In addition, the Serial Debug
protocol support enable all these debug features to be available with just two pins. For
those who prefer traditional JTAG protocol, such option is also available.
The Cortex-M0þ processor also support the optional MTB which provides instruction
trace feature. This is very powerful and is not available in many traditional 8-bit and
16-bit microcontrollers.
The debug systems on the Cortex-M Processors are also very scalable, making these
processors suitable for many multiprocessor designs.

2.6.7 Configurability, Flexibility, and Scalability

The Cortex-M Processors are very flexible. A number of configuration options are
available to the chip designers so that they can implement the chips with only the features
they need. For example, for system that does not require the MPU, the chip designer can
omit the MPU from the design by setting a parameter.
Although the instruction set supported by the Cortex-M0 and the Cortex-M0þ processors is
quite a simple instruction set, it is very efficient for most general data processing and can
handle majority of the microcontroller applications very well. The system-level features also
enable these processors to be used in wide range of applications, including many applications
that requires very deterministic responses and very flexible memory system designs.

The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are also very scalable; they can be used in
very small simple microcontroller designs to as a part of a much larger multiprocessor
system. The bus architecture (based on AMBAÒ AHB-Lite) support complex bus systems
with additional bus interconnect components, and the debug architecture also allows
multiple processors to be debugged using a single debug interface. There are also debug
synchronization interface to allow debug events to be shared between multiple processors,
and enable the debugger to control multiple processors at the same time.

2.6.8 Software Portability and Reusability

One of the key advantages of using the Cortex-M processors is that almost everything can
be written in C/Cþþ or other high-level programming languages. As a result, the software
can be very portable because there is no need to use much assembly code or tool chain-
specific keywords, which are not portable.
With the help of the CMSIS projects, the software portability is even higher than
traditional microcontrollers. You can port an application from one Cortex-M-based
microcontroller to another fairly easily. And many middleware developed for the Cortex-M
Processors can be used on wide range of microcontrollers.
You can even port a number of source code files from PC (Personal Computer)
environment and compile it with an ARM microcontroller development suite, add device
driver code and get things running.
Such portability also means that you can reuse many of your program codes easily
(reusable) and provides higher Return of Investment.

2.6.9 Wide Range of Product Choices

In 2014, there are more than 3000 microcontroller devices based on the ARM Cortex-M
Processors. For the microcontrollers based on Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors,
they are available from Freescale, NXP, Nuvoton, ST Microelectronics, Infineon, Silicon
Labs, Atmel, Nordic Semiconductor, Cypress Semiconductor, Sonix Semiconductor, etc.
There are also specialized ASSPs based on the Cortex-M0/M0þ Processors including wireless
communication chips (e.g., Zipbee, Bluetooth products), sensors, touch screen sensors, etc.
In addition to the chip products based on the Cortex-M processors, there are also wide
range of the following:
•   Compiler tool chains available for ARM (e.g., ARM/KeilÒ, mbedÔ .org, IAR Systems,
    Green Hill Systems, Atollic Truestudio, Rowley Associates Crosswork for ARM,
    Raisonance ride7, Mentor Graphics Sourcery CodeBench, Tasking VX-Toolset, mikroC

    Pro for ARM, ImageCraft ICCV8 for ARM Cortex, Cosmic ARM/Cortex-M Cross
    Development tools, Atmel Studio, Cypress PSoC Creator, Infineon DAVE, gcc, Coocox).
•   Debug tools (e.g., Segger, Lauterbach, iSystem, and many of the companies that
    provide compiler tool chains).
•   Wide range of embedded OS.
•   Java platforms (Oracle Java ME, IS2T MicroEJ).
•   Middleware (e.g., communication protocol stack, GUI library).
•   Hardware development boards.
As a result, it is easy to find product development solutions based on ARM Cortex-M
architecture.

2.6.10 Wide Ecosystem Support

A broad ecosystem is one of the key factors of ARM’s success. In addition to working
closely with various silicon partners, ARM also works closely with EDA companies,
software solution providers, open source communities, and so on. For example, ARM has
been investing in improving gcc (GNU Compiler Collection) for ARM Cortex processors,
so that various companies can create high quality and successful microcontroller tool
chains with gcc.
ARM is also working with a number of academic organizations including a number of
universities to help these organizations teaching microcontrollers and processor architecture
subjects. For example, in February 2014, ARM University Program and Partners launched
“Lab-in-a-Box” for Participating Universities Worldwide. There are also various companies
that provide technical trainings, design services, consultancy services, etc.
Since the technical details of the ARM Cortex-M Processors are very open and easy to
access, you can find various design solutions (e.g., example codes, tutorials, books) for
microcontroller based on ARM Cortex-M Processors easily.

2.7 Applications of the Cortex®-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors
2.7.1 Microcontrollers

The most obvious applications of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors are
microcontrollers. Today, there are already a wide range of microcontroller products based
on these two processors. For those who have used microcontroller products for a while,
you would know that there are different types of microcontroller products, and the
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are particularly suitable for the following markets:
    Ultra low-power microcontrollersdSince the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors
    are optimized for low-power applications (e.g., small area, supports various low-power

    sleep modes, support for low-power chip design technologies, high code density, etc.),
    they are very successful in the ultra low-power microcontroller market segment.
    Low cost microcontroller productsdIn many applications, however, cost is the key
    focus. Since the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are very small, and provide
    very good code density, microcontroller devices based on these two processors can have
    very small silicon areas, hence the production cost is reduced.
    Mixed signal microcontrollersdIn some specialized microcontrollers that comes with
    various types of analog circuits, the gate count of the processor need to be very small
    due to the larger transistor geometry. In such applications, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-
    M0þ processors are very attractive because they have very low gate count figures.
    Wireless communication microcontrollersdIn some wireless applications where the
    data rate is fairly low, an ultra low-power processor is highly desirable because a lower
    power processor can help reducing the electromagnetic interference and hence provides
    better wireless communication performance. Also, many of these products are used in
    cost-sensitive applications and therefore small silicon size helps too.

2.7.2 Sensors

There are many types of sensors modern electronics systems. For example, a mobile
phone can have touch screen sensors, temperature sensors, accelerometers, gyroscopes,
sensors inside the batteries, etc. In order to save power, a lot of these sensors need to
operate and alert the main processor only when certain events occurred, and as a result,
many of these sensors need to have built-in data processing capabilities and are therefore
are called Smart Sensors, which contains a processor system and can handle data
processing on its own.
The adding of a processor system brings additional advantages to many of these sensors. For
example, self test, self calibrations, temperature compensation, and various adaptive filtering
operations can now be carried out in software. The sensors can also utilize many of the
low-power strategies for microcontrollers like sleep modes to further enhance battery life.
The low-power nature of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors makes them well
suitable for these usages. The sleep mode support of the processors can also be utilized
when designing low-power support in these sensors.
For example, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are used in a number of touch
screen controllers, accelerometers, and so on. While the data processing performance of
the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors is not as high as the Cortex-M3 and
Cortex-M4 processors, many sensors do not need high data processing bandwidth (due to
low sampling rate) so that a small processor like the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor
is sufficient.

2.7.3 Sensor Hubs

In some devices, like some of the mobile phone and tablets, a sensor hub device is used to
handle processing of data from various sensors and sometimes combine the data to provide
additional information. Some of these sensor hubs can be based on the Cortex-M0/Cortex-
M0þ processors (e.g., Kionix’s KX23H).

2.7.4 Power Management IC

In many mobile phones and tablets, you might see that there is an IC called PMIC (Power
Management IC). This chip controls the power supply to the main application processor,
manages battery charging, and might also handle some audio functions. The Cortex-M
processors are used on a number of PMIC products.
In complex SoC designs, the chips can require a number of voltage supplies. When the
SoC is being use in different situations, the power management software inside the OS
switches between different power profiles based on the current work load. During the
switching, the multiple supply voltages and the clock systems need to be adjusted
accordingly with appropriate stepping sequences. The use of a processor in PMIC enables
these switching sequences to be controlled by software, allowing high flexibility and the
design can be adapted to product requirements.

2.7.5 ASSPs, ASICs

There is a wide range of ASSPs and ASICs designed using the Cortex-M Processors,
including wireless communication IC (e.g., Nordic Semiconductor nRF51 series), smart
meter controller (e.g., Toshiba TMPM061), MEMS (e.g., LIS331EB accelerometer from
ST Microelectronics), power controllers (e.g., Active-semi PACÔ series).

2.7.6 Subsystems in System on Chips

The Cortex-M processors are often used inside many complex SoC for the following:
•   Power management
•   Boot sequence control
•   I/O processing offloading and peripheral monitoring
Using a Cortex-M for I/O processing subsystems allows the main application processor(s)
to stay in sleep modes as much as possible to reduce power. This also allows faster
response time to I/O events because context switching in application processors can take
sometime.

2.8 Why Using a 32-Bit Processor for Microcontroller Applications?
2.8.1 Performance

One of the most significant benefits of the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors over
other traditional 8-bit and 16-bit processors is its energy efficiency. The size of the Cortex-
M0 processor is about the same as typical 16-bit processors and slightly bigger than some
of the 8-bit processors (Note: total silicon size can still be lower because of the higher
code density in ThumbÒ instruction set). However, it has much better performance than
typical 16-bit and 8-bit architectures. As a result, you can put the processor system
(including memory) into sleep mode for more portion of the time to reduce power to a
minimum, while still be able to get the processing task done with a similar silicon and
active power foot print.
Typically benchmark programs are used to determine the performance of processors.
However, performance of a processor is often debatable for several reasons:
•   Benchmark codes might not reflect the processing requirements of real-world
    applications.
•   All C-language-based benchmarks depend on the quality of the C compiler being used.
•   Some benchmark results can be greatly affected by the compiler optimizations.
•   Typical benchmarks cannot cover every aspects of processor requirements in real-world
    applications (e.g., interrupt processing).
Nevertheless, we can still use some of the benchmark result to get an estimation of the
relative performance.
Today, the CoreMarkÒ is one of the more reliable benchmark for microcontroller
performance measurements. CoreMark is developed by Embedded Microprocessor
Benchmark Consortium (EEMBC), it is open access and many CoreMark scores are
posted on the EEMBC Website (www.eembc.org/coremark/). The CoreMark results for the
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are shown in Table 2.1.

For reference, the Dhrystone 2.1 performances of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
Processors are shown in Table 2.2.

The official figures are generated with inline and multifile compilation disabled, as
recommended in the original Dhrystone benchmark. The results with maximum
optimizations are also quotes as some microcontroller vendors quote the Dhrystone results
based on maximum optimization.
Typically the microcontrollers based on Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors have
maximum frequency range of less than 100 MHz, with many of them at round 50 MHz.
Technically, the clock frequency can go much higher depending on the silicon process, but

Table 2.1: CoreMark per MHz results on Embedded Microprocessor Benchmark Consortium
                                     (EEMBC) web site

 Processor                                                   CoreMark/MHz
 CortexÒ-M0þ processor                                       2.49
 Cortex-M0 processor                                         2.33
 Atmel AT89C51RE2 (8051-based design with 6 oscillator       0.11 (oscillator cycle)
 cycle per CPU cycle)
 Atmel ATmega644                                             0.54
 Altera NIOS II                                              1.60
 Microchip dsPIC33 (2 oscillator cycles per CPU cycle)       1.89 (machine cycle)/0.9 (oscillator clock)
 Microchip PIC24 (2 oscillator cycles per CPU cycle)         1.88 (machine cycle)/0.9 (oscillator clock)
 Microchip PIC18                                             0.04
 Renesas RL78/G14                                            0.89
 TI MSP430                                                   1.11
Data from EEMBC Web sitedwww.eembc.org/coremark.

Table 2.2: Dhrystone per MHz results

                                          Official figure            Maximum optimization
                    Ò
             Cortex -M0                   0.87 DMIPS/MHz             1.27 DMIPS/MHz
             Cortex-M0þ                   0.95 DMIPS/MHz             1.36 DMIPS/MHz
           Data from ARMÒ Web sitedwww.arm.com.

very often the speed of the flash memory limited to the maximum throughput. It is possible
to build faster microcontrollers with Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors by adding flash
access accelerators or cache to compensate for the flash memory speed limitations. But for
applications that need high performance, it is more likely to use Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, or
Cortex-M7 processors as the richer instruction set can help enhancing performance.

2.8.2 Code Density

It is a common misunderstanding that 32-bit processor has much larger code size than
8-bit and 16-bit processors. Some people thought that 8-bit processor has 8-bit
instructions, 16-bit processors have 16-bit instructions, etc. This is incorrect (Figure 2.8).
In reality, many instructions in 8-bit microcontrollers are 16-bit, 24-bits, or other sizes
larger than 8-bit, for example, the PIC18 instruction size is 16-bit.
Even for the antiquated 8051 architecture, although some instructions are 1-byte long,
many others are 2 or 3 bytes long. The same generally applies to 16-bit architectures, for
example, some MSP430 instructions take 6 bytes (or even 8 bytes for the MSP430X).

        Number of
        bytes in a                            Instruction size
        instruction
                      8                                               Max
                                                                   (MSP430X)
                      6
                                                                     Max
                                                                   (MSP430)
                      4
                                                                                Max
                             Max
                      2
                                                                      Min       Min
                             Min
                             8051        PIC18          PIC24     MSP430 /      ARM
                                                                  MSP430X
                                                Figure 2.8
                          Instruction size of commonly used microcontrollers.

Most of the instructions in Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are 16 bit, and only a
few instructions are 32 bit. Being a load-store architecture (data need to be loaded from
memory before being processed, and need to write back to memory after the processing is
done), the Cortex-M processor might take more number of instructions, but the overall
code size can still be lower due to overall instruction efficiency.
For example, ARM processors support stack operations (PUSH/POP) of multiple registers
in a single instruction. This feature is not available in most other architectures. Also, the
various address modes also made accessing of local variables, for both signed and unsigned
data, very easy (e.g., sign extension for signed data can be done on the fly during a data
load). Finally, in 8-bit microcontrollers, integers are still 16-bit and hence each integer data
operation requires a sequence of instructions, thus results in much larger code size.
The code density factor has a significant impact to the power consumption because a
significant area of the microcontroller chip is occupied by the flash memory (Figure 2.9).
For a given application, by moving from an 8-bit processor to ARM Cortex-M processor
you could select a chip with much smaller flash memory, possibly by a factor of half the
flash size. As a result, you could use a chip with smaller silicon size, possibly a smaller
chip package, lower power, and having higher performance at the same time.
Since the processor is only a small part of the silicon chip, at the system level, you can
find that the ARM Cortex-M-based microcontrollers have similar range of active power
compare to other 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers. And when including the code density
and performance factors, it is common to see that the energy efficiency of ARM Cortex-
M-based microcontrollers is significantly better than many 8-bit and 16-bit microcontroller
products. For example, an interrupt-driven application scenario is shown in Figure 2.10,
demonstrating Cortex-M-based microcontrollers can have much lower average power.

                              8-bit MCU : consume more
                                                                           ARM MCU : smaller memory
                                  power due to larger
                                                                            requirement, lower power
                                 memory requirement

                                SRAM
                                                              Migrate to                          SRAM
                                                                               Peripherals
                                                              ARM MCU
                          I/O
                          pad       8-bit
                                    CPU     Flash memory
                          Bus
                                                                                   Cortex-M       Flash

                                                                             Bus
                                                                                   processor     memory
                              Peripherals
                                                                                   I/O pad

                               Larger die area due to                         High code density allows
                                  larger code size                            smaller flash to be used
                                        Figure 2.9
   High code density in ARMÒ CortexÒ-M processors enables lower power and smaller designs.

                Microcontroller current on different architectures executing the same interrupt task
Electric
Current                                                 Interrupt events                          Interrupt events
           Interrupt events

                                                                                                                         Time
           Average current for                       Average current for                       Average current for
           8-bit microcontroller                    16-bit microcontrollers                  Cortex-M microcontrollers
                                              Figure 2.10
    At chip level, the energy efficiency of CortexÒ-M-based microcontrollers can be significantly
                                                 better.

When running other applications that are not interrupt driven, the clock frequency for the
Cortex-M0 processor can be reduced significantly compared to 8-bit/16-bit processors to
lower the power consumption, as illustrated in Figure 2.11. In this diagram, it is assumed
that the Cortex-M0/M0þ microcontroller has slightly higher peak current than 16-bit and
8-bit microcontrollers. In reality, many of the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers
have lower peak current than many legacy 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers.
Although there are various other 32-bit microcontrollers available with higher
performance than the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, their processor sizes are
often significantly larger than the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor. As a result, the average
power consumptions of these microcontrollers are higher than the Cortex-M0- and
Cortex-M0þ-based products.

           Performance
                         Cortex-M0/M0+

                                               16-bit
                                             processor

                                                                8-bit
                                                             processor
 Required
performance

                                                         Frequency
 Microcontroller
     power
  consumption                                  Cortex-M0/M0+
                                                16-bit processor
                                                8-bit processor
                                                                         Average current for 8-bit processor

                                                                         Average current for 16-bit processor

                                                                         Average current for Cortex-M0/M0+

                                                         Frequency

                                           Figure 2.11
  CortexÒ-M-based microcontrollers can provide lower power consumption by running at lower
             clock frequencies, even if the electric current could be slightly larger.

2.8.3 Other Benefits of ARM Architectures

Often in 8-bit and 16-bit architectures there are a range of limitations. Apart from the
obvious data size limitation, address size can also be an issue. For example, many of these
architectures cannot handle more than 64 KB memory size, or when over 64 KB memory
space is needed, memory banking is needed which results in significant software overhead.
Memory banking also increases difficulties in software development. On the other hand,
ARM-based microcontrollers use 32-bit addressing, enabling a much larger address space
(up to 4 GB, but a small portion of the spaces are assigned to the processor’s internal
peripherals) and therefore allow easier software development in large projects.
Unlike many 8-bit architecture, the stack of the ARM processors is placed in the main
memory address space. Many 8-bit architecture like 8051 requires the stack memory to be
placed in specific memory range which have very limited size, which create a severe
limitation to the software.
Another limitation of 8-bit microcontroller architectures is the limited instruction sets and
fixed register usages for certain instructions. For example, 8051 heavily relies on the

accumulator register and data pointer registers to handle data processing and memory
transfers. This increases the code size because it needs to keep transferring data into the
accumulator and taking it out before and after operations. For instance, when processing
integer (16-bt) multiplications on an 8051, a lot of data transfer is required to move data
in and out of ACC (Accumulator) register and B register. In Cortex-M processors, the
register usages have fewer restrictions.
For applications that require multitasking, the OS support in ARM Cortex-M processor
series is also much superior. For example, the banked stack pointers in ARM Cortex-M
processors enable efficient context switching and smaller stack size usages.

2.8.4 Software Reusability

For proprietary architectures, quite often program code requires a range of compiler-
specific language extensions, which make it difficult to learn and reuse program code. This
is not the same in the ARM Cortex-M programming. Since almost everything can be
programmed in C/Cþþ on ARM Cortex-M processors, and there is little dependency on
tool chain-specific features, this enables much better software reuse and made learning of
programming easier.
This page intentionally left blank
