                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 4

Architecture
4.1 Overview of ARMv6-M Architecture
4.1.1 What Architecture Means

The ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors are both based on the ARMv6-M
architecture. As covered in Section 2.4, the term architecture can refer to the following
two areas:
•     Architecture: defines how the program execution should behave and how the debuggers
      interact with the processor
•     Microarchitecture: the exact implementation details of the processor, for example, how
      many pipeline stages, instruction cycles, what type of bus interface used, etc.
Not everything in the ARMv6-M architecture definition is fixed, for example:
•     Some of the features defined in the architecture can be optional. For example, the
      Memory Protection Unit (MPU) is optional and the number of interrupt sources
      supported in a device can be configured by chip designers.
•     Some areas of the architecture can be implementation defined. For example, the number
      of clock cycle for an instruction to execute is processor design specific. Similarly, a
      number of identification (ID) registers can be architecturally defined to be needed, but
      the exact value is processor specific.
•     Some of the features on the processor are not essentially architectural features. For
      example, the single cycle I/O interface on the Cortex-M0þ processor is not a part of the
      ARMv6-M Architecture specification, but can be very valuable to various applications.
As a result, you can have the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors both based on the
ARMv6-M architecture, with different pipeline implementations, and with different feature
set. However, when executing a certain program code sequence, you will get the same data
processing results, although the timing (i.e., number of clock cycle required) can be different.

4.1.2 Background of the ARMv6-M Architecture

The first ARM processor based on the ARMv6-M architecture is actually a processor called
the Cortex-M1 processor. This processor is designed for FPGA applications. The Cortex-M0
processor and then the Cortex-M0þ Processor were developed afterward. There is a little bit
of interesting history about this.
The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00004-7
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

After the success of the Cortex-M3 processor in microcontroller applications, ARM had
been looking into expanding into FPGA applications. After some investigations, the ARM
processor engineering team found that while the Cortex-M3 processor can work fine in
FPGA, it is not well optimized for FPGA hardware and therefore the maximum clock
frequency is a bit slow. Also, the Cortex-M3 processor has multiple bus interface (based
on AHB-Lite protocol) which need to be connected to memory blocks, making it slightly
more work for FPGA designers to integrate the processor into their FPGA projects.
When looking into the details of the design requirements, many FPGA applications only
need a simple processor for control, and complex data processing could be done in FPGA
hardware. On the other hand, the exception handling and system features of the Cortex-M3
processor is very attractive for many FPGA system designers, so ARM decided that there is a
need to have a new processor architecture and a new processor based on these requirements.
As a result, the ARMv6-M architecture and the Cortex-M1 processor were formed. The
programmer’s model of the Cortex-M1 processor and the exception model is based on the
Cortex-M3 processor, while the instruction set is based on the Thumb instruction set found
in ARMv6 architecture, plus additional system instructions required for the Cortex-M
processor (e.g., special register accesses), as shown in Figure 4.1.
After the Cortex-M1 processor was developed, a number of ARM customers were very
interested to create microcontroller products based on the ARMv6-M architecture.
According to my colleagues the idea was formed when some of the microcontroller vendor’s
management team was chatting with ARM product marketing team in an English pub in an
eveningdThere are a wide range of microcontroller and ASSP/ASIC applications that
requires a simple processor with a small instruction set, while still need to have very capable
interrupt handling capability. While the Cortex-M1 processor is optimized for FPGA

             Architecture      Architecture
                                               Architecture v6          Architecture v7
               v4 / v4T          v5 / v5E                                                   ARMv7-A
                                                                                          E.g. Cortex-A9

                                                                                              ARMv7-R
                                                                                            E.g. Cortex-R4

                                                            ARMv6-M                         ARMv7-M
                                                           Cortex-M1,                     E.g. Cortex-M3
                                                           Cortex-M0,
                                                           Cortex-M0+

                                                 ARM1136,
                ARM7TDMI,     ARM926EJ-S,
  Examples                                       ARM1176,
                920T, 922T     946E, 966E
                                                ARM1156T-2

                                            Figure 4.1
                             Evolution of the ARMv6-M architecture.

designs, it was not optimized for low-power applications so that it is not suitable for these
applications. As a result, ARM decided to design a new processor based on the ARMv6-M
architecture, and optimized it for low-power designs and low-cost microcontrollers.
The outcome was the Cortex-M0 processor, and it had become the quickest licensed
processor product in ARM history. At a minimum gate count of just 12K gates, it was a
ground-breaking product at the time as it enabled many ultra-low power designs to
integrate a high performance (related to 8-bit and 16-bit processors) processor, together
with sensors, wireless communication chipset, smart analog components, etc.
Over the year, the ARMv6-M architecture expanded further to add additional system
features including MPU support (which was not available for Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M1
processors). In addition to the Cortex-M1, Cortex-M0, and Cortex-M0þ processors, the
ARMv6-M architecture is also used in SC000, one of the SecurCoreÒ processor products
developed for SmartCards and other security products.

4.2 Programmer’s Model
4.2.1 Operation Modes and States

The ARMv6-M architecture has two operation modes and two states. In addition, it can have
privileged and unprivileged access levels. These are shown in Figure 4.2. The privileged
access level can access to all resources in the processor, while unprivileged access level
means some memory regions can be inaccessible, and a few operations cannot be used.
Unprivileged access level is not available in the CortexÒ-M0 processor, and is optional
(device-specific) in the Cortex-M0þ processor.

                       Thumb State

           Exception      Handler Mode
            request      Executing exception
                              handler                          Exception                    Debug State
                                                                request     Debug
                                                                                           (The processor stop
                                                                           activities
                Thread Mode                                                               executing instruction)
                Executing normal
Start
               code in Privileged      Exception
                  access level          return                                           Debug operation - Only
                                                                                        possible when debugger is
                        Software                    Thread Mode                                 connected.
                         switch                      Executing normal
                                                   code in Unprivileged
                                                       access level
                                                                              Optional in the Cortex-M0+
                                                                            processor, and not available in
                         Normal operation – the processor is                    Cortex-M0 processor
                        running Thumb/Thumb-2 instructions

                                            Figure 4.2
                         Processor modes and state in ARMv6-M architecture.

When the processor is running a program, it is in the Thumb state. In this state, it can be
either in the Thread mode or the Handler mode. In the ARMv6-M architecture, the
programmer’s model of Thread mode and Handler mode are almost completely the same.
The only difference is that Thread mode can use a shadowed stack pointer (Figure 4.8) by
configuring a special register called CONTROL. Details of stack pointer selection will be
covered later in this chapter (Section 4.4).
Architecturally, Thread Mode can be configured as:
•   Privileged, or
•   Unprivileged (with restriction to certain memory spaces, and cannot access to certain
    core internal registers). This is defined as an optional feature in the architecture.
In the Cortex-M0þ processor, a program running in privileged state can switch itself into
unprivileged access level (if unprivileged level is implemented) by programming the
CONTROL register, but cannot switch itself back to privileged state. To get back to
privileged state, it must go through an exception sequence. This mechanism prevents an
untrusted application task from gaining privileged accesses without going through Operating
System (OS) services.
In the Cortex-M0 processor, the processor always executes in privileged state.
Unprivileged Thread mode is not available.
The Debug state is active when the processor is halted, for example, by a debugger via a
debug connection. This is used for debugging operation only. This state allows the
debugger to access or change the processor register values. The debugger can access
system memory locations in both Thumb state or Debug state.
When the processor is powered up, it starts with running code in Thumb state and Thread
mode, with privileged access level by default.

4.2.2 Registers and Special Registers

In order to perform data processing and controls, a number of registers are required inside
the processor core. If data from memory is to be processed, it has to be loaded from the
memory to a register in the register bank, processed inside the processor, and then written
back to the memory if needed, or kept in the register bank for another operation. This is
commonly called “load-store architecture.” By having a sufficient number of registers in
the register bank, this mechanism is easy to use, and is C-friendly. It is easy for C
compilers to compile a C program into machine code with good performance.
The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor provides a register bank of 16 32-bit registers
(most are general purposed, R13eR15 has special purposes), and a number of special
registers (Figure 4.3).

                        Register bank
         R0          General Purpose Register
         R1          General Purpose Register                                   Special Registers
         R2          General Purpose Register
                                                                            xPSR          Program Status Registers
         R3          General Purpose Register
                                                         Low Registers
         R4          General Purpose Register
         R5          General Purpose Register                              APSR       EPSR        IPSR
         R6          General Purpose Register                            Application Execution   Interrupt
         R7          General Purpose Register                              PSR         PSR         PSR
         R8          General Purpose Register
         R9          General Purpose Register                            PRIMASK          Interrupt Mask Register
         R10         General Purpose Register           High Registers
         R11         General Purpose Register                            CONTROL          Stack definition
         R12         General Purpose Register
     R13 (banked)       Stack Pointer (SP)
         R14            Link Register (LR)
         R15          Program Counter (PC)

                            MSP              Main Stack Pointer
                            PSP              Processs Stack Pointer

                                             Figure 4.3
                     Registers in the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors.

The detailed descriptions for these registers are as follows:
R0eR12
Registers R0eR12 are for general uses. Due to the limited space in the 16-bit ThumbÒ
instructions, many of the Thumb instructions can only access R0eR7, which are also
called the low registers. While some instructions, like MOV (move), can be used on all
registers. When using these registers with ARMÒ development tools such as the ARM
assembler, you can use either upper case (e.g., R0) or lower case (e.g., r0) to specify the
register to be used. The initial values of R0eR12 at reset are undefined.
R13, Stack Pointer
R13 is the Stack Pointer. It is used for accessing the stack memory via PUSH and POP
operations. There are physically two different stack pointers in Cortex-M0 and Cortex-
M0þ Processors.
•   The Main Stack Pointer (MSP, or SP_main in ARM documentation) is the default Stack
    Pointer after reset, and is used when running exception handlers.
•   The Process Stack Pointer (PSP, or SP_process in ARM documentation) can only be
    used in Thread mode (when not handling exceptions).
The stack pointer selection is determined by the CONTROL register, one of the special
registers which will be introduced later (CONTROLdSpecial Register).

When using ARM development tools, you can access the stack pointer using either “R13”
or “SP.” Both upper case and lower case (e.g., “r13” or “sp”) can be used. Only one of the
stack pointers is visible at a given time. However, you can access to the MSP or PSP
directly when using the special register access instructions MRS and MSR. In such cases,
the register names “MSP” or “PSP” should be used.
The lowest 2 bits of the stack pointers are always zero and writes to these 2 bits are ignored.
In ARM processors, PUSH and POP are always 32-bit accesses because the registers are
32-bit, and the transfers in stack operations must be aligned to a 32-bit word boundary. The
initial value of MSP is loaded from the first 32-bit word of the vector table from the program
memory during the start-up sequence. The initial value of PSP is undefined.
It is not necessary to use the PSP. In many applications, the system can completely rely on
the MSP. The PSP is normally used in designs with an OS, where the stack memory for
OS Kernel and the thread-level application codes must be separated.
R14, Link Register
R14 is the Link Register (LR). The LR is used for storing the return address of a subroutine
or function call. When BL or BLX is executed, the return address is stored in LR. At the end
of the subroutine or function, the return address stored in LR is loaded into the program
counter (PC) so that the execution of the calling program can be resumed. In the case where
an exception occurs, the LR also provides a special code value which is used by the
exception return mechanism. When using ARM development tools, you can access to the
LR using either “R14” or “LR.” Both upper and lower case (e.g., “r14” or “lr”) can be used.
Although the return address in the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor is always an even address
(bit[0] is zero because smallest instruction are 16-bit and must be half-word aligned), bit
zero of LR is readable and writeable. In the ARMv6-M architecture, some instructions
require bit zero of a function address set to 1 to indicate Thumb state.
R15, Program Counter
R15 is the PC. It is readable and writeable. A read returns the current instruction address
plus four (this is caused by the pipeline nature of the design). Writing to R15 will cause a
branch to take place (but unlike a function call, the LR does not get updated).
In the ARM assembler, you can access the PC using either “R15” or “PC,” in either upper
or lower case (e.g., “r15” or “pc”). Instruction addresses in the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor
must be aligned to half-word address, which means the actual bit zero of the PC should be
zero all the time. However, when attempting to carry out a branch using the branch
instructions (BX or BLX), the LSB of the PC should be set to1.1 This is to indicate that

1
    Not required when a move (MOV) or add (ADD) instruction is used to modify the PC.

the branch target is a Thumb program region. Otherwise, it can imply an attempt to switch
the processor to ARM state (depending on the instruction used), which is not supported
and will cause a fault exception.
xPSR, Combined Program Status Register
The combined Program Status Register (PSR) provides information about program
execution and the ALU flags. It consists of the following three PSRs (Figure 4.4):
•   Application PSR (APSR),
•   Interrupt PSR (IPSR), and
•   Execution PSR (EPSR)

              bit                                                                             bit
              31      28       24                   16                   8                     0

      APSR     N Z C V                                   Reserved

              31               24                   16                   8   5                 0

      IPSR                               Reserved                                ISR Number

              31               24                   16                   8                     0

      EPSR          Reserved   T                              Reserved

                                            Figure 4.4
             Application PSR (APSR), Interrupt PSR (IPSR), and Execution PSR (EPSR).

The APSR contains the ALU flags: N (negative flag), Z (zero flag), C (carry or borrow
flag), and V (overflow flag). These bits are at the top 4 bits of the APSR. The common use
of these flags is to control conditional branches.
The IPSR contains the current executing ISR (Interrupt Service Routine) number. Each
exception on the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor has a unique associated ISR number (exception
type). This is useful for identifying the current interrupt type during debugging and allows an
exception handler that is shared by several exceptions to know which exception it is serving.
The EPSR on the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor contains the T bit which indicates that the
processor is in the Thumb state. On the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor, this bit is normally set
to 1 because the Cortex-M processors only support Thumb state. If this bit is cleared, a
HardFault exception will be generated in the next instruction execution.
These three registers can be accessed as one register called xPSR. For example, when an
interrupt takes place, the xPSR is one of the registers that is stored on to the stack memory
automatically and restored automatically after returning from an exception. During the
stack store and restore, the xPSR is treated as one register (Figure 4.5).

                    bit                                                                                bit
                    31          28   24           16                         8        5                 0

             xPSR    N Z C V Reserved T            Reserved                               ISR Number

                                           Figure 4.5
                                              xPSR.

Direct access to the PSRs is only possible through special register access instructions.
However, the value of the APSR can affect conditional branches and the carry flag in the
APSR can also be used in some data processing instructions.
PRIMASKdInterrupt Mask Special Register
The PRIMASK register is a 1-bit wide interrupt mask register. When set, it blocks all
interrupts apart from the Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI) and the HardFault exception.
Effectively it raises the current interrupt priority level to 0 which is the highest value for a
programmable exception (Figure 4.6).

                          bit                                                                       bit
                          31                                                                      1 0

             PRIMASK                              Reserved

                                                                                       PRIMASK

                                           Figure 4.6
                                           PRIMASK.

The PRIMASK register can be accessed using special register access instructions (MSR,
MRS) as well as using an instruction called CPS. This is commonly used for handling
time critical routines.
CONTROLdSpecial Register
As mentioned earlier, there are two stack pointers in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors. The stack pointer selection is determined by the processor mode as well as the
configuration of the CONTROL register (bit 1dSPSEL). The Thread mode of the
Cortex-M0þ processor can either be privileged or unprivileged, and this is also controlled
by CONTROL (bit 0dnPRIV) (Figure 4.7).

                          bit                                                                       bit
                          31                                                                      1 0

             CONTROL                            Reserved

                                                                     SPSEL (Stack definition)
                                                             nPRIV (not Privileged) / Reserved

                                           Figure 4.7
                                           CONTROL.

After reset, the MSP is used, but can be switched to the PSP in Thread mode (when not
running an exception handler) by setting bit[1] in the CONTROL register. During running
of an exception handler (when the processor is in handler mode), only the MSP is used,
and the CONTROL register reads as zero. The bit[1] of CONTROL register can only be
changed in Thread mode, or via the exception entrance and return mechanism
(Figure 4.8).
                                                   Thumb State

                             Exception            Handler Mode              Exception
                              request         Executing exception handler    return

                                                 CONTROL[1] = 0
                                                  MSP selected

                                                  Thread Mode
                                                Executing normal code

                                  CONTROL[1] = 0               CONTROL[1] = 1
                   Start
                                     MSP selected                 PSP selected

                                           Figure 4.8
                                     Stack pointer selection.

Bit[0] of the CONTROL register is for selecting between Privileged and Unprivileged
states during Thread mode. Some of the Cortex-M0þ devices and all Cortex-M0
processor-based devices do not support unprivileged state and therefore this bit is always
zero (Figure 4.9).

                                                   Thumb State

                             Exception            Handler Mode              Exception
                              request         Executing exception handler    return

                                                Always Privileged

                                                  Thread Mode
                                                Executing normal code

                                  CONTROL[0] = 0               CONTROL[0] = 1
                   Start
                                         Privileged              Unprivileged

                                            Figure 4.9
                                    Privileged state selection.

Access of Registers and Special Registers
In C/Cþþ programming or any other high level languages, the registers in the register
bank (R0eR12) can be utilized by the compiler automatically. In most cases, you do not
need to worry about which registers being used, unless you are interfacing assembly code
and C/Cþþ code (such mixed language development will be cover in Chapter 21).
The other special registers need to be accessed using some special instructions (MRS and
MSR). The CMSIS-CORE provides a number of APIs for such usages. However, please note
that some of these special registers cannot be accessed or changed by software (Table 4.1).

Table 4.1: Access limitations to special registers

                              Privileged                                       Unprivileged
 APSR                         R/W                                              R/W
 EPSR                         No access (T bit read as zero)                   No access (T bit read as zero)
 IPSR                         Read only                                        Read only
 PRIMASK                      R/W                                              Read only
 CONTROL                      R/W                                              Read only

4.2.3 Behaviors of the APSR

Data processing instructions can affect destination registers as well as the APSR which is
commonly known as ALU status flags in other processor architectures. The APSR is
essential for controlling conditional branches. In addition, one of the APSR flags, the C
(Carry) bit, can also be used in add and subtract operations.
There are four APSR flags in the Cortex-M0 ad Cortex-M0þ processors (Table 4.2).

Table 4.2: ALU flags on the Cortex®-M0 and Cortex-M0+ processors

 Flag          Descriptions
 N (bit 31)    Set to bit[31] of the result of the executed instruction. When it is “1,” the result has a
               negative value (when interpreted as a signed integer). When it is “0,” the result has a
               positive value or equal zero.
 Z (bit 30)    Set to “1” if the result of the executed instruction is zero. It can also be set to “1” after a
               compare instruction is executed if the two values are the same.
 C (bit 29)    Carry flag of the result. For unsigned addition, this bit is set to “1” if an unsigned
               overflow occurred. For unsigned subtract operations, this bit is the inverse of the borrow
               output status.
 V (bit 28)    Overflow of the result. For signed addition or subtraction, this bit is set to “1” if a signed
               overflow occurred.

A few examples of the ALU flag results are as given in Table 4.3.

Table 4.3: ALU flags operation examples

 Operation                              Results, flags
 0x70000000 + 0x70000000                Result ¼ 0xE0000000, N ¼ 1, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 0, V ¼ 1
 0x90000000 + 0x90000000                Result ¼ 0x20000000, N ¼ 0, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 1, V ¼ 1
 0x80000000 + 0x80000000                Result ¼ 0x00000000, N ¼ 0, Z ¼ 1, C ¼ 1, V ¼ 1
 0x00001234 -- 0x00001000               Result ¼ 0x00000234, N ¼ 0, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 1, V ¼ 0
 0x00000004 -- 0x00000005               Result ¼ 0xFFFFFFFF, N ¼ 1, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 0, V ¼ 0
 0xFFFFFFFF -- 0xFFFFFFFC               Result ¼ 0x00000003, N ¼ 0, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 1, V ¼ 0
 0x80000005 -- 0x80000004               Result ¼ 0x00000001, N ¼ 0, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 1, V ¼ 0
 0x70000000 -- 0xF0000000               Result ¼ 0x80000000, N ¼ 1, Z ¼ 0, C ¼ 0, V ¼ 1
 0xA0000000 -- 0xA0000000               Result ¼ 0x00000000, N ¼ 0, Z ¼ 1, C ¼ 1, V ¼ 0

In the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, almost all of the data processing instructions
modify the APSR; however, some of these instructions do not update the V flag or the C flag.
For example, the MULS (multiply) instruction only changes the N flag and the Z flag.
The ALU flags can be used for handling data that is larger than 32-bits. For example, we
can perform a 64-bit addition by splitting the operation into two 32-bit additions. The
pseudo form of the operation can be written as follows:
       // Calculating Z = X + Y, where X, Y and Z are all 64-bit
       Z[31:0] = X[31:0] + Y[31:0];       // Calculate lower word addition,
                                          // carry flag get updated
       Z[63:32] = X[63:32] + Y[63:32] + Carry; // Calculate upper word addition.

An example of carry out such 64-bit add operation in assembly code can be found in
Chapter 6 (Section 6.5.1).
The other common usage of APSR flag is to control branching. More on this will be covered
in Chapter 5 (Section 5.4.8), where the details of the condition branch instruction will be
covered.

4.3 Memory System
4.3.1 Overview

All ARMÒ CortexÒ-M processors have a 4 GB of memory address space. The memory
space is architecturally defined into a number of regions, with each region having a
recommended usage to help software porting between different devices (Figure 4.10).
The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors contain a number of built-in components like
the NVIC (the interrupt controller) and a number of debug components. These are located in
fixed memory locations within the system region of the memory map. As a result, all the
devices based on the Cortex-M processors have the same programming model for interrupt
control and debug. This makes it convenient for software porting as well as helping debug

                                                                            0xE00FFFFF        0xE000EFFF
                                0xFFFFFFFF
Private peripherals including
                                                                                Private
built-in interrupt controller                                                                System Control
                                                    System                  Peripheral Bus
(NVIC) and debug                                                                              Space (SCS)
                                                                                (PPB)
components
                                0xE0000000   Private Peripheral Bus
                                0xDFFFFFFF                                  0xE0000000        0xE000E000
Mainly used for external
                                                External Device       1GB
peripherals.
                                0xA0000000
                                0x9FFFFFFF
Mainly used for external
                                                 External RAM      1GB
memory.
                                0x60000000
                                0x5FFFFFFF
Mainly used for peripherals.                      Peripherals     0.5GB
                                0x40000000
Mainly used for data memory     0x3FFFFFFF
                                                    SRAM          0.5GB
(e.g. static RAM.)              0x20000000
Mainly used for program         0x1FFFFFFF
code. Also used for default                         CODE          0.5GB
exception vector table          0x00000000

                                                 Figure 4.10
                                                Memory map.

tool vendors to develop debug solutions for the Cortex-M0-based microcontroller or System-
on-Chip (SoC) products.
The memory space is shared between instruction memory, data memory, peripherals
processor’s built-in peripherals (e.g., the interrupt controller), and processor’s debug
components. However, the debug components are not visible to the software running on
the processor (from architecture point of view this is implementation defined, and existing
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are designed to make the debug components to be
visible only from debugger). This is different from Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7
processors, where privileged codes can access the debug components.
In most cases, the memories connected to the Cortex-M processors are 32-bits, but it is also
possible to connect memory of different data widths to a Cortex-M processor with suitable
memory interface hardware. The memory system in Cortex-M processors supports memory
transfers of different sizes such as byte (8-bit), half word (16-bit), and word (32-bit). The
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor designs can be configured to support either little
endian or big endian memory systems, but cannot switch from one to another in an
implemented design.
Since the memory system and peripherals connected to the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ
processors are developed by microcontroller vendors or SoC designers, different memory
sizes and memory types can be found in different Cortex-M0/M0þ-based products.

4.3.2 Single Cycle I/O Interface

The Cortex-M0þ Processor has an optional feature, which allows chip designer to add a
separated bus interface (in addition to the main system bus), which allows certain
peripheral registers to be accessed in a single clock cycle. This enables the microcontroller
product to provide better performance in I/O operations, as well as improve energy
efficiency in I/O intensive applications.
When this feature is implemented, the address space connect to the single cycle I/O
interface appears as a part of the main memory space, so from software point of view the
peripheral registers in the single cycle I/O bus works in the same way as registers on the
AHB-Lite system bus. However, this interface can only be used for data accesses and does
not support instruction accesses (Figure 4.11).

                                                      Address          Single Cycle I/O interface
                                                 decoder to define
                                                  fast I/O memory      Data Transfers in memory
                                                        space.         space allocated for fast I/O
                                                                        are handled on this bus.

                                                                             Fast
                                       Processor
                                                                          Peripherals
              System Bus

        Data Transfers not belong              System bus
          to fast I/O space and                (Pipelined operation,
           instruction fetches.
                                               AHB Lite protocol)

                                     AHB interconnect

                               ROM     RAM     Peripherals
                                           Figure 4.11
               Optional single Cycle I/O Interface on the CortexÒ-M0þ Processor.

The single cycle I/O interface is intended for connecting small number of peripherals, which
need faster access speed (e.g., GPIO). Peripherals like UART and timers are normally
connected via the AHB-Lite system bus because the associated operations typically do not
have short-latency requirement and do not occur frequently.

4.3.3 Memory Protection Unit

Another optional feature in the Cortex-M0þ processor is the MPU (MPU). This is a
programmable unit and is to be used with the privilegedeunprivileged states of the

processor. The MPU provides up to eight programmable regions, and each region can be
defined with different starting addresses, sizes, and memory access permissions.
In a multitasking system, an OS can run some of the application tasks in unprivileged state
and the OS can program the optional MPU each time it switches between tasks, so each of
the unprivileged application tasks run in their own permitted memory space and can only
access to memory locations allocated to them.
The configuration registers of the MPU is privileged access only so that an unprivileged
task cannot change the access permission to bypass the MPU.
More information about the MPU is covered in Chapter 12.

4.4 Stack Memory Operations
Stack memory is a memory usage mechanism that allows the system memory to be used as
temporary data storage that behaves as a first-in-last-out buffer. One of the essential elements
of stack memory operation is a register called the Stack Pointer. The stack pointer indicates
where the current stack memory location is, and is adjusted automatically each time a stack
operation is carried out.
In the CortexÒ-M processors, the Stack Pointer is register R13 in the register bank.
Physically there are two stack pointers in the Cortex-M processors, but only one of them
is used at a time, depending on the current value of the CONTROL register and the state
of the processor (see Figure 4.8).
In common terms, storing data to the stack is called pushing (using the PUSH instruction)
and restoring data from the stack is called popping (using the POP instruction). Depending
on processor architecture, some processors perform storing of new data to stack memory
using incremental address indexing and some use decrement address indexing. In the
Cortex-M processors, the stack operation is based on a “full-descending” stack model.
This means the stack pointer always points to the last filled data in the stack memory, and
the stack pointer predecrements for each new data store (PUSH) (Figure 4.12).
PUSH and POP are commonly used at the beginning and at the end of a function or
subroutine. At the beginning of a function, the current contents of the registers used by the
calling program are stored onto the stack memory using PUSH operations, and at the end of
the function, the data on the stack memory is restored to the registers using POP operations.
Typically, each register PUSH operation should have a corresponding register POP operation;
otherwise the stack pointer will not be able to restore registers to their original values. This
can result in unpredictable behaviors, for example, function return to incorrect addresses.
The minimum data size to be transferred for each push and pop operations is one word
(32-bit) and multiple registers can be pushed or popped in one instruction. The stack

                       PUSH operation                                           POP operation
                                                  Data Processing
                 Stack PUSH operation to back     (Original register     Stack POP operation to restore
                      up register contents       contents destroyed)            register contents

                                                                                    Stack pointer
                                                                                    incremented
       Address   Memory                 Memory

         SP                                                                         SP
                             SP          1234                           1234

   1234
                                                                       Memory              1234
    Register                  Stack pointer
    contents                  decremented                                              Register
                                                                                   contents restored

                                       Figure 4.12
                      Stack PUSH and POP in the CortexÒ-M processors.

memory accesses in the Cortex-M processors are designed to be always word aligned
(address values must be a multiple of 4, for example, 0x0, 0x4, 0x8,.) as this gives the
best efficiency for minimum design complexity. For this reason, bit [1:0] of both stack
pointers in the Cortex-M processors are hardwired to zeros and read as zeros.
In programming, the stack pointer can be accessed as either R13 or SP in the program codes.
Depending on the processor state and the CONTROL register value, the stack pointer
accessed can either be the MSP or the PSP. In many simple applications, only one stack
pointer is needed and by default the MSP is used. The PSP is usually only required when an
OS is used in the embedded application.
In a typical embedded application with an OS, the OS kernel uses the MSP and the
application processes use the PSP. This allows the stack for the kernel to be separate from
stack memory for the application processes. This allows the OS to carry out context
switching quickly (switching from execution of one application process to another). Also,
since exception handlers only use main stack, each of the stack spaces allocated to
application tasks do not need to reserve space needed for exception handler, thus allow
better memory usage efficiency.
Even though the OS kernel only uses the MSP as its stack pointer, it can still access the
value in PSP by using special register access instructions (MRS and MSR) (Table 4.4).
Since the stack grows downward (full-descending), it is common for the initial value of
the stack pointer to be set to the upper boundary of SRAM. For example, if the SRAM
memory range is from 0x20000000 to 0x20007FFF, we can start the stack pointer at

Table 4.4: Stack pointer usage definition

 Processor state         CONTROL[1] [ 0 (default setting)             CONTROL[1] [ 1 (OS has started)
 Thread mode             Use MSP (R13 is MSP)                         Use PSP (R13 is PSP)
 Handler mode            Use MSP (R13 is MSP)                         Use MSP (R13 is MSP)

0x20008000. In this case, the first stack PUSH will take place at address 0x20007FFC, the
top word of the SRAM (see Figure 4.13).

                                                            Memory
                                                            Address

                   SP initial value                    0x20008000
                                                       0x20007FFC
                    First memory
                    location used
                       for stack                                                 SRAM

                                                       0x20000000

                                            Figure 4.13
                                Example of stack pointer initial value.

The initial value of MSP is stored at the beginning of the program memory. Here we will
find the exception vector table, which is introduced in the next section. The initial value of
PSP is undefined, and therefore the PSP must be initialized by software before using it.
In many software development environments, the stack pointer can be set up again during
the C start-up code (before entering “main()”). This two-stage stack initialization sequence
enables a system to boot up the system with the stack pointing to a small internal SRAM
inside the chip, and then change the stack definition to a larger external memory space
after the external memory controller has been initialized.

4.5 Exceptions and Interrupts
Exceptions are events that cause changes to program control: when an exception occurred,
instead of continuing program execution, the processor suspends the current executing task
and executes a part of the program code called the exception handler. After the exception
handler is completed, it will then resume the normal program execution.
There are various types of exceptions, and interrupts are a subset of exceptions.
The CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors supports up to 32 external interrupts
(commonly referred as IRQ), and an additional special interrupt called the NMI

(Non-Maskable Interrupt). The exception handlers for interrupt events are commonly
known as ISRs (Interrupt Service Routines). Interrupts are usually generated by on-chip
peripherals, or by external input through I/O ports. The exact number of available
interrupts on the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor depends on the microcontroller product you
use. In systems with more peripherals, it is possible for multiple interrupt sources to share
one interrupt connection.
In addition to the NMI and IRQs, there are a number of system exceptions in the Cortex-M0/
M0þ processors primarily for OS use and fault handling, which are as given in Table 4.5.

Table 4.5: Exception types

                          Exception
    Exception type        number             Description
    Reset                 1                  Power on reset or system reset.
    NMI                   2                  Non-Maskable interruptdhighest priority exception that cannot
                                             be disabled. For safety critical events.
    HardFault             3                  For fault handlingdactivated when a system error is detected.
    SVCall                11                 Supervisor calldactivated when SVC instruction is executed.
                                             Primarily for OS applications.
    PendSV                14                 Pendable service (system) calldactivate by writing to an
                                             interrupt control and status register. Primarily for OS
                                             applications.
    SysTick               15                 System Tick timer exception e typically used by an OS for a
                                             regular system tick exception. The system tick timer (SysTick) is
                                             an optionala timer unit inside the CortexÒ-M processor.
    IRQ0 to IRQ31b        16e47              Interruptsdcan be from external sources or from on-chip
                                             peripherals.
a
 SysTick is optional in ARMv6-M architecture, and mandatory in ARMv7-M architecture.
b
 ARMv6-M architecture limited the design to 32 IRQs. ARMv7-M architecture allows up to 480, but the Cortex-M3,
Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors limited this to 240.

Each exception has an exception number. This number is reflected in various registers
including the IPSR, and is used to define the exception vector addresses. Note that
exception number is separated from interrupt numbers used in device driver libraries. In
most device driver libraries, system exceptions are defined using negative numbers, and
interrupts are defined as positive numbers from 0 to 31.
Reset is a special type of exception. When the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor exits from a
reset, it executes the reset handler in thread mode (no need to return from handler to
thread). Also, the exception number of 1 is not visible in the IPSR.
Apart from NMI, HardFault and reset, all other exceptions have a programmable priority
level. The priority level for NMI and HardFault are fixed and both have a higher priority
than the rest of the exceptions. More details will be covered in Chapter 8 of this book.

4.6 Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller
In order to prioritize the interrupt requests and handle other exceptions, the CortexÒ-M
processors have a built-in interrupt controller called the NVIC. The interrupt management
function is controlled by a number of programmable registers in the NVIC. These registers
are memory mapped, with the addresses located within the System Control Space (SCS) as
illustrated in Figure 4.10.
The NVIC supports a number of features:
•   Flexible interrupt management
•   Nested interrupt support
•   Vectored exception entry
•   Interrupt masking

4.6.1 Flexible Interrupt Management

In the Cortex-M processors, each external interrupt can be enabled, disabled, and can have
its pending status set or clear by software. It can also accept exception requests at signal
level (interrupt request from a peripheral remain asserted until the ISR clears the interrupt
request), as well as an exception request pulse (minimum 1 clock cycle). This allows the
interrupt controller to be used with any interrupt source.

4.6.2 Nested Interrupt Support

In the Cortex-M processors, each exception has a priority level. The priority level can be
fixed or programmable (all interrupts has programmable priority levels). When an exception
occurs such as an external interrupt, the NVIC will compare the priority of this exception to
the current level. If the new exception has a higher priority, the current running task will be
suspended. Some of the registers will be stored on to the stack memory and the processor
will start executing the exception handler of the new exception. This process is called
“preemption.” When the higher priority exception handler is completes, it is terminated with
an exception return operation and the processor automatically restores the registers from the
stack and resumes the task that was running previously. This mechanism allows nesting of
exception services without any software overhead.

4.6.3 Vectored Exception Entry

When an exception occurs, the processor will need to locate the starting point of the
corresponding exception handler. Traditionally, in ARMÒ processors such as the ARM7TDMI,
this is done by software. The Cortex-M processors automatically locate the starting point of
the exception handler from a vector table in the memory. As a result, the delay from the
occurrence of the exception to the execution of the exception handlers is reduced.

4.6.4 Interrupt Masking

The NVIC in the Cortex-M processors provides an interrupt masking feature via the
PRIMASK special register. This can disable all exceptions except HardFault and NMI.
This masking is useful for operations that should not be interrupted such as time critical
control tasks or real time multimedia codecs. (Note: Processors based on ARMv7-M have
additional interrupt masking registers, see Section 22.5 in Chapter 22.)
These NVIC features help makes the Cortex-M processors easier to use, provides better
response times and reduces program code size by managing the exceptions in the NVIC
hardware.

4.7 System Control Block
Apart from the NVIC, the SCS also contains a number of other registers for system
management. This is called the System Control Block. It contains registers for sleep mode
features, system exception configurations as well as a register containing the processor
identification code (which can be used by in circuit debuggers for detection of the
processor type).

4.8 Debug System
Although being currently the smallest processors in the ARMÒ processor family, the
CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support a range of debug features. The processor
core provides halt mode debug, stepping, register accesses, and memory accesses for
debugger, and additional debug blocks provide debug features like the Breakpoint Unit
(BPU) and Data Watchpoint (DWT) units. The BPU supports up to four hardware
breakpoints, and the DWT supports up to two watchpoints.
In order to allow a debugger to control the aforementioned debug components and carry
out debug operations, the Cortex-M processors provide a debug interface unit. This debug
interface unit can either use the JTAG protocol or the Serial Wire Debug (SWD) protocol
(Figure 4.14). In some Cortex-M-based products, the microcontroller vendors can also
choose to use a debug interface unit which supports both JTAG and SWD protocol.
However, typical Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ implementations are likely to support only
one protocol with SWD probably being preferred due to fewer pins required.
The SWD protocol is a new standard developed by ARMÒ and can reduce the number
debug connection pins to just two signals. It can handle all the same debug features as
JTAG without any loss of performance. The SWD interface shares the same connector as
JTAG: the Serial clock signal is shared with JTAG TCK signal, and the Serial Wire data is
shared with the JTAG TMS signal. There are many debug emulators for ARM

                                                                      JTAG connection                 Serial-Wire connection

                                                                        nTRST
                                                                                                           not used
                                                                          TCK
                                                                                                  Serial-Wire clock
                                                                          TDI                              not used
                                                                         TMS                      Serial-Wire data
       KEIL                                                              TDO
                                                                                                           not used
  Microcontroller
 Development Kit

                                                Com
                                                      USB
                                          Run
                     USB
                                                                                                                    ARM
                                                                                                                 Cortex-M0/
                                                                                                                 Cortex-M0+
                                                                                 Flat cable
                                 KEIL                       ULINK 2
                                 An ARM Company
                                                                                             IDC
                                     In-Circuit Debugger                                  connector

                                             Figure 4.14
              Debug interface connections can be JTAG or the Serial Wire debug protocol.

microcontrollers including ULINK2 (from KeilÒ), and JLink (from SEGGER) that support
the SWD protocol.

4.9 Program Image and Start-up Sequence
To understand the start-up sequence of the CortexÒ-M processors, we need to have a quick
overview on the program image first. Normally, the program image for the Cortex-M0/
M0þ processor is located from address 0x00000000.
The beginning of the program image contains the vector table. It contains the starting
addresses (vectors) of exceptions. Each vector is located in address of “Exception_Number
x 4.” For example, external IRQ #0 is exception type #16, therefore the address of the
vector for IRQ#0 is in 16x4 ¼ 0x40. These vectors have LSB set to 1 to indicate that the
exceptions handlers are to be executed with Thumb instructions. The size of the vector
table depends on how many interrupts are implemented.
The vector table also defines the initial value of the MSP. This is stored in the first word of
the vector table, as shown in Figure 4.15.
When the processor exits from reset, it will first read the first two word addresses in the
vector table, as shown in Figure 4.16. The first word is the initial MSP value, and the
second word is the reset vector which determines the starting of the program execution
address (reset handler).
For example, if we have boot code starting from address 0x000000C0, we need to put this
address value in the reset vector location with the LSB set to one to indicate that it is

                             Program
                             memory
                                                                    Interrupt vectors

                                                                                           0x00000040
                                                                     SysTick vector        0x0000003C
                                                                     PendSV vector         0x00000038
                                                                           reserved
                                                                       SVC vector          0x0000002C
                             Program
                               code                                        reserved
       Program
        image
                                                                    Hard fault vector      0x0000000C
                                                                       NMI vector          0x00000008
                                                                      Reset vector         0x00000004
                            Vector table
      0x00000000                                                    Initial MSP value      0x00000000

                                               Figure 4.15
                                    Vector table in a program image.

                                                         Read address
                   Read address         Read address
                                                          indicated by            Subsequent
                   0x00000000           0x00000004
          Reset                                           reset vector         instruction fetches
                    Fetch initial          Fetch reset   1st instruction
                   value for MSP             vector           fetch

                                                 Time
                                               Figure 4.16
                                             Reset sequence.

Thumb code. Therefore, the value in address 0x00000004 is set to 0x000000C1, as shown
in Figure 4.17. After the reset vector is fetched by the processor, it will start executing
program code from the address found there. This behavior is different from traditional
ARMÒ processors (e.g., ARM7TDMI), where the processor executes the program starting
from address 0x00000000, and the vectors in the vector table are instructions as opposed
to address values in the Cortex-M processors.
The reset sequence also initializes the MSP. Assume we have SRAM located from
0x20000000 to 0x20007FFF, and we want to put the main stack at the top of the SRAM, we
can set this up by putting 0x20008000 in address 0x00000000 (also shown in Figure 4.17).
Since the Cortex-M processor will first decrement the stack pointer before pushing the
data on to the stack, the first stacked item will be located in 0x200007FFC, which is just
at the top of the SRAM. While the second stacked item will be in 0x20007FF8, below the
first stacked item.

            0x20008000
            0x20007FFC      1st stacked item
                                                   Stack
            0x20007FF8      2nd stacked item
                                                  memory                  Stack grow
            0x20007FF4
                                                                          downwards

            0x20000000           SRAM

                             Program code

                               Boot code                                  Program
            0x000000C0
                                                                          execution
                                                   Reset
                             Other vectors
                                                   vector
            0x00000004        0x000000C1                            Initial MSP
                                                                        value
            0x00000000        0x20008000

                                        Figure 4.17
                            Example of MSP and PC initialization.

This behavior is different from traditional ARM processors and many other
microcontroller architectures where the stack pointer has to be initialized by software code
rather than a value in a fixed address.
If the PSP is to be used, it must be initialized by software code before writing to the
CONTROL register to switch the stack pointer. The reset sequence only initializes the
MSP and not the PSP.
Different software development tools have different ways of specifying the initial stack
pointer value and the values for the reset and exception vectors. Most of the development
tools come with code examples demonstrating how this can be done with their
development flow. In most compilation tools, the vector table can be defined completely
using C codes.
