                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 7

Memory System
7.1 Memory Systems in Microcontrollers
All processor systems need memories. In typical microcontrollers we need Non-Volatile
Memory (NVM) for program storage, such as flash memories or mask ROM, as well as
memory space such as SRAM (Static Random Access Memory) in which we can easily
write and read back. SRAM is typically used for data variables, stack memory, as well as
heap memory for dynamic memory allocation (e.g., when using alloc() function in C
language).
In most microcontrollers, you can find these memories integrated in the microcontroller
chip. This makes these microcontrollers much easier to use (requires fewer external
connections and reduces costs for the final embedded products). However, the on-chip
flash and SRAM memory sizes are limited. Many low cost microcontrollers have around
128 KB (or less) of flash memory and around 32 KB (or less) of SRAM size.
A number of microcontrollers also have a boot loader ROM which enables the
microcontroller to execute a small program provided by the Micro-Controller Unit (MCU)
vendor before starting the user applications stored in the flash memory. The boot loader
ROM might provide various boot options and flash programming utility, as well as setting
up factory calibration data for internal clock source calibration, or calibration data for
internal voltage references. Some of the microcontroller designs do not allow the boot
loader to be modified or erased by the software developers.
If the project requires more memories in the system, the system designer would need to
select a microcontroller product which supports external memory interface. Please note
that many microcontroller products are not designed to support off-chip memory systems.
Even with microcontrollers that support external memories, each memory access to the
off-chip memory system can take multiple clock cycles, and therefore the system
performance is likely to be lower than placing all data in the on-chip memory systems.
Traditional microcontrollers require separate NVM and SRAM because NVM-like flash
memories require a complex programming sequence to update, therefore is not suitable for
data storage (e.g., data variables, stack, which need to be updated very frequently).
Recently, some microcontroller products start to use FRAM (Ferroelectric RAM) or
MRAM (Magnetoresistive RAM). These technologies enable a single memory block to be

The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00007-2
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

used for both program code and data storage, and have the advantage that the memory
system can be powered down completely and then resume operations without losing the
data in the RAM (traditional approach requires the SRAM to be put into a state retention
mode which still incurs leakage current). While existing CortexÒ-M processor-based
microcontroller products do not use these memory technologies, this can be done (and
have been demonstrated experimentally1) as the Cortex-M processors do not restrict the
types of memory technologies used for the implementation.
One important aspect of NVM memories in microcontrollers is that many NVM technologies
are relatively slow compared to SRAM access speed. As a result, the bus interface for the
flash memories or FRAM memories needs to insert wait states to the bus system when the
processor bus is running faster than the maximum access speed of the memory. For example,
typically on-chip flash memory has access speed ranged from 25 to 50 MHz (some high-
speed flash memory technologies can run at over 100 MHz, but they are rarely used for ultra
low power microcontroller devices as their power consumption is relatively high).

7.2 Bus Systems in the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors
The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors have a 32-bit system bus interface with 32-bit
address lines (4 GB address space). The system bus is based on a bus protocol called
AHB-Lite (Advanced High-performance Bus), which is a protocol defined in the AMBAÒ
(Advanced Microcontroller Bus Architecture) standard. The AMBA standard is developed
by ARMÒ and is widely used in semiconductor industry.
The system bus interface is a generic design that can be connected to different types of
memories with suitable memory interface logic. The bus interface can support read/write
transfers with 32-, 16-, and 8-bit data, and support wait states and slave responses (can be
OKAY or ERROR). Technically the memory devices connected to the processor can be any
size and can be different width. For example, the memory devices can be 8-bit, 16-bit, or
64-bit memory, but would require additional hardware to bridge between different bus sizes.
Typically 32-bit on-chip memories are used to keep the design’s complexity at minimum.
While the AHB-Lite protocol provides high-performance accesses to the memory system,
very often a secondary bus segment can also be found for slower devices including
peripherals, as shown in Figure 7.1. In ARM microcontrollers, the peripheral bus system is
normally based on the APB (Advanced Peripheral Bus) protocol. The APB is connected to
the AHB-Lite via a bus bridge and may run at a different clock speed compared to the
AHB system bus. The data path on the APB is also 32-bit, but the address lines are often
less than 32-bit as the peripheral address space is relatively small.

1
    http://www.electronicsweekly.com/news/design/embedded-systems/isscc-cortex-m0-sleeps-on-nothing-and-
    wakes-in-400ns-2013-02/.

                                                                                               Microcontroller

      Cortex-M0
                                                   32-bit System bus (AHB Lite)

                        Program Memory         Data Memory                                  External memory
                                                                      Bus Bridge
                           (e.g. Flash)        (e.g. SRAM)                                      interface

                              32-bit Peripheral bus (APB)

                                                                                                     External bus
       Peripheral          Peripheral            Peripheral            Peripheral                     (optional)
       (e.g. I/O)         (e.g. Timer)          (e.g. UART)      (e.g. Watchdog timer)

                                           Figure 7.1
            Separation of system and peripheral bus in a simple 32-bit microcontroller.

Due to the separation of main system bus and peripheral bus, and in some cases with
separated clock frequency controls, an application might need to initialize some clock
control hardware in the microcontroller before accessing some of the peripherals. In some
cases, there can also be multiple peripheral bus segments in a microcontroller running at
different clock frequencies. Beside from allowing some part of the system running in a
slower speed, the separation of bus segments also provide possibilities of power reduction
by allowing clock signal to a peripheral system to be stopped completely.
Depending on the microcontroller designs, some high-speed peripherals might be
connected to the AHB-Lite system bus instead of the APB. This is because the AHB-Lite
protocol requires less number of clock cycles for each transfer when compared to the
APB. The bus protocol behavior affects the system operation and programmer’s view on
the memory system in a number of ways. This will be covered in Section 7.9.

7.3 Memory Map
7.3.1 Overview

The 4 GB memory space of the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors is architecturally
divided into a number of regions (Figure 7.2). Each region has its recommended usage,
and the memory access behavior could be dependent on which memory region you are
accessing to. This memory region definition helps software porting between different
ARMÒ Cortex microcontrollers as they all have the similar arrangements.

                                            Memory map of the
                   Memory map
                                           Private Peripheral Bus
0xFFFFFFFF                                                          0xE00FFFFF
                                                ROM Table
                     Reserved                                       0xE00FF000
0xE0100000                                                          0xE00FEFFF
                                                                                   Debug Control
0xE00FFFFF   Internal Private Peripheral                                                                 0xE000ED00
                                                 Reserved
0xE0000000               Bus
                                                                                        NVIC
0xDFFFFFFF                                                          0xE000F000    (Nested Vectored
                                                                                 Interrupt Controller)   0xE000E100
                                           System Control Space
0xC0000000                                        (SCS)             0xE000E000        Reserved           0xE000E020
                  External device
0xBFFFFFFF                                                                         SysTick Timer         0xE000E010
                                                 Reserved
                                                                    0xE0003000        Reserved           0xE000E000
0xA0000000                                         BP
0x9FFFFFFF                                   (Breakpoint unit)      0xE0002000
                                               DWT (Data
0x80000000                                    Watchpoint unit)      0xE0001000
                       RAM
0x7FFFFFFF
                                                 Reserved
                                                                    0xE0000000
0x60000000
0x5FFFFFFF
                     Peripheral
0x40000000
0x3FFFFFFF
                       SRAM
0x20000000
0x1FFFFFFF
                       Code
0x00000000

                                           Figure 7.2
             Architecturally defined memory map of the CortexÒ-M0/M0þ processor.

Although having an architectural defined memory map, the actual usage of the memory map
is very flexible. There are only a few limitations, for example: a few memory regions which
are allocated for peripherals do not allow program code execution, and there are a number
of internal components that have fixed memory addresses to ensure software portability.
Next we will have a look into the usage of each region.

7.3.2 Code Region (0x00000000e0x1FFFFFFF)

The size of the code region is 512 MB. It is primarily used to store program code,
including the initial exception vector table at address 0x00000000 which is a part of the
program image. This region can also be used for data memory (connection to RAM).

7.3.3 SRAM Region (0x20000000e0x3FFFFFFF)

The SRAM region is the located in the next 512 MB of the memory map. It is primarily
used to store data, including stack. It can also be used to store program codes. For
example, in some cases you might want to copy program codes from slow external

memory to the SRAM and execute it from there. Despite the name given to this region is
called “SRAM,” the actual memory devices being used could be SRAM, SDRAM or other
types or readewrite memory.

7.3.4 Peripheral Region (0x40000000e0x5FFFFFFF)

The Peripheral region also has the size of 512 MB. It is primarily used for peripherals, and
can also be used for data storage. However, program execution is not allowed in the
Peripheral region. The peripherals connected to this memory region can either be
AHB-Lite peripheral or APB peripherals (via a bus bridge).

7.3.5 RAM Region (0x60000000e0x9FFFFFFF)

The RAM region consists of two 512 MB blocks, which results in total of 1 GB space.
Both 512 MB memory blocks are primarily used to stored data, and in most cases the
RAM region can be used as a 1 GB continuous memory space. The RAM region can also
be used for program code execution. The only differences between the two halves of the
RAM region are the memory attributes, which might cause differences in caching behavior
if a system level cache (level-2 cache) is used. More about memory attributes will be
covered in later part of this chapter.

7.3.6 Device Region (0xA0000000e0xDFFFFFFF)

The external device region consists of two 512 MB memory blocks, which results in a
total of 1 GB space. Both 512 MB memory blocks are primarily used for peripherals and
I/O usages. The device region does not allow program execution, but it can be used for
general data storage. Similar to the RAM region, the two halves of the device region have
different memory attributes.

7.3.7 Internal Private Peripheral Bus (0xE0000000e0xE00FFFFF)

The internal Private Peripheral Bus (PPB) memory space is allocated for peripherals inside
the processor, such as the interrupt controller Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC), as
well as the debug components. The internal PPB memory space is 1 MB in size, and
program execution is not allowed in this memory range.
Within the PPB memory range, a special range of memory is defined as the System Control
Space (SCS). The SCS address is from 0xE000E000 to 0xE000EFFF. It contains the
interrupt control registers, system control registers, debug control registers, etc. The NVIC
registers are part of the SCS memory space. The SCS also contains an optional timer called
the SysTick. This will be covered in Chapter 10 (Section 10.3, The SysTick Timer).

7.3.8 Reserved Memory Space (0xE0100000e0xFFFFFFFF)

The last section of the memory map is a 511 MB reserved memory space. This may be
used in some microcontrollers for microcontroller vendor specific usages.

7.3.9 System Level Design

Although all the Cortex-M Processors have this fixed memory map, the usage of the
memory is very flexible. For example, it can have multiple SRAM memory blocks placed
in SRAM region as well as other locations like the CODE region, and it can also execute
program code from external memory components located in CODE/SRAM/RAM region.
Microcontroller vendors can also add their own system level memory features like system
level cache if needed.
So how does the memory map of a typical real system look like?
For a typical microcontroller developed with the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor, normally you
can find:
•   Flash memory (for program code)
•   Internal SRAM (for data)
•   Internal peripherals
•   External memory interface (for external memories as well as external peripherals, optional)
•   There could also be other external peripherals interface
After putting all these components together, an example microcontroller could be
illustrated as in Figure 7.3, with the nonexecutable memory regions highlighted in yellow.
Figure 7.3 shows some of the possibilities of how memory regions can be used. However,
in many low cost microcontrollers the system designs do not have any external memory
interface or SD (Secure Digital) card interface. In these cases, some of the memory
regions like the external RAM or the external device regions might be unused.

7.4 Program Memory, Boot Loader, and Memory Remapping
7.4.1 Program Memory and Boot Loader

In microcontroller products, usually the program memory of the CortexÒ-M0 or
Cortex-M0þ processor is implemented with on-chip flash memory. However, it is also
possible that the program is stored externally or using other types of memory devices (e.g.,
external Quad SPI flash, EEPROM).
When the Cortex-M processor comes out of reset, it accesses the vector table in address
zero for initial Main Stack Pointer value and reset vector value, and then starts the

                        Microcontroller                                         Peripheral
                                                                                   bus
                Cortex-M0 / Cortex-M0+                                                        I/O
                       processor
                   (Internal PPB region)
                                                                                              I/O
                    NVIC        Debug                       AHB to APB
                                                              bridge
                                                          (Peripheral region)                UART

                                           System bus

                                                                                             UART
                 On chip flash
                                                 On chip SRAM
                   memory                        (SRAM region)
                  (CODE region)
                                                                                             I2C

                                External Memory             SD Card                          Timer
                                    Interface               interface
                                  (RAM, Device             (Device/RAM
                                    regions)                  region)                        Timer

                                                                                    (Peripheral region)

                                                                 SD card
              External SRAM,
                   Flash             LCD module
                                     (Device region)
                (RAM regsion)
                                                                                    Non-executable memories

                                        Figure 7.3
             Example usage of various memory regions in a microcontroller design.

program execution from the reset vector. In order to ensure the system start up correctly, a
valid vector table and a valid program memory must be available in the system to prevent
the processor from executing rogue program code. In many designs the required vector
table and boot code are provided by a flash memory starting from address zero. However,
an off-the-shelf microcontroller product might not have any program in the flash memory
before it is programmed. In order to allow the processor start up correctly, some Cortex-M
microcontrollers come with a boot loader, a small program located on the microcontroller
chip that executes after power-up and branch to the user’s application in the flash memory
only if the flash is programmed.
The boot loader is preprogrammed by the chip manufacturer. Sometimes it is stored on the
on-chip flash memory with a memory section separated from user applications (to allow
update of user program without affecting the boot loader), or stored on an NVM separated

from the user programmable flash memory. The boot loader feature is not always needed,
even if the microcontroller does not boot up correctly due to the lacking of a valid
program image in the flash memory, a debugger can still be able to connect to the
processor via a debug connection and reprogram the flash memory.

7.4.2 Memory Remap

When a boot loader is present, it is possible that the microcontroller vendor would
implement a memory map switching feature called “remap” on the system bus. The
switching of the memory map is controlled by a hardware register, which is programmed
when the boot loader is executed. There are various types of remap arrangements. One
common remap arrangement is to allow the boot loader to be mapped to the start of the
memory during power-up using address alias, as shown in Figure 7.4.
             Memory map at power up                                          Memory map after remap
              with remap turned on                                                 turned off

                                                                                                        Boot loader turn off
                                                                                                      remap (address alias),
                   Boot loader         Processor fetch reset                      Boot loader            and execute user
  CODE                                vector from boot loader     CODE                                 application if flash is
  region                                  alias and start         region                                   programmed.
                                       executing boot loader

                      User                                                           User
                      flash                                                          flash

  Address                                                         Address
                Boot loader alias
0x00000000                                                      0x00000000

                                            Figure 7.4
                    An example of memory-remap implementation with boot loader.

The boot loader might also support additional features like hardware initialization (clock
and PLL setup), supporting of multiple boot configurations, firmware protection or even
flash erase utilities. The memory remap feature is implemented on the system bus and is
not a part of the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor, therefore different microcontrollers from
different vendors have different implementations.
Another common type of remap features implemented on some ARM microcontrollers
allows an SRAM block to be remapped to address 0x0 (Figure 7.5). Normally NVM used
on microcontrollers like flash memory is slower than SRAM. When the microcontroller is
running at high clock rate, wait states would be required if the program is executed from
the flash memory. By allowing an SRAM memory block to be remapped to address 0x0,
then the program can be copied to SRAM and execute at maximum speed. This also
avoids wait states in vector table fetch which affects interrupt latency.

             Memory map before SRAM is                                       Memory map after SRAM is
                    remapped                                                        remapped

                   SRAM (data)                                                     SRAM (data)

                                           Processor copies
                   SRAM (code)             program code into                       SRAM (code)
                                                                                                        SRAM is remapped to
                                         SRAM, and then remap                                           address 0x0 for zero
                                             SRAM to 0x0                                                 wait state accesses.

                                                                                    User flash
                       User
                       flash                                                       SRAM (code)
  Address                                                         Address             alias
0x00000000                                                      0x00000000

                                         Figure 7.5
    A different example of memory-remap implementationdSRAM for fast program accesses.

In some other cases, the memory remapping technique is being used in Cortex-M0
microcontrollers to allow the vector table (see Section 8.5 in Chapter 8) to be modified
dynamically during runtime. For this usage, a small part of the SRAM can be mapped
into address 0x0 as an address alias and used for storing vector table entries. Since the
Cortex-M0þ processor has the vector table relocation feature (see Section 9.2.4 Vector
Table Offset Register in Chapter 9), the system level memory remap is not essential
because the users can define part of the on-chip SRAM or user flash memory as vector table.

7.5 Data Memory
The data memory in CortexÒ-M processors is used for software variables, stack memory,
and in some cases, heap memory. Sometimes local variables in C functions could be
stored onto the stack memory. The heap memory is needed when the applications use C
functions that require dynamically allocated memory space (e.g., alloc(), malloc()
functions). Other data variables like global variables and static variables are normally
statically allocated in the beginning of the RAM space.
In most embedded applications without Operating Systems (OS), only one stack is used
(only the Main Stack Pointer is required). In this case the data memory can be arranged as
shown in Figure 7.6.
Since the stack operation is based on full descending stack arrangement, and heap memory
allocation is ascending, it is common to put the stack at the end of the memory block and
heap memory just after normal memory to get the most flexible arrangement.
For embedded applications with embedded OS, each task might have their own stack
memory range (see Figure 3.9 in Chapter 3). It is also possible that each task has its own

                    Address
                  0x3FFFFFFF

                                      Stack grow
                                                         Stack space
                     SRAM              direction
                     region
                                      SRAM
                                      Heap grow           Heap data
                                       direction

                    Address                                Data
                  0x20000000                              (e.g. Global variables,
                                                             static data, data
                                                                structures)

                                          Figure 7.6
                              An example of common SRAM usage.

allocated memory space, with each memory space containing a memory layout which
consists of stack, heap, and data.

7.6 Little Endian and Big Endian Support
The CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support either little endian or big endian
memory format. The choice is made by the microcontroller vendor when the chip is
designed, and cannot be changed by embedded programmers. Software developers must
configure their development tools project options to match the endianness of the targeted
microcontroller.
The big endian mode supported on the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor is called Byte-Invariant
big endian mode, or “BE8” big endian mode. It is one of the big endian modes in ARM
architectures. Traditional ARM processors like ARM7TDMIÔ use a different big endian
mode called Word-Invariant big endian mode, or “BE32.” The difference between the two
is on the hardware interface level and does not affect programmer’s view.
Most of the Cortex-M Processor-based microcontrollers are using little endian
configuration. With little endian arrangement, the lowest byte of a word-size data is stored
in bit 0 to bit 7 (Figure 7.7).
While in big endian configuration, the lowest byte of a word-size data is stored in bit 24 to
bit 31 (Figure 7.8).

                   Bits         [31:24]       [23:16]      [15:8]        [7:0]

              0x00000008       Byte 0xB     Byte 0xA       Byte 9       Byte 8

              0x00000004        Byte 7       Byte 6        Byte 5       Byte 4

              0x00000000        Byte 3       Byte 2        Byte 1       Byte 0
                                            Figure 7.7
                                  Little endian 32-bit memory.

                   Bits         [31:24]       [23:16]      [15:8]        [7:0]

              0x00000008        Byte 8       Byte 9      Byte 0xA      Byte 0xB

              0x00000004        Byte 4       Byte 5        Byte 6       Byte 7

              0x00000000        Byte 0       Byte 1        Byte 2       Byte 3
                                           Figure 7.8
                                   Big endian 32-bit memory.

Both memory configurations support data handling of different sizes. The Cortex-M
processors can generate byte, half-word, and word transfers. When the memory is
accessed, the memory interface selects the data lanes based on the transfer size and the
lowest 2 bits of the address. For little endian systems, the data access can be illustrated by
the following diagram (Figure 7.9).
Similarly, a big endian system support data access of different size (Figure 7.10).
Note that there are two exceptions in big endian configurations:
1. the instruction fetch is always in little endian, and
2. the accesses to PPB address space are always in little endian.

7.7 Data Type
The CortexÒ-M processors support different data types by providing various memory
access instructions for different transfer sizes, and by providing a 32-bit AHB-Lite
interface which supports 32-bit, 16-bit, and 8-bit transfers. For example, in C language
development, the following data types are commonly used (Table 7.1).

               Address    Size             Bits 31-24    Bits 23-16    Bits 15-8      Bits 7-0

          0x00000000     Word              Data[31:24]   Data[23:16]   Data[15:8]     Data[7:0]

          0x00000000     Half word                                     Data[15:8]     Data[7:0]

          0x00000002     Half word         Data[15:8]     Data[7:0]

          0x00000000      Byte                                                        Data[7:0]

          0x00000001      Byte                                          Data[7:0]

          0x00000002      Byte                            Data[7:0]

          0x00000003      Byte              Data[7:0]

                                         Figure 7.9
                             Data access in little endian system.

               Address    Size             Bits 31-24    Bits 23-16    Bits 15-8      Bits 7-0

          0x00000000     Word               Data[7:0]    Data[15:8]    Data[23:16]   Data[31:24]

          0x00000000     Half word          Data[7:0]    Data[15:8]

          0x00000002     Half word                                      Data[7:0]    Data[15:8]

          0x00000000      Byte              Data[7:0]

          0x00000001      Byte                            Data[7:0]

          0x00000002      Byte                                          Data[7:0]

          0x00000003      Byte                                                        Data[7:0]

                                           Figure 7.10
                                 Data access in big endian system.

Table 7.1: Commonly used data types in C language development

        Type                          Number of bits in ARMÒ             Instructions
        “char”, “unsigned char”       8                                  LDRB, LDRSB, STRB
        “enum”                        8/16/32 (smallest is chosen)       LDRB, LDRH, LDR,
                                                                         STRB, STRH, STR
        “short”, “unsigned short”     16                                 LDRH, LDRSH, STRH
        “int”, “unsigned int”         32                                 LDR, STR
        “long”, “unsigned long”       32                                 LDR, STR

If “stdint.h” in C99 is used, the following commonly used data types are available
(Table 7.2).
Table 7.2: Commonly used data types provided in “stdint.h” in C99

           Type                      Number of bits in ARMÒ      Instructions
           “int8_t”, “uint8_t”       8                           LDRB, LDRSB, STRB
           “int16_t”, “uint16_t”     16                          LDRH, LDRSH, STRH
           “int32_t”, “uint32_t”     32                          LDR, STR

For other data type that requires larger size (e.g., int64_t, uint64_t), the C compilers
automatically convert the data transfer into multiple memory access instructions.
Note that for peripheral register accesses, the data types being used should match the
hardware register sizes. Otherwise the peripheral might ignore the transfer or not
functioning as expected. In most cases, peripherals connected to the peripheral bus (APB)
should be accessed using word-size transfers. This is due to the fact that APB protocol
does not have transfer size signals, hence all the transfers are assumed to be word size.
Therefore peripheral registers accessed via the APB are normally declared as “volatile
unsigned integer” or “volatile uint32_t” if “stdint.h” is used.

7.8 Memory Attributes and Memory Access Permission
The CortexÒ-M Processors can be used with a wide range of memory systems and
devices. In order to make porting of software between different devices easier, a number
of memory attribute settings are available for each regions in the memory map. Memory
attributes are characteristics of the memory accesses; they can affect data and instruction
accesses to memory as well as accesses to peripherals.
In the ARMv6-M architecture, which is used by the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors, a number of memory access attributes are defined for different memory regions
(these attributes are also available on ARMv7-M architecture):
    ExecutabledThe executable attribute defines whether program execution is allowed in
    that memory region. If a memory region is defined as nonexecutable, in ARM
    documentation it is marked as eXecute Never (XN).
    BufferabledWhen a data write is carried out to a bufferable memory region, the write
    transfer can be buffered, which means the processor can continue to execute next
    instruction without waiting for the current write transfer to complete.
    CacheabledIf a cache device is present on the system, it can keep a local copy of the
    data during a data transfer, and reuse it next time the same memory location is accessed
    to speed up the system. The cache device can be a cache memory unit, or could be a
    small buffer in a memory controller.

    ShareabledThe shareable attribute defines whether a memory region can be accessed
    by more than one processor. If a memory region is shareable, the memory system needs
    to ensure coherency between memory accesses by multiple processors in this region.
For most users of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor-based products, only the XN
attribute is relevant as it defines which regions can be used for program execution. The
other attributes are used only if cache unit or multiple processors are used. Since the
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors do not have an internal cache unit, in most cases
these memory attributes are not used. If a system level cache is used, or when the memory
controller has a build-in cache, then these memory attributes signals exported by the
processor via the AHB interface could be used.
Base on the memory attributes, various memory types are architecturally defined, and is
used to define what type of devices could be used in each memory region:
    Normal memorydNormal memories can be shareable or nonshareable, and can be
    either cacheable or noncacheable. For memories with cacheable, the caching behavior
    can be further divided into Write Through (WT) or Write Back Write Allocate
    (WBWA).
    Device memorydDevice memories are noncacheable. They can be shareable or
    nonshareable.
    Strongly Ordered (SO) memorydA memory region that is nonbufferable, noncache-
    able and transfer to/from SO region takes effect immediately. Also, the orders of SO
    transfers on the memory interface must be identical to the orders of the corresponding
    memory access instructions (i.e., no access reordering for speed optimizationdplease
    note that the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors do not have such access
    reordering feature anyway). SO memory regions are always shareable in terms of
    architectural definition.
The memory attribute and memory types for each memory region in the Cortex-M
processors are defined in the architecture (Table 7.3), and the attribute for some of the
regions can be overridden with configuration settings in the MPU (Memory Protection
Unit) if available. During the memory accesses, the memory attributes are exported from
the processor to the AHB system, which can be used by a system level cache controller
(L2 cache) when applicable.
The PPB memory region is defined as SO. This means the memory region is nonbufferable
and noncacheable. In the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, operations following an
access to SO region are not started until the access is completed. This behavior is important
for changing registers in the SCS, where we often expected the operations of changing a
control register should take place immediately before next instruction is executed. Please
note that memory attributes and permissions for SCS cannot be changed by MPU.

Table 7.3: Default memory attribute map defined by the architecture

                                Memory
 Address         Region         type         Cache         XN     Shareable   Descriptions
 0x00000000e     CODE           Normal       WT            e      e           Memory for program code
 0x1FFFFFFF                                                                   including vector table
 0x20000000e     SRAM           Normal       WBWA          e      e           SRAM, typically used for
 0x3FFFFFFF                                                                   data and stack memory
 0x40000000e     Peripheral     Device       e             XN     e           Typically used for on-chip
 0x5FFFFFFF                                                                   devices
 0x60000000e     RAM            Normal       WBWA          e      e           Normal memory with
 0x7FFFFFFF                                                                   Write Back, Write Allocate
                                                                              cache attributes
 0x80000000e     RAM            Normal       WT            e      e           Normal memory with
 0x9FFFFFFF                                                                   Write Through cache
                                                                              attributes
 0xA0000000e     Device         Device       e             XN     S           Shareable device memory
 0xBFFFFFFF
 0xC0000000e     Device         Device       e             XN     e           Nonshareable device
 0xDFFFFFFF                                                                   memory
 0xE0000000e     PPB            Strongly     e             XN     S           Internal Private Peripheral
 0xE00FFFFF                     ordered                                       Bus
 0xE0100000e     Reserved       Reserved     e             e      e           Reserved (Vendor-specific
 0xFFFFFFFF                                                                   usage)

In some other ARM processors like the Cortex-M3 processor, there can also be default
memory access permission for each region. Since the Cortex-M0 processor does not have
separated privileged and nonprivileged (user) access level, the processor is in privilege
access level all the time and therefore does not have a memory map for default memory
access permission. The Cortex-M0þ processor, however, has the optional unprivileged
execution level and therefore has the default access permission as shown in Table 7.4.
In practice, most of the memory attributes and memory type definitions are unimportant
(apart from the XN attribute and access permissions) to users of Cortex-M0 and Cortex-
M0þ microcontrollers. However, if the software code has to be reused on high-end

Table 7.4: Memory access permission

 Memory region                       Default permission                  Note
 CODE, SRAM, Peripheral,             Accessible for both privileged      Access permission can be
 RAM, Device                         and unprivileged code.              overridden by MPU
                                                                         configurations
 System Control Space                Accessible for privileged code      Cannot be overridden by MPU
 including NVIC, MPU, SysTick        only. Attempts to access these      configurations
                                     registers from unprivileged code
                                     result in HardFault exception.

processors, especially on systems with multiple processors and cache memories, these
details can be important.

7.9 Effect of Hardware Behavior to Programming
The design of the processor hardware and the behavior of the bus protocol affect the
software in a number of ways. In previous section we have already mentioned that
peripherals connected to the APB are usually accessed using word-size transfers due to the
nature of the APB protocol. In this section we will look into other aspects.

7.9.1 Data Alignment

The ThumbÒ instruction set supported by the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors
can only generate aligned transfers. It means that the transfer address must be a multiple
of the transfer size. For example, a word-size (32-bit) transfer can only access addresses
like 0x0, 0x4, 0x8, 0xC, etc. Similarly, a half-word transfer can only access addresses like
0x0, 0x2, 0x4, etc. All byte data accesses are aligned. Examples of aligned and unaligned
data accesses are shown in Figure 7.11.

  Byte      Byte       Byte        Byte                    Byte       Byte         Byte      Byte
   3         2          1           0                       3          2            1         0

                    word                   Word transfer                     upper 3 bytes
                                                           lower
                                                            byte

                                                                                   upper half word     Word
     half word
                                             Half word                                               transfers
                                                           lower half word
                             half word       transfers
                                                                                             upper
                                                                                              byte
   byte                                                            lower 3 bytes

                                                                                             upper
             byte                            Byte size                                        byte
                                             transfers     lower
                           byte                             byte                                     Half word
                                                                                                     transfers
                                    byte                                  Half word

      Aligned transfers                                      Unaligned transfers
                                              Figure 7.11
          Examples of aligned and unaligned transfers (for little endian memory configuration).

If the program executed attempts to generate an unaligned transfer, this will result in a fault
exception and cause the HardFault handler to be executed. In normal cases, C compilers do

not generate any unaligned transfers, but an unaligned transfer can still be generated if a C
program directly manipulated a pointer (example in Appendix G, Section G.6.3).
Unaligned transfers can also be generated accidentally when programming in assembly
language, for example, when load/store instructions of wrong transfer size is used. In the
case of a half-word data located in address 0x1002, which is an aligned data, it can be
accessed using LDRH, LDRSH, or STRH instructions without problems. But if the
program code used LDR or STR instruction to access this data, an unaligned access fault
would be triggered.

7.9.2 Access to Invalid Addresses

Unlike most 8-bit or 16-bit processors, a memory access to an invalid memory address
generates a fault exception on ARMÒ Cortex-M-based microcontrollers. This provides
better program error detection and allows software bugs to be detected earlier.
In an AHB system connected to a Cortex-M processor, the address decoding logic detects
the address being accessed and the bus system response with an error signal if the access
is going to an invalid location. The bus error can be caused by either data accesses or
instruction fetches. When the processor detects the error response, it can trigger a
HardFault exception to handle the error.
One exception to this behavior is the branch shadows for instruction fetch. Due to the
pipeline nature of the Cortex-M processors, instructions are fetched in advance. Therefore
if the program execution reaches the end of a valid memory region and a branch is
executed, there might be chances that the addresses beyond the valid instruction memory
region could have been fetched and result in a bus error response in the AHB system.
However, in this case the bus fault would be ignored if the faulted instruction is not
executed due to the branch.

7.9.3 Use of Multiple Load and Store Instructions

The multiple load and store instructions in the Cortex-M processor can greatly increase the
system performance when used correctly. For example, it can be used to speed up data
transfer processes or can be used as a way to adjust memory pointer automatically.
However, when handling peripheral accesses, typical use of LDM or STM instructions
should be avoided. If the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor received an interrupt
request during the execution of LDM or STM instruction, the LDM or STM instruction
will be abandoned and the interrupt service will start. At the end of the interrupt service,
the program execution will return to the interrupted LDM or STM instruction and restart
again from the first transfer of the interrupted LDM or STM.

As a result of this restart behavior, some of the transfers in this interrupted LDM or STM
instruction could be carried out twice. It is not a problem for normal memory devices.
However, if the access is carried on a peripheral, then the repeating of the transfer could
cause error. For example, if the LDM instruction is used for reading a data in a FIFO
(First-In-First-Out) buffer, then some of the data in the FIFO could be lost as the read
operation is repeated.
As a precaution, we should avoid the use of LDM or STM instruction on peripheral
accesses unless we are sure that the restart behavior does not cause incorrect operation to
the peripheral.

7.9.4 Wait States

Some of the memory accesses might take several clock cycles to complete. For example,
the flash memory used in a low power microcontroller might have a maximum access
speed of just around 20 MHz while the microcontroller can run at over 40 MHz. When
this happens, the flash memory interface would need to insert wait states to the bus system
so that the processor will wait for the transfer to complete.
The wait states can affect the systems in a number of ways:
•   The performance of the system is reduced.
•   The energy efficiency of the system can be reduced because the performance is
    reduced.

              Performance

                               Flash           Flash           Flash           Flash
                               0 WS            1 WS            2 WS            3 WS

                        0MHz           20MHz           40MHz           60MHz         Clock
                                                                                  frequency
                                        Figure 7.12
            Performance of an example system based on the CortexÒ-M0 processor
                         with various wait states for flash memory.

•   The interrupt latency of the system increases.
•   The system behavior is less deterministic in terms of program execution timing.
For example, assume the flash memory system of an MCU with Cortex-M0 processor has
an access speed of 50 ns (20 MHz), the performance curve of the device could look like
the one shown in Figure 7.12.
As you can see from Figure 7.12, the performance is not linear because the flash memory
access speed could limit the maximum performance. In order to solve this problem, many
microcontroller vendors introduce flash prefetch hardware in the design so that multiple
words of instructions are fetched from the flash memory each time, and when the
processor is still consuming the instructions in the buffer, the next set of instruction
fetches can start. This technique reduces the performance drop when the frequency
increases. For example, Figure 7.13 shows the improvement with a simple prefetch logic
design.

         Performance

                          Flash           Flash           Flash           Flash
                          0 WS            1 WS            2 WS            3 WS

                                                                              With prefetch logic

                                                                              Without prefetch logic

                   0MHz           20MHz           40MHz           60MHz         Clock
                                                                             frequency
                                      Figure 7.13
Performance comparison for a simple MCU with flash prefetch logic and without prefetch logic.

Further performance improvement is possible with more complex designs or with a system
level cache.
This page intentionally left blank
