                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 8

Exceptions and Interrupts
8.1 What are Exceptions and Interrupts?
In most microcontrollers, the interrupt feature enables a peripheral or an external hardware
to send a request to a processor so that the processor can execute a piece of code to
service the request. The process involves suspending the current executing task, or wake
up from sleep mode, and execute the piece of software code called exception handler to
service the request. After the request is serviced, the processor can then resume the
previous interrupted code.
In Figure 8.1:

1. A peripheral generates an interrupt request (IRQ) to the processor.
2. The processor detected and accepted the IRQ. The current executing task is
   suspended and some of the status information including Program Status Register
   (xPSR) (including APSR flags like carry, overflow, negative sign, and zero) and the
   Program Counter (PC) are pushed into the stack alongside with couple of other
   registers.
3. The processor locates the starting address of the interrupt handler from the vector table,
   and then executes the interrupt handler associated with this IRQ.
4. The processor finishes the handler execution, restores the information previously pushed
   to the stack, and resumes the interrupted task.

                                                                      Program
                                                                     execution
                                                                                              Processor status and
                                                                 Thread
                                                                                             some registers are save       Handler
                                                               e.g. main()
                                                                                                    to stack
                      1                                                                                                              3
                                                                              2
    Peripheral                           Processor                                                                                       Service the
                           IRQ                                                                                                           peripheral
                       (Interrupt                                                                                                         request
                        Request)
                                                                  Thread      4                                                Interrupt
                                                                                               Processor status and
                                                                  resume                        some registers are               return
                                                                                              restored from the stack

                                                              Figure 8.1
                                                     Interrupt handling concept.

The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00008-4
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

After the interrupt is serviced, the thread or interrupted task can resume operations as
nothing has happened because the status of the processor (e.g., APSR) is saved and
restored by the processor.
In general, interrupt is just one type of exceptions in ARMÒ CortexÒ-M Processors.
Exceptions are events that cause changes in program flow outside normal code sequence.
When it happens, the current executing program would be suspended, and the exception
handler associated with the event would be executed. The events could either be external
or internal. When an event is from an external source, it is commonly known as interrupts
or IRQ. Exceptions and interrupts are supported in almost all modern processors. In
typical microcontrollers, the interrupts can also be generated using on-chip peripherals or
by software.
Before we continue to cover the exception and interrupt topic in details, let us first cover
some common terminologies:
Interrupt Requests (IRQs)dOne of the exception types in the Cortex-M processors
which are associates with peripherals including external interrupt inputs via GPIO pins.
The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support up to 32 IRQ inputs.
Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI)dA special IRQ with highest priority level and cannot
be disabled. Typically generated by peripherals like the watchdog timer or a Brown Out
Detector (BOD). This is exception type 2 in the Cortex-M Processors.
HandlersdThe software code that gets executed when an exception occurred is
called exception handler. If the exception handler is associated with an interrupt
event, then it can also be called as interrupt handler, or Interrupt Service Routine
(ISR). The exception handlers are part of the program code in the compiled
program image.
Nested InterruptsdIt is common to divide interrupts and exceptions into multiple levels
of priority, and while running an exception handler of a low priority exception, a higher
priority exception can be triggered and get serviced. This is commonly known as nested
exception. Priority level of an exception can be programmable or fixed. Apart from
priority settings, some exceptions (including most interrupts) can also be disabled or
enabled by software.
Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC)dA programmable hardware unit inside
the Cortex-M processors to handle the management of interrupts and exception requests.
The NVIC in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors can support up to 32 IRQ inputs,
an NMI input, and a number of system exceptions including one exception type from the
SysTick (System Tick) timer (Figure 8.2).

                              Microcontroller
                                                     Cortex-M processor
                 Peripheral
                                           NMI
                                                                    Processor
                                                  NVIC                Core
                 Peripherals
                                           IRQs                 System
                                                                Exceptions

                 I/O port
                                             SysTick timer
                 I/O port

                                       Figure 8.2
The NVIC in the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors can deal with up to 32 IRQ inputs, an
                         NMI, and a number of system exceptions.

8.2 Exception Types on the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors
8.2.1 Overview

The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors contain a built-in interrupt controller called
NVIC which supports up to 32 IRQ inputs, an NMI input, and a number of system
exceptions from within the processor. Depending on the design of the microcontroller
product, the IRQ and the NMI can be generated either from on-chip peripherals or from
external sources.
Each exception source in the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor has a unique exception
number. The exception number for NMI is 2, and the exception numbers for the on-chip
peripherals and external interrupt sources are from 16 up to 47. The other exception
numbers from 1 to 15 are for system exceptions generated inside the processor, with some
of the exception numbers in this range are not used.
Each exception type also has an associated priority. The priority levels of some exceptions
are fixed and some are programmable. Table 8.1 shows the exception types, exception
number, and priority level.

8.2.2 Non-Maskable Interrupt

The NMI is similar to IRQ, but it cannot be disabled and has the highest priority apart
from the reset. It is very useful for safety critical systems like industrial control or
automotive. Depending on the design of the microcontroller, the NMI could be used for
power failure handling, or can be connected to a watchdog unit to restart a system if the

Table 8.1: List of exceptions in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors

 Exception number      Exception type   Priority          Descriptions
 1                     Reset            -3 (Highest)      Reset
 2                     NMI              -2                Non-Maskable Interrupt
 3                     HardFault        -1                Fault handling exception
 4e10                  Reserved         NA                e
 11                    SVCall           Programmable      Supervisor call via SVC instruction
 12e13                 Reserved         NA                e
 14                    PendSV           Programmable      Pendable request for system service
 15                    SysTick          Programmable      System Tick Timer
 16                    Interrupt #0     Programmable      External Interrupt #0
 17                    Interrupt #1     Programmable      External Interrupt #1
 .                     .                .                 .
 47                    Interrupt #31    Programmable      External Interrupt #31

system stopped responding. Since the NMI cannot be disabled by control registers, the
responsiveness is guaranteed.

8.2.3 HardFault

HardFault is an exception type dedicated for handling fault conditions during program
execution. These fault conditions could be trying to execute an unknown opcodes,
fault on bus interface or memory system, or illegal operations like trying to switch to
ARMÒ state.

8.2.4 SVCall (Supervisor Call)

SVCall exception takes place when the SVC instruction is executed. SVC is usually used
in system with Operating System (OS), allowing applications to access to system services.

8.2.5 Pendable Service Call

Pendable Service Call (PendSV) is another exception for applications with OS. Unlike the
SVCall exception, which must start immediate after the SVC instruction is executed,
PendSV can be delayed. PendSV is commonly used by the OS to schedule system
operations to be carried out only when high priority tasks are completed.

8.2.6 System Tick Timer

The SysTick Timer inside the NVIC is another feature for OS application. Almost all OS
need a timer to generate periodic interrupt for system maintenance works like context
switching. By integrating a simple timer in the Cortex-M processor, porting of OS from

one device to another is much easier. The SysTick timer and its exception are optional in
the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors. However, they are included in most
microcontroller implementations.

8.2.7 Interrupts

The number of interrupts supported in a microcontroller based on the Cortex-M0 or
Cortex-M0þ processor could be from 1 to 32. The interrupt signals could be connected
from on-chip peripherals, or from external source via the I/O port. In some cases
(depending on the microcontroller design), the external interrupt number might not match
the interrupt signal number on the Cortex-M processor.
External interrupts need to be enabled before being used. If an interrupt is not enabled, or
if the processor is already running another exception handler with same or higher priority,
the IRQ will be stored in a pending status register. The pended IRQ can be triggered when
the priority level allows and if the interrupt is enabled, for example, when the higher
priority interrupt handler that was blocking the service is completed and returned. The
NVIC can accept IRQ signals in the form of a high logic level, as well as interrupt pulse
(minimum one clock cycle). Note that in the external interface of a microcontroller, the
external interrupt signals can be active high or active low, or can have programmable
configurations.

8.3 Brief Overview of the NVIC
The NVIC is a programmable unit that allows software to manage interrupts and
exceptions. It has a number of memory mapped registers for the following:
•   Enabling or disabling of each of the interrupts
•   Defining the priority levels of each interrupts and some of the system exceptions
•   Enabling the software to access the pending status of each interrupt, including the capa-
    bility to trigger interrupts by setting pending status in software.
An additional interrupt masking feature, the PRIMASK special register covered in Section
4.2.2.6, is available to allow software to disable all interrupts and exceptions (apart from
the NMI and HardFault).
The NVIC registers can only be accessed in privileged state. For the NVIC design in
ARMv6-M architecture, including the CortexÒ-M0 and Corex-M0þ Processors, the NVIC
registers must be accessed using aligned 32-bit transfers. To make it easier for software
development, the CMSIS-CORE software framework includes a set of standardized APIs
for interrupt management. This is integrated in the device driver libraries for most
microcontrollers based on the ARM Cortex-M processors.

The ARMv7-M architecture (e.g., Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors) has
additional interrupt masking registers and a set of interrupt active status registers. Full
details on the differences of the NVIC between different Cortex-M processors are covered
in Section 22.5 in Chapter 22.

8.4 Definition of Exception Priority Levels
In the CortexÒ-M processors, each exception has a priority level. The priority level affects
whether the exception will be carried out, or waits until later (stay in a pending state). The
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support three fixed highest priority levels for three
of the system exceptions (Reset, NMI, and HardFault) and four programmable levels for
all other exceptions including interrupts. For exceptions with programmable priority levels,
the priority level configuration registers are 8-bit wide, but only the two MSBs are
implemented, as shown in Figure 8.3.

                 Bit 7     Bit 6   Bit 5   Bit 4    Bit 3   Bit 2    Bit 1    Bit 0

                  Implemented               Not implemented, read as zero

                                             Figure 8.3
                         A Priority Level Register with 2 bits implemented.

Since bit 5 to bit 0 are not implemented, they are always read as zero, and write to
these bits is ignored. With this setup, we have possible priority levels of 0x00
(high priority), 0x40, 0x80, and 0xC0 (low priority). This is very similar to the Cortex-
M3 processor, except that on the Cortex-M3 processor it has at least 3 bits
implemented, and therefore the Cortex-M3 processor has at least eight programmable
priority levels, while the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors have only four
programmable levels.
When combine with the three fixed priority levels, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors have total of seven priority levels, as shown in Figure 8.4.
The reason for removing the LSB of the Priority Level Register instead of the MSB is to
make it easier to port software from one Cortex-M-based device to another. In this way,
a program written for devices with wider priority width registers is likely to be able run
on devices with narrower priority width. If the MSB is removed instead of LSB, you
might get an inversion of priority level arrangement among several exceptions during
porting of the application. This might result in an exception which is expected to have
a lower exception priority preempting another exception which was expected to be
higher priority.

                                  Highest priority                   Implemented
                                                                   Exception Priority
                                                                  Levels on Cortex-M0
                                       -3              Reset                    -3
                                       -2               NMI                     -2
                                       -1            Hard Fault                 -1
                                   0
                                                                                0
                Architectural
                priority range
                                 0x40                                         0x40

                                                   Programmable
                                 0x80                                         0x80
                                                     Exceptions

                                 0xC0                                         0xC0

                                 0xFF

                                 Lowest priority
                                             Figure 8.4
            Available priority levels in the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors.

If an enabled exception event occurred (e.g., interrupt, SysTick timer) while no other
exception handler is running, and the exception is not blocked due to PRIMASK (the
interrupt masking register, see descriptions in Chapter 4), then it will be accepted by the
processor, and the exception handler will be executed. The process of switching from a
current running task to an exception handler is called preemption.
If the processor is already running another exception handler, but the new exception has
higher priority level than the current level, then preemption will also take place. The
running exception handler will be suspended, and the new exception handler is executed.
This is commonly known as Nested Interrupt or Nested Exception. After the new
exception handler is completed, the previous exception handler can resume execution and
return to thread when it is completed.
However, if the processor is already running another exception handler that has the same
or higher priority level, the new exception will have to wait by entering a pending state.
A pending exception can wait until the current exception level changes, for example, after
the running exception handler completed and returned, and lowering the current priority
level to be below the priority level of the pending exception. The pending status of
exceptions can be accessed via memory-mapped registers in the NVIC. It is possibly to
clear the pending status of an exception by writing to an NVIC register in software. If the
pending status of an exception is cleared, it will not be executed.

If two exceptions happen at the same time and they have the same programmed priority
level, the exception with a lower exception type number will be processed first. For
example, if both IRQ #0 and IRQ #1 are enabled, both have the same priority level and
both get asserted at the same time, IRQ #0 will be handled first. This rule only applies
when the processor is accepting the exceptions, but not when one of these exceptions is
already being processed.
The interrupt nesting support in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors does not
require any software intervention. This is different from traditional ARM7TDMIÔ , as well
as some 8-bit and 16-bit microcontroller architectures where interrupts are disabled
automatically during interrupt services, and require additional software processing to
enable nested interrupt supports.
The ARMv6-M architecture does not support dynamic changing of interrupt priority level
for active/enabled interrupts. If the priority level of an interrupt needs to be changed, it is
normal to disable the interrupt first, change the priority level, and then enable the interrupt
again. This is different from ARMv7-M architecture (e.g., Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4
Processors), where you can dynamically change the priority level of an active interrupt.

8.5 Vector Table
The interrupt handling in the CortexÒ-M Processor is vectored, which means the
processor’s hardware automatically determines which interrupt or exception to service.
After receiving an IRQ of exception event, the processor will need to decide whether to
accept the request, and if yes, it will need to execute the corresponding exception handler
or interrupt handler. And to do that, it will need to know the starting address of the
handler, and the vector table is a lookup table in the memory that provides such
information.
The interrupt handling in the Cortex-M processors is different from the classic ARMÒ
processors like the ARM7TDMIÔ . In the ARM7TDMI, the starting addresses of the
exception handlers are fixed. Since the ARM7TDMI has only one IRQ input, multiple
IRQs have to share the same IRQ handler starting address, and the IRQ handler has to
access the status of a system level interrupt controller to determine which interrupt to be
serviced and branch to the service function accordingly.
In the Cortex-M processors, the vector table stores the starting address of each exception
and interrupt individually (Figure 8.5). The built-in interrupt controller (NVIC)
automatically decides which interrupt or exception to be serviced first based on the
priority levels and generate a vector so that the processor hardware can look up the
starting address of the exception handler from the vector table.

            Memory                                   Exception
            Address                                   Number

          0x0000004C      Interrupt#3 vector             19
          0x00000048      Interrupt#2 vector             18
          0x00000044      Interrupt#1 vector             17
          0x00000040      Interrupt#0 vector             16
          0x0000003C        SysTick vector               15
          0x00000038       PendSV vector                 14
          0x00000034          Not used                   13
          0x00000030          Not used                   12
          0x0000002C         SVC vector                  11
          0x00000028          Not used                   10
          0x00000024          Not used                   9
          0x00000020          Not used                   8
          0x0000001C          Not used                   7
          0x00000018          Not used                   6
          0x00000014          Not used                   5
          0x00000010          Not used                   4
          0x0000000C       HardFault vector              3
          0x00000008         NMI vector                  2
          0x00000004         Reset vector                1       Note : LSB of each vector must be
          0x00000000       MSP initial value             0        set to 1 to indicate Thumb state

                                                Figure 8.5
                                               Vector table.

Some of the spaces in the vector table are not used because the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-
M0þ processors only have a few system exceptions. Some of the unused exceptions are
used on other ARM processors like the Cortex-M3/M4 processor for additional system
exceptions.
By default, the vector table is in address 0x00000000 of the memory space. The vector
table contains the exception vectors (starting address of ISR) for available exceptions in
the system, as well as the starting value of the Main Stack Pointer (MSP) in the beginning
of the vector table. The order of exception vector being stored is the same order of the
exception number. Since each vector is one word (4 bytes), the address of the exception
vector is the exception number times four. Each exception vectors is the starting address of
the exception handler, with the LSB set to one to indicate that the exception handler is in
ThumbÒ code.

The Cortex-M0þ Processor has a vector table relocation feature so that you can define a
different part of the memory space as vector table by programming a hardware register
called VTOR (Vector Table Offset Register). In the Cortex-M0þ processor, the vector
table starting address must have bit 7 to bit 0 set to 0. In order words, the starting address
must be a multiple of 0?100 (256 bytes). More details of the VTOR can be found in
Section 9.2.4, Vector Table Offset Register.

8.6 Exception Sequence Overview
8.6.1 Acceptance of Exception Request

The processor accepts an exception if the following conditions are satisfied:
•   The processor is not halted for debugging
•   For interrupt and SysTick IRQs, the interrupt has to be enabled
•   The processor is not running an exception handler of same or higher priority
•   The exception is not blocked by the PRIMASK interrupt masking register
Note that for SVCall exception, if the SVC instruction is accidentally used in an exception
handler that has same or higher priority than the SVC exception itself, it will cause the
HardFault exception handler to execute.

8.6.2 Stacking and Unstacking

In order to allow an interrupted program to be resumed correctly, some of the current state
of the processor must be saved before the program execution switch to the exception
handler that services the occurred exception. Different processor architectures have
different ways to do this, in the CortexÒ-M processors, the architecture uses a mixture of
automatic hardware arrangement and, only if necessary, additional software steps for
saving and restoring of processor status.
When an exception is accepted on the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, some of the
registers in the register banks (R0 to R3, R12, R14), the return address (PC), and the xPSR
are pushed to the current active stack memory automatically. The Link Register (LR/R14)
is then updated to a special value to be used during exception return (EXC_RETURN, to
be introduced later in this chapter, Section 8.7), and then the exception vector is
automatically located from the vector table and the exception handler starts to execute.
At the end of the exception handler, the exception handler executes a return using the
special value (EXC_RETURN, previously generated in LR) to trigger the exception return
mechanism. The processor checks if there is any other exception to be serviced. If not, the
register values previously stored onto the stack memory are restored and the interrupted
program is resumed.

                                                      Interrupt cleared
                        Interrupt occur                    by ISR
      Interrupt

                                                                            Exception
                                                                             Return

      Handler                                          Exception handler
       mode

                                    Stacking                                     Unstacking

      Thread
       mode           Thread           Main                                         Main     Thread
                  (main program)     program                                      program (main program)
                                   interrupted                                    resumed
                                                     Time

                                             Figure 8.6
                   Stacking and unstacking of registers at exception entry and exit.

The actions of automatic saving and restoring of the register contents are called “stacking”
and “unstacking” (see Figure 8.6). These mechanisms allow exception handlers to be
implemented as normal C functions, thereby reducing the software overhead of exception
handling, as well as reducing the circuit size (no need to have extra banked registers), and
hence lowering the power consumption of the design.
For the registers not saved by the automatic stacking process, they will have to be saved
and restored by software in the exception handler if they are modified by the exception
handler. However, this does not affect the use of normal C functions as exception handler
because it is a requirement for C compilers to save and restore these other registers
(R4-R11) if they will be modified during the C function execution.

8.6.3 Exception Return Instruction

Unlike some other processors, there is no special return instruction for exception handlers.
Instead, a normal return instruction is used and a special value called EXC_RETURN is
used to trigger the exception return when it is loaded into PC. This mechanism allows
exception handlers to be implemented as a normal C function.
Two different instructions can be used for exception return. They are:
  BX <Reg> ; Load a register value into PC. E.g. “BX LR”
And
  POP {<Reg1>,<Reg2>,..,PC}                      ; POP instruction with PC being one of the registers
being updated

When one of these instructions is executed with a special value called EXC_RETURN
being loaded into the PC, the exception return mechanism will be triggered. If the value
being load into PC does not match the EXC_RETURN pattern, then it will be executed as
a normal BX or POP instruction.

8.6.4 Tail Chaining

If an exception is in pending state when another exception handler is completed, instead of
returning to the interrupted program and then entering exception sequence again, a tail-
chain scenario will occur. When this happens, the processor will not have to restore all
register values from stack and push them back to the stack again (Figure 8.7). Only a few
memory accesses are made between the switch. The tail chaining of exceptions allows
lower exception processing overhead and hence better energy efficiency.

                                                Interrupt cleared
                      Interrupt occur                 by ISR
  Interrupt A
                                                                                Interrupt cleared
                                               Interrupt occur                        by ISR
  Interrupt B

                                                               Exception                  Exception
                                                                Return                     Return

   Handler                                   Exception handler A           Exception handler B
    mode
                                                                Tail-chaining
                                  Stacking                                                       Unstacking

   Thread
    mode            Thread           Main                                                           Main      Thread
                (main program)     program                                                        program (main program)
                                 interrupted                                                      resumed
                                                        Time

                                                 Figure 8.7
                                 Tail chaining of interrupt service routines.

8.6.5 Late Arrival

Late arrival is an optimization mechanism in some of the Cortex-M processors to speed up
processing of higher priority exceptions. If a higher priority exception occurs during
stacking process of a lower-priority exception, the processor switches to handle the higher
priority exception first (Figure 8.8).

                                                                              Interrupt cleared
                        Interrupt occur                                            by ISR
  Interrupt A
 (low priority)
                                                    Interrupt cleared
                             Interrupt occur             by ISR
 Interrupt B
(high priority)

                      Late arrival                           Exception                 Exception
                  (processor switch to                        Return                    Return
                  process interrupt B)
     Handler
                                               Exception handler B       Exception handler A
      mode

                                    Stacking                                               Unstacking

     Thread
      mode           Thread            Main                                                      Main      Thread
                  (main program)     program                                                   program (main program)
                                   interrupted                                                 resumed
                                                         Time

                                                      Figure 8.8
                                               Late arrival optimization.

Since processing of either interrupt requires the same stacking operation, the stacking
process continues as normal when the late arriving higher priority interrupt occurs. At the
end of the stacking process, the vector for the higher priority exception is fetched instead
of the lower priority one.
Without the late arrival optimization, a processor will have to preempt and enter the
exception entry sequence again at the beginning of the lower-priority exception handler.
This results in longer latency as well as larger stack memory usage.

8.7 EXC_RETURN
The EXC_RETURN is a special architecturally defined value for triggering and
helping exception return mechanism. This value is generated automatically when an
exception is accepted and is stored into the Link Register (LR, or R14) after stacking.
The EXC_RETURN is a 32-bit value, the upper 28 bits are all set to 1, with bit 2 and
bit 3 used to provide information for exception return mechanism, as shown in
Table 8.2.
Bit 0 of EXC_RETURN on the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor is reserved and must be 1.
Bit 2 of EXC_RETURN indicates whether the unstacking should restore registers from
the main stack (using MSP) or process stack (using Process Stack Pointer (PSP)).

Table 8.2: Bit fields in the EXC_RETURN value

 Bits           31:28          27:4       3                2                      1        0
 Descriptions   EXC_RETURN     Reserved   Return mode      Return stack           Reserved Processor
                indicator                                                                  state
 Value          0xF            0xFFFFFF 1 (thread) or      0 (main stack)         0        1
                                        0 (handler)        or 1 (process stack)            (reserved)

Bit 3 of EXC_RETURN indicates whether the processor is returning to Thread mode or
Handler mode.
The valid EXC_RETURN values for Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are shown in
Table 8.3.

Table 8.3: Valid EXC_RETURN values for the Cortex-M0 and
                                    Cortex-M0þ processors

           EXC_RETURN        Condition
           0xFFFFFFF1        Return to handler mode (nested exception case)
           0xFFFFFFF9        Return to Thread mode and use the main stack for return
           0xFFFFFFFD        Return to Thread mode and use the process stack for return

Since the EXC_RETURN value is loaded into LR automatically at exception entry,
it is handled as a normal return address by the exception handler. If the return
address does not need to be saved onto the stack, the exception handler can trigger
the exception return and return to the interrupted program by executing “BX LR”, just like
a normal function. Alternatively, if the exception handler needs to execute function calls, it
will need to push the LR to the stack. At the end of the exception handler, the stacked
EXC_RETURN value can be load into PC directly by a POP instruction, thus trigger the
exception return sequence and return to the interrupted program.
The following diagrams (Figure 8.9 and Figure 8.10) show the situations where different
EXC_RETURN values are generated and used.
If the thread is using main stack (CONTROL register bit 1 is zero), the value of the LR
will be set to 0xFFFFFFF9 when it enters an exception, and 0xFFFFFFF1 when a nested
exception is entered, as shown in Figure 8.9.
If the thread is using process stack (CONTROL register bit 1 is set to 1), the value of LR
would be 0xFFFFFFFD when entering the first exception and 0xFFFFFFF1 for entering a
nested exception, as shown in Figure 8.10.

  Interrupt #1
 (Low priority)

  Interrupt #2
 (High priority)

                                                Interrupt                                Exception
                                                event #2                                  return
   Execution
                               Stacking
    status                                                   Interrupt Serivce                       Exception
                                                                Routine #2                            return
                       Interrupt                 Interrupt Serivce
    Handler
                       event #1                     Routine #1

                                                                                   Unstacking
    Thread
                   Main program

                     Main Stack                                 Main Stack                           Main Stack

                                           Handler                Handler             Handler
                   Thread mode                                                                        Thread mode
                                            mode                   mode                mode

                         LR = 0xFFFFFFF9               LR = 0xFFFFFFF1
                                      Figure 8.9
     LR set to EXC_RETURN values at exceptions (main stack is used in Thread mode).

 Interrupt #1
(Low priority)

 Interrupt #2
(High priority)

                                                                                      Exception
                                                                                       return
  Execution
                              Stacking
   status                                                    Interrupt Serivce                    Exception
                                                                Routine #2                         return
                      Interrupt          Interrupt Serivce
   Handler
                      event #1              Routine #1

                                                                                   Unstacking
   Thread
                   Main program

                   Process Stack                                Main Stack                           Process Stack

                                          Handler               Handler               Handler
                   Thread mode                                                                         Thread mode
                                           mode                  mode                  mode

                       LR = 0xFFFFFFFD                 LR = 0xFFFFFFF1
                                     Figure 8.10
   LR set to EXC_RETURN values at exceptions (process stack is used in Thread mode).

As a result of EXC_RETURN format, a normal return instruction cannot return to an
address in the range of 0xFFFFFFFX, because this will be treated as an exception return
rather than a normal one. However, since the address range 0xFXXXXXXX is reserved
and should not contain program code, it is not a problem.

8.8 NVIC Control Registers for Interrupt Control
8.8.1 Overview of NVIC Control Registers

The NVIC interrupt control registers are memory mapped. Their addresses are part of the
System Control Space (SCS), starting from 0xE000E100. Here you can find the registers
for the following:
•   Enabling/disabling interrupts
•   Controlling the priority level of interrupts
•   Accessing to the pending status of each interrupts
For ARMv6-M architecture (including CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors), all these
registers can only be accessed in privileged state and with 32-bit accesses only. In C/Cþþ
programming, these registers can be accessed using pointers, but it is more common and
recommended to the standardized APIs provided in the CMSIS-CORE to handle interrupt
control. CMSIS-CORE software framework is integrated in most of the device driver
libraries for Cortex-M-based microcontroller devices. Using the standard APIs in
CMSIS-CORE makes the program code more portable.
The NVIC in Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors supports up to 32 IRQ inputs.
However, in some devices there could be less number of interrupts and therefore of the
bits in the interrupt control registers described in this section might not be implemented.
Please note there is another group of system control registers called System Control Block
(SCB), which share part of the SCS. The SCB contains registers for low power features
and OS support. The OS-related features will be covered in Chapter 10, OS Support
Features.

8.8.2 Interrupt Enable and Clear Enable

The Interrupt Enable control register is a programmable register, which is used to control
the enable/disable of the IRQs (exception 16 and above). The width of this register
depends on how many interrupts are supported, the maximum size is 32 bit and minimum
size is 1 bit. This register is programmed via two separate addresses. To enable an
interrupt, the SETENA address is used, and to disable an interrupt, the CLRENA address
is used, as described in Table 8.4.

Table 8.4: Interrupt Enable Set and Clear Register

 Address          Name        Type      Reset value     Descriptions
 0xE000E100       SETENA      R/W       0x00000000      Set enable for interrupt 0 to 31. Write
                                                        1 to set bit to 1, write 0 has no effect.
                                                        Bit[0] for Interrupt #0 (exception #16)
                                                        Bit[1] for Interrupt #1 (exception #17)
                                                        .
                                                        Bit[31] for Interrupt #31 (exception #47)
                                                        Read value indicates the current enable
                                                        status
 0xE000E180       CLRENA      R/W       0x00000000      Clear enable for interrupt 0 to 31. Write 1
                                                        to clear bit to 0, write 0 has no effect.
                                                        Bit[0] for Interrupt #0 (exception #16)
                                                        .
                                                        Bit[31] for Interrupt #31 (exception #47)
                                                        Read value indicates the current enable
                                                        status

Separating the set and clear operations in two different addresses has various advantages.
First, it reduces the steps needed for enabling an interrupt, thus getting small code and
shorter execution time. For example, to enable interrupt #2, we only need to program the
NVIC with one access:
  *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E100))      =0x4; //Enable interrupt #2

Or in assembly
       LDR    R0,=0xE000E100 ; Setup address in R0
       MOVS   R1,#0x4        ; interrupt #2
       STR    R1,[R0]        ; write to set interrupt enable

The second advantage is that this arrangement prevents race condition between
multiple application processes that can result in losing of programmed control
information. For example, if the enable control is implemented using a simple read/
write register, a read-modify-write process is required for enabling an interrupt,
e.g., interrupt #2 in this case, and if between the read operation and write operation,
an interrupt occurred and the ISR changed another bit in the interrupt enable register,
the change done by the ISR could be overwritten when the interrupted program
resumed.
Clearing of interrupt enable can be done with similar code, only the address is different.
For example, to disable interrupt #2:
  *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E180))      =0x4; //Disable interrupt #2

Or in assembly
       LDR    R0,=0xE000E180 ; Setup address in R0
       MOVS   R1,#0x4        ; interrupt #2
       STR    R1,[R0]        ; write to clear interrupt enable

In normal application development, it is best to use NVIC control functions provided in
the CMSIS compliant device driver library to enable or disable interrupts. This gives your
application code the best software portability. CMSIS-CORE is part of the device driver
library from your microcontroller vendor and is covered in Chapter 4. To enable or disable
interrupt using CMSIS, the functions provided are:
  // Enable Interrupt e IRQn value of 0 refer to Interrupt #0
  void NVIC_EnableIRQ(IRQn_Type IRQn);
  // Disable Interrupt e IRQn value of 0 refer to Interrupt #0
  void NVIC_DisableIRQ(IRQn_Type IRQn);

8.8.3 Interrupt Pending Set and Clear Register

If an interrupt takes place but cannot be processed immediately, for example, if the
processor is serving another higher priority interrupt, the IRQ will be pended. The pending
status is held in a register and will remain valid until the current priority of the processor
is lowered so that the pending request is accepted, or if the application clears the pending
status manually.
The interrupt pending status can be accessed, or modified, through the Interrupt Set
Pending (SETPEND) and Interrupt Clear Pending (CLRPEND) register addresses. Similar
to the Interrupt Enable control register, the Interrupt Pending status register is physically
one register, but use two addresses to handle the set and clear of the bits. This allows each
bit to be modified independently, without risk of losing information due to race conditions
between two application processes. The description of the Interrupt Pending Set and Clear
Register is shown in Table 8.5.
The Interrupt Pending status register allows an interrupt to be triggered by software. If the
interrupt is already enabled, no higher priority exception handler is running, and no
interrupt masking is set, then the ISR will be carried out almost immediately. For example,
if we want to trigger interrupt #2, we can use the following code:
  *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E100))      =0x4; //Enable interrupt #2
  *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E200))      =0x4; //Pend interrupt #2

Or in assembly
       MOVS   R1,#0x4        ; interrupt #2
       LDR    R0,=0xE000E100 ; Setup address in R0

Table 8.5: Interrupt Pending Set and Clear Register

 Address         Name        Type     Reset value    Descriptions
 0xE000E200      SETPEND     R/W      0x00000000     Set pending for interrupt 0 to 31. Write 1 to
                                                     set bit to 1, write 0 has no effect.
                                                     Bit[0] for Interrupt #0 (exception #16)
                                                     Bit[1] for Interrupt #1 (exception #17)
                                                     .
                                                     Bit[31] for Interrupt #31 (exception #47)
                                                     Read value indicates the current pending
                                                     status
 0xE000E280      CLRPEND     R/W      0x00000000     Clear pending for interrupt 0 to 31. Write 1
                                                     to clear bit to 0, write 0 has no effect.
                                                     Bit[0] for Interrupt #0 (exception #16)
                                                     .
                                                     Bit[31] for Interrupt #31 (exception #47)
                                                     Read value indicates the current pending
                                                     status

      STR     R1,[R0]        ; write to set interrupt enable
      LDR     R0,=0xE000E200 ; Setup address in R0
      STR     R1,[R0]        ; write to set pending status

In some cases we might need to clear the pending status of an interrupt. For example,
when an interrupt generating peripheral is being reprogrammed, we can disable the
interrupt for this peripheral, reprogram its control registers, and clear the interrupt
pending status (which might be set by spurious activities in the peripheral during
reprogramming) before re-enabling the peripheral (in case unwanted IRQs might
be generated during reprogramming). For example, to clear the pending status of
interrupt 2:
  *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E280)) = =0x4;//Clear interrupt #2
                                                   // pending status

Or in assembly
      LDR     R0,=0xE000E280 ; Setup address in R0
      MOVS    R1,#0x4        ; interrupt #2
      STR     R1,[R0]        ; write to clear pending status

In the CMSIS compliant device driver libraries, three functions are provided for accessing
the pending status registers:
  // Set pending status of a interrupt
  void NVIC_SetPendingIRQ(IRQn_Type IRQn);
  // Clear pending status of a interrupt
  void NVIC_ClearPendingIRQ(IRQn_Type IRQn);

  // Return true if the interrupt pending status is 1
  uint32_t NVIC_GetPendingIRQ(IRQn_Type IRQn);

8.8.4 Interrupt Priority Level

Each external interrupt has an associated priority level register. Each of them is 2 bit wide,
occupying the two MSBs of the Interrupt Priority Level Registers. Each Interrupt Priority
Level Register occupies 1 byte (8 bits), as shown in Figure 8.11. NVIC registers in the
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors can only be accessed using word-size transfers, so
for each access, four Interrupt Priority Level Registers are accessed at the same time.

        Bit    31 30            24 23 22             16 15 14              8 7 6           0
 0xE000E41C    31                   30                   29                   28
 0xE000E418    27                   26                   25                   24
 0xE000E414    23                   22                   21                   20
 0xE000E410    19                   18                   17                   16
 0xE000E40C    15                   14                   13                   12
 0xE000E408    11                   10                   9                    8
 0xE000E404     7                    6                   5                    4
 0xE000E400   IRQ 3                IRQ 2                IRQ 1                IRQ 0

                                            Figure 8.11
                       Interrupt Priority Level Registers for each interrupt.

The unimplemented bits are read as zero. Write to those unimplemented bits are ignored
and read values of the unimplemented bits return zeros (Table 8.6).
Because each access to the Priority Level Register will access four of them in one go, if
we only want to change one of them, we need to read back the whole word, change 1 byte
and then write back the whole value. For example, if we want to set priority level of
interrupt #2 to 0?C0, we can do it by:
  unsigned long temp; // a temporary variable
  temp = *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E400)); // Get IPR0
  temp = temp & (0xFF00FFFF) j (0xC0 << 16); // Change Priority level
  *((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000E400)) = temp; // Set IPR0

Or in assembly
       LDR    R0,=0xE000E400 ; Setup address in R0
       LDR    R1,[R0]        ; Get PRIORITY0
       MOVS   R2, #0xFF      ; Byte mask
       LSLS   R2, R2, #16    ; Shift mask to interrupt #2’s position
       BICS   R1, R1, R2     ; R1 = R1 AND (NOT(0x00FF0000))
       MOVS   R2, #0xC0      ; New value for priority level
       LSLS   R2, R2, #16    ; Shift left by 16 bits
       ORRS   R1, R1, R2     ; Put new priority level
       STR    R1,[R0]        ; write back value

Table 8.6: Interrupt Priority Level Registers (0xE000E400e0xE000E41C)

 Address           Name        Type       Reset value      Descriptions
 0xE000E400        IPR0        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 0 to 3.
                                                           [31:30] Interrupt priority 3
                                                           [23:22] Interrupt priority 2
                                                           [15:14] Interrupt priority 1
                                                           [7:6] Interrupt priority 0
 0xE000E404        IPR1        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 4 to 7.
                                                           [31:30] Interrupt priority 7
                                                           [23:22] Interrupt priority 6
                                                           [15:14] Interrupt priority 5
                                                           [7:6] Interrupt priority 4
 0xE000E408        IPR2        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 8 to 11.
                                                           [31:30] Interrupt priority 11
                                                           [23:22] Interrupt priority 10
                                                           [15:14] Interrupt priority 9
                                                           [7:6] Interrupt priority 8
 0xE000E40C        IPR3        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 12 to 15.
                                                           [31:30] Interrupt priority 15
                                                           [23:22] Interrupt priority 14
                                                           [15:14] Interrupt priority 13
                                                           [7:6] Interrupt priority 12
 0xE000E410        IPR4        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 16 to 19.
 0xE000E414        IPR5        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 20 to 23.
 0xE000E418        IPR6        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 24 to 27.
 0xE000E41C        IPR7        R/W        0x00000000       Priority level for interrupt 28 to 31.

Alternatively, if the mask value and new value are fixed in the application code, we
can set the mask value and new priority level values using LDR instructions to shorten
the code:
      LDR     R0,=0xE000E400 ; Setup address in R0
      LDR     R1,[R0]        ; Get PRIORITY0
      LDR     R2,=0x00FF0000 ; Mask for interrupt #2’s priority
      BICS    R1, R1, R2     ; R1 = R1 AND (NOT(0x00FF0000))
      LDR     R2,=0x00C00000 ; New value for interrupt #2’s priority
      ORRS    R1, R1, R2     ; Put new priority level
      STR     R1,[R0]        ; write back value

With CMSIS compliant device driver libraries, the interrupt priority level can be accessed
by two functions:
  // Set the priority level of an interrupt or a system exception
  void NVIC_SetPriority(IRQn_Type IRQn, uint32_t priority);

  // return the priority level of an interrupt or a system exception
  uint32_t NVIC_GetPriority(IRQn_Type IRQn);

Note that these two functions automatically shift the priority level values to the
implemented bits of the Priority Level Registers. Therefore when we want to set the
priority value of interrupt #2 to 0xC0, we should use:
       NVIC_SetPriority(2, 0x3); // priority value 0x3 is shifted to become 0xC0

The Interrupt Priority Level Registers should be programmed before the interrupt is
enabled. Usually this is done at the beginning of the program. Changing of interrupt
priority when the interrupt is already enabled should be avoided as this is
architecturally unpredictable in the ARMv6-M architecture and is not supported in
Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processors. This is different from the ARMv7-M
Architecture (e.g., Cortex-M3/M4 Processor) which supports dynamic switching of
interrupt priority levels.
Another different between ARMv6-M Architecture and ARMv7-M Architecture is that the
interrupt priority registers in ARMv7-M can be accessed using byte or half-word transfers,
so that you can access to individual priority level setting with byte size accesses. More
details of the differences between various Cortex-M processors are covered in Chapter 22,
Section 22.5.

8.9 Exception Masking Register (PRIMASK)
In some applications, it is necessary to disable all interrupts for a short period of time for
some time critical processes. Instead of disabling all interrupts and restoring them using
the interrupt enable/disable control register, the CortexÒ-M processors provide a separate
feature for this usage. One of the special registers called PRIMASK (introduced in
Chapter 4) can be used to mask all interrupts and system exceptions, apart from the NMI
and the HardFault exceptions.
The PRIMASK is a single-bit register and is set to 0 at reset. When set to 0, interrupts and
system exceptions are allowed. When set to 1, only NMI and HardFault exceptions are
allowed. Effectively, when it is set to 1, it changes the current priority level to 0 (the
highest programmable level).
There are various ways to program the PRIMASK register.
In assembly language, you can set or clear the PRIMASK register using MSR instruction.
For example, you can use the following code to set PRIMASK (disable interrupt):
       MOVS      R0, #1      ; New value for PRIMASK
       MSR       PRIMASK, R0 ; Transfer R0 value to PRIMASK

Enabling the interrupt can be done in the same way by just changing the R0 value to 0.

Alternatively, you can use the CPS instructions to set or clear PRIMASK:
       CPSIE   i    ; Clear PRIMASK (Enable interrupt)
       CPSID   i    ; Set PRIMASK (Disable interrupt)

In C language, users of CMSIS compliant device drivers can use the following functions
to set and clear PRIMASK. Even if CMSIS is not used, most C compilers for ARMÒ
processors handle these two functions automatically as intrinsic functions:
    void __enable_irq(void);      // Clear PRIMASK
    void __disable_irq(void);     // Set PRIMASK

These two functions get compiled into the CPS instructions.
It is important to clear the PRIMASK after the time critical routine is finished. Otherwise
the processor will stop accepting new IRQ. This applies even if the __disable_irq()
function (or setting of PRIMASK) is used inside an interrupt handler. This behavior is
                                Ô
different from the ARM7TDMI ; in the ARM7TDMI processor, the I-bit in Current
Program Status Register (CPSR) can be reset (to enable interrupts) at exception return due
to restoration of the CPSR. When in the Cortex-M processors, PRIMASK and xPSR are
separated and therefore the interrupt masking is not affected by exception return.

8.10 Interrupt Inputs and Pending Behavior
The CortexÒ-M processors support IRQs in form of level trigger as well as pulse input.
This feature involves a number of pending status registers associated with interrupt inputs,
including the NMI input. For each interrupt input, the pending status for each interrupt is
held in a 1-bit register which holds the interrupt request even if the IRQ signal is
de-asserted (e.g., an interrupt pulse generated from external hardware connected via the
I/O port). When the exception starts being served by the processor, the pending status is
cleared automatically by hardware.
In the case of NMI it is almost the same, apart from the fact that the NMI request is
usually served almost immediately because it is the highest priority interrupt type. In other
aspects NMI is quite similar to the IRQs: the pending status register for NMI allows
software to trigger NMI, and allows new NMI to be held in pending state if the processor
is still serving the previous NMI request.

8.10.1 Simple Interrupt Process

Most peripherals developed for ARMÒ processor use level trigger interrupt output. When
an interrupt event takes place, the interrupt signal connected from the peripheral to the
NVIC will be asserted. The signal will remain high until the processor clears the IRQ at

                                                                                    Interrupt service routine clears the
   Interrupt request X                 Assertion of interrupt                        interrupt request at the peripheral
                                      request cause pending
                                         status to be set
                                                            Entering the interrupt handler cause
    Interrupt pending                                        the pending status to be cleared
         status X

                                                      Handler

    Processor mode
                            Thread                                                                                                  Thread

 Processor operation         Thread                                         Interrupt Handler X                                        Thread
                                        Stacking
                                                                                                                      Unstacking
                                              Vector fetch                                               Exception
                                                                                                          return

                                                   Figure 8.12
                         Simple case of interrupt activation and pending status behavior.

the peripheral during the ISR. Inside the NVIC, the pending status register of the interrupt
is set when the interrupt is detected and gets cleared as the processor accepted and started
the ISR execution (Figure 8.12).

8.10.2 Simple Pulse Interrupt Handling

Some interrupt sources might generate IRQs in form of a pulse (for at least one clock
cycle). In this case, the pending status register will hold the request until the interrupt is
being served (Figure 8.13).
For pulsed IRQs, there is no need to clear the IRQ at the peripheral.

                                      Assertion of interrupt
                                     request cause pending
  Interrupt request X                   status to be set

                                                        Entering the interrupt handler cause
   Interrupt pending                                     the pending status to be cleared
        status X

                                                     Handler

   Processor mode
                           Thread                                                                                                  Thread

  Processor operation       Thread                                         Interrupt Handler X                                        Thread
                                       Stacking
                                                                                                                     Unstacking
                                             Vector fetch                                              Exception
                                                                                                        return

                                                 Figure 8.13
                   Simple case of pulsed interrupt activation and pending status behavior.

                                 Assertion of interrupt request
                                 cause pending status to be set

  Interrupt request X
                                          Interrupt request de-asserted by
                                                   the peripheral
  Interrupt pending
       status X

                                                           Pending status cleared by software

   Processor mode
                        Thread                                                                                               Thread

 Processor operation                            Thread (interrupt X is not accepted due to disabled or masked by PRIMASK)

                                              Figure 8.14
         Interrupt pending status gets cleared by software and is not taken by the processor.

8.10.3 Canceling of Interrupt Pending Status Before the Interrupt Is Serviced

If the IRQ is not carried out immediately and is de-asserted, and the pending status is
cleared by software, then the IRQ will be ignored, and the processor will not execute the
interrupt handler (Figure 8.14). The clearing of the pending status can be carried out by
writing to the NVIC CLRPEND register. This is sometimes necessary when setting up a
peripheral, and the peripheral might have generated spurious IRQs previously.

8.10.4 Clearing of Pending Status While Peripheral Still Asserting IRQ

If the IRQ signal is still asserted by the peripheral when the software clears the pending
status, the pending status will be asserted again immediately (Figure 8.15).

                              Assertion of interrupt request
                             cause pending status to be set

  Interrupt request X
                                                                                                Pending status re-asserted

   Interrupt pending
        status X

                                                          Pending status cleared by software

   Processor mode
                        Thread                                                                                               Thread

 Processor operation                        Thread (interrupt X is not accepted due to disabled or masked by PRIMASK)

                                               Figure 8.15
                        Interrupt pending status gets cleared and reasserted again.

8.10.5 IRQ Remains High When ISR Completed

Now let us go back to the normal interrupt processing scenarios. If the IRQ from a
peripheral is not cleared during the execution of the exception handler, the pending status
will be activated again at the exception return and will cause the exception handler to be
executed again. This might happen if the peripheral got more data to be processed (for
example, a data receiver might want to hold the IRQ high as long as data remain in its
received data FIFO) (Figure 8.16).

                                                                                     Interrupt request remain high
  Interrupt request X              Assertion of interrupt
                                  request cause pending
                                     status to be set
                                                                                                              Interrupt handler entered
                                                     Entering the interrupt handler cause                        again and clear the
  Interrupt pending                                   the pending status to be cleared
       status X                                                                                                     pending status

                                                  Handler
                                                                          Exception return while interrupt
   Processor mode                                                         asserted cause pending status
                        Thread                                                   to get activated

                                                                                                                Interrupt re-entered
 Processor operation     Thread                                      Interrupt Handler X                             Interrupt handler X
                                    Stacking
                                          Vector fetch                                           Exception
                                                                                                  return

                                                                                                         Vector fetch

                                          Figure 8.16
Interrupt request remains high at the end of ISR causes reentering of the same interrupt handler.

8.10.6 Multiple IRQ Pulses Before Entering ISR

For pulsed interrupts, if the IRQ is pulsed several times before the processor starts the ISR
(for example, the processor could be handling another IRQ), then the multiple interrupt
pulses will be treated as just one IRQ (Figure 8.17).

8.10.7 IRQ Pulse During ISR Execution

If the pulsed IRQ is triggered again during the execution of the ISR, it will be processed
as a new IRQ and will cause the ISR to be entered again after the interrupt exit
(Figure 8.18).
The second IRQ does not cause the interrupt to be serviced immediately because it is at
the same priority level as the current execution priority. Once the processor exits the
handler, then the current priority level is lowered and thus allows the pending IRQ to be
serviced.

                                 Multiple interrupt pulses before the
                               processor start processing the interrupt

   Interrupt request X

                                                                                      Entering the interrupt handler cause
   Interrupt pending                                                                   the pending status to be cleared
        status X

                             Handler                                                   Handler

    Processor mode
                                                                       Tail-chain                                                    Thread

  Processor operation                     Interrupt Handler Y                              Interrupt Handler X                          Thread

                       The processor cannot process interrupt X
                                                                                                                       Unstacking
                             until handler Y is completed              Exception Vector fetch              Exception
                                                                        return                              return

                                                    Figure 8.17
                          Multiple interrupt request pulses can be treated as one request.

                                      Assertion of interrupt
                                     request cause pending
Interrupt request X                     status to be set
                                                                                New activation of the interrupt request cause the
                                                                               pending status to be set again during the execution
                                                                                              of interrupt handler
Interrupt pending
     status X

                                                    Handler

 Processor mode
                          Thread                                                                                                       Thread

Processor operation         Thread                             Interrupt Handler X               Interrupt Handler X                      Thread
                                       Stacking
                                                                                                                          Unstacking
                                             Vector fetch                    Exception Vector fetch
                                                                              return

                                          Figure 8.18
 Interrupt pending status can be set by new interrupt request pulse during its handler execution.

8.10.8 IRQ Assertion for a Disabled Interrupt

The pending status of an interrupt can be activated even when the interrupt is disabled.
Therefore when reprogramming a peripheral and setting up its interrupt and if the previous
state of the peripheral is unknown, you might need to clear its interrupt pending status in
the NVIC before re-enabling the interrupt in the NVIC. This can be done by writing to the
Interrupt Clear Pending register in 0xE000E280 (Section 8.8.3, Interrupt Pending Set and
Clear Register).

One of the most common cases for this is a GPIO peripheral being reprogrammed
to switch between different interrupt-triggering modes. The external input value during
the reconfiguration might change and could cause the pending status to be set
unexpectedly.

8.11 Details of Exception Entry Sequence
When an exception takes place, a number of things happen as follows:
•   Stacking and update of one of the Stack Pointers (SPs)
•   Vector fetch (determine starting address of ISR) and update R15 (PC)
•   Registers update (LR, Internal Program Status Register (IPSR), NVIC registers)

8.11.1 Stacking

When an exception takes place, eight registers are pushed to the stack automatically.
These registers are R0eR3, R12, R14 (the Link Register), the return address/PC (address
of the next instruction, or current address if the current instruction is to be abandoned),
and the xPSR. The stack being used for stacking is the current active stack: If the
processor was in Thread mode when the exception happened, the stacking could be using
either process stack or the main stack, depending on the setting in the CONTROL
register bit 1. If CONTROL[1] was 0, the main stack would be used for the stacking, as
shown in Figure 8.19.

                                                                                 Nested ISR
                                                                                 execution

                                                                    Stacking
                                                                                Using main
                                                                                   stack
                                                    ISR execution

               Handler
                                         Stacking
                mode
                                                                     Using
                                                    Using main
                               IRQ                                   main
                                                       stack
                                                                     stack

                Thread
                 mode       Thread                            Higher priority
                                          Using                    IRQ
                                          main
                                          stack
                      Using main stack
                     (CONTROL[1] = 0)
                                          Figure 8.19
       Exception stacking in nested interrupt with main stack used in the Thread mode.

If the processor was in Thread mode and CONTROL[1] was set to 1 when the exception
occurred, the stacking will be using the process stack, as shown in Figure 8.20.

                                                                                Nested ISR
                                                                                 execution

                                                                    Stacking
                                                                               Using main
                                                                                  stack
                                                    ISR execution

               Handler
                                         Stacking
                mode
                                                                     Using
                                                    Using main
                              IRQ                                    main
                                                      stack
                                                                     stack

               Thread
                mode       Thread                            Higher priority
                                          Using                  IRQ
                                         process
                                          stack
                   Using process stack
                   (CONTROL[1] = 1)
                                          Figure 8.20
      Exception stacking in nested interrupt with process stack used in the Thread mode.

For nested exceptions, the stacking always uses the main stack because the processor is
already in handler mode, which can only use the main stack.
The reason for the registers R0eR3, R12, PC, LR, and xPSR to be saved to stack is that
these are called “caller saved registers.” According to the AAPCS (ARM Architecture
Procedure Call Standard, reference 6), a C function does not have to retain the values of
these registers. In order to allow exception handlers to be implemented as a normal C
functions, these registers have to be saved and restored by hardware, so that when the
interrupt program resumes, all these registers will be the same as before the exception
occurred.
The grouping of the register contents that are pushed onto the stack during stacking is
called a “Stack Frame.” In the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, a stack frame
is always double word aligned. This ensures that the stack implementation conforms to
the AAPCS standard (reference 6). If the position of the last pushed data could be in
an address that is not double word aligned, the stacking mechanism automatically
adjusts the stacking position to the next double-word-aligned location, and sets a flag
(bit 9) in the stacked xPSR to indicate the double word stack adjustment has been
made, as shown in Figure 8.21.
During unstacking, the processor checks the flag in the stacked xPSR and adjusts the SP
accordingly.

 0x20008000                             Old SP            0x20008000
 0x20007FFC    xPSR (bit 9 is 0)                          0x20007FFC                               Old SP
               Return Address                             0x20007FF8       Unused
                     LR                                   0x20007FF4    xPSR (bit 9 is 1)
                    R12                   A stack                       Return Address               A stack
                     R3                    frame                              LR                      frame
                     R2                                                      R12
                     R1                                                       R3
 0x20007FE0          R0                   New SP          0x20007FE0          R2
 0x20007FDC                                               0x20007FDC          R1
                                                          0x20007FD8          R0                    New SP

               SP was double                                           SP was not double
                word aligned                                             word aligned
                                             Figure 8.21
                             Stack frame and double word stack alignment.

The stacking of registers is carried in the following order, as shown in Figure 8.22.

                                                                                                     Fetch
 Stacking                                                       LR        Return
              R0        R1         R2    R3         R12                                     xPSR   exception
   start                                                       (R14)     Address
                                                                                                    vector
                                           Figure 8.22
    Order of register stacking during exception sequence in the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
                                            processors.

When the stacking is completed, the SP will be updated, and the MSP will be selected as
the current SP (handlers always use main stack), then the exception vector will be fetched.

8.11.2 Vector Fetch and Update PC

After the stacking is done, the processor then fetches the exception vector (starting address
of the ISR) from the vector table. The vector is then updated to the PC, and instruction
fetch of the exception handler execution starts from this address.

8.11.3 Registers Update

As the exception handler starts to execute, the value of LR is updated to the corresponding
EXC_RETURN value. This value is to be used for exception return. In addition, the IPSR
is also updated to the exception number of current serving exception.
In addition, a number of NVIC registers might also get updated. This included the pending
status registers (see Section 8.8.3) for external interrupts if the exception taken is an

interrupt, or an internal memory-mapped register called the Interrupt Control and Status
Register (see Section 9.2.3, Control registers for System exception management) if the
exception is a system exception.

8.12 Details of Exception Exit Sequence
When an exception return instruction is executed (loading of EXC_RETURN into PC by
POP or BX instruction), the exception exit sequence begins. This included the following:
•   Unstacking of registers
•   Fetch and execute from the restored return address

8.12.1 Unstacking of Registers

In order to restore the status of the registers, as it was before the exception is taken, the
register values which were stored onto the stack during stacking is read (POP) and
restored back to the registers. Since the stack frame can either be stored on the main stack
or the processor stack, the processor first checks the value of the EXC_RETURN being
used. If bit 2 of EXC_RETURN is 0, it starts the unstacking from the main stack. If this
bit is 1, it starts the unstacking from process stack, as shown in Figure 8.23.
After the unstacking is done, the SP needs to be adjusted. During stacking, a 4 byte space
might have been included in the stack memory so as to ensure the stack frame is double
word aligned. If this is the case, the bit 9 of the unstacked xPSR would be 1, and the value
of SP could be adjusted accordingly to remove the 4 byte padding space.
In addition, the current SP selection may be switched back to process stack if bit 2 of
EXC_RETURN was set to 1, and when bit 3 of the EXC_RETURN was set, indicating the
exception exit is returning to Thread mode.

8.12.2 Fetch and Execute From Return Address

After the exception return process is completed, the processor can then fetch instruction
from the restored return address in the PC, and resume execution of the interrupted
program. The Interrupt Program Status Register (IPSR) also get updated to match the
restored context.

8.13 Interrupt Latency
For simple cases (with assumptions described below), the interrupt latency of the CortexÒ-
M0 processor is 16 cycles, and the interrupt latency for the Cortex-M0þ processor is 15
clock cycles. The interrupt latency is defined as from the processor clock cycle the

                                Exception Return
                                   executed

                EXC_RETURN[2] =0                  EXC_RETURN[2] =1

             Unstacking                                       Unstacking
             using MSP                                        using PSP
                                                                                                xPSR
                                     Restore
                                    Registers
                                   from Stack                                                   R0
                                      Frame
                                                                                                R1
                                        xPSR
                                       Return                                                   R2
                                                                         Register
                                       Address
                                                                        unstacking
                                        (PC)
                                                                          order                 R3
                                        LR
                                        R12
                                                                                                R12
                                        R3
                                        R2
                                                                                                LR
                                        R1
                SP before
                unstacking              R0
                                                                                          Return Address

                                                  Unstacked xPSR[9]=1      Adjust SP due to
                 Unstacked xPSR[9]=0                                     previous stack frame
                                                                        double word alignment
                                   SP = SP + 32               SP = SP + 36

               EXC_RETURN[2] =0                  EXC_RETURN[2] =1

          MSP selected         SP selection update          PSP selected
        (CONTROL[1] = 0)                                  (CONTROL[1] = 1)

                                Resume program
                                   execution

                                          Figure 8.23
                              Unstacking operation at exception exit.

interrupt is asserted, to the start of the execution of the interrupt handler. This interrupt
latency assumes the following:
•   The interrupt is enabled and is not masked by PRIMASK or other executing exception
    handlers.
•   The memory system does not have any wait state. If the memory system has wait state,
    the interrupt could be delayed by wait states that occur at the last bus transfer before

    interrupt processing, stacking, vector fetch, or instruction fetch at the starting of inter-
    rupt handler.
The interrupt latency figure included the time required for NVIC to detect the IRQ, the
stacking of registers, vector fetch and fetching of the instructions in the ISRs.
There are some cases that can result in different interrupt latency:
•   Tail chaining of interrupt: if the IRQ occurs just as another exception handler return, the
    unstacking and stacking process can be skipped and thus reduces the interrupt latency.
    Note: a few memory accesses cycles (e.g., vector fetch) are still required.
•   Late arrival: if the IRQ occurred during the stacking process of another lower-priority
    interrupt, the late arrival mechanism allows the new high priority to take place first.
    This can result in lower latency for the higher-priority interrupt.
These two behaviors are features to allow interrupt latency to be reduced to minimum.
However, in some embedded application, zero jitter interrupt response is required.
Fortunately the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors equipped with a zero jitter feature.
On the interface of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, there is an 8 bit signal
called IRQLATENCY connected to the NVIC. This signal can be used to control the
interrupt latency behavior. If this signal is connected to 0, then the processor will start to
process the IRQ as soon as possible. If the signal is set to a specific value depending on
the timing of the memory system, then it can enable the zero jitter behavior to force the
interrupt latency to a higher number of cycles, but is guaranteed to have zero jitter. The
IRQLATENCY signal is normally controlled by configurable registers developed by
microcontroller vendors and is not visible on the microcontroller interface.
This page intentionally left blank
