                                                                                                                     C H A P T E R 11

Fault Handling
11.1 Fault Exception Overview
In ARMÒ processors, if a program goes wrong and the processor detects a fault, then a
fault exception occurs. On the CortexÒ-M0/M0þ processors, there is only one exception
type that handles faults: the HardFault exception.
The HardFault exception is almost the highest priority exception type, with a priority level
of ?1. Only the Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI) can preempt the HardFault exception.
When the HardFault handler is triggered, we know that the microcontroller is in trouble
and corrective action is needed. The HardFault handler is also useful for debugging
software during the software development stage. By setting a breakpoint in the HardFault
handler (or use a debug feature called vector catch to halt the processor at HardFault), the
program execution stops when a fault occurs. By examining the content of the stack, often
we can back trace the location of the fault and try to identify the reason for the failure.
This behavior is very different from most 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers. In these
microcontrollers, often the only safety net is a watchdog timer. However, it takes time for
a watchdog timer to trigger, and often there is no way to determine how the program went
wrong.

11.2 What Can Cause a Fault?
There are a number of possible reasons for a fault to occur. For the CortexÒ-M0 and
Cortex-M0þ processors, we can group these possible causes into two areas: Memory
related and Program Errors (Table 11.1).
For memory related faults, the error response from the bus system can also be caused by a
number of different reasons:
•     Address being accessed is invalid. In such case the bus interconnect component should
      generate an error response back to the processor to indicate an error.
•     The bus slave cannot accept the transfer because the transfer type is invalid (depending
      on bus slave design).
•     The bus slave cannot accept the transfer because it is not enabled or initialized (for
      example, a microcontroller might generate an error response if a peripheral is accessed
      but the clock for the peripheral bus is turned off).
The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00011-4
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 11.1: Faults that trigger HardFault exceptions

 Fault classification    Fault condition
 Memory related          • Bus error (can be program accesses or data accesses).
                           • Bus error generated by bus infrastructure due to attempt to access an
                              invalid address.
                           • Bus error generated by bus slave.
                         • Attempt to execute program from memory region marked as nonexecutable
                           (see memory attribute in Chapter 7).
                         • Attempt to access registers in System Control Space at unprivileged access
                           level (not applicable to CortexÒ-M0 processor).
                         • Memory access violated the memory permission defined in the Memory
                           Protection Unit (MPU) settings (MPU is an optional component in the
                           Cortex-M0þ processor, see Chapter 12 for more information).
 Program error           • Execution of undefined instruction.
                         • Trying to switch to ARMÒ state (Cortex-M processors only support ThumbÒ
                           instructions).
                         • Attempt to generate an unaligned memory access (not allowed in ARMv6-M
                           architecture).
                         • Attempt to execute an SVC (SuperVisor Call) instruction when the SVCall
                           exception priority level is the same or lower than the current exception level.
                         • Invalid EXC_RETURN value during exception return.
                         • Attempt to execute a breakpoint instruction (BKPT) when debug is not
                           enabled (no debugger attached).

When the direct cause (e.g., program code segment) of the HardFault exception is located,
it might still take some effort to locate the source of the problem. For example, a bus error
can be caused by an incorrect pointer manipulation, a stack memory corruption, a memory
overflow, an incorrect memory map setup, or other reasons.

11.3 Analyze a Fault
Depending on the type of fault, very often it is straightforward to locate the instruction
that caused the HardFault exception. In order to do that, we need to know the register
contents when the HardFault exception is entered and the register contents that were
pushed to the stack just before the HardFault handler starts. These values include the
return program address, which usually tells us the instruction address that caused the fault.
If a debugger is available, we can create a HardFault exception handler that includes a
breakpoint instruction, which halts the processor. Alternatively, we can use the debugger to
set a breakpoint at the beginning of the HardFault handler, so that the processor halts
automatically when a HardFault is entered. After the processor is halted due to a
HardFault, we can then try to locate the fault by the following flow (Figure 11.1).

                                                     Start

                                                                No                Processor is not in
                              IPSR = 3?                                       HardFault exception, it is
                                                                              halted by other breakpoint
                                                          Yes                       or watch point.

                             Bit 2 of LR                             No
                         (EXC_RETURN) is 0?

                                                          Yes

                                           Main Stack Pointer (MSP)            Process Stack Pointer (PSP)
                                            was used for stacking                 was used for stacking

                          MSP pointed to valid                       No         No                         PSP pointed to valid
                         stack memory region?                                                             stack memory region?

                                                          Yes                          Yes
        Memory                                                                                                         Investigate stack pointer
        Address                                                                                                        setup in vector table and
                                                                                                                              in project.

                                           Stack frame starting at              Stack frame starting at
                                                                                                                       Investigate possible stack
                                            MSP. Stacked PC is                   PSP. Stacked PC is
                  xPSR                                                                                                   leak in program code.
                                           located at MSP+0x18                  located at PSP+0x18
Stack                       Stacked PC
                  PC
Frame                       at SP+0x18
                  LR                                                                                                   Investigate any program
                                                                                                                        code that modify stack
                  R12                                                                                                      pointer directly
                                                             Create disassembled code of
                  R3                                         the execution image and see
                                                               where the stacked PC is.
                  R2
                  R1
                  R0           Stack Pointer

                                                  Figure 11.1
                               Identifying the program address of a fault event.

To aid the analysis, we should also generate a disassembly listing of the compiled image,
and locate the fault using the stacked program counter (PC) value found on the stack
frame. If the faulting address is a memory access instruction, you should also check
the register value (or stacked register value) to see if the memory access operated on the
correct address. Besides from checking the address range, we should also check if the
address of the memory access is aligned correctly.
Apart from the stacked PC (return address) value, the stack frame also contains other
stacked register values, which can be useful for debugging. For example, the stacked
interrupt program status register (IPSR) (within the xPSR) indicates that if the processor
was running an exception handler, and if the stacked execution PSR (EPSR) shows the
processor state is not ThumbÒ state, it could indicate that the LSB of an exception vector
is not set to 1 correctly. (If the T bit of EPSR is 0, the fault is caused by accidentally
switching to ARMÒ state.)

The stacked LR might also provide information like the return address of the faulting
function. If the fault happened within an exception handler, it could show whether the
value of the EXC_RETURN was accidentally corrupted.
In addition, the current register values can provide various clues that can help identify the
cause of a fault. Apart from the current stack pointer values, the current Link Register
(R14) value might also be useful. If the LR shows an invalid EXC_RETURN value, it
could mean that the value of LR was modified incorrectly during an exception handler
before the HardFault is triggered.
The CONTROL register can also be useful. In simple applications without an OS, usually
the Processor Stack Pointer (PSP) is not used and the CONTROL register should always
be zero in such cases. If the CONTROL register value was set to 0x2/0x3 (bit 1 set to 1,
indicates that PSP is used in Thread state), it could mean LR has been modified
incorrectly during a previous exception handler, or a stack corruption has taken place
which incorrectly modified the value of EXC_RETURN.

11.4 Accidental Switching to ARMÒ State
A number of common program errors that cause HardFault are due to accidentally
switching to ARM state. Usually this can be detected by checking the values of the
stacked xPSR. If the T (ThumbÒ) bit is cleared, then the fault was caused by an accidental
switch to ARM state.
The common errors that cause this problem are given in Table 11.2.

Table 11.2: Various causes of accidental switching to ARMÒ state

 Error                           Descriptions
 Use of incorrect libraries      The linking stage might have accidentally pulled in libraries compiled
                                 with ARM instructions (for ARM7TDMI). Check linker script setting
                                 and disassembled code of the compiled image to see if the C libraries
                                 are correct.
 Functions not being declared    If you are using GNU assembly tools and the project contains multiple
 correctly                       files, you need to make sure that the functions being called from a
                                 different file are declared correctly. Otherwise any such calls might
                                 result in an accidental state change.
 LSB of vector in the vector     The vector in the vector table should have the LSB set to 1 to indicate
 table set to 0                  ThumbÒ state. If the stacked PC is pointing to the beginning of an
                                 exception handler and the stacked xPSR has the T bit cleared to 0, the
                                 error is likely to be in the vector table.
 Function pointer with LSB       If a function pointer is declared with the LSB set to 0, calling the
 set to 0                        function will also cause the processor to enter a HardFault.

11.5 Error Handling in Real Applications
In real applications, the embedded systems will be running without a debugger attached
and stopping the processor is not acceptable for many applications. In most cases, the
HardFault exception handler can be used to carry out safety actions and then reset the
processor. For example, the following steps can be carried out.
•   Perform application specific safety actions (e.g., perform shut down sequence in a
    motor controller).
•   Optionally the system can report the error within a user interface, and then reset the
    system using the SYSRESETREQ (System Reset Request) in the Application Interrupt
    and Reset Control Register (AIRCR, see Chapter 9, Table 9.8), or other system control
    methods specific to the microcontroller.
Since a HardFault could be caused by an error in the stack pointer value, a HardFault handler
programmed in C language might not perform correctly because C generated code might
require stack memory to operate. Therefore, for safety critical systems, ideally the HardFault
handler should be programmed in assembly language, or use an assembly language wrapper
to check if the stack pointer is in a valid memory range before entering a C routine.

11.6 Error Handling During Software Development
Typically, the development tools provide various debug functionality to help debug
software issues. For example, if the CortexÒ-M0þ processor is used and the Micro Trace
Buffer (MTB) feature is available on the chip, the development tool might be able to make
use of such feature to enable software developers to locate fault information quickly. For
users of the Cortex-M0 processor, the MTB feature is not available and so other debug
analysis methods might be needed. (More information of using MTB is covered in Chapter
13, Debug Features).
The HardFault handler can be used to report debug information during software
development. This could be done using a user interface (e.g., LCD module), a simple
UART interface, or if the development tool supports semihosting (see Chapter 18,
Programming Examples), you could just use simple “printf” for such purpose.
In order to simplify coding effort, the error reporting function is typically written in C. If
the HardFault handler needs to report debug information such as the extracted faulting
program address, as shown in Figure 11.1, we will also need an assembly wrapper to
determine the address location of the stack frame.
The assembly language wrapper code extracts the address of the exception stack frame and
passes it to the C section of the HardFault handler, which displays the stack frame

              Bit 2 of LR                           No
          (EXC_RETURN) is 0?

                                         Yes

                           Main Stack Pointer (MSP)           Process Stack Pointer (PSP)
                            was used for stacking                was used for stacking

                                                 Put Stack Frame
                                                  address in R0

                                                                      No   Dead loop / self reset /
                       Stack Frame located in
                                                                             Halt (using BKPT
                        valid memory region?
                                                                                instruction)
                                                           Yes

                                                Branch to C handler
                                                   for reporting
                                        Figure 11.2
                           Assembly wrapper for HardFault handler.

(Figure 11.2). Otherwise, there is no easy way to locate the stack frame inside the C
handler. Although you can access the stack pointer value using inline assembly, embedded
assembly, a named register variable, or an intrinsic function, the value of the stack pointer
could change when entering the C function itself.
The assembly code for such an assembly wrapper can be implemented using embedded
assembly if using KeilÒ MDK-ARMÔ or ARM DS-5Ô, for example:

 Assembly wrapper using embedded assembler in KeilÒ MDK
    // HardFault handler wrapper in assembly
    // It extracts the location of stack frame and passes it to handler
    // in C as a pointer. We also extract the LR value as second
    // parameter.
    __asm void HardFault_Handler(void)
    {
      MOVS   r0, #4
      MOV    r1, LR
      TST    r0, r1
      BEQ    stacking_used_MSP
      MRS    R0, PSP ; first parameter - stacking was using PSP
      B      get_LR_and_branch
    stacking_used_MSP
      MRS    R0, MSP ; first parameter - stacking was using MSP

    get_LR_and_branch
      MOV    R1, LR ; second parameter is LR current value
      LDR    R2,=__cpp(hard_fault_handler_c)
      BX     R2
    }

The handler in C accepts the parameters from the assembly wrapper and extracts the stack
frame contents and LR values.

 HardFault handler to report stacked register values
    // HardFault handler in C, with stack frame location and LR value
    // extracted from the assembly wrapper as input parameters
    void hard_fault_handler_c(unsigned int * hardfault_args, unsigned lr_value)
    {
      unsigned int stacked_r0;
      unsigned int stacked_r1;
      unsigned int stacked_r2;
      unsigned int stacked_r3;
      unsigned int stacked_r12;
      unsigned int stacked_lr;
      unsigned int stacked_pc;
      unsigned int stacked_psr;

        stacked_r0 = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[0]);
        stacked_r1 = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[1]);
        stacked_r2 = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[2]);
        stacked_r3 = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[3]);
        stacked_r12 = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[4]);
        stacked_lr = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[5]);
        stacked_pc = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[6]);
        stacked_psr = ((unsigned long) hardfault_args[7]);

        printf ("[HardFault handler]\n");
        printf ("R0 = %x\n", stacked_r0);
        printf ("R1 = %x\n", stacked_r1);
        printf ("R2 = %x\n", stacked_r2);
        printf ("R3 = %x\n", stacked_r3);
        printf ("R12 = %x\n", stacked_r12);
        printf ("Stacked LR = %x\n", stacked_lr);
        printf ("Stacked PC = %x\n", stacked_pc);
        printf ("Stacked PSR = %x\n", stacked_psr);
        printf ("Current LR = %x\n", lr_value);
        while(1); // endless loop
    }

The C handler can only work if the stack pointer is still pointing to a valid RAM/SRAM
memory region because (a) it extracts debug information from the stack, and (b) the
handler codes generated from C compilers often require a valid stack memory
configuration to operate. Alternatively, you can carry out the debug information reporting
entirely in assembly code. Doing this in assembly language is not too difficult when you
have access to an assembly routine for text output. Several examples of assembly text
outputting routines can be found in Chapter 21. Details about embedded assembly
programming (used in the assembly wrapper) can also be found in this chapter.

11.7 Lockup
The CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors can enter a lockup state if another fault
occurs during the execution of a HardFault exception handler, or when a fault occurs
during the execution of an NMI handler. This is because when these two exception
handlers are executing, the priority level does not allow the HardFault handler to preempt.
During the lockup state, the processor stops executing instructions and asserts a LOCKUP
status signal. Depending on the implementation of the microcontroller, the LOCKUP
status signal can be programmed to reset the system automatically, rather than waiting for
a watchdog timer to time out and reset the system.
The lockup state prevents the failed program from corrupting more data in the memory or
data in the peripherals. During software development, this behavior can help us debug the
problem as the memory contents might contain vital clues about how the software failed.

11.7.1 Causes of Lockup

There are a number of conditions that can cause lockup in the CortexÒ-M0 or Cortex-M0þ
processor (or ARMv6-M architecture).
•   Fault occurred during NMI handler
•   Fault occurred during HardFault handler (also referred as double fault)
•   Bus error response during reset sequence (when trying to obtain initial SP value/reset
    vector)
•   Bus error response during unstacking of xPSR during exception return using MSP
    (Main Stack Pointer) for the unstacking
•   SVC instruction execution inside NMI handler or HardFault handler (insufficient priority)
Use of an SVC instruction in an NMI or HardFault handler can cause a lockup because
the SVC all priority level is always lower than these handlers and therefore blocked. Since
this program error cannot be handled by the HardFault exception (the priority level is
already ?1 or ?2), the system enters lockup state.

The lockup state can also be caused by a bus system error during the reset sequence.
When the first two words of the memory are fetched and if a bus fault happens in one
of these accesses, it means the processor cannot determine the initial stack pointer
value (the HardFault handler might need the stack as well), or the reset vector is
unknown. In these cases, the processor cannot continue normal operation and must
enter the lockup state.
If a bus error response occurs during exception entrance (stacking), this does not cause a
lockup even when entering a HardFault or NMI exception, see Figure 11.3. However, once
the HardFault exception or NMI exception handler is started, a bus error response can
cause a lockup. As a result, in safety critical systems, a HardFault handler written in C
might not be the best arrangement because the C compiler might insert stack operations at
the beginning of the handler code. E.g.:
   HardFault_Handler
       PUSH {R4, R5}            ; This can cause lock up if the MSP is corrupted

         .
For exception exit (unstacking), it is possible to cause a lockup if a bus error response is
received during the unstacking process of the xPSR using MSP, see Figure 11.3. In such
cases, the xPSR cannot be determined and so the correct priority level of the system is
unknown. As a result, the system is locked up and cannot be recovered apart from
resetting it or halting it for debug.

                                              Fault occurring here cause
                                                        lock up             Fault occurring
         Priority    Fault occurring                                       here might cause
                    here do not cause                                           lock up       Fault occurring
                         lock up
                                                                                              here does not
                                                                                              cause lock up
   -1 / -2

0 to 0xC0,
 or thread

                                              HardFault or NMI handler

                                   Stacking                                Unstacking

                                                        Time
                                               Figure 11.3
                               Lockup condition during exception sequences.

11.7.2 What Happens During a Lockup?

If the lockup is caused by a double fault, the priority level of the system stays at ?1. If
an NMI exception occurred, it is possible for the NMI to preempt and execute. After the
NMI is completed, the exception handler is terminated and the system returns to the
lockup state.
Otherwise, in other lockup scenarios the system cannot be recovered and must be reset or
restored using a debugger attached to it. The LOCKUP signal can be used by
microcontroller designers or system-on-chip designer to reset the system via a configurable
setting in the reset controller.

11.8 Preventing Lockup
Lockup and HardFault exceptions might look scary to some embedded developers. There
are various reasons why embedded systems can go wrong but the lockup and HardFault
mechanisms can prevent the problem from getting worse. The sources of errors or
problems that can cause any embedded microcontroller system to crash are
•   unstable power supply or electromagnetic interference,
•   flash memory corruption,
•   an error in external interface signals,
•   component damage due to operating conditions or natural aging process,
•   incorrect clock generation arrangement or poor clock signal quality,
•   software errors
The HardFault and lockup behaviors allow error conditions to be detected and help
debugging. Although we cannot fully prevent all the potential issues listed above, we can
take various measures in software to improve the reliability of an embedded system.
First, we should keep the NMI exception handler and HardFault exception handler as
simple as possible. Some tasks associated with the NMI exception or HardFault exception
can be separated into a different exception like PendSV, and executed after the urgent
parts of the exception handling are complete. By making the NMI and HardFault handler
shorter and easier to understand, we can also reduce the risk of accidentally using SVC
instruction in these handlers.
Second, for safety critical applications, you might want to use an assembly wrapper to
check the SP value before entering the HardFault handler in C (Figure 11.4).
If necessary, we can program the entire HardFault handler in assembly. In such cases, we
can avoid some stack memory accesses to prevent lockup if the stack pointer is corrupted
and pointing to an invalid memory location.

                                             HardFault
                                              handler

                                               Start

                                         N               Y
                                             SP valid?

                            Deal with                         Call main
                           stack error                         body of
                              first                          handler in C

                                                               Return

                                         Figure 11.4
                          Adding of SP checking in assembly wrapper.

Similarly, if the NMI handler is very simple, we can program the NMI handler in
assembly language and use just R0eR3, R12 if we want to avoid stack memory accesses
because these registers are already stacked. But in most cases, a stack pointer error would
probably trigger the HardFault exception fairly quickly so there is no need to worry about
programming the NMI in C language.

11.9 Comparison with Fault Handling in ARMv7-M Architecture
Since the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are designed to target ultra-low power
applications, it does not include some of the additional fault analysis features found in
processors using the ARMv7-M architecture.
Table 11.3 lists the major differences between the fault handling features in ARMv6-M
and ARMv7-M processors. The most significant difference is that the ARMv7-M
architecture supports an extra three fault exception types, which are configurable.
The additional fault exceptions in ARMv7-M architecture have programmable priority
levels and enable some of the faults to be dealt with using lower priority exception
handlers, while high priority interrupt services are still serviced. These fault exceptions are
disabled by default, so all fault events are managed by HardFault handlers. When enabled,
if the fault event occurs when the current priority is lower than the corresponding
configurable fault exception, the corresponding configurable fault handler is executed.
Otherwise, it will escalate to the HardFault handler.
Additional fault status registers are also available to provide information about what
caused the fault. These registers can be used by the fault handlers or the debugger, to
provide fault details to the software developers.

Table 11.3: Comparison for fault handling features in various CortexÒ-M processors

                            ARM6-M         ARM7-M
                            (CortexÒ-M0,   (Cortex-M3,   ARM7-M
                            Cortex-M0þ     Cortex-M4     (Cortex-M7
                            processors)    processors)   processor)   Notes
 HardFault exception        Y              Y             Y            For faults at start-up
                                                                      sequence or fault escalation
                                                                      (configurable fault exception
                                                                      not available)
 Bus Fault exception        e              Y             Y            For bus error response and
                                                                      unprivileged access to system
                                                                      control space
 MemManage Fault            e              Y             Y            For MPU access violation and
 exception                                                            execution from XN memory
 Usage Fault exception      e              Y             Y            For other software-generated
                                                                      fault
 Fault Status Registers     Y              Y             Y            Debug Fault Status Register
 for debugger                                                         (DFSR) indicates the source
                                                                      of a debug event
 Fault Status Registers     e              Y             Y            Fault Status Registers that
 for application software                                             provide hints about the cause
                                                                      of the fault
 Fault Address Registers    e              Y             Y            A register to indicate the
                                                                      memory address that is
                                                                      associated with a BusFault/
                                                                      MemManage fault event
 Auxiliary Fault Status     e              Y             e            For additional device-specific
 Register                                                             fault information
 Auxiliary Bus Fault        e              e             Y            Indicates which bus interface
 Status Register                                                      triggered a bus fault
