                                                                                                                     C H A P T E R 13

Debug Features
13.1 Software Development and Debug Features
During software development, we often need to examine the operation of program
execution in detail, to understand why a program does not work as expected, or to ensure
correct operations. Although it is possible to provide some visibility of the program’s
operation using various peripheral interfaces such as using a UART to generate debug
messages, the level of details you can get through these interfaces is limited. In addition, it
is not always possible to debug some of the issues, especially if the program crashed
before the interface peripheral is initialized, or if the failure mechanism can be affected by
debug message reporting code.
As a result, the ARMÒ CortexÒ-M processors integrate a number of debug features to
make it easier for software developers to find out what is happening inside the processors.
The debug features on the processor is only part of the story. We also need the following
items to support the debug operations (Figure 13.1).
•     Debugger software on the debug host (e.g., personal computer) is needed to enable the
      software developers to extract the debug information.
•     Debug adaptor (typically a hardware unit) that connects between the debug host and the
      microcontroller. Sometimes the adaptor is integrated in the development board.
•     Debug interface on the microcontrollers.

                                                  Debugger
                                                  software

                                                             USB connection
                                                                                      Microcontroller

                                                                                         Debug
                                Debug Host                                             connection        Development
                            (Personal Computer)                                                             board
                                                                   Debug Adaptor
                                                       Figure 13.1
                                   A classic microcontroller development environment.
The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00013-8
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

For some of the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 microcontrollers, you might have
an additional trace interface for additional debug information to be sent to the debug host
in real time. The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors do not have such trace interface
and therefore will not be covered in this book.
In this chapter, we will cover a number of debug terms and some of these are listed in
Table 13.1. Note these terms are not standardized across all microcontroller architectures,
so the terms used by some microcontroller vendors can be different.
During software development, some of the debug features like breakpoint, watchpoints,
and single stepping are often needed. These debug features are now part of modern
processor design and part of the ARMv6-M and ARMv7-M architecture.
All the debug and trace features on the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor are
designed so that the debug operations can be performed on a target platform via a low-pin
count serial interface. In addition to debug operations, this interface can also be used for
device programming (in-system programmable). This is different from some older

Table 13.1: Common debug terminologies related to ARM® microcontrollers

 Terms                      Descriptions
 Halt                       Stopping of program execution due to a debug event (e.g., breakpoint or
                            watchpoint), or due to user debug request.
 Breakpoint                 Program execution reaches an address marked as a breakpoint, causing a
                            debug event to be generated, which halts the processor.
 Hardware breakpoint        A hardware comparator is used to compare the current program address to a
                            reference address setup by the debugger. When the processor fetches and
                            executes an instruction from this address, the comparator generates a debug
                            event signal to stop the processor.
 Software breakpoint        A BreakPoint instruction (BKPT) is inserted to the program memory so that
                            program execution halts when it get to this address.
 Watchpoint                 A data or peripheral address can be marked as a watched variable, and an
                            access to this address causes a debug event to be generated, which halts
                            program execution.
 Debugger                   A piece of software running on a debug host (e.g., a personal computer) that
                            communicates with the debug system in a microcontroller, usually via a USB
                            adaptor (or an in-circuit debugger), so that the debug features of the
                            microcontroller can be accessed.
 In-Circuit Debugger        A piece of hardware that connects between the debug host (e.g., a personal
                            computer) and the microcontroller. Usually the connection to the debug
                            host is USB or ethernet, and the connection to the microcontroller is JTAG
                            or Serial Wire protocol. Various terminologies are used for In-Circuit
                            Debuggers: USB-JTAG adaptor, In-Circuit Emulator (ICE), JTAG/SW
                            emulator, Run-Time Control Unit, etc.
 Profiling                  A feature in debugger that collects statistics of program execution. This is
                            very useful for performance analysis and software optimization.

generation microcontrollers that require an emulator to emulate the microcontroller, or in
some other microcontroller products that require the microcontroller to be programmed,
prior to insertion in the target platform.
Another difference between ARM-based microcontrollers and some other microcontrollers
is that there is no need for a debug agent (a small piece of debug support software)
running on the processor to perform the debug operations. When the debug features are
accessed, the processor hardware performs the debug operation. As a result, the debug
operations do not require any program size overhead and does not affect any data in
memory including the stack.

13.2 Debug Interface
13.2.1 JTAG and Serial Wire Debug Communication Protocol

In order to access the debug features on the microcontroller, a debug interface is needed.
For ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers, this interface can either be the
JTAG (Joint Test Action Group) protocol or the Serial Wire debug protocol (Figure 13.2).
    JTAGdMany microcontrollers support a serial protocol called JTAGdJoint Test Action
    Group. JTAG protocol is an industry standard protocol (IEEE 1149.1) and can be used for
    various functions such as chip-level or PCB-level testing, as well as access to debug fea-
    tures inside microcontrollers. While JTAG is sufficient for many debug usage scenarios, it
    needs at least 4 pins: TCK, TDI, TMS, and TDO, while the reset signal nTRST is optional.
    Serial Wire DebugdThe Serial Wire debug protocol only needs two pins: SWCLK and
    SWDIO. The Serial Wire debug protocol provides the same debug access features and
    also supports parity error detection, which enables better reliability in systems with
    higher electrical noises. Therefore the Serial Wire debug protocol is very attractive for
    many microcontroller vendors and users.

            JTAG Debug interface                         Serial Wire Debug interface

                            nTRST (optional)
                            TDI
                           TCK                                            SWCLK (share with TCK)
  Debug                                         Debug
                           TMS                                            SWDIO (share with TMS)
                           TDO

                                          Figure 13.2
                              JTAG and Serial Wire debug interface.

Table 13.2: Signals for JTAG debug connection

              JTAG Signal        Descriptions
              TCK                Clock signal
              TMS                Test Mode Select signaldcontrols the protocol state
                                 transition.
              TDI                Test Data Indserial data input
              TDO                Test Data Outdserial data output
              nTRST              Test resetdActive-low asynchronous reset for a JTAG state
                                 control unit called the TAP controller. The nTRST signal is
                                 optional. Without nTRST, the TAP controller can be reset
                                 with five cycles of TMS pulled high.

Both protocols transfer the control information and data in serial bit sequences. Many
debug adaptors can support both protocols and they can share the same debug connector
layout (see appendix F, Debug Connector Arrangements).
JTAG is a four-pin or five-pin serial debug protocol that is commonly used for digital
component testing. The interface contains the following signals (Table 13.2).
Although the JTAG interface is commonly used and well supported, using four or five pins
for debug operations is too many for some microcontrollers with low-pin counts. As a result,
ARM developed the Serial Wire debug protocol, which uses only two pins (Table 13.3).

Table 13.3: Signals for Serial Wire debug connection

        Serial Wire signal      Descriptions
        SWCLK                   Clock signal
        SWDIO                   Data input/outputdbidirectional data and control communication

Although only two signals are required, the Serial Wire debug protocol can
offer better performance than JTAG and can provide the same processor debug
functionality. The Serial Wire debug protocol is already supported by most in-circuit
debuggers and debugger software tools that support the ARM Cortex-M processor
family.
Typically Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers only support one of these debug
protocols to reduce power: mostly Serial Wire debug protocol because fewer pins are
needed.
The debug interface allows the following:
•   The flash memory to be reprogrammed easily without the need to remove it from the
    circuit board.
•   Applications to be debugged and tested.

•   Production testing (e.g., a self-test application can be downloaded to the microcontroller
    memory and executed, or boundary scan could be carried out via JTAG connection if it
    is implemented in the microcontroller).

13.2.2 Cortex-M Processor and CoreSight™ Debug Architecture

Unlike most other processors, in ARM Cortex processors the debug interface and the
debug features of the processor are implemented in separate units. The processor design
contains a generic parallel bus interface that allows all the debug features to be accessed.
A separate debug interface block (called Debug Access Port in ARM documentation) is
used to convert a debug interface protocol to the parallel bus interface (Figure 13.3). This
arrangement is part of the CoreSightÔ debug architecture and it makes the ARM Cortex
processors debug solution flexible.
The use of the CoreSight debug architecture brings a number of advantages to the Cortex-
M0/M0þ processor and other processors in the Cortex-M processor family:
•   By separating the debug interface from the main processor logic, the choice of debug
    interface protocol is much more flexible, without affecting the underlying debug fea-
    tures on the main processor logic.
•   Multiple processors can share the same debug interface block, allowing a much more
    scalable debug system. Other test logic can also be added to the system easily, as the
    internal connection is a simple parallel bus interface.
•   The design is consistent between all Cortex-M processors, making it easy for tool
    vendors to support the whole Cortex-M processor family with one tool chain.
Details of the CoreSight debug architecture can be found in the ARM Web site.

                                         Figure 13.3
                       Debug interface connection inside the processor.

For normal software development, it is not necessary to have an in-depth understanding of
CoreSight technology. For readers who would like to have a brief overview of the
CoreSight technology, a document called “CoreSight Technical Introduction” (ARM EPM
039795, reference 13) provides a good overview of the CoreSight Debug Architecture. In
addition, the ARM Debug Interface v5.2 (ARM IHI 0031C, reference 14) provides
detailed information on the Serial Wire debug protocol.

13.2.3 Design Considerations with Debug Interface

Many microcontroller products have the JTAG or Serial wire interface pin shared with the
peripheral interface or other I/O pins. When the debug interface pins are used for I/O,
usually by programming certain peripheral control registers to switch the usage to I/O, the
debugger cannot connect to the processor. Therefore when designing an embedded system,
you should avoid using the debug interface pins as I/O if you want to allow the system to
be debugged easily.
In some cases, if the pins are switched from debug mode to I/O very quickly after the
program starts, this could lock out the debugger completely. This is due to the debugger not
having enough time to connect and halt the processor before the pin usage is switched.
As a result, you cannot debug the application and cannot reprogram the flash memory. From
another point of view, you might be able to use it as a feature to block other people from
accessing the program code in the chip. However, this arrangement is not guaranteed to be
secure and can be worked around if the microcontroller’s design has a special boot mode
that can disable the application. Some microcontrollers have read-back protection features
to prevent access to the program images, which is a more secure solution. For details of
such features, please refer to the documentation from your microcontroller vendor.

13.3 Debug Features Overview
The CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support a number of useful debug features.
For example:
•   Halting, resume, and single stepping of program execution
•   Access to processor core registers and special registers
•   Hardware breakpoints (up to four comparators)
•   Software breakpoints (BKPT instruction)
•   Data watchpoints (up to two comparators)
•   On-the-fly memory access (system memory can be accessed without stopping the processor)
•   PC sampling for basic profiling
•   Support JTAG or Serial Wire debug protocol
In addition, the Cortex-M0þ processor supports:
•   Instruction trace using a debug component called Micro Trace Buffer (MTB)

Theses debug features are vital for software development, and can be used for other tasks
like flash programming and product testing.
The debug features of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are based on the ARMÒ
CoreSight debug architecture. They are consistent between all Cortex-M processors,
making it easy for a debug tool to support all Cortex-M processors with little modification.
It is also very scalable, making it possible to build complex multiprocessor products using
the CoreSight debug architecture.
The designs of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors allow the debug features to be
configurable. For example, system-on-chip designers can remove some or all of the debug
features, to reduce the circuit size for ultra-low power applications like wireless sensors. If
a debug interface is implemented, debugger software can also read various registers to
detect which debug features are implemented.

13.4 Debug System
The debug features on CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are controlled by a
number of debug components. These debug components are connected together via an
internal bus system. However, application code running on the Cortex-M processor
cannot access these components (this is different from the Cortex-M3/M4/M7 processor,
where debug components can be accessed by application software). The debug
components can only be accessed by the debugger that connects to the microcontroller
(Figure 13.4).
There are a number of debug components in the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ-based systems
(Table 13.4).
The debug system also allows access to the system’s memory map including flash, SRAM,
and peripherals. The accesses to the system memory can be carried out even when the
processor is running. By accessing the Application Interrupt and Reset Control Register in
the System Control Block (SCB), the debugger can also request a system reset to reset the
microcontroller.
Additional information about the debug components is covered in appendix E.

13.5 Halt Mode and Debug Events
The CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors have a halt mode that stops the program
execution and allows processor registers and memory space to be accessed by the
debugger. During halt mode:
•   Instruction execution is stopped.
•   SysTick timer stops counting.

                                                                                      Note: MTB is available on Cortex-M0+ only
                                                                    Trace interface

                                                  Processor core
                                    Internal
                                      bus                                                     MTB
                                                                                                             SRAM
                                                Debug
                                                            NVIC,      AHB
                                                control
                                                            SCB
Serial wire                                    registers                Bus
 or JTAG                Debug                                        interface
                       Interface

                                                                                                 Flash
                                                 BP unit
                                                                                                memory

                                                DWT unit

                                                              Cortex-M0/M0+
                                               ROM table                                       Peripherals
                                                                Processor
                Microcontroller

                                              Figure 13.4
                      Debug components in CortexÒ-M0/Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers.

Table 13.4: Debug components in the Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M+ processor systems

    Debug components               Descriptions
    Processor core                 Debug features inside the processor core are accessible by a few debug
    debug registers                control registers. They provide:
                                   • Halting, single step, resume execution
                                   • Access to the core’s registers when the processor is halted
                                   • Control of the vector catch feature
    BP unit                        The BreakPoint unit provides up to 4 breakpoint address comparators.
    DWT unit                       The Data Watchpoint unit provides up to 2 data address comparators. It also
                                   allows the debugger to sample the program counter regularly for profiling.
    ROM table                      A small lookup table that enables a debugger to detect the available debug
                                   components in the system. The table lists the address of each debug
                                   component and the debugger can then identify the available debug features
                                   by checking the Identification registers of these components.
    MTB                            The Micro Trace Buffer supports instruction trace by allocating a small part of
                                   the SRAM for storing program flow changes.

•      If the processor was in sleep mode, it wakes up from the sleep mode before halt.
•      Registers in the processor’s register bank, as well as special registers, can be accessed
       by the debugger (both read and write).
•      Memory and peripheral contents can be accessed (this can be done without halting the
       processor).

•   Interrupts can still enter pending state.
•   You can resume program execution, carry out single step operation, or reset the
    microcontroller.
When a debugger is connected to the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, it first
programs a debug control register in the processor to enable the debug system. This step
cannot be done by the application running on the microcontroller. After the debug system
is enabled, the debugger can then stop the processor, download the application to the
microcontroller flash memory if required, reset the microcontroller and then we can test
the application.
The Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor enters halt mode when:
•   Debug is enabled by a debugger, and
•   A debug event occurs.
There are various sources of debug events. They can be generated by either hardware or
software (Figure 13.5).

                            Debugger asserts
                              halt request

                              Completion of a
                           single step operation

                                Watchpoint                                    HALT

                                                                       Debug
                                                                      Enabled
                           Hardware Breakpoint

            Debug
            Events                                                     Debug
                           Vector Catch events                        Disabled

                                                                          Ignore

                              Hardware debug
                                                        Debug
                             request (on-chip /
                                                       Enabled
                                 external)

                               Execution of
                           Breakpoint instruction
                                                     Debug
                                                                  HardFault
                                                    Disabled
                                        Figure 13.5
                     Debug events on CortexÒ-M0/Cortex-M0þ processor.

A debugger can stop the program execution by writing to debug control registers. On an
embedded system with multiple processors, it is also possible to stop multiple processors
at the same time using a hardware debug request signal and distribute the debug request
using an on-chip debug event communication system.
The program execution can be stopped by hardware breakpoints, software breakpoints,
watchpoints, or a vector catch event. The vector catch is a mechanism that allows the core
to be halted when certain exceptions take place. On the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ
processor, two vector catch conditions are provided:
•   Reset
•   HardFault
The vector catch feature is controlled by debug registers in the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor
allowing the processor to be stopped automatically upon a reset, or when a HardFault
execution takes place (e.g., due to a software error). When the vector catch operation
occurs, the processor stops before execution of the first instruction in the reset or
HardFault exception handler.
Once the debugger software detects that the processor is halted, the debugger then
checks a Debug Fault Status Register inside the SCB of the Cortex-M0/M0þ processor
to determine the reason for halting. Then the debugger can inform the user that the
processor is halted and why, for example, when it reached a breakpoint. After the
processor is halted, you can then access the registers inside the processor’s register
bank and special registers, the data in memories or peripherals, or carry out single step
operation.
A halted Cortex-M0/M0þ processor can resume program execution by the debugger
writing to the debug register, by a hardware debug restart interface (e.g., used in
multiprocessor systems so that multiple processors can resume program execution at the
same time), or by reset.

13.6 Instruction Tracing Support Using the MTB
When program execution fails and the processor enters HardFault, it is very useful if we
can see the instruction execution history and see what program code was executed before
the fault event. This feature is what instruction trace is used for, and is one of the key
reasons to have the MTB (Micro Trace Buffer) in the CortexÒ-M0þ processor.
The MTB is a small component that is placed between the SRAM and the system bus
(Figure 13.6). In normal operation, the MTB acts as an interface module to connect the
on-chip SRAM to AHB.

                                                                    Trace
                                    Cortex-M0+ processor          interface

                                 AHB
                             interconnect

                                AHB

                             MTB                  Configuration
                                                    registers
                                                       Trace
                                                    information
                              Arbiter

                                   SRAM interface

                                        On-chip
                                        SRAM

                                         Figure 13.6
                 MTB integrates as a bridge between AHB and on-chip SRAM.

During debug operations, the debugger can configure the MTB to allocate a small portion of
the SRAM as trace buffer for storing trace information. Of course, care must be taken to
ensure that the application does not use the same SRAM space allocated for trace operations.
When a program branch occurred, or when the program flow changed due to interrupts,
the MTB stores the source program counter and destination program counters into the
SRAM. A total of 8 bytes of trace data per branch is needed. For example, if just 512
bytes of the SRAM is allocated for instruction trace, we can store up to 64 most recent
program flow changes. This is a great help for software debugging.
The MTB supports two operation modes:
    Circular buffer modedthe MTB uses the allocated SRAM in circular buffer mode and
    trace operates continuously. When the processor enters HardFault, the debugger can
    then extract the information in the trace buffer and recreate the trace history. An
    example screen shot of using MTB with KeilÒ MDK is shown in Figure 13.7.
    The circular buffer mode is the most common usage model for the MTB.
                                                                                       326 Chapter 13
                                 Figure 13.7
MTB provides instruction execution history including visibility of interrupt events.

    One shot modedthe MTB starts writing trace from the start of the allocated trace
    buffer, and stops tracing when the trace write pointer reaches a specific watermark
    level. The MTB can optionally stop the processor execution by asserting a debug
    request signal.
The key advantages of the MTB instruction trace solutions are as follows:
•   Software developer can use existing low-cost debug adaptors to extract trace
    information.
•   Typically, the impact to the program execution cycles is tiny. For example, when
    executing a branch operation, the processor does not access the SRAM and so the MTB
    can write the trace information without stalling the processor. However, if another bus
    master (e.g., a DMA controller) is trying to access the SRAM at the same time, the
    DMA access would stall.
•   Small silicon overheaddthe size of the MTB is typically 1.5 K gates in size (some
    interface logic is needed to bridge between the SRAM and the AHB anyway), and it
    shares the system SRAM for trace operations. So it has minimum impact to the power
    and area of the silicon.
•   The size and base address of the MTB instruction trace is completely configurable
    allowing high flexibility.
If required, a chip designer could also design the system with a separate SRAM for MTB
operation. But of course this will increase the silicon area and power. But then if the MTB
is not used, potentially the application code might be able to utilize the extra SRAM.
There are some limitations of the MTB solution:
•   The MTB instruction trace can only provide limited trace history. Unlike the ETM trace
    solution in the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors, the trace history is
    stored on chip until the debugger extracts the trace, so the length of the trace history is
    limited.
•   The MTB trace does not provide timing information of the program execution. The
    trace information only provides the source and destination of the program flow changes.
Nevertheless, it is a very useful low-cost debug solution for microcontroller software
developers.
This page intentionally left blank
