                                                                                                                     C H A P T E R 15

Getting Started with IAR Embedded
Workbench for ARM®
15.1 Overview of IAR Embedded Workbench for ARM®
IAR Embedded Workbench for ARM is a popular development suite for ARM-based
microcontrollers. It contains the following:
•     C and Cþþ compiler for various ARM processors
•     Integration Development Environment (IDE) with project management and editor
•     C-SPYÒ debugger with ARM simulator, JTAG support and support for RTOS-aware
      debugging on hardware (a number of RTOS plug-ins are available). The debugger sup-
      ports various debug adaptors including the following:
      • IAR I-Jet/I-jet Trace and JTAGjet/JTAGjet Trace,
      • CMSIS-DAP,
      • Segger J-Link/J-Link Ultra/J-Trace,
      • GDB server,
      • ST Link/ST Link v2,
      • TI XDS 100/200 and Stellaris FTDI/ICDI,
      • SAM-ICE (Atmel), .etc.
•     Additional components including ARM assembler, linker and librarian tools, flash pro-
      gramming support
•     Examples for various development boards from multiple manufacturers
•     Documentation
The full version of IAR Embedded Workbench also supports the following:
•     Automatic checking of MISRA C rules (MISCRA C:1998, MISRA C:2004)
•     Source code for runtime libraries
•     C-RUN runtime analysis (optional)
•     C-STAT static analysis
IAR Embedded Workbench is a commercial tool. Various editions are available, including
a free version called Kickstart which is limited to 16 KB1 code size (for CortexÒ-M0 and

1
    16 KB code size limit applies to ARMv6-M processors including Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors.
    For ARMv7-M including Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4 and the Cortex-M7 processors, the code size limit is 32 KB.

The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00015-1
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Cortex-M0þ processors) and has some of the advance features disabled. You can also
download a fully featured version for a 30 days evaluation.
IAR Embedded Workbench is easy to use and supports many debug features available in
the Cortex-M processors. In this chapter we will demonstrate the use of IAR Embedded
Workbench for ARM with the Freescale Freedom board FRDM-KL25Z. Before you start,
please read section 14.3.1 regarding updating the firmware and device driver installation.
In the example code package from the companion Web site for this book, there are
additional examples for other hardware listed in section 14.3.

15.2 Typical Program Compilation Flow
Just like most commercial development suites, the compilation process is handled
automatically by the IDE and can be invoked easily by the GUI. So in most cases you do
not need to understand the details of the compilation flow. Once the project is created, the
IDE automatically invokes various tools to compile the code and generate the executable
image, as shown in Figure 15.1.
Most of the device configurations such as configuration files for memory layout, flash
programming details are preinstalled so that you only need to select the right
microcontroller devices in the project settings to enable the correct compilation flow.
In order to simplify the application development and allow quicker software development,
in most cases you will be using a number of files prepared by the microcontroller vendors
so that you do not have to waste time in creating definition files for peripheral registers.

      C files (.c)                 Object files (.o)
                                                                                                     Binary program
                                                                                                       image (.bin)
                       iccarm
                                                                                          p
                                                                                       te
                                                                                       ls

                     (compiler)                                    Executable
                                                                                     na
                                                                                 tio

                                                                   image file             ielftool
                                                                                Op

                                    Config (.icf)                    (.out)
            Project                     memory         ilinkarm                 Optional step
                                                                                                       Disassembled
            settings                     layout         (linker)                                        code (.txt)
                                                                                ielfdumparm

    Assembly files (.s)            Object files (.o)
                                                                               Flash
                                                                           Programming
                       iasmarm
                     (assembler)

                                                                                            Debug
                                                 Figure 15.1
                          Example compilation flow with IAR Embedded Workbench.

These files are normally part of the CMSIS compliant device driver library from the
microcontroller vendors. In many cases these are referred as software packages which might
also include additional components such as examples, tutorials, additional software libraries.
A minimalistic example project using CMSIS device library is illustrated in Figure 15.2.

                                                Startup code file
                                               startup_<device>.s         Startup
                                                   (assembly)

                                                                          CMSIS system Initialization
                                               system_<device>.h
                                                                              Need customization
                                                                                 e.g. for clock
                                               system_<device>.c
                                                                                configuration

                      Application           Device specific header file   Device specific
     Application
                      program file                 <device>.h               definitions

                      Application            From microcontroller
                       specific                   vendors
                                           Figure 15.2
                                Example project with CMSIS-CORE.

While your application might only contain one file (left hand side of Figure 15.2), the
project also includes a number of files from the microcontroller vendor. While you can
create your applications almost entirely in C language, the start-up code which contains
the vector table is often provided in form of an assembly code. The start-up code is tool
chain specific. However, the rest of the files in the project are tool chain independent. In
fact, in the blinky project example that we will cover in Section 15.3, apart from the
assembly start-up code, all the other program code files are identical to the example
project for KeilÒ MDK-ARM as in Chapter 14. This is an important advantage of the
CMSIS-CORE because it makes most of the software components independent of the tool
chain; hence the software codes are much more portable and reusable.
Additional CMSIS-CORE files are referenced by some of these CMSIS-CORE files. These
are generic header files from ARM (bottom right-hand corner of Figure 15.3) and are
integrated in the IAR Embedded Workbench installation. One of the project options
enables these files to be automatically included during the compilation stage.
If necessary, you can disable this project option and add the generic CMSIS-CORE files
into the project manually. This might be needed if you need to use a specific version of
CMSIS-CORE files.

                                       Startup code file                         From microcontroller
                                      startup_<device>.s         Startup              vendors
                                          (assembly)

                                                                 CMSIS system Initialization
                                      system_<device>.h
                                                                     Need customization
                                                                        e.g. for clock
                                      system_<device>.c
                                                                       configuration

                                                                       From ARM (generic CMSIS files)
                Application        Device specific header file
Application
                program file              <device>.h                  core_cm0.h /
                                                                     core_cm0plus.h
                                  Device specific definitions
                Application
                 specific
                                                                     core_cmFunc.h         core_cmInstr.h

                                         Figure 15.3
              Example project view when including CMSIS-CORE files from ARMÒ.

If you are using older versions of CMSIS-CORE (version 2.0 or older), you might also
find that you need to include a file called core_cm3.c or core_cm0.c in the CMSIS-CORE
package for some of the core functions like access to special registers and couple of
intrinsic functions. These files are no longer required in newer versions of CMSIS-CORE,
and the CMSIS-CORE functions are still fully compatible to older version.

15.3 Creating a Simple Blinky Project
When IAR Embedded Workbench starts, you can see the screen as shown in Figure 15.4.
You can open an existing example project by clicking on “EXAMPLE PROJECTS.” There
are many ready-to-run examples that can serve as a starting point for application
development. In this section, we look at how to create a new project from scratch.
We can create a new project using the pull down menu: Project / Create New Project.
A new window will appear to allow you to select which type of project to create, as shown
in Figure 15.5.
There are a number of choices here, for example, we can select:
•   Create an empty project and add source code files we have already created, or
•   Create a C project and that have a minimum main.c with “int main(void)”.
For this demonstration we select an empty project. The project wizard will then proceed to
ask us to define the location of the project file. Here in this stage we create a project
called blinky (Figure 15.6).

                     Figure 15.4
Start screen of IAR Embedded Workbench for ARMÒ.

                 Figure 15.5
              New Project window.

                                         Figure 15.6
                                    Create a blinky project.

Once this is done, we have an empty project created, and we can start adding files to it.
In order to make the project more organized, we can add a number of file groups in the
project and put different types of files into these groups. You can access to the add group/
file function by right clicking on the project target (Debug) and select “Add,” as shown in
Figure 15.7, or from the pull down menu, “Project / Add Group/Add File.”
For this project we create three file groups.
•   Application (where the blinky program is placed)
•   Startup (for the start-up code)
•   CMSIS (for CMSIS-CORE-related files such as system_<device>.c)
In the following steps, the project setup step for Freescale FRDM-KL25Z is illustrated.
For other hardware platform the steps are almost identical, just the filenames and the
actual blinky code are different. For the Freescale FRDM-KL25Z hardware, the following
files are added to the project, as shown in Table 15.1.

                                        Figure 15.7
                             Adding groups and files to a project.

Table 15.1: Files in the blinky project

 File                 Description
 startup_MKL25Z4.s    Startup code (in Assembly) for MKL25Z. This file is specific to IAR
                      Embedded Workbench.
 MKL25Z4.h            Device definition files including peripheral register definitions, exception-type
                      definitions.
 system_MKL25Z4.c     System initialization function (SystemInit()) for MKL25Z and related
                      functions as specified in CMSIS-CORE.
 system_MKL25Z4.h     Header file for defining function prototypes of functions in system_MKL25Z4.c.
 blinky.c             The blinky application which toggles LEDs on the board.

After adding the blinky program and the additional files to the project, a project navigation
window as shown in Figure 15.8 is obtained. We have not explicitly included other CMSIS
Header files as these can be automatically included using a project option (General option,
see Table 15.2).

                                         Figure 15.8
                                        Blinky project.

Table 15.2: Useful project options for the blinky project

 Category          Tab              Details
 General options   Target           Device / MKL25Z128xxx4
 General options   Library          Use CMSIS. This automatically includes essential
                   configuration    CMSIS-CORE Header files in the project.
 C/C++ Compiler    Optimizations    Optimization options. This is optional for the blinky project.
 C/C++ Compiler    List             Output list file. This is optional, but can be useful for debugging.
 C/C++ Compiler    Preprocessor     Include directory and preprocessing macros.
 Linker            Config           Optional settings: Override default if you need to change the
                                    memory map (e.g., different stack and heap size)
 Debugger          Setup            CMSIS-DAP. Use the on-board debug adaptor for debug.
 Debugger          Download         Enable “Use flash loader(s)” option. This essential step
                                    enable flash download to the microcontroller.
 CMSIS-DAP         JTAG/SWD         Optionally specify debug protocol and debug connection speed.

In the next steps, we need to set up various project options. For minimum, a number of
project options are essentials, for example:
• Device
• Enable CMSIS
• Include path for device-specific header files
• Enable flash programming option
• Debug adaptor options
Note: For user of the STM32L0 Discovery development board, an additional preprocessing
macro “STM32L051xx” needs to be defined in the project.
The project options can be accessed by right clicking on the project target
(“blinkydDebug” as shown in Figure 15.8), by the pull down menu (Projects / Options),
or by shortcut key ALT-F7. There are wide ranges of project options available, for many
categories on the left, you can find multiple tabs. For example, in the “General options”
category, you can find: Target, Output, Library Configuration, Library Options, MISRA
C-2004, MISRA C-1998 (Figure 15.9).

                                         Figure 15.9
                                       Project options.

In this blinky project, we need to set up a number of options as shown in Table 15.2.
After setting up the project options, we can now try to compile the project and test it. To
start with, we right click on the project target (blinkydDebug) and select Build, and then
the IDE will ask us to save the current workspace, which we will save it in the same
project directory as “blinky.eww,” as shown in Figure 15.10.
If everything is setup correctly, you should see the compilation report at the IDE as shown
in Figure 15.11. Congratulations! You have built you first ARMÒ project with IAR
Embedded Workbench successfully.
Now you need to download the program to the microcontroller board and test it. This can be
done in three ways: Using the pull down menu to select “Project / Download and Debug,”
click on the    (Download and Debug icon) on the tool bar or use short cut key Ctrl-D.
After the program image is downloaded to the board, the debugger screen should appear
as shown in Figure 15.12. The program is currently halted just before the first line of C
code in main(), as indicated with the green arrow.

                                         Figure 15.10
                         Saving workspace before compiling the project.

                                         Figure 15.11
                                       Compilation result.

You can start running the program by clicking on the “go” icon         on the tool bar. The LEDs
on the board should start flashing. You can halt, resume, reset, or single step the program
using various icons on the debugger screen, as shown in left hand side of Figure 15.13.

                                      Figure 15.12
                                   Debug session screen.

                              Replace                                                                  Goto
                                  Find                                                                 Toggle Bookmark
                             Find Next                                                                 Previous Bookmark
                         Find Previous                                                                 Next Bookmark
Reset
                                                                                                       Navigate backward
Stop running (available when the processor is running)                                                 Navigate foreward

                               Stop Debugging                             Compile
                               Go (Run program)                              Make
                               Run to cursor                            Stop build
                               Next statement                  Toggle Breakpoint
                               Step out               Make and restart debugger
                               Step Into                        Restart debugger
                               Step over
                               Enable SWO (trace output features, not available in Cortex-M0/M0+)
                               Enable ETM (Cortex-M3/M4/M7) / MTB (Cortex-M0+) instruction trace feature

                                  Figure 15.13
                   Icons on the tool bar of the debug screen.

By default the register window is not enabled. To enable the register window, use the pull
down menu to select “View / Register.”
You can insert or remove breakpoints by right clicking a line on the source window, and
select toggle breakpoint. When the processor is halted, you can see the processor’s registers
using the register window which can be accessed by pull down menu “View / Register.”

15.4 Project Options
The IDE in the IAR Embedded Workbench provides many options. Figure 15.14 shows
the main option categories and the tabs available.

        General Options       Target (e.g. device)                               Assembler   Language
                              Output (e.g. executable / library)                             Output
                              Library Configuration (e.g. CMSIS, semihosting)                List
                              Library Options (e.g. printf, scanf)                           Preprocessor
                              MISRA-C:2004                                                   Diagnostics
                              MISRA-C:1998                                                   Extra options
        Runtime Checking      C-RUN runtime checking (e.g. heap checking)         Linker     Config

        C/C++ Compiler        Language 1 (e.g.C89/C99)                                       Library

                              Language 2 (e.g. signed/unsigned char)                         Input

                              Code (e.g. position indepenent)                                Optimizations

                              Optimizations (e.g. optimization effort)                       Advanced

                              Output (e.g. elf section name)                                 Output

                              List (e.g. C listing/disassembly code)                         List

                              Preprocessor (e.g. define symbol, inc directory)               #Define

                              Diagnostics (e.g. warning/error settings)                      Diagnostics

                              MISRA-C:2004                                                   Checksum

                              MISRA-C:1998                                                   Extra options

                              Extra options                                      Debugger    Setup

          Output convertor   Output (e.g.binary, hex file outputs)                           Download

           Custom Build      Custom Tool Configuration                                       Images

           Build Actions     Pre-build and post-build commands Configuration                 Extra options
                                                                                             Multi-core
                                                                                             Plugins

                                           Figure 15.14
                               Project options categories and tabs.

For example, the IAR C Compiler allows various levels of optimization efforts, and when
the optimization level is set to high, you can select between size optimization, speed
optimization, and balance optimization. You can also enable or disable some of the
individual optimization techniques (Figure 15.15).
There are also a number of additional settings for each supported debug adaptor. In some
cases you need to set up the debug adaptor settings to specific debug protocol (i.e., JTAG/

                                        Figure 15.15
                          Optimization options for C/Cþþ compiler.

Serial Wire debug) and reset behaviors. Additional debug and trace options might also be
needed if you are using CortexÒ-M3/M4/M7 processor which has trace features.

15.5 Using MTB Instruction Trace with IAR EWARM
The MTB feature of the CortexÒ-M0þ processor is supported in the IAR Embedded
Workbench on the debug adaptors including: CMSIS-DAP and IAR I-Jet/I-Jet Trace. For
example, if you are using the Freescale Freedom board FRDM-KL25Z, you can enable the
MTB trace in the debug session from the pull down menu: CMSIS-DAP / ETM Trace,
as shown in Figure 15.16.
A new window will then be displayed, and you might need to click in the On/Off icon to
enable the trace, as shown in Figure 15.17.
When trace is enabled, the ETM icon on the tool bar is displayed with green background
color.
After program execution started and then halted (e.g., by a breakpoint), the instruction
trace will then be displayed in the trace window, as shown in Figure 15.18.

                                         Figure 15.16
                              Selecting instruction trace feature.

                                          Figure 15.17
                Enabling instruction trace by clicking on the Trace On/Off icon.

15.6 Hints and Tips
In an IAR EWARM project, the stack size and heap size requirement of a project is
defined in the Linker options. You need to select the option to override the default Linker
Configuration File, set up the stack and heap memory size (Figure 15.19), and save the
settings in a new configuration file in your project directory.
            Figure 15.18
     Instruction traces display.

           Figure 15.19
Stack and Heap memory size settings.

You can determine the amount of stack space you need for your application by enabling
the stack analysis feature. In order to do this, you need to enable two options in the linker
settings:
1. Enable linker map file generation (Figure 15.20), and
2. Enable stack analysis (Figure 15.21)

                                         Figure 15.20
                       Enable linker map file generation for stack report.

Once the options are enabled and the project is recompiled, you should see a linker map
file in the Debug\List directory, and you can see the stack report like the following:

    *******************************************************************************
    *** STACK USAGE
    ***

      Call Graph Root Category     Max Use   Total Use
      ------------------------     -------   ---------
      Program entry                     20          20
      Uncalled function                  4           4

Program entry
  "__iar_program_start": 0x000008dd

 Maximum call chain                                   20 bytes

    "__iar_program_start"                              0
    "__cmain"                                          0
    "main"                                             8
    "LED_Set"                                          8
    "LED_On" in blinky.o [1]                           4

Uncalled function
  "SystemInit": 0x00000411

 Maximum call chain                                    4 bytes

    "SystemInit"                                       4

                                    Figure 15.21
                             Enable stack usage analysis.

Another useful feature of the IAR EWARM is C-RUN, a range of runtime check features
that allows detection of potential software failures with just a small amount of software
overhead. The C-RUN is an add-on product for IAR EWARM 7.20 and later versions.
The C-RUN feature can be enabled from the project option, as shown in Figure 15.22.

                                       Figure 15.22
                                   C-RUN project options.

Much of the useful information about IAR Embedded Workbench is included in the
documentation which is part of the installation. Typically you can find these files from the
Help menu.
On the IAR Web site, under the support->resources section, there are also a number of
useful and informative technical articles. An example is “Mastering stack and heap for
system reliability,” reference 10.
