                                                                                                                     C H A P T E R 19

Ultralow-Power Designs
19.1 Examples of Using Low-Power Features
19.1.1 Overview

More and more chip designers are using the ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors in wide range of ultralow-power (ULP) microcontrollers and System-on-Chip
products. In Section 2.6.1 (Chapter 2) we have already covered the low-power benefits of
the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, and then in Chapter 9, we have also covered
the low-power features of the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors. Here we will go
into more details of how to utilize various features, and what we should be aware of when
creating low-power applications.
Before we start going into the details, a key point that software developers need to
understand is that low-power features are very device specific. What we illustrated in the
examples here is not sufficient to enable the software developers to get the longest battery
life. Software developers should refer to application notes or examples from
microcontroller vendors to utilize the low-power features available.

19.1.2 Entering Sleep Modes

By default, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support a sleep mode and a deep
sleep mode. However, please note that microcontroller vendors can define additional sleep
modes using device-specific programmable registers. Inside the processor, the selection
between sleep mode and deep sleep mode is defined by the SLEEPDEEP bit in the System
Control Register (Table 9.9).
For the users of CMSIS-compliant device driver library, the System Control Register can
be accessed by the register symbol “SCB->SCR.” For example, to enable deep sleep
mode, you can use:
    SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPDEEP_Msk; /* Enable deep sleep feature */

The System Control Register must be accessed using a word size transfer.
The actual differences between normal sleep mode and deep sleep mode on a
microcontroller depend on the chip’s system level design. For example, normal sleep
might result in some of the clock signals being switched off, while deep sleep might also

The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00019-9
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

reduce voltage supplies to the memory blocks and might switch off additional components
in the system.
After selecting the sleep mode, you can enter sleep mode using either the WFE (Wait-for-
Event) or WFI (Wait-for-Interrupt) instructions. It is recommended to add a DSB (Data
Synchronization Barrier) instruction before executing WFI/WFE to allow better portability
(e.g., in other high-performance processors, there could be outstanding memory transfers
that need to be completed before entering sleep).
In most cases, the device driver libraries from microcontroller vendors contain functions to
enter low-power modes that are customized for the corresponding microcontrollers. Using
these functions will often help achieving the best level of power optimization for the
microcontrollers.
However, if you are developing C code that needs to be portable between multiple Cortex-
M microcontrollers, you can use the following CMSIS functions to access WFE and WFI
instructions directly (Table 19.1).

Table 19.1: CMSIS intrinsic functions for WFE
                                     and WFI instructions

                         Instruction                     CMSIS functions
                         WFE                             __WFE();
                         WFI                             __WFI();

For users that are not using CMSIS-compliant device drivers, you can use intrinsic
functions provided by the C compilers, or using in-line assembly to generate the WFE and
WFI instructions. In these cases, the software code will be tool chain dependent and less
portable. For example, KeilÒ MDK-ARM and ARM DS-5Ô provides the following C
intrinsic functions (unlike the CMSIS version, they are in lower cases) (Table 19.2).
From architecture point of view, a DSB instruction should be executed before executing
WFE or WFI. This ensures that outstanding data memory operations (e.g., buffered write)
are completed before entering sleep. However, on existing Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processor, omitting the DSB instruction does not cause any issue.

Table 19.2: Keil® MDK or ARM® DS-5 intrinsic functions for WFI and WFE

                                          Built-in intrinsic functions provided in ARM
           Instruction                    DS-5 or Keil MDK
           WFE                            __wfe();
           WFI                            __wfi();

Since the WFE can be woken up by various sources of events, including event occurred in
the past, it is usually used in an idle loop. For example:
  while (processing_required()==0) {
     __DSB();// Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
     __WFE();
   }

Users of assembly programming environments can use WFE and WFI directly in their
assembly codes.

19.1.3 WFE versus WFI

One of the commonly asked questions about sleep modes on the Cortex-M processors is
when to use WFI and when to use WFE. Typically, for interrupt-driven applications, the
WFI instruction is used.

 A simple interrupt-driven application
    int main(void)
    {
        peripheral_setup();
        while (1) {
        __DSB();// Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
        __WFI();
        }
    }
    void Timer0_Handler(void)
    {
        // do work
        .
    }

However, if there are interactions between the interrupt handlers and the main program,
the WFE instruction should be used.

 A simple application with interaction between interrupt handler and the main program
    volatile int timer_irq_occurred = 0;
    int main(void)
    {
        peripheral_setup();
        while (1) {
          while (timer_irq_occurred==0) {
            __DSB();// Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability

                                                                                        Continued

                __WFE();
                }
              printf ("[Timer IRQ]\n");
              .
              timer_irq_occurred = 0;
        }
    }
    void Timer0_Handler(void)
    {
        // do work
        .
        timer_irq_occurred = 1;
    }

The reason for using WFE is to prevent a corner case that if the interrupt took place
between the comparison of “timer_irq_occurred” and the sleep operation, the processor
would go to sleep despite the timer interrupt has took place and the main program should
continue. By using WFE, the processor’s event register is set by the IRQ and therefore the
WFE will not enter sleep, thus enable the “printf” statement to execute.

19.1.4 Using Sleep-On-Exit Feature

The Sleep-On-Exit feature is ideal for interrupt-driven applications. When it is enabled,
the processor can enter sleep as soon as it completes an exception handler and returns to
thread mode. It does not cause the processor to enter sleep if the exception handler is
returning to another exception handler (nested interrupt). By using Sleep-On-Exit, the
microcontroller can stay in sleep mode as much as possible (Figure 19.1).
When the Cortex-M processor enters sleep using Sleep-On-Exit, it is just like executing
WFI immediately after the exception exit. However, the unstacking process is not carried

                                                                                                 (Nested
                                                                   (Interrupt                   interrupt)
Handler                                                                                          ISR 3
                                                                   handling)
 mode                                                                 ISR 1             ISR 2            ISR 2
                             Sleep-On-Exit
                                enabled
Thread
                                                                                Sleep                            Sleep
 mode              Initialization                       stacking
                                             Sleep
      Reset
                                     WFI             IRQ 1                         IRQ 2    IRQ 3
                                                                     Time
                                                                                        Sleep-On-Exit

                                                 Figure 19.1
                                           Sleep-On-Exit operations.

out because the registers will have to be pushed on to the stack at the next exception entry.
The Sleep-On-Exit feature reduces the power consumption of the system by
1. avoiding unnecessary program execution in thread in interrupt-driven applications and
2. reducing unnecessary stack push and pop operations.
In the case when the processor is woken up by a halt debug request, then the unstacking
process will be carried out automatically.
When the Sleep-On-Exit feature is used, the WFE or WFI instruction is normally placed
in an idle loop.
  SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPONEXIT_Msk; // Enable Sleep-On-Exit feature
  while (1) {
    __DSB(); // Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
    __WFI(); // Execute WFI and enter sleep
    };

The loop is required because if the processor is woken up by a halt debug request, the
instruction after the WFI (branch back to WFI loop) would be executed when the
processor is unhalted after debugging.
If you are not using CMSIS-compliant device driver, you can use the following C code to
enable the Sleep-On-Exit feature.
  #define SCB_SCR (*((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000ED10)))
  /* Set SLEEPONEXIT bit in System Control Register */
  SCB_SCR = SCB_SCR j 0x2;

Users of assembly language can enable this feature using the following assembly code.
  LDR     r0, =0xE000ED10 ; System Control Register address
  LDR     r1, [r0]
  MOVS    r2, #0x2
  ORR     r1, r2 ; Set SLEEPONEXIT bit
  STR     r1, [r0]

In interrupt-driven applications, do not enable Sleep-On-Exit feature too early during the
initialization. Otherwise if the processor receives an interrupt request during the
initialization process, it will enter sleep automatically after the interrupt handler executed,
before the rest of the initialization process completes.

19.1.5 Using Send-Event-on-Pend Feature

The Send-Event-on-Pend feature allows any interrupt (including disabled ones) to wake up
the processor if the processor entered sleep by executing the WFE instruction. When the

SEVONPEND bit in the System Control Register is set, an interrupt switching from
inactive state to pending state generates an event, which wakes up the processor from
WFE sleep.
If the pending status of an interrupt was already set before entering sleep, a new request
from this interrupt during WFE sleep will not wake up the processor.
For users of CMSIS-compliant device driver libraries, the Send-Event-on-Pend feature can
be enabled by setting bit 4 in the System Control Register. For example, you can use:

    SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SEVONPEND_Msk; /* Enable Send-Event-on-Pend */

If you are not using a CMSIS-compliant device driver library, you can use the following C
code to carry out the same operation:

    #define SCB_SCR (*((volatile unsigned long *)(0xE000ED10)))
    /* Set SEVONPEND bit in System Control Register */
    SCB_SCR j= 1<<4;

Users of assembly language can enable this feature using the following assembly code.

    LDR    r0, =0xE000ED10 ; System Control Register address
    LDR    r1, [r0]
    MOVS   r2, #0x10 ; Set SEVONPEND bit
    ORR    r1, r2
    STR    r1, [r0]

To utilize the Send-Event-on-Pend feature, the program must execute WFE instruction
rather than using WFI or Sleep-On-Exit to enter sleep mode.

19.1.6 Using Wake-up Interrupt Controller

The Wake-up Interrupt Controller (WIC) feature allows the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ
processor to enter a sleep state with all clock signals stopped, or even powered down with
state retention in the processor logic, while still be able to wake up and resume operations
quickly. Details of this feature are covered in Section 9.5.6.
Since the interrupt masking information is transferred between NVIC and WIC
automatically using a hardware interface, there is no additional programming step for
interrupt management. However, the enabling of some of the ULP states might involve
additional device-specific programming steps. For example:
•    A device-specific system level power management unit might need to be programmed
     to enable the WIC functionality and other sleep mode options.

•   Depending on the device you are using, you might need to switch on deep sleep mode
    to use the WIC feature. (Note: in Cortex-M3 r2p0 and r2p1, and Cortex-M4 r0p1, it is
    necessary to enable deep sleep mode to use the WIC feature. Whereas in Cortex-M0
    and Cortex-M0þ processors, both sleep and deep sleep modes can use the WIC
    feature.)
Apart from these, the presence of the WIC feature is usually transparent to the software.
Since all the clock signals connected to the processor could be stopped in WIC-enabled
sleep, the SysTick timer (which is inside the processor) could also be stopped. As a result,
it could be necessary to set up a separate peripheral timer to wake up the processor
periodically if your application requires an embedded OS and need the OS to operate
continuously. In addition, when developing simple applications that need a periodic timer
interrupt, and if WIC-mode deep sleep is required, it might be necessary to use a
peripheral timer for periodic interrupt generation instead of the SysTick timer even
embedded OS is not used.
Not all Cortex-M processor-based microcontrollers support the WIC feature. The reduction
of power using the WIC depends on the application and the semiconductor process being
used. Currently, the State Retention Power Gating (see Section 9.5.6) technology is only
supported in a limited number of silicon technology processes (cell libraries), therefore
some chip designs might use the WIC but without using the state retention power down
state.

19.1.7 Using Event Communication Interface

One of the wake-up sources for the WFE sleep operation is an external event signal. (Here
the word “external” refers external to the processor boundary. The source generating the
event can be on chip or off chip.) The event signal could be generated by on-chip
peripherals, or another processor on the same chip. The event communication and WFE
can be used together to reduce power in polling loops.
On the Cortex-M processors, there are two signals for event communication:
•   TXEV: Transmit Event. A pulse is generated when the SEV instruction is executed.
•   RXEV: Receive Event. When a pulse is received on this signal, the event latch inside
    the processor would be set and can cause the processor to wake up from WFE sleep
    operation.
First, we look at a simple use of the event connection in a single-processor system: the
event can be generated by a number of peripherals. For this example, a DMA controller is
illustrated here (Figure 19.2).

                                    TXEV
                                           (not used)
                                                                       Peripheral #1
                   Cortex-M
                   processor
                                   RXEV
                                                                       Peripheral #2

                                                                Done
                                                                       DMA controller

                                                        Programmable
                                                         enable mask
                                                           register

                                          Figure 19.2
                     Usage of event interface: example 1dDMA controller.

In a microcontroller system, a memory block copying process can be accelerated using a
DMA controller. If a polling loop is used to determine the DMA status, this will waste
energy and consume memory bandwidth and might end up slowing down the DMA
operation. To save energy, WFE is used to put the processor into sleep state. When the
DMA operation completes, we can then use a “Done” status signal (DMA completed) to
wake up the processor and continue program execution.
In the application code, instead of using a simple polling loop that continuously monitor
the status of the DMA controller, the polling loop can include WFE instruction as follows:
  Enable_DMA_event_mask(); // Write to programmable enable mask register
                           // to enable DMA event
  Start_DMA(); // Start DMA operation
  do {
      __DSB(); // Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
      __WFE(); // WFE Sleep operation, wake up when an event is received
  } while (check_DMA_completed()==0);
  Disable_DMA_event_mask(); // Write to programmable enable mask register
                            // to disable DMA event

Since the processor could be woken up by other events, the polling loop must still check
the DMA controller status.
For applications using an embedded OS, an OS-specific delay function should be used
instead of using WFE to allow the processor to switch to another task that is waiting to be
executed. Using of embedded OS is covered in Chapter 20.
In multiprocessor systems, interprocessor communication such as spin lock often involves
polling software flags in shared memory. Similar to the DMA controller example, the

                              TXEV                           TXEV

              Cortex-M                                                   Cortex-M
              Processor                                                  Processor
                              RXEV                            RXEV

                                         Peripheral events

                                          Figure 19.3
       Usage of event interface: example 2ddual processor event cross over connection.

WFE sleep operation can be used to reduce power consumption during these activities. In
a dual processor system, the event communication interface can be connected in a cross
over configuration as shown in Figure 19.3.
In this arrangement, the polling loop for a shared software flag could be written as:

  do {
      __DSB(); // Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
      __WFE(); // WFE Sleep operation, wake up when an event is received
  } while (sw_flag_x==0); // poll software flag
  task_X(); // execute task X when software flag for task X is received

On the other process that changes “sw_flag_x,” it needs to generate an event after the
shared variable is updated. This can be done by executing the SEV (Send event)
instruction.

  sw_flag_x = 1; // Set software flag in shared memory
  __DSB(); // Data synchronization barrier to ensure the write is completed
           // not essential for Cortex-M0/M0+ but is added for software porting
  __SEV(); // execute SEV instruction

Using this arrangement, the processor running the polling loop can stay in sleep mode
until it receives an event. Since the SEV execution sets the internal event latch, this
method works even if the polling process and the process that sets the software variable
are running at different times on the same processor, as in a single processor multitasking
system.
For applications using an embedded OS, OS-specific event-passing mechanism should be
used instead of directly using WFE and SEV.

19.2 Requirements of Low-Power Designs
There are many low-power microcontrollers on the market. Traditionally,
many microcontroller vendors classify their microcontrollers as low-power or ULP
based on:
•   Active current during program execution
•   Idle current during sleep
Today, when selecting microcontrollers for low-power applications, designers should also
consider:
•   Energy efficiencydhow much processing work can be done with certain amount of
    energy.
•   Code densitydhow much program memory is need for an application. ROM
    (or flash) size requirement can have a significant impact on the system level power.
•   Latenciesdhow long would it take to wake up the processor from sleep, and how
    long it will take for the processor to complete an interrupt processing task? This can
    be important for some applications with real-time requirements that the processor
    might have to run at higher clock frequency to response to an interrupt request
    quickly.
In many applications, energy efficiency is the key for better battery life. If a
microcontroller has lower active current but need several times higher number clock cycles
to complete a task, overall it can burn off more power. As a result, the CortexÒ-M
processors have been very popular in low-power design as they offer excellent energy
efficiency as well as high code density.
In addition to longer battery life, there are many other benefits for having energy-efficient
processor in low-power designs. For example,
•   Smaller battery is requireddenable smaller, more portable products
•   Low-power requirement might simplify the design of power supply, cooling
•   Might enable easier PCB design (thinner power tracks) and thinner wires inside
    products
•   Reduce the electromagnetic interference the microcontroller generates. This can be
    important to wireless communication product as it affects the quality of the wireless
    communications
•   Enable energy harvesting
Many of these factors can also have direct impact to product cost and product
development time.

19.3 Where Does the Power Go?
To create better low-power design, it would be helpful if we first understand where the
power is consumed on a silicon chip. We start by first looking into a photo of a
microcontroller die with a CortexÒ-M3 processor, as shown in Figure 19.4.
Note on Figure 19.4: Integrated circuit die photo of a STM32F100C4T6B ARMÒ Cortex-
M3 MCU (microcontroller) with 16 KB Flash, 4 KB SRAM, 24 MHz CPU, motor control,
and CEC functions.
While it is not clear where the processor is in the photo (it is likely to have merged with
the digital logic on the upper right-hand side of the photo, which might also contains
digital peripherals, DMA controller, and bus interconnect components), it is clear that the
memory blocks (left-hand side) takes a significant space. The bottom right contains some
nicely structured components. Some of these blocks could be the analog components (this
chip has one 12-bit ADC and two 12-bit DACs).

                                    Figure 19.4
 Die of a STM32F100C4T6B ARM CortexÒ-M3 microcontroller. Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/
                               wiki/ARM_Cortex-M).

And next to each of the I/O pads, there are also some transistors to help boosting the drive
current and also components for protection and voltage level conversions.
Somewhere in the chip, there are also other clock-related components like three internal
oscillators, an external Phase Locked Loop (PLL).
In general, the power consumption of a component in the chip is closely related to its area
and its signal toggling activities (Table 19.3).

Table 19.3: Common elements that consume power in a microcontroller

    Components                     Description
    Memories                       Typically memories are the most power hungry part of the chip,
                                   especially if the microcontroller supports large memory size. The power
                                   consumption of the system could also depend on the application code.
                                   If the application task is intensive on memory accesses, this can increase
                                   the power consumption of the memory system.
    Processor                      Since the CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are quite small, the
                                   actual power consumption of the processor is also fairly small.
    Peripherals                    Some of the peripherals, especially analog peripherals like ADC and DAC
                                   can also consume fair amount of power when they are enabled.
                                   However, in most all microcontrollers some of these peripherals can
                                   often be powered down if they are not used.
    Oscillators                    Some external crystal oscillators could consume fair amount of power
                                   when enabled. Many modern microcontrollers have internal RC
                                   oscillator which can be lower power but less accurate.
    I/O pads                       When enabled, especially when configured as an output pin, the I/O
                                   pad can consume fair amount of power due to the transistor size and
                                   potentially, additional power for pull up or pull down support. Many
                                   microcontrollers allow the I/O pads to be enabled/disabled via software.
    Clock distribution network     Hidden in the chip photo there is also a range of transistors that
                                   distributes the clock signals to different parts of the chip. These
                                   transistors can also consume quite a bit of power when the clock is
                                   running.

Today we see many low-power Cortex-M microcontrollers with very sophisticated system
features which enable longer battery life. For example:
•      Various run modes and sleep modes available
•      Ultralow-power Real Time Clock (RTC), watchdog, and Brown Out Detector (BOD)
•      Smart peripherals that can operate while the processor remains in sleep modes
•      Flexible clock system control features to allow clock signals for inactive parts of the
       design to be turned off.
While we will not be able to cover the details of all the low-power features in individual
microcontroller devices here, we can cover some of the general concepts. Since different

microcontrollers have different low-power features, if you want to fully utilize the low-
power capability of the microcontrollers, you need to check out the details of the low-
power features from reference materials or examples available from the microcontroller
vendors. In many cases, example code could be available for download from the
manufacturer Web site.

19.4 Developing Low-Power Applications
19.4.1 Overview of Low-Power Design Practices

In general, there are various measures that can be taken to reduce power consumption:
•   Reduction of active power
    • Choose the right microcontroller devicedOnce the basic system and memory size
       requirements of the project are clear, you can select a microcontroller with enough
       memory and peripherals but not too much more.
    • Run the processor at suitable clock frequencydMany applications do not require a
       high clock frequency. When a processor is running at high clock speed, it might
       require wait states due to flash memory access time and hence reduce the energy
       efficiency.
    • Choose the right clock sourcedMany low-power microcontrollers provide multiple
       clock sources including internal ones. Depending on the requirements of your appli-
       cations, some clock sources might work better than others. There is no general rule
       of “best choice” for which clock source to use. It entirely depends on the applica-
       tion and the microcontroller you are using.
    • Do not enable a peripheral unless it is neededdsome low-power microcontrollers
       allow you to turn off clock signals to each peripheral. In some cases, you can even
       turn off the power supply to certain peripheral to reduce power.
    • Other clock system featuresdSome microcontrollers provide various clock dividers
       for different parts of the system. You can use these dividers to reduce the power, for
       example, reduce the processor speed when the processing requirement is low.
    • Good power supply designdGood choice of power supply design can provide
       optimum voltage for the application.
•   Reduction of active cycles
    • When the processor is idle, sleep modes can be used to reduce power consumption,
       even it is going to enter sleep only for a short period of time.
    • Application code can be optimized for speed to reduce active cyclesdIn some cases
       (e.g., C compiler option set to speed optimization), it might increase code size, but
       when there is spare space in the flash memory then the optimization is worth trying.
    • Features like Sleep-On-Exit can be used to reduce active cycles in interrupt-driven
       applications.

•   Reduce of power during sleep
    • Select the right low-power featuresdA low-power microcontroller might support
       various low-power sleep modes. Using the right sleep modes might help you to
       reduce the power consumption significantly.
    • Turn off unneeded peripherals and clock signals during sleep. This can reduce the
       power consumption, but it might also increase the time required to restore the
       system to operation state after exiting sleep mode.
    • Some microcontrollers can even turn off power supply to some parts inside the mi-
       crocontroller like flash memory and oscillators during sleeps. But doing this usually
       needs a longer time to wake up the system.
Most microcontroller vendors would provide code library and example codes to
demonstrate the low-power features of their microcontrollers. Those examples can make
the application development much easier.
The first step of developing a low-power application is to be familiar with the
microcontroller device you are using. A few areas to investigate when developing sleep
mode support code included:
•   Determine which sleep mode should be used
•   Determine which clock signals need to be remain turn on
•   Determine if some clock support circuits like crystal oscillators can be switched off
•   Determine if clock source switching is needed

19.4.2 Various Approaches to Reduce Power

There are several approaches for creating low-power applications.
Run the Application Quickly and Then Go to Sleep as Much as Possible
This is a very common approach to use. Sleep-mode supports are very common in modern
microcontrollers and this approach allows a very good performance margin. So in case
there are more interrupt requests arriving than usual, the system can still cope with the
processing demand. The down side is that the peak current could be high, and you might
need to enable and switch the clock to a fast clock every time the microcontroller wakes
up, which could take some time.

Slow Down the Clock as Much as Possible
Many microcontrollers allow you to run the processor at a very slow clock rate, for
example, using the RTC 32 KHz oscillator as the processor clock. This enables a much
lower active current, and is suitable for applications that only need to deal with periodic
tasks where latency to other requests is not an issue.

Power Down and Restart
Depending on the application requirements, some designers choose to power down the
microcontroller and configure the microcontroller to wake up on certain hardware events.
This can help getting the lowest idle power. But the time required to restart the processor
can result in longer response latency, and the restarting process could also consume fair
amount of energy.
Some microcontroller vendors include a state retention SRAM and firmware to help
shortening the restart process. Firmware APIs could be available to store processor
registers and states into the retention SRAM before power down, and the boot loader can
then restore the information automatically so that the processor resumes from where it was
in the application code. However, there could be some limitations, for example, some
processor states like exception status (i.e., IPSR) might not be restored and therefore such
power down feature might only be used in thread mode.
Other Possibilities
Some designers have investigated other approaches such as Dynamic Voltage and
Frequency Scaling (DVFS) for microcontrollers (mostly academic research studies).
However, DVFS is not suitable for some applications because in some microcontrollers, the
clock outputs from on-chip PLL is unstable during switching and the PLL switching time
could be too long to allow such system to deal with interrupt requests in real time. In
addition, this method is unsuitable for many microcontrollers where the peripherals are
operating on a clock derived from the processor’s clock and require a constant clock speed.

19.4.3 Selecting the Right Approach

The actual selection of the low-power approach depends on many device-specific factors
and application-specific requirements. For example, if in your application it might have to
deal with unpredictable processing loading requirements, then it is better to run the
processor faster so that it can cope with occasional high processing demand periods, and
get the system to sleep mode as long as possible. However, running the clock faster than
needed can also have drawbacks:
•   Excessive power consumption on the oscillator, and potentially high power wastage in
    the PLL (if used).
•   Clock signals going to some of the peripherals could still be on all the time. If avail-
    able, consider utilizing some of the clock prescalars to reduce the clock speed of certain
    peripherals.
You can also consider running the clock in a medium frequency range, and only increase the
clock speed when certain processing tasks (that require longer execution time) are executed.

In some applications, you could find that instead of using a PLL to get a high clock
frequency, you can use a higher frequency crystal and use clock prescalar to reduce the
processor’s clock to lower operating frequency when the work load is low. If the
processing requirement increases, then reprogram the prescalar to increase the processor’s
clock speed. This avoids the need to use the PLL (especially if the PLL is power hungry)
and reduce the clock speed switching time (reprogram a clock prescalar is normally much
faster than a PLL frequency switch).
In applications that the role of the processor is just to wake up periodically and do some
processing, and the processing latency is not an issue, then running the clock slow could
be one good way to reduce power. This is particularly useful for systems based on energy
harvesting because it reduces the peak current to a minimum. However, there are some
cases where running the clock as slow as possible might not able to save energy:
•   At low frequency range, the power consumption does not necessarily reduce linearly
    as the clock rate reduced due to leakage current, or active power of external compo-
    nents connected to the microcontroller. If the leakage current of the system is high,
    then running the system for longer can increase the power consumed due to leakage
    current. This is particularly true for microcontroller devices with memories that
    have high leakage current, or when certain analog components need to be turned on
    throughout the processing. If the leakage current is much lower during sleep,
    running the system faster and putting it into sleep mode longer might save more
    power.
•   There can be various limitations of frequency range and low-power characteristics of
    the oscillator and clock circuit designs. If the oscillator and PLL power consumption is
    significant and the power of these components cannot be able to reduce any further
    under certain frequency range, then reducing clock frequency further lower is not going
    to help.
•   Do not use a crystal with frequency lower than the specified frequency range stated by
    the microcontroller data sheet. Not only the crystal oscillator might not be able to
    startup properly, it might end up with harmonic in the oscillation which might result in
    an unreliable system and the oscillator could consume more power. It is also important
    to use the right capacitors with the crystal as stated in data sheet.
For applications that stay in sleep mode for extensive amount of time and if wake-up
latency is not an issue, power down the design when the system is idle could be the best
choice. In such case, care must be taken to reduce the power consumed in the start-up
sequence. For example, a slow oscillator (e.g., 32 KHz) might take much longer time than
a fast crystal oscillator to startup, therefore could end up with higher start-up energy
consumption.

19.5 Debug Considerations
19.5.1 Debug and Low-Power

Depending on the microcontroller devices used, in some cases the sleep modes can disable
all the clock signals or can disable the signal paths for debug connections. In such cases, if
you are running a debug session on a debug host and such sleep mode is used, the debug
session would terminate as the debugger can no longer talk to the chip.
In some other cases, you might find that when a debugger is connected, it disables certain
low-power features so that the debug session can continue during sleep. However, the power
of the system during debug will not reflect the real-world scenarios (it will be higher).

19.5.2 “Safe Mode” for Debug and Flash Programming

If you are using a microcontroller device that could terminate your debug connection
during sleep mode, and if you are developing an application that could go into sleep mode
fairly quickly after the system powers up, you could find that your microcontroller device
get locked out from the debug connections after the program image is programmed. This
is because the debugger does not have enough time to connect to the device before the
sleep mode takes place (unless you can force the processor clock to run very slowly). This
could also prevent you from updating the program image in the flash, because that also
requires a debug connection.
For this case, you should consider adding a “safe mode” at the starting of the application
so that the device will not go into sleep mode, or at least, not immediately when the safe
mode is activated. Alternatively, the safe mode can force the application to use a sleep
mode that does not disconnect the debugger. Such safe mode can be implemented by
adding a simple status check on an input pin at start-up.
In some microcontroller devices, there are boot mode configurations and you can use that
to enable flash programming instead of using a safe mode. However, the “safe mode”
feature in the application is still useful for enabling debug operations.

19.5.3 Debug Interface and Low-Voltage Pins

Some microcontrollers can work at low voltage supply and this enables them to have very
low-power consumption. However, some debug adaptors are not designed for low-voltage
debug interface. As a result, you might need to increase the supply voltage for the
development board during software development, or to get a debug adaptor that can
operate at lower voltage.

19.6 Benchmarking of Low-Power Devices
19.6.1 Background of ULPBenchÔ

Currently, most microcontroller vendors describe the low-power characteristic of their
products by quoting active current and idle current. However, as highlighted in the
beginning of Section 19.2, this is no longer enough for designers. As there were no
standardized rules of how active current should be measured, some of the quoted active
current from microcontroller vendors could be controversial because:
•   The data can be obtained by running “while(1)”dthe instruction could be fetched from
    a prefetch buffer and therefore no memory access activity in the flash and SRAM.
•   The data can be obtained by running program code from SRAM, with the flash memory
    turned off.
•   The data can be obtained by running program with wait states for flash memory
    enabled. This reduces the signal toggling and therefore reduces power.
•   The test could be carried out with a voltage supply that is only suitable for labs envi-
    ronment and is not suitable for real-world applications.
As a result, there is a need to come up a standardize way to demonstrate energy efficiency
in low-power microcontroller devices.
Although it is possible to use existing benchmark code like EEMBCÒ CoreMarkÒ as a
reference for measuring power, the data processing complexity of CoreMark is somewhat
overkill for a lot of the ULP applications. On the other hand, Dhrystone is too small to
illustrate processing requirements and therefore is not suitable either.
There is also the need to demonstrate the sleep mode current. If the program execution is
too long, the active power will dominate the test result.
As a result, the EEMBC ULPBench workgroup was formed in 2012. The aim of the
work group is to create benchmark suites that are suitable for measuring energy efficiency
of low-power and ULP microcontroller devices, with a consistent and well-defined
method.
The ULPBench project is divided into multiple phases. The first phase focuses on the
energy efficiency of the processors inside the microcontroller, and is named ULPBench-
Core Profile (or ULPBench-CP). Currently, additional profiles are being discussed and
investigated in the EEMBC ULPBench workgroup.

19.6.2 Overview of the ULPBench-CP

The score of the ULBench-CP is to measure the energy efficiency of ULP microcontroller
devices, including 8-, 16-, and 32-bit devices. Unlike traditional benchmarks, the

ULPBench needs a piece of hardware to measure the actual energy consumption by a
device. Therefore the ULPBench-CP has defined:
•     A workload (in C language) that can be used on 8-, 16-, and 32-bit architectures,
•     A reference energy measurement hardware, called the EnergyMonitor,
•     A Windows-based GUI to access the measurement hardware and control the test process
      and to display and compute the results.
In order to reflect the work load pattern of real-world applications, the workload executes
a workload once every second and enter sleep mode the rest of the time (Figure 19.5).
The measurement process spans 10 occurrences of the processing. In order to ensure the
data is accurate, 12 occurrences of the processing are needed and the software controlling
the test detects the middle 10 occurrences and uses them for calculation of benchmark
result.
The workload contains data processing functions including:
•     Data processing of 8-, 16-, and 32-bit data types,
•     Control functions (7-segment LCD),
•     Sorting,
•     String functions,
•     Task scheduling.

    Power                    1 second

                          Workload
                  Sleep   execution
      Initialization

                                                                                                        Time
                                                          Measurement
Accumulative
   energy

                                                                                                        Time

                                                           Figure 19.5
                                        Processor activities in ULPBench-CP execution.

A simple task scheduler is included as part of the workload, but no actual context
switching takes place because such operation is not supported by a number of 8-bit
microcontrollers targeting ULP applications.
On existing CortexÒ-M0, Cortex-M0þ, Cortex-M3, and Cortex-M4 processors, the
execution time of the workload takes around 10e14 k clock cycles. So if you wish, you
can execute the workload with an on-chip 32-KHz crystal provided it has the required
accuracy (?50 ppm).
To support the measurement setup, EEMBC provides a reference hardware tool called
EnergyMonitor that you can buy from EEMBC Web site, and a software running on a
personal computer to collect the data from EnergyMonitor and compute the result. The
EnergyMonitor hardware is shown in Figure 19.6.
The Energy Monitor receives the power from the USB connector, and supplies the power
to the DUT (Device Under Test) using jumper connector (Figure 19.7).
Some software porting work is required to get the ULPBench-CP working on a
microcontroller. ARMÒ has already contributed a template for the Cortex-M processors,
but software developers need to add device-specific low-power feature support code, and
might need to port the timer code to use device-specific low-power timer instead of the
generic SysTick timer for best results. Also, some I/O control functions are defined in
ULPbench-CP to indicate that the system is indeed running ULPBench-CP correctly
(signal toggling can be observed with an oscilloscope). These functions also need to be
ported.
After the software porting work is done, we can then test the ULPBench-CP with the
ULPBench EnergyMonitor software. The measurement process is repeated a number of

                                      Figure 19.6
                                  EEMBC Energy Monitor.

                                         USB                           +3V
                                                           EEMBC
                                                           Energy              DUT
                                                           Monitor
                                                                       0V

                                            Figure 19.7
                                       ULPBench-CP test setup.

times before the score were computed. The result can then be optionally uploaded to the
EEMBC Web site for display. Figure 19.8 shows the ULPBench-CP test result of a
STM32L476, a microcontroller with Cortex-M4 with FPU processor, 1 MB on-chip flash
and 12 KB of SRAM, which has an impressive official score of 123.5 ULPMarkÔ -CP.
Additional ULPBench-CP scores can be found on EEMBC Web site.1
Unlike traditional power measurement tools, the EnergyMonitor essentially measures the
charging time of a capacitor which supplies current to the device under test. Unlike ADC
sampling, this method provides higher accuracy by avoiding any error stemming from
current spikes between samples.
In order to make sure the test provides a fair and equitable comparison, the measurement
setup has a number of requirements:
•     The supply voltage is 3 V.
•     The wake-up timer must be accurate (within ?50 ppm).
•     The program code must run from the microcontroller’s flash memory (or NVM).
The benchmark result is represented as ULPMark-CP ¼ 1000/(median of 5 times average
energy per second for 10 ULPBench cycles). The energy is measure in microjoules.

1
    EEMBC ULPbench Web site: http://eembc.org/ulpbench/.

                                        Figure 19.8
                                ULPBench Energy Monitor GUI.

19.7 Example of Using Low-Power Features on Freescale KL25Z
19.7.1 Objective

The aim of this test example is to generate a 1-Hz- period interrupt to output a message
via the UART interface, and have the processor put in low-power mode to reduce the
overall current as much as possible.
In this example, we assume that the timing of the wake-up event needs to be very
accurate. As a result, we use the external crystal for the clock source during operation.

19.7.2 Test Setup

The test is based on the Freescale Freedom board (FRDM-KL25Z). In this development
board, you can do a small modification so that you can measure the electric supply current
going into the microcontroller by connecting an ammeter across jumper J4 (Figure 19.9).
•   If you are using REV-D of the FRDM-KL25Z, there is a solder shorter right under
    jumper J4 that you need to cut out.
•   If you are using REV-E of the FRDM-KL25Z, there are two resistors connected across
    J4 and both are placed next to J4: a 0 U (R73) and a 10 U (R81). If you want to
    measure the current using an ammeter, you should desolder both of them. Alternatively
    you can remove just the 0-U resister and measure the current using a voltmeter.

                                         Figure 19.9
                             Jumper J4 on the FRDM-KL25z Board.

After doing the modification, you can put the board back into normal operations again by
putting a jumper header on jumper J4. In case you want to find out more about the
differences between the REV D and REV E of the Freedom board, Erich Styger wrote a
very good blog about this which can be found in http://mcuoneclipse.com/2013/06/09/
frdm-kl25z-reve-board-arrived/.

19.7.3 Low-Power Modes on KL25Z

The KL25Z128VL microcontroller device supports a number of power modes, as shown in
Figure 19.10.
In this example, we use the VLPS (Very Low Power Stop) mode. Alternatively LLS (Low
Leakage Stop) could be used but the UART will be stopped during sleep. If the processor entered
sleep before the UART transmission completed, the output UART data could be corrupted.
The selection of the operation mode is handled by a unit called System Mode Controller (SMC).

19.7.4 Clocking Arrangement

The clock generation involved several components, as illustrated in Figure 19.11. This
included:
•   System oscillatordThis can be configured for high-speed crystal operation or low-
    power 32 KHz operation. On the Freescale Freedom Board, the system oscillator is
    connected to an external 8-MHz crystal.

                                    Sleep with            Sleep with                                  Wake up with NVIC
     Processor Running
                                  SLEEPDEEP = 0         SLEEPDEEP = 1

                                                                           All clocks to processor core stopped (SysTick
                                   Normal WAIT            Normal STOP      stopped) and use WIC to wake up. LVD (Low
        Normal Run
                                    (WFI/WFE)              (WFI/WFE)        Voltage Detection) protection on. By default
                                                                                   peripheral clocks are stopped.

                                                                           All clocks to processor core stopped (SysTick
           VLPR
                                  VLPW (Very Low        VLPS (Very Low         stopped) and use WIC to wake up. LVD
      (Very Low Power
                                    Power Wait)          Power Stop)       protection off and by default peripheral clocks
            Run)
                                                                                             are stopped.

                                Core clock stopped &                                               Wake up with LLWU IRQ
    Core & system clocks
                                  flash in low power                       State retention power mode. Most peripherals
    limited to 4MHz, bus
                                state. System clocks    LLS (Low Leakage    are in state retention mode (clock stopped)
     clock & flash limited
                                limited to 4MHz, bus          Stop)          but OSC, LLWU, LPTMR, RTC, CMP and
           to 1MHz
                                clock limited to 1MHz                                     TSI can be used.

                                                                                                 Wake up with LLWU reset

    LLWU – Low Leakage Wakeup Unit                      VLLS3 (Very Low    Similar to LLS, with SRAMs in retention state
    LPTMR – Low Power Timer                              Leakage Stop3)                 and I/O state held.

    CMP - Comparator
    OSC - Oscillator
                                                        VLLS1 (Very Low
    RTC – Real Timer Clock                                                       Similar to VLLS3 but SRAM is off.
                                                         Leakage Stop1)
    TSI – Touch Sensing Input

                                                        VLLS0 (Very Low     Similar to VLLS1 but CMP cannot be used,
                                                         Leakage Stop0)     and internal LPO (Low Power Oscillator) off

                                                     Figure 19.10
                                         Power modes in KL25Z microcontrollers.

•     Multipurpose Clock Generator (MCG)dThis unit contains the internal RC oscillators
      (4 MHz and 32 KHz), a Frequency Locked Loop (FLL) and a Phase Locked Loop
      (PLL). The FLL and PLL can utilize the clock generated from the System Oscillator.
•     System Integration Module (SIM)dThis unit provides various clock multiplexing/
      routing/prescaling options, as well as controls the clocks to peripherals.
•     Power Management Controller (PMC)dThis unit contains the internal voltage regu-
      lator, power on reset (POR), and low-voltage detect system. (Not used in this example.)
•     Real Time Clock (RTC)dGenerate Timer interrupts and a 1-Hz clock. (Not used in this
      example.)
Instead of using RTC for the 1-Hz interrupt generation, we use the LPTMR (Low-Power
Timer) because the external crystal is connected to an 8-MHz crystal. The RTC works best
with an external 32-KHz crystal.

                                       Figure 19.11
Clocking diagram from Freescale KL25 Subfamily Reference Manual (KL25P80M48SF0RM, rev3).

To make things slightly more challenging, software developers also need to understand the
operation states of the MCG (Figure 19.12).
In our example, the system starts-up in FEI state, then switches the FBE state, and then
switches to BLPE state. The switching of the operation states are done inside the
“SystemInit()” function at start-up.

19.7.5 The Test Setup

The overview of the setup can be summarized as:
•   MCG running in BLPE (Bypassed Low-Power External) state. External crystal oscil-
    lator running at 8 MHz is used with PLL and FLL disabled and bypassed.

                       Use Internal Crystal Oscillator                      Use External Crystal Oscillator

        Reset
                                            FEI                              FEE
                                      (FLL Engaged                       (FLL Engaged
                                         Internal)                         External)

                                            FBI                              FBE
                                      (FLL Bypassed                     (FLL Bypassed
                                   Internal – FLL on but             External – FLL on but
                                         not used)                         not used)

                 BLPI                                                                                   BLPE
        (Bypassed Low Power                                                                     (Bypassed Low Power
       Internal – both FLL and                                                                 External – both FLL and
          PLL are disabled)                                                                       PLL are disabled)

                                                                  PBE (PLL Bypassed External
                                                                   – PLL is on but is not used.
                                                                    FLL is disable. Useful for
                                                                      waiting for PLL lock)

                                                                             PEE
                                                                   (PLL Engaged External –
                                                                  Use PLL for clock generation
                                                                       and FLL disabled)

                            Return to                                             Any
                         previous state                                           state
                          (unless it is a
                         wake up reset)
                                                                                  Deep sleep
                                        Wake up            Stop

                                                 Figure 19.12
                                 Multipurpose Clock Generator operating states.

•   For first step of our experiment, the microcontroller uses Normal Run and Normal Stop.
    The system runs on 8-MHz clock frequency.
•   Then we enhance the design to use Very Low-Power Run (VLPR) and Very Low-Power
    Stop (VLPS) modes to further reduce the power.
•   The wake-up source selected is the Low-Power Timer (LPTMR) module.
•   UART0 is used and is configured to run at 38,400 bps.

The setup of the MCG is easy. The control code is already included in the default.
  "system_MKL25Z4.c". We only need to select the define option in this file:

  #define DISABLE_WDOG      1

  #define CLOCK_SETUP    2
  /* Predefined clock setups
     0 . Multipurpose Clock Generator (MCG) in FLL Engaged Internal (FEI) mode
          Reference clock source for MCG module is the slow internal clock source
          32.768kHz
          Core clock = 41.94MHz, BusClock = 13.98MHz
     1 . Multipurpose Clock Generator (MCG) in PLL Engaged External (PEE) mode
          Reference clock source for MCG module is an external crystal 8MHz Core
          clock = 48MHz, BusClock = 24MHz
     2 . Multipurpose Clock Generator (MCG) in Bypassed Low Power External (BLPE)
          mode
          Core clock/Bus clock derived directly from an external crystal 8MHz with
          no multiplication
          Core clock = 8MHz, BusClock = 8MHz
  */

The code to get the system running is as follows. Please note that at the start of the test
program, a UART input function is called so that the test does not start until it has
received a character from the UART interface. This prevents the board from being
locked out completely by the low-power mode and allow the program flash to be
reprogrammed (see safe mode operation in 19.5.2).

 Example code to program LPTMR to wake up the system at 1-Hz interval. Normal Run and
 Normal STOP modes are used
    #include <MKL25Z4.H>
    #include "stdio.h"

    void    LPTimer_Config(void);
    void    Low_Power_Config(void);

    // UART functions
    extern void UART_config(void);
    extern char UART_putc(char ch);
    extern char UART_getc(void);
    extern void UART_echo(void);

    volatile int irq_count=0;

    int main(void)
    {
      SystemCoreClockUpdate();

                                                                                        Continued

     UART_config();

     printf("Low Power Sleep test\n");
     printf("Press ANY key to start .\n");
     UART_getc();
     printf("Continue.\n");

     // Low power optimizations
     Low_Power_Config();
     LPTimer_Config();

     // Enable Sleep-on-Exit
     SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPONEXIT_Msk;
     while(1){
       __DSB();// Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
       __WFI();
       };
   }
   // ----------------------------------------
   // Configure Low Power Timer
   // ----------------------------------------
   void LPTimer_Config(void)
   {
     SIM->SCGC5 j= SIM_SCGC5_LPTMR_MASK; // enable access to LPTMR
     LPTMR0->CSR = 0; // Disable timer
     LPTMR0->PSR = LPTMR_PSR_PRESCALE(8)j // Prescalar set to 512, OSCERCLK
                    LPTMR_PSR_PCS(3);     // OSCERCLK
     LPTMR0->CMR = 15625;                 // 8MHz / 512 / 15625 = 1Hz
     // Clear pending interrupt if any
     NVIC_ClearPendingIRQ(LPTimer_IRQn);
     // Enable Timer in free running mode
     LPTMR0->CSR = LPTMR_CSR_TIE_MASK j LPTMR_CSR_TEN_MASK j LPTMR_CSR_TCF_MASK;
     // Enable NVIC
     NVIC_EnableIRQ(LPTimer_IRQn);
     return;
   }
   // ----------------------------------------
   // Low Power Timer interrupt handler
   // ----------------------------------------
   void LPTimer_IRQHandler(void)
   {
     irq_count++;
     printf ("[LPTimer_IRQHandler] %d\n", irq_count);
     LPTMR0->CSR j= LPTMR_CSR_TCF_MASK;
     return;
   }
   // ----------------------------------------
   // Low Power Configuration
   // ----------------------------------------

      void Low_Power_Config(void)
      {
        // Enable deep sleep mode
        SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPDEEP_Msk;
        // Enable OSCERCLK in STOP mode
        OSC0->CR j= OSC_CR_EREFSTEN_MASK;
        // Need this for UART and Low Power Timer to continue
        return;
      }

Once this is working, the "void Low_Power_Config(void)" function is updated to include the
additional enhancement:
•     To enable the use of VLPR and VLPS modes, we need to reduce the clock frequency of
      the system from 8 MHz to a lower frequency at 4 MHz or lower. A frequency value of
      1 MHz is selected.
•     To save more power, the flash memory is turned off during sleep (this is referred as
      Flash Doze feature in Freescale document).
•     Turn off internal oscillator.
•     Enable the very-low power modes by programming to the System Mode Controller
      (SMC) module.
The modified “void Low_Power_Config(void)” function is as follows.

    Modified “void Low_Power_Config(void)”
      // ----------------------------------------
      // Low Power Configuration
      // ----------------------------------------
      void Low_Power_Config(void)
      {
        // Enable deep sleep mode
        SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPDEEP_Msk;

        // Enable OSCERCLK in STOP mode
        OSC0->CR j= OSC_CR_EREFSTEN_MASK;
        // Need this for UART and Low Power Timer to continue

        // Switch system to run at 1MHz
        SIM->CLKDIV1 = SIM_CLKDIV1_OUTDIV1(7)jSIM_CLKDIV1_OUTDIV4(7);
        // Turn off flash during sleep (Flash Doze)
        SIM->FCFG1 j= SIM_FCFG1_FLASHDOZE_MASK;

        MCG->C2 j= MCG_C2_LP_MASK; // Low Power Select
        //Controls whether the FLL or PLL is disabled in

                                                                                      Continued

        //BLPI and BLPE modes. In FBE or PBE modes, setting this
        //bit to 1 will transition the MCG into BLPE mode;
        //in FBI mode, setting this bit to 1 will transition the MCG
        //into BLPI mode. In any other MCG mode, LP bit has no affect.
        //0 FLL or PLL is not disabled in bypass modes.
        //1 FLL or PLL is disabled in bypass modes (lower power)

        MCG->C2 &= wMCG_C2_HGO0_MASK;
        // Controls the crystal oscillator mode of operation.
        // See the Oscillator (OSC) chapter for more details.
        // 0 Configure crystal oscillator for low-power operation.
        // 1 Configure crystal oscillator for high-gain operation.
        // Note: HGO0 of MCG->C2 might already be zero
        // Turn off internal reference clock, as we are
        // using external crystal

        MCG->C1 &= wMCG_C1_IRCLKEN_MASK;

        // Enable Very Low Power modes
        SMC->PMPROT j= SMC_PMPROT_AVLP_MASK;
        // Enable Very-Low-Power Run mode (VLPR)
        // and Very-Low-Power Stop (VLPS)
        SMC->PMCTRL = SMC_PMCTRL_RUNM(2) j // VLPR
                       SMC_PMCTRL_STOPM(2); // VLPS
        printf ("Waiting to enter VLPR.\n");
        while ((SMC->PMSTAT & 0x7F)!=0x04);
        printf ("VLPR activated!\n");
        return;
    }

19.7.6 Measurement Results

After the test is created, several measurements were made (Table 19.4). Please note that
the measurements should be made without debugger connected. Note: Due to the
limitation of the multimeter used and other potential factors in the setup (e.g., potentially
activities of the onboard SDA debugger chip might have affected the debug operation
state), the results shown here might not be accurate.
The sleep current of 1.27 mA seems a bit high. With a CR2032 coin cell of 225 mAh, this
gives only 177 h of operations (just over 1 week). However, the KL25Z data sheet quotes
the power of using an external 4 MHz crystal adds around 228 mA electric current. Since

Table 19.4: Test results with 8-MHz clock source

           Condition                                                          Current
           Running the processor at 8 MHz without entering sleep              3.23 mA
           Running the processor at 1 MHz without entering sleep              2.52 mA
           (Note: Oscillator still running at 8 MHz)
           Sleep current                                                      1.27 mA

we are using an 8-MHz crystal, the actual power used by the external crystal oscillator can
be quite significant. In addition, the 8-MHz clock routing paths to peripherals (e.g., clock
buffers and capacitance of clock lines) can also contribute to the higher power.
In order to double check how the system power can be further reduced, the test setup is
modified to use the internal 4-MHz RC oscillator. The “SystemInit()” function is edited to
add a new clock setup so that the system is Started with MCG unit in BLPI (Bypassed
Low Power Internal) mode. The processor and bus clocks are reduced to 1 MHz by the
clock dividers (Table 19.5).

Table 19.5: Test results with 4-MHz internal
                                          clock source

                         Condition                                 Current
                         Run current                               0.11 mA
                         Sleep current                             0.04 mA

To help investigate the power activities, a 10-U resistor can be used to connect along the
voltage supply connection and the voltage across the resistor can be measured with an
oscilloscope (Figure 19.13). However, due to the small electrical current in this test, the
result cannot be read from the graph accurately.
Assume that most of the time the microcontroller is sleeping (using 0.04 mA), this now
gives us 5500 h, or over 200 days of battery life from a single CR2032 battery.
Additional power saving could be possible by reducing the active cycles. For example, by
using interrupt-driven mechanism to output the text string into the UART, instead of
polling-based UART function, could help. However, an experimental trial of changing the
printf message to just output one character do not seems to be able to reduce the power
consumption. This potentially highlight that the majority of the power is not consumed by
the processor or the UART, but could be by other components inside the chip.

                                        Figure 19.13
                                Measurement of power pattern.

The active cycles can also be reduced by compiler optimizations and software
optimizations. Also, potential delay could also be resulted if some of the bus clock
frequency and memory clock speed are set too low. It is important to carefully investigate
the clock frequency requirements for each part of the design.
If the application is not using the UART interface, potentially we can run the system at a
much lower clock frequency. According to the datasheet, the electric current of the
oscillator can be reduced to w0.5 mA if using a 32 KHz. Also, with such arrangement, the
RTC can be used for the periodic 1-Hz interrupt generation instead of the Low-Power
Timer module.
Do not forget that we have not utilized all the low-power modes in the KL25Z design yet.
There are a number of other low-leakage power modes available and can further reduce
the idle/sleep current.

19.8 Example of Using Low-Power Feature on LPC1114
19.8.1 Overview of LPC1114FN28

While the LPC1114 product series is not the lowest power CortexÒ-M0/Cortex-M0þ
microcontroller from NXP, it is an interesting product as it is available in DIP package. It
means even hobbyists can construct low-power circuit boards at home (e.g., on
breadboard). While there are plenty of other microcontroller development boards that can
plug onto breadboard, often those boards do not allow users to isolate the power of the

microcontroller from the power supply of the other components. So that adds to
complexity when creating simple low-power systems.
The LPC111x supports four power modes (Table 19.6).
The LPC1114FN28 device has an internal 12-MHz RC oscillator (trimmed), and a
programmable low-power watchdog oscillator. In addition, there is an external crystal
oscillator. The clock generation unit of the LPC111x is shown in Figure 19.14.
The power management of the LPC111x is controlled by a number of registers
(Table 19.7).
The details of these registers can be found in NXP LPC111x User Manual.

Table 19.6: Power modes in LPC111x

 Power modes           Descriptions
 Run mode              The microcontroller system in normal operation.
                       • Clocks to various parts of the microcontroller can be turned on/off using
                         System AHB clock control register (LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKCTRL)
                       • Clocks to several components including the processor can be divided to
                         lower frequency
                       • Several parts of the system (ADC, oscillator, PLL, etc.) can be powered down
                         using Power-down Configuration Register (LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG)
 Sleep mode            The processor entered sleep mode with SLEEPDEEP bit in System Control
                       Register (SCB->SCR) cleared.
                       • Clock to the processor stopped
                       • Peripheral clock continues to run (based on LPC_SYSCON-
                         >SYSAHBCLKCTRL)
 Deep sleep mode       The processor entered sleep mode with DEEPSLEEP bit in System Control
                       Register (SCB->SCR) set to 1.
                       • Clock to the processor stopped
                       • Several parts of the system (flash, oscillator, PLL, etc.) can be powered down
                         using the Deep Sleep Configuration Register (LPC_SYSCON->PDSLEEPCFG)
                       • The microcontroller can be wake up from “start logic” feature on the I/O
                         port
                       • When wake up from deep sleep, value of Power-down Configuration Register
                         (LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG) is updated from Wake-Up Configuration
                         Register (LPC_SYSCON->PDAWAKECFG)
 Deep power down       In this mode, most parts of the system are powered down. The status of the
 mode                  processor and RAM is lost. However, data in four general purpose register
                       inside the Power Management Unit are retained. This mode is entered by
                       entering sleep mode with
                       • Deep sleep mode enabled (SLEEPDEEP bit in SCB->SCR set)
                       • DPDEN bit in the PCON register in the power management unit is set
                       The processor can be wake up by reset or by “start logic” feature on the I/O
                       port.

                                        Figure 19.14
                LPC111x clock generation unit. Image from LPC111x User Manual.

Table 19.7: Device-specific system configuration registers needed for deep sleep program

 Register                        Symbol                          Descriptions
 Power-down Configuration        LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG            Power down control for
 Register                                                        running mode.
 Deep sleep mode Configuration   LPC_SYSCON->PDSLEEPCFG          Power down configuration to
 Register                                                        be used when the CortexÒ-M0
                                                                 is in deep sleep.
 Wake-up Configuration           LPC_SYSCON->PDAWAKECFG          Value to be copied to
 Register                                                        LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG
                                                                 when the microcontroller wakes
                                                                 up from deep sleep.

19.8.2 First ExperimentdRunning at 12 MHz with Internal and External Crystal

In the first test, a small experiment is carried out to compare the power consumption when
running the system at 12 MHz, with internal and external crystals.
In the project, we set the CLOCK_SETUP macro in system_LPC11xx.c to 0. And handle all the
clock initialization in the main program code if needed. We added a C macro
USE_EXT_CRYSTAL to select between internal crystal and external crystal.

 Simple test to compare between internal and external crystals
    #include "LPC11xx.h"
    #include "stdio.h"

    /* Power down control bit definitions */
    #define IRC_OUT_PD                      (0x1<<0)
    #define IRC_PD                          (0x1<<1)
    #define FLASH_PD                        (0x1<<2)
    #define BOD_PD                          (0x1<<3)
    #define ADC_PD                          (0x1<<4)
    #define SYS_OSC_PD                      (0x1<<5)
    #define WDT_OSC_PD                      (0x1<<6)
    #define SYS_PLL_PD                      (0x1<<7)

    //#define USE_EXT_CRYSTAL

    // UART functions
    extern void UART_config(void);
    extern char UART_putc(char ch);
    extern char UART_getc(void);
    extern void UART_echo(void);

    void Timer_Config(void);
    void Clock_Config(void);
    void Low_Power_Config(void);

    volatile int irq_count=0;

    int main(void)
    {
      // Initialize UART
      UART_config();
      printf("Sleep test\n");
      printf("Press any key to start...");
      UART_getc();
      printf("Continue\n");

      Clock_Config();
      Low_Power_Config();
      Timer_Config();

                                                                                          Continued

       // Enable Sleep-on-Exit
       SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPONEXIT_Msk;

       while(1){
          __DSB();// Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
          __WFI();
       };
   }
   // ----------------------------------------
   // Low Power Configuration
   // ----------------------------------------
   void Low_Power_Config(void)
   {
     // To be added
     return;
   }
   // ----------------------------------------
   // Clock Configuration
   // ----------------------------------------
   void Clock_Config(void)
   {
   #ifdef USE_EXT_CRYSTAL
     int i;
     // Power Down Configuration Register
     LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG &= w(SYS_OSC_PD); // Power-up System Osc
     LPC_SYSCON->SYSOSCCTRL = 0;         // Osc not bypassed, 1-20Mhz range
     for (i = 0; i < 200; i++) __NOP();

       LPC_SYSCON->SYSPLLCLKSEL = 0x1;     // System oscillator
       LPC_SYSCON->SYSPLLCLKUEN = 0x01;    // Update Clock Source
       LPC_SYSCON->SYSPLLCLKUEN = 0x00;    // Toggle Update Register
       LPC_SYSCON->SYSPLLCLKUEN = 0x01;
       while (!(LPC_SYSCON->SYSPLLCLKUEN & 0x01)); // Wait Until Updated

       LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKSEL = 0x1;       // Select PLL input
       LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN = 0x01;      // Update MCLK Clock Source
       LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN = 0x00;      // Toggle Update Register
       LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN = 0x01;
       while (!(LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN & 0x01)); // Wait Until Updated

       // Power down internal RC oscillator
       LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG j= IRC_PDjIRC_OUT_PD;

       #endif
       // Zero flash wait state for upto 20MHz
       LPC_FLASHCTRL->FLASHCFG = (LPC_FLASHCTRL->FLASHCFG & 0xFFFFFFFC) j (0 & 0x3);
   }

// ----------------------------------------
// Timer Configuration
// ----------------------------------------
void Timer_Config(void)
{

 // Use 16-bit timer 0
 // Enable clock to 16-bit timer 0 (bit 7)
 // Enable clock to IO configuration block (bit[16] of AHBCLOCK Control
    register)
 // and enable clock to GPIO (bit[6] of AHBCLOCK Control register
 LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKCTRL j= (1<<7);

 LPC_TMR16B0->TCR = 2;        // Disable and reset timer
 LPC_TMR16B0->TCR = 0;        // Disable timer

 // 12MHz setup
 LPC_TMR16B0->PR = (10000-1);// Prescaler set to 9999 (TC increment every 10K
     cycles)
 LPC_TMR16B0->TC = 0;         // Timer counter current value clear
 LPC_TMR16B0->MR1 = 1200-1;   // Match Register set to “1200 - 1”
                              // because System freq is 12 MHz,prescale reduce
                                 to 1200Hz
                              // match occur once every second
 LPC_TMR16B0->MCR = (1<<4)j(1<<3); // Reset & interrupt on MR1 match

 LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKCTRL &= w((1<<16)j(1<<6)); // Remove clock from IOCON &
 GPIO

  LPC_TMR16B0->TCR = 1;        // Enable
  NVIC_EnableIRQ(TIMER_16_0_IRQn);
  return;
 }
// ----------------------------------------
// Interrupt Handler
// ----------------------------------------
void TIMER16_0_IRQHandler(void)
{
  LPC_TMR16B0->IR = (1<<1); // Clear Interrupt request
  irq_count++;
  printf ("[Timer16B0 IRQ] %d\n", irq_count);
  return;
}

Table 19.8: Comparison of using internal and external crystals for low-power design

                               With internal RC OSC             With external crystal OSC
      Run mode                 3.3 mA                           3.09 mA
      Sleep current            2.22 mA                          2.16 mA

After compiling and executing the program, some measurements are carried out
(Table 19.8).
From here, we can see that you can have lower power with an external crystal oscillator.
Of course, this result is device-specific and in general the result can be affected by many
factors like the crystal component being used and if there is any special low-power feature
for either oscillators.

19.8.3 Second ExperimentdRunning at Reduced Frequencies
       of 1 MHz and 100 KHz

We can save a large portion of power by reducing the operation frequency. In the
LPC1114, we can do this by programming the System AHB clock divider
(LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKDIV). Please note this can have an impact to the timer’s
programming if we need to wake up the system at the same 1-Hz rate.
Most of the codes are similar from the previous example, with the addition of:

 Additional code for void Clock_Config(void)
    #ifdef SLOWER_TO_1MHZ
      LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKDIV = 12;
    #endif
    #ifdef SLOWER_TO_100KHZ
      LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKDIV = 120;
    #endif

And the timer configuration code needs to deal with the new preprocessing macros.

 Adjustment for void Timer_Config(void)
    #ifdef SLOWER_TO_1MHZ
      LPC_TMR16B0->PR = (10000-1);
                       // Prescaler set to 9999 (TC increment every 10K cycles)
      LPC_TMR16B0->TC = 0;        // Timer counter current value clear
      LPC_TMR16B0->MR1 = 100-1;   // Match Register set to "100 - 1"
                        // because System freq is 1 MHz, prescale reduce to 100Hz
                        // match occur once every second

    #else
    #ifdef SLOWER_TO_100KHZ
      LPC_TMR16B0->PR = (1000-1);
                       // Prescaler set to 999 (TC increment every 1K cycles)
      LPC_TMR16B0->TC = 0;     // Timer counter current value clear
      LPC_TMR16B0->MR1= 100-1; // Match Register set to "100 - 1"
                       // because System freq is 100KHz MHz, prescale reduce to 100Hz
                       // match occur once every second
    #else
      // 12MHz setup
      LPC_TMR16B0->PR = (10000-1);
                           // Prescaler set to 9999 (TC increment every 10K cycles)
      LPC_TMR16B0->TC = 0;         // Timer counter current value clear
      LPC_TMR16B0->MR1= 1200-1;   // Match Register set to “1200 - 1”
                           // because System freq is 12 MHz, prescale reduce to
                              1200Hz
                           // match occur once every second
    #endif // end of not SLOWER_TO_100KHZ
    #endif // end of not SLOWER_TO_1MHZ

After doing the changes, we can measure the result and compare to the previous 12-MHz
setup (Table 19.9). All results here are based on using of external 12-MHz crystal as
source.

Table 19.9: Comparison of using different internal clock frequencies

                                   12 MHz             1 MHz              100 KHz
             Run mode              3.09 mA            1.29 mA            1.15 mA
             Sleep current         2.16 mA            1.22 mA            1.14 mA

Here, we can see that at low-clock frequencies (using clock divider or prescalar), the
reduction of power is not linear. So even the operating frequency is reduced by 10? from
1 MHz to 100 KHz, the active current reduction is only around 11%.

19.8.4 Additional Improvements

Some simple additional improvements can help. In the project you might have noticed that
we have an empty function call “void Low_Power_Config(void).” Here we add the addition
code to reduce the power further.

    Additional code for void Clock_Config(void)
      void Low_Power_Config(void)
      {
        // Power down BOD
        LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG j= BOD_PD;
        /* Turn off all other peripheral dividers */
        LPC_SYSCON->SSP0CLKDIV     = 0;
        LPC_SYSCON->SSP1CLKDIV     = 0;
        LPC_SYSCON->WDTCLKDIV      = 0;
        return;
      }

After doing the changes, we can measure the result and compare to the previous 100 KHz
setup (Table 19.10). Again, all results here are based on using of external 12-MHz crystal
as source.

Table 19.10: Comparison of using different internal clock frequencies

                                          100 KHz                   100 KHz improved
              Run mode                    1.15 mA                   1.04 mA
              Sleep current               1.14 mA                   1.02 mA

So these minor changes give approximately 10% reduction in power.

19.8.5 Using Deep Sleep on LPC1114

While we can get to just w1 mA operation, this is not good enough for some of the ULP
applications. You might notice that so far the deep sleep mode feature has not been
enabled in the previous examples. To use deep sleep mode, the program code quite a few
changes because of several restrictions on the LPC1114 deep sleep mode support:
•     In deep sleep mode, the only available clock source is the watchdog oscillator. It is very
      low power, but can have up to ?40% tolerance of the clock frequency value.
•     In deep sleep mode, the timer interrupt will not operate and it can only be wake up by
      one of the Wake-Up interrupts.
There are a couple of other areas we need to take care of:
•     Due to the inaccuracy of the clock source, it is not ideal for UART communication. As
      an experiment, it is still usable by tuning the UART baud rate setting based on the
      actual frequency, but this is not suitable for product production.

•     When the LPC1114 microcontroller is in deep sleep mode, it will not be able to be
      wake up by a debugger and therefore could lock out the device from flash program
      updates.

    Note
    Depending on the microcontroller product, there can be special boot mode(s) to disable
    execution of application programmed in the flash memory. In the NXP LPC111x, port 0 bit 1
    can be used in such situation. The NXP111x has an In-System Programming (ISP) feature to
    allow the flash to be programmed using the boot loader and the serial port. By pulling bit 1
    of port 0 to low at power up reset, the ISP program in the boot loader will be executed.
    You can use the ISP feature to update flash, or connect the in-circuit debugger to the
    microcontroller and update the flash.

Before using the deep sleep mode, we need to configure a number of registers as shown in
Table 19.7, and then program the System Control Register (SCB->SCR) to enable the
deep sleep mode. We also need to program the NVIC, timer, watchdog clock, and start
logic.
Start logic on the NXP LPC111x is triggered by I/O port activities. So we use the timer
match event output to drive an I/O port output, and then use this signal level to trigger the
wake up as shown in Figure 19.15.

                                  I/O pin configuration
                                    registers (IOCON)

                                 MAT1 (Match Output 1)
              16-bit timer #0
                                            Timer
                                            match
                                            event          Pin multiplexing         I/O pad

                                                                                              Port 0, bit 9

                I/O Port 0

                                                  Wakeup
                                         Wake up
                Cortex-M0
                                         Interrupt           Start logic

                                            Figure 19.15
                       Deep sleep wake up mechanism used for LPC1114 example.

In this example, we are going to toggle pin 9 of port 0. The processor is put into sleep
mode most of the time, and woken up only when the 16-bit timer 0 reaches the required
value.

 Deep sleep example
    #include “LPC11xx.h”
    #include “stdio.h”
    /* Power down control bit definitions */
    #define IRC_OUT_PD                       (0x1<<0)
    #define IRC_PD                           (0x1<<1)
    #define FLASH_PD                         (0x1<<2)
    #define BOD_PD                           (0x1<<3)
    #define ADC_PD                           (0x1<<4)
    #define SYS_OSC_PD                       (0x1<<5)
    #define WDT_OSC_PD                       (0x1<<6)
    #define SYS_PLL_PD                       (0x1<<7)

    // UART functions
    extern void UART_config(void);
    extern char UART_putc(char ch);
    extern char UART_getc(void);
    extern void UART_echo(void);
    extern int uart_status_rxd(void);

    void Timer_Config(void);
    void Clock_Config(void);
    void Low_Power_Config(void);

    volatile int irq_count=0;

    int main(void)
    {
      // Initialize UART
      UART_config();
      printf("Sleep test\n");
      printf("Press any key to start...");
      UART_getc();
      printf("Continue\n");

      Clock_Config();
      Low_Power_Config();
      Timer_Config();

      // Enable Sleep-on-Exit
      SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPONEXIT_Msk;

 while(1){
   __DSB();// Use of memory barrier is recommended for portability
   __WFI();
   };
}
// ----------------------------------------
// Low Power Configuration
// ----------------------------------------
void Low_Power_Config(void)
{
  // Power down BOD
  LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG j= BOD_PD;
  /* Turn off all other peripheral dividers */
  LPC_SYSCON->SSP0CLKDIV = 0;
  LPC_SYSCON->SSP1CLKDIV = 0;
  LPC_SYSCON->WDTCLKDIV = 0;

 /* Enable flash */
 //LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG &= w( IRC_OUT_PD j IRC_PD j FLASH_PD );
 LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG &= w( FLASH_PD );
 // Power down IRC OSC and other unused components
 LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG j= (IRC_OUT_PD j IRC_PD j BOD_PD j ADC_PD j SYS_OSC_PD j
     SYS_PLL_PD);

 /* Copy current run mode power down configuration
    to wake up configuration register so that
    current configuration is restored at wakeup */
 LPC_SYSCON->PDAWAKECFG = LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG;

 /* For deep sleep - retain power to flash, watchdog and reserved */
 //LPC_SYSCON->PDSLEEPCFG = 0x000018B7; // WD osc on, BOD on
 LPC_SYSCON->PDSLEEPCFG = 0x000018BF; // WD osc on, BOD off
 //LPC_SYSCON->PDSLEEPCFG = 0x000018F7; // WD osc off, BOD on
 //LPC_SYSCON->PDSLEEPCFG = 0x000018FF; // WD osc off, BOD off

 // Enable deep sleep mode
 SCB->SCR j= SCB_SCR_SLEEPDEEP_Msk;
 return;
}
// ----------------------------------------
// Clock Configuration
// ----------------------------------------
void Clock_Config(void)
{
  int i;
  // In Deep sleep mode, the only clock you can get is Watchdog oscillator
  LPC_SYSCON->PDRUNCFG &= w(1 << 6); // Power-up Watchdog Osc
  // Select Watchdog freq and divider
  // FREQSEL Fclkana

                                                                                 Continued

     //   0x1       0.6MHz
     //   0x2       1.05MHz
     //   0x3       1.4MHz
     //   0x4       1.75MHz
     //   0x5       2.1MHz
     //   0x6       2.4MHz
     //   0x7       2.7MHz
     //   0x8       3.0MHz
     //   0x9       3.25MHz
     //   0xA       3.5MHz
     //   0xB       3.75MHz
     //   0xC       4.0MHz
     //   0xD       4.2MHz
     //   0xE       4.4MHz
     //   0xF       4.6MHz
     // DIVSEL
     //   wdt_osc_clk = Fclkana/ (2 x (1 + DIVSEL))
     //   0x0       1/2
     //   0x1       1/4
     //   0x1F      1/64
   #define WDT_FREQSEL 0x6
   #define WDT_DIVSEL   0x0
     LPC_SYSCON->WDTOSCCTRL   = (WDT_FREQSEL <<5)j(WDT_DIVSEL<<0);
     for (i = 0; i < 200; i++) __NOP();

     LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKSEL   = 0x2;       // Select Watchdog Osc
     LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN   = 0x01;      // Update MCLK Clock Source
     LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN   = 0x00;      // Toggle Update Register
     LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN   = 0x01;
     while (!(LPC_SYSCON->MAINCLKUEN & 0x01)); // Wait Until Updated

     // Main clock Frequency =
     // 2.4MHz / 2 = 1.2MHz

     // Need to reprogram UART!
     // Enable access to divisor latch
     // bit[7] - DLAB (Divisor Latch Access Bit)
     // bit[1:0] - Word length (0= 5bits, 1= 6bits, 2= 7bits, 3= 8bits)
     LPC_UART->LCR = (1<<7) j 3;

     // Baud rate 38400, system clock 1.2MHz
     // PCLK / Baud Rate / 16 = 1.953 = (256 x DLM + DLL) x (1 + DivAddVal/MulVal)
     // DLM = 0
     // DLL = 1
     // MulVal = 15
     // DivAddVal = 13
     // 1 * (1 + 13/15) = 1.8666
     LPC_UART->DLM = 0;
     LPC_UART->DLL = 1;
     LPC_UART->FDR = (15 << 4) j (13 << 0);

 LPC_UART->LCR = 3;

 // Interrupt Disable (IER can only be programmed when DLAB = 0)
 // bit[0] - RBR (Receive Data Available Enable)
 // bit[1] - THRE (Transmit Enable)
 // bit[2] - RX Line (Receive Line Interrupt Enable)
 // bit[8] - ABEOIntEn (auto band interrupt)
 // bit[9] - ABTOIntEn (auto band timeout interrupt)
 LPC_UART->IER = 0;

 // Wait until TX buffer is empty
 while (((LPC_UART->LSR >> 6) & 0x1) == 0);
 // Drain RX buffer
 while (uart_status_rxd()!=0) UART_getc();

 LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKDIV = 12; // Divide processor system clock to 100KHz
 // Zero flash wait state for upto 20MHz
 LPC_FLASHCTRL->FLASHCFG = (LPC_FLASHCTRL->FLASHCFG & 0xFFFFFFFC) j (0 & 0x3);
}
// ----------------------------------------
// Timer Configuration
// ----------------------------------------
void Timer_Config(void)
{
  // Use 16-bit timer 0
  // Enable clock to 16-bit timer 0 (bit 7)
  // Enable clock to IO configuration block (bit[16] of AHBCLOCK Control
     register)
  // and enable clock to GPIO (bit[6] of AHBCLOCK Control register

 LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKCTRL j= (1<<7) j (1<<16) j (1<<6);

 LPC_TMR16B0->TCR = 2;       // Disable and reset timer
 LPC_TMR16B0->TCR = 0;       // Disable timer
 // Clock running at 100KHz (1.2MHz / 12)
 LPC_TMR16B0->PR = (1000-1); // (TC increment every 10K cycles)
 LPC_TMR16B0->TC = 0;        // Timer counter current value clear
 LPC_TMR16B0->MR1 = 100-1;   // Match Register set to "1200 - 1"
          // because System freq is 1 MHz, prescale reduce to 100Hz
          // match occur once every second

 // Cannot wake up from timer interrupt, use timer to trigger
 // pin and route it to wakeup interrupt
 LPC_TMR16B0->MCR = (1<<4)j(0<<3); // Reset on MR1 match
 LPC_TMR16B0->EMR = (0x2<<6); // Enable match output MAT1
 LPC_IOCON->PIO0_9= (2<<0); // Set PIO0_9 to MAT1 output function

 /* Use port0_9 as wakeup source, i/o pin */
 LPC_IOCON->PIO0_9 = (2<<0); // Function set to MAT1

                                                                                Continued

      /* Only edge trigger. Activation polarity on P0.9 is rising edge. */
      LPC_SYSCON->STARTAPRP0 = LPC_SYSCON->STARTAPRP0 j (1<<9);
      /* Clear all wakeup source */
      LPC_SYSCON->STARTRSRP0CLR = 0xFFFFFFFF;
      /* Enable Port 0.9 as wakeup source. */
      LPC_SYSCON->STARTERP0 = 1<<9;

      NVIC_ClearPendingIRQ(WAKEUP9_IRQn);
      NVIC_EnableIRQ(WAKEUP9_IRQn); // Enable wake up handler

      LPC_SYSCON->SYSAHBCLKCTRL &= w((1<<16)j(1<<6)); // Remove clock from IOCON &
         GPIO

      LPC_TMR16B0->TCR = 1; // Enable
      NVIC_EnableIRQ(TIMER_16_0_IRQn);
      return;
    }
    // ----------------------------------------
    // Interrupt Handler
    // ----------------------------------------
    void WAKEUP_IRQHandler(void)
    {
      unsigned int regVal;
      // Get Start logic status register 0
      regVal = LPC_SYSCON->STARTSRP0;
      if ( regVal != 0 )
      { // Clear status using Start logic reset register 0
      LPC_SYSCON->STARTRSRP0CLR = regVal;
      }
      /* Clear the timer match output to 0 */
      LPC_TMR16B0->EMR = LPC_TMR16B0->EMR & w(1<<1);
      irq_count++;
      printf ("[WAKEUP IRQ] %d\n", irq_count);
      return;
    }

The result is very encouraging (Table 19.11 and Figure 19.16).
To get a better view of the result, we connect a 10-U resistor in series with the voltage
supply of the microcontroller and measure the voltage across. The waveform obtained is
shown in Figure 19.16.
Although there are some limitations for the deep sleep mode in LCP1114, if the system
design does not have to wake up at a precise time interval, you can still utilize the deep

Table 19.11: Result of using deep sleep mode

                                             1.2 MHz with watchdog
                                             oscillator
                    Run mode                 0.54 mA
                    Sleep current            0.04 mA

                                          Figure 19.16
                              Test result using deep sleep mode.

sleep mode to get very low idle current. After the system woke up, you can optionally
turn on and switch to an alternate clock source (e.g., external crystal for higher
frequency accuracy) for the data processing, and switch that back off before returning
to sleep.
This page intentionally left blank
