                                                                                                                     C H A P T E R 22

Software Porting
22.1 Overview
The CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors are designed for wide range of applications.
Due to their low-power capabilities and flexible system designs, they fit very well into
many applications where traditional uses of 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers were
common. By switching to low-power 32-bit microcontroller, many designers can further
enhance their products without losing out on energy efficiency or battery life.
On the other hand, many designs that are using older generations of 32-bit
microcontrollers (for example, microcontrollers based on the ARM7TDMIÔ ) or other
Cortex-M processor-based microcontrollers could also benefit from switching to some of
the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers too. For example, many Cortex-M0 and
Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers are selling at very low price.
As a result, software porting is becoming a common task for some of the embedded
software developers. In this chapter, we will look into the following:
•     Porting of software from 8-bit and 16-bit architectures to Cortex-M0, Cortex-M0þ, or
      Cortex-M processors in general.
•     Differences between the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ processors and various common
      ARMÒ processors for microcontrollers, and what areas in a program need to be
      modified when porting software between them.

22.2 Porting Software from 8-Bit/16-Bit Microcontrollers to ARM®
     Cortex®-M
22.2.1 Common Modifications

Some application developers might need to port applications from 8-bit or 16-bit
microcontrollers to microcontrollers based on Cortex-M processors. By moving from these
architectures to the Cortex-M0, often you can get better code density, higher performance,
and lower power consumption.
When porting applications from these microcontrollers to the Cortex-M processors, the
modifications of the software typically involve the following:
•     Start-up code and vector tabledDifferent processor architectures have different start-up
      code and interrupt vector tables and therefore these codes need to be replaced.
The Definitive Guide to ARMÒ CortexÒ-M0 and Cortex-M0+ Processors. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803277-0.00022-9
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

•   Stack allocation adjustmentdWith ARM Cortex-M processors, the stack size
    requirement can be very different from an 8-bit or 16-bit architecture. In addition, the
    methods to define stack locations and stack sizes can also be very different from 8-bit
    and 16-bit development tools.
•   Removal of architecture-specific/tool chain-specific C language extensionsdMany of
    the C compilers for 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers require a number of C language
    extensions features. This included special data type like Special Function Registers
    (SFRs) and bit data in 8051, or various “#pragma” statements in various C compilers.
•   Interrupt controldIn 8-bit and 16-bit microcontroller programming, the interrupt
    configuration is usually done by directly writing to various interrupt control registers.
    When porting the applications to the ARM Cortex-M processor family, these codes
    should be converted to use the interrupt control functions from CMSIS-CORE for the
    best software portability. For example, configuration of individual interrupts can be
    handled by various Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC) functions in CMSIS
    (e.g., NVIC_EnableIRQ and NVIC_DisableIRQ), and enable and disable of all interrupts can
    be converted to __enable_irq() and __disable_irq().
•   Peripheral programmingdIn 8-bit and 16-bit microcontroller programming, the
    peripherals control is usually handled with programming to registers directly. When
    using ARM microcontrollers, many microcontroller vendors provide device driver
    libraries to make use of the microcontroller easier. You can use these library functions
    to reduce software development time, or write to the hardware registers directly if
    preferred. If you prefer to program the peripherals by accessing the registers directly, it
    is still beneficial to use the header files in the device driver library as these have all the
    peripheral registers defined and can save you time preparing and validating the code.
•   Assembly code and inline assemblydObviously all the assembly and inline assembly
    code needs to be rewritten when switching to a completely different architecture. In
    many cases, you can rewrite the required function in C when the application is ported to
    a Cortex-M processor.
•   Unaligned datadSome 8-bit or 16-bit microcontrollers might support unaligned data.
    Since the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors do not support unaligned data, some
    data structures definitions or pointer manipulation codes might need to be changed. For
    data structures that require unaligned data handling, we can use the __packed attribute
    when defining the structure. However, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ require multiple
    instructions to access an unaligned data. So it is best to convert the data structures so
    that all elements inside are aligned. Alternatively, if the performance of unaligned data
    accesses is crucial for the application, the Cortex-M3/M4/M7 processors could be more
    suitable as these processors support unaligned data accesses.
•   Be aware of data size differencesdThe integers in most 8-bit and 16-bit processors are
    16 bit, while in ARM architectures integers are 32 bit. This difference causes changes
    in overflow behavior, it can also affect memory size required for storing the data. For
    example, when a program file defines an array of integers from 8-bit or 16-bit

    architecture, we might want to change the code to use “short int” or “int16_t” (in
    “stdint.h”, introduced in C99) when porting the code to ARM architecture so that the
    size remains unchanged.
•   Floating pointdMany 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers define “double” (double
    precision floating point) as 32-bit data. In ARM architecture a “double” data is 64 bit.
    When porting applications containing floating-point operations, you might need to
    change the double precision floating-point data to “float” (single precision floating
    point). Otherwise the processing speed would be reduced and the program size could
    increase due to the requirement to process the data in extra precision. For the same
    reason, some function calls for mathematical operation might need to be changed to
    ensure the single precision version is used. For example, by default the cosine function
    “cos()” is a double precision version of the cosine function, for single precision
    operation, use “cosf()” instead.
•   Adding fault handlersdIn many 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers, there are no fault
    exceptions. While embedded applications can operate without any fault handlers, adding
    of fault handlers can help an embedded system to handle errors (e.g., data corruption
    caused by voltage drop or electromagnetic interference).

22.2.2 Memory Requirements

One of the points mentioned above is the stack size. After porting to the ARM
architecture, the required stack size could increase or decrease, depending on the
application. The stack size might increase because of the following:
•   Each register push takes 4 bytes of memory in ARM, while in 16-bit or 8-bit, each
    register push takes 2 bytes or 1 byte.
•   In ARM programming, local variables are often stored in stack. While in some
    architecture local variables might be defined in a separate data memory area.
On the other hand, the stack size could decrease because of the following:
•   With 8-bit or 16-bit architecture, multiple registers are required to hold a large data, and
    often these architectures have fewer registers compared to ARM, so more stacking
    would be required.
•   More powerful addressing mode in ARM means address calculations can be carried out
    on the fly without taking up register space. The reduction of register used for an
    operation can reduce stacking requirement.
Overall, the total RAM size required could decrease significantly after porting because in
some legacy processor architectures such as the 8051, local variables are defined statically
in data memory space rather on the stack. For these architectures, the memory space is used
even when the function or subroutine is not running. Whereas in ARM processors, local
variables are typically allocated on stack memory and take up memory space only when the

function or subroutine is executing. Also, with more registers available in the ARM
processor’s register bank compared to some other architectures, some of the local variables
might only need to be stored in the register bank instead of taking up memory space.
Due to high code density, the program memory requirements in ARM Cortex-M
processors are normally much lower than 8-bit microcontrollers, and often lower than most
16-bit microcontrollers. So when you port your applications from these 8-bit or 16-bit
microcontrollers to ARM Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers, you could possibly
use a device with smaller flash memory size. The reduction of the program memory size is
often caused by the following:
•    Better efficiency at handling 16-bit and 32-bit data (including integers, pointers)
•    More powerful addressing modes
•    Some memory access instructions can handle multiple data, including PUSH and POP
There can be exceptionsdFor applications that contain only small amount of code, the
code size in ARM Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ microcontrollers could be larger compared to
8-bit or 16-bit microcontrollers because of the following:
•    Most of the microcontrollers based on Cortex-M processors support more interrupts and
     therefore have a much larger vector table (and each vector takes 4 bytes in ARM
     Cortex-M instead of 2 bytes in 8-bit or 16-bit microcontrollers).
•    The C start-up code for ARM Cortex-M processors might be larger. Most development
     tool chains for ARM processor support full standard C libraries which support many
     features not available in 8-bit or 16-bit architecture. However, many tool chains also
     provide smaller version of C start-up libraries. For example, MicroLIB in ARM
     development tools like KeilÒ MDK-ARMÔ or ARM DS-5Ô , and NewLib-Nano in
     ARM gcc are designed to reduce the code size.

22.2.3 Nonapplicable Optimizations for 8-Bit or 16-Bit Microcontrollers

Some optimization techniques used in 8-bit/16-bit microcontroller programming are not
required on ARM processors. In some cases, these optimizations might result in extra
overhead due to architecture differences. For example, many 8-bit microcontroller
programmers uses character data as loop counter for array accesses:
    unsigned char i; /* use 8-bit data to avoid 16-bit processing */
    char a[10], b[10];
    for (i=0;i<10;i++) a[i] = b[i];

When compiling the same program on ARM processors, the compiler will have to insert a
UXTB instruction to replicate the overflow behavior of the array index (“i”). To avoid this
extra overhead we should declare “i” as integer “int”, “int32_t”, or “uint32_t” for best
performance.

Another example is the unnecessary use of casting. For example, the following code uses
casting to avoid the generation of 16 ? 16 multiply operation in an 8-bit processor:
  unsigned int x, y, z;
  z = ((char) x) * ((char) y); /* assumed both x and y must be less than 256 */

Again, such casting operation will result in extra instructions in ARM architecture. Since
Cortex-M processors can handle 32 ? 32 multiply with 32-bit result in a single instruction,
the program code can be simplified into:
  unsigned int x, y, z;
  z = x * y;

22.2.4 ExampledMigrate from 8051 to ARM Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0+

In general, since most applications can be programmed in C entirely on the Cortex-M
processors, the porting of applications from 8-bit/16-bit microcontrollers is usually
straightforward and easy. Here we will see some simple examples of modifications required.
Vector Table
In the 8051, the vector table contains a number of JMP (jump) instructions that branch to
the start of the interrupt service routines. In some development environments, the compiler
might create the vector table for you automatically. For ARM Cortex-M processors, the
vector table contains the address of the main stack pointer (SP) initial values, and starting
addresses of the exception handlers (Table 22.1). The vector table is part of the start-up
code, which is often provided by the development environment. For example, when
creating new project in the Keil MDK-ARM, the software component manager (“Manage
Runtime Environment”) in the project wizard can add the default start-up code into the
project, which contains the vector table.
Data Type
In some cases, we need to modify the data type so as to maintain the same program
behavior as shown in Table 22.2.
Some function calls might also need to be changed if we want to ensure only single
precision floating point is used (Table 22.3).
Some special data types for 8051 are not available on ARM architecture: bit, sbit, sfr,
sfr16, idata, xdata, bdata.
Interrupt
Interrupt control code in 8051 is normally written as direct access to SFRs. They need to
be changed to CMSIS-CORE function when porting to Cortex-M microcontrollers
(Table 22.4).

Table 22.1: Vector table comparison

 8051                                     Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
 org 00h                                  __Vectors DCD __initial_sp ; Top of Stack
     jmp start                                      DCD Reset_Handler ; Reset Handler
 org 03h   ; Ext Int0 vector                        DCD NMI_Handler   ; NMI Handler
     ljmp handle_interrupt0                         DCD HardFault_Handler ; Hard Fault
 org 0Bh ; Timer 0 vector                           DCD 0,0,0,0,0,0,0 ; Reserved
     ljmp handle_timer0                             DCD SVC_Handler   ; SVCall Handler
 org 13h   ; Ext Int1 vector                        DCD 0,0           ; Reserved
     ljmp handle_interrupt1                         DCD PendSV_Handler ; PendSV Handler
 org 1Bh ; Timer 1 vector                           DCD SysTick_Handler ; SysTick Handler
     ljmp handle_timer1                         ; External Interrupts
 org 23h ; Serial interrupt                         DCD WAKEUP_IRQHandler ; Wakeup PIO0.0
     ljmp handle_serial0                            ...
 org 2bh ; Timer 2 vector
     ljmp handle_timer2

Table 22.2: Data type change during software porting

 8051                                         Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
 int my_data[20]; // array of 16-bit values   short int my_data[20]; // array of 16-bit values
 double pi;                                   float pi;

Table 22.3: Floating point C code change during software porting

 8051                                                   Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
 Y =T*atan(T2*sin(Y)*cos(Y)/                            Y =T*atanf(T2*sinf(Y)*cosf(Y)/
 (cos(X+Y)+cos(X-Y)-1.0));                              (cosf(X+Y)+cosf(X-Y)-1.0F));

Table 22.4: Interrupt control change during software porting

 8051                                         Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
 EA = 0; /* Disable all interrupts */         __disable_irq(); /* Disable all interrupts */
 EA = 1; /* Enable all interrupts */          __enable_irq(); /* eEnable all interrupts */
 EX0 = 1; /* Enable Interrupt 0 */            NVIC_EnableIRQ(Interrupt0_IRQn);
 EX0 = 0; /* Disable Interrupt 0 */           NVIC_DisableIRQ(Interrupt0_IRQn);
 PX0 = 1; /* Set interrupt 0 to high          NVIC_SetPriority(Interrupt0_IRQn, 0);
 priority*/

The interrupt service routine also requires minor modifications. Some of the special
directives used by interrupt service routines specific to 8051 need to be removed when the
application code is ported to the Cortex-M microcontrollers. For Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ

processors, the interrupt service routine can be a normal C function. In ARM tool chains
we can add “__irq” directive for clarify purpose (Table 22.5).
Table 22.5: Interrupt handler change during software porting

       8051                                          Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
       void timer1_isr(void) interrupt 1 using 2     __irq void timer1_isr(void)
       {/* Use register bank 2 */                    {
         .;                                            .;
         return;                                       return;
       }                                             }

Sleep Mode
Entering of sleep mode is different too. In 8051 sleep mode can be entered by setting the
IDL (idle) bit in PCON. In Cortex-M processors, you can use the WFI/WFE instructions,
or use vendor-specific functions provided in the device driver library (Table 22.6).

Table 22.6: Sleep mode control change during software porting

       8051                                     Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
       PCON = PCON j 1; /* Enter Idle mode */   __WFI(); /* Enter sleep mode */

22.3 Differences between ARM7TDMI ™ and
     Cortex®-M0/M0+ Processor
22.3.1 Overview of Classic ARM® Processors

Before the ARM Cortex-M processors are developed, there are a number of previous
generation ARM processors being used in microcontroller applications (Table 22.7).
For example, some of the ARM-based microcontrollers on the market are based on the
ARM7TDMI processor, a processor that was released around 1994 and is still being
used today.
While it is less common to find ARM920T, 922T, and 940T processors today, there are
still ranges of ARM926EJ-S and even ARM11 series processors on the market. However,
those designs are usually focussed on running embedded Linux systems and have quite
different application areas compared to the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors. For
these applications, it is more common to migrate to the newer Cortex-A processors.
Since there are still a number of ARM7TDMI-based microcontrollers on the market, we
will cover the key differences between the ARM7TDMI and the Cortex-M0 and
Cortex-M0þ processors, and then cover the software migration considerations.

Table 22.7: Some of the classic ARM® processors that are used in microcontroller applications

 Processor                  Descriptions
             Ô
 ARM7TDMI                   A very popular 32-bit processor and widely supported by development tools.
                            It is based on ARM architecture version 4T and supports both ARM and
                            Thumb instruction set. Upward compatible to ARM9, ARM11, and
                            CortexÒ-A/R processors.
 ARM920T/922T/940T          Microcontrollers based on these processors are less common nowadays. They
                            are based on ARM architecture version 4T but with Harvard bus architecture.
                            Some of them also support cache, MMU, or MPU features.
 ARM9E processor family     Most of the ARM9 microcontrollers are based on the ARM9E processor
                            family. They are based on ARM architecture version 5 TE (with Enhanced
                            DSP instructions) and provide various memory/system features (cache, TCM,
                            MMU, MPU, DMA, etc) depending on processor model. Usually they are
                            targeted at higher end of microcontroller application space with high
                            operating frequency, larger memory system support.
 ARM11 processor family     They are application processors based on ARM architecture version v6 (do not
                            confuse it with ARMv6-M). These processors are targeted at applications that
                            require full feature OS, so they support MMU and the pipeline design is
                            optimized for higher clock frequency. Today, ARM11 processors are still used
                            in a range of popular projects such as the Raspberry Pi (model A, B, and Bþ).
Note for Table 22.7: TCMdTightly Coupled Memory, MMUdMemory Management Unit, DMAdDirect Memory Accesses.

22.3.2 Operation Mode

The ARM7TDMI processor has a number of operation modes, while the Cortex-M0/
Cortex-M0þ processors only have two modes (Table 22.8).
Some of the exception models from the ARM7TDMI are combined in Handler mode in
the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ processors with different exception types. For example, see
Table 22.9.
The reduction of operation modes simplifies the programs running on Cortex-M
processors. For example, in ARM7TDMI you need to set up different SPs for different

Table 22.8: Operation modes comparison between
                     ARM7TDMI™ and Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+ processors

                   Operation modes in
                   ARM7TDMI                           Operation modes in Cortex-M0
                   System                             Thread
                   Supervisor                         Handler
                   IRQ (interrupt)
                   FIQ (fast interrupt)
                   Undefined (Undef)
                   Abort
                   User

Table 22.9: Exception comparison between ARM7TDMI™ and
                               Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+ processor

                    Exceptions in ARM7TDMI                           Exception in Cortex-M0
                    IRQ                                              Interrupts
                    FIQ                                              Interrupts
                    Undefined (Undef)                                HardFault
                    Abort                                            HardFault
                    Supervisor                                       SVCall

modes, whereas in the Cortex-M processor it is fine to run many applications with just one
SP, and need a second SP when an Embedded OS is used.

22.3.3 Registers

The ARM7TDMI has a register bank with banked registers based on current operation
mode. In the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, only the SP is banked. And in most
simple applications without an OS, only the Main Stack Pointer (MSP) is required.
Figure 22.1 shows the comparison of the register bank between ARM7TDMI and Cortex-
M0/M0þ processors.
                                                                                        Registers in Cortex-M0 /
                                Registers in ARM7TDMI                                    Cortex-M0+ Processor
   Registers                                                                                Registers
      R0                                                                                       R0
      R1                                                                                       R1
      R2                                                                                       R2
      R3                                                                                       R3
      R4                                                                                       R4
      R5                                                                                       R5
      R6                                                                                       R6
      R7                                                                                       R7
      R8         R8_fiq                                                                        R8
      R9         R9_fiq                                                                        R9
     R10        R10_fiq                                                                       R10
     R11        R11_fiq                                                                       R11
     R12        R12_fiq                                                                       R12
   R13 (SP)     R13_fiq      R13_irq       R13_svc      R13_undef         R13_abt          R13 (MSP)     R13 (PSP)
   R14 (LR)     R14_fiq      R14_irq       R14_svc      R14_undef         R14_abt           R14 (LR)
   R15 (PC)                                                                                 R15 (PC)

    CPSR                                                                                      xPSR
                SPSR_fiq     SPSR_irq     SPSR_svc      SPSR_undef        SPSR_abt         CONTROL
                                                                                            PRIMASK
               FIQ mode     IRQ mode     SVC mode         Undef             Abort
  Common
                 banked       banked       banked         mode              mode
  registers
                registers    registers    registers      banked            banked
                                                        registers         registers

                                       Figure 22.1
 Register bank differences between ARM7TDMIÔ and the CortexÒ-M0/Cortex-M0þ processors.

There are some differences between the CPSR (Current Program Status Register) in the
ARM7TDMI and the xPSR in the Cortex-M processors. For instance, the mode bits in
CPSR are removed, replaced by IPSR, and interrupt masking bit I-bit is replaced by the
PRIMASK register, which is separated from the xPSR.
Despite the differences between the register banks, the programmer’s model or R0 to R15
remains the same. As a result, most ThumbÒ instruction codes on ARM7TDMI can be
reused on Cortex-M processors, simplifying software porting.

22.3.4 Instruction Set

The ARM7TDMI supports the ARM instructions (32 bit) and Thumb instructions (16 bit)
in ARM architecture v4T. The Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors support Thumb
instructions in ARMv6-M, which is a superset of the Thumb instructions supported by the
ARM7TDMI. However, the Cortex-M processors do not support ARM instructions.
Therefore applications for ARM7TDMI must be modified when porting to Cortex-M
microcontrollers.

22.3.5 Interrupts

The ARM7TDMI supports an IRQ interrupt input and an FIQ (Fast Interrupt) input.
Normally a separate interrupt controller is required in an ARM7TDMI microcontroller to
allow multiple interrupt sources to share the IRQ and FIQ inputs. As a result, the interrupt
control codes need to be modified.
In ARM7TDMI, since the FIQ has more banked registers and its vector is located at the
end of the vector table, it can work faster by reducing the register stacking required and
the FIQ handler can be placed at the end of vector table to avoid branch penalty.
Unlike the ARM7TDMI, the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors have a built-in
interrupt controller called NVIC with up to 32 interrupt inputs. Each interrupt can be
programmed at one of the four available priority levels. There is no need to separate
interrupts into IRQ and FIQ because stacking of registers is handled automatically by
hardware. In addition, the vector table in Cortex-M processors stores the starting address
of each interrupt service routine, while in ARM7TDMI the vector table holds instructions
(usually branch instructions that branch to interrupt service routines).
When the ARM7TDMI processor receives an interrupt request, the interrupt service
routine starts in ARM state (using ARM instruction set). Additional assembly wrapper
code is also required to support nested interrupts. In Cortex-M processors there is no need
to use assembly wrappers for normal interrupt processing.

22.4 Porting Software from ARM7TDMI ™ to the Cortex®-M0/
     Cortex-M0+ Processors
Application codes for ARM7TDMI must be modified and recompiled to be used on the
Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ processors.

22.4.1 Start-up Code and Vector Table

Since the vector table and the initialization sequence are different between ARM7TDMI
and the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, the start-up code and the vector table must
be replaced (See Table 22.10).
Examples of start-up code for Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ based microcontrollers can be
found in various examples in this book, which is available on the companion Web site.

22.4.2 Interrupt

Since the interrupt controller used in microcontrollers with ARM7TDMI would be
different from the NVIC in the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, all the interrupt
control codes need to be updated. It is recommended to use NVIC access functions
defined in CMSIS-CORE for portability.
The interrupt wrapper functions for nested interrupt support for the ARM7TDMI processor
must be removed. If the interrupt service routine was written in assembly, the handler code

Table 22.10: Vector table differences between ARM7TDMI™ and Cortex®-M0/Cortex-M0+
                                           processors

 Vector table in Arm7TDMI                           Vector table in the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0+
 Vectors                                            Vectors
   B Reset_Handler                                    IMPORT __main
   B Undef_Handler                                    DCD _stack_top; Main SP starting value
   B SWI_Handler                                      DCD __main; Enter C startup
   B PrefetchAbort_Handler                            DCD NMI_Handler
   B DataAbort_Handler                                DCD HardFault_Handler
   B IRQ_Handler                                      DCD 0,0,0,0,0,0,0
   B FIQ_Handler                                      DCD SVC_Handler
 Reset_Handler; Setup Stack for each mode             DCD 0, 0
   LDR R0,¼Stack_Top                                  DCD PendSV_Handler
   MSR CPSR_c, #Mode_IRQ:OR:I_Bit:OR:F_Bit            DCD SysTick_Handler
   MOV SP, R0                                         .; vectors for other interrupt handlers
   . ; setup stack for other modes
   IMPORT __main
   LDR R0, ¼ __main; Enter C startup
   BX R0

will probably require rewriting because many ARMÒ instructions cannot be directly
mapped to ThumbÒ instructions. For example, the exception handler in ARM7TDMI can
be terminated by “MOVS PC, LR” (ARM instruction). This is not valid for Cortex-M0/
M0þ processors and must be replaced by a “BX LR” instruction or a POP instruction.
FIQ handlers for the ARM7TDMI processor might rely on the behavior that R8 to R14 are
banked in ARM7TDMI to save execution time. For example, constants used by the FIQ
handler might be preloaded into these banked registers before the FIQ is enabled. When
porting such handlers to the Cortex-M processors, the constants must be loaded into the
registers within the handler.
In some cases you might find assembly code being used to enable or disable interrupts by
modifying the I-bit in CPSR. In Cortex-M processor, this is replaced by the PRIMASK
interrupt masking register. Note that in ARM7TDMI, you can carry out the exception
return and change I-bit in a single exception return instruction. In the Cortex-M
processors, this method cannot be used because the PRIMASK and xPSR are separate
registers. As a result, if the PRIMASK register is set during an exception handler, it must
be cleared before the exception exit. Otherwise the PRIMASK register will remain set and
no other interrupts (apart from NMI) can be accepted.

22.4.3 C Program Code

Apart from the usual changes due to peripherals, memory map, and system level feature
differences, the C applications might require changes in the following areas:
•   Compile directives like “#pragma arm” and “#pragma thumb” are no longer required
    because the Cortex-M processors support Thumb instructions only.
•   For project previously created with ARM RealView Development Suite (RVDS), DS-5Ô
    or KeilÒ MDK tool chains, it is likely that all inline assembly codes have to be
    rewritten because the inline assembly in the ARM tool chain previously only supports
    ARM instructions, which is not supported in the Cortex-M processors. To rewrite these
    inline assembly codes, this could be done either using inline assembly, embedded
    assembler, separate assembly code, or C functions. Users of GNU C compiler might
    also need to modify their inline assembly code if that was written for ARM instructions,
    or if the code attempts to switch to ARM state.
•   Exception handlers can be simplified because in the Cortex-M processors, each interrupt
    has its own interrupt vector. There is no need to use software to determine which inter-
    rupt service is required and there is no software overhead in supporting nested interrupts.
•   Although the “__irq” directive is not essential in the exception handlers for Cortex-M
    processors, this directive for interrupt handlers can be retained in the ARM DS-5 or
    Keil MDK-ARMÔ projects for clarity. It might also help software porting if the applica-
    tion has to be ported to other ARM processors in the future.

The C code should be recompiled to ensure that only Thumb instructions are used and no
attempt to switch to ARM state should be contained in the compiled code. Similarly,
library files must also be updated to ensure that it will work with Cortex-M processors.

22.4.4 Assembly Code

Due to the fact that the Cortex-M processors do not support the ARM instruction set,
assembly code which uses ARM instructions has to be rewritten.
Be careful with legacy Thumb programs that use the CODE16 directive. When the
CODE16 directive is used, the instructions are interpreted as traditional Thumb syntax.
For example, data processing op-codes without S suffixes are converted to instructions that
update APSR when CODE16 directive is used. However, you can reuse assembly files
with CODE16 directive because it is still supported by existing ARM development tools.
For new assembly code, the Thumb directive is recommended, which indicates to the
assembly that the UAL (Unified Assembly Language) is used. With UAL syntax, data
processing instructions updating the APSR require the S suffix.
Fault handlers and system exception handlers like SWI must also be updated to work with
Cortex-M processors.

22.4.5 Atomic Access

Since Thumb instructions do not support swap (SWP and SWPB instructions), code for
handling atomic access must be changed. For single processor systems without other bus
master, you can use either the exception mechanism or PRIMASK interrupt masking
register to achieve atomic operations. For example, you can use SVCall exception as a
gateway to handle atomic operations because there can only be one instance of the SVCall
exception handler running (when an exception handler is running, other exceptions of
same or lower priority levels are blocked).

22.4.6 Optimizations

After getting the software working on the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, there are
various areas you can look into to optimize your application code.
For assembly code migrated from the ARM7TDMI, the data type conversion is one of the
potential areas for improvement due to new instructions available in the ARMv6-M
architecture.
If the interrupt handlers were written in assembly, there might be chance that the stacking
operations can be reduced since R0eR3, R12 are automatically stacked by the exception
sequence.

More sleep mode features are available in the Cortex-M processors which can be used to
reduce power consumption. To take the full advantages of the low power features on a
Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ based microcontroller, you will need to modify your
application codes to make use of the power management features in the microcontroller.
These features are dependent on the microcontroller products and the information in this
area can usually be found in user manuals or application notes provided by the
microcontroller vendors. Chapter 19 covers some of the examples of using low power
features in microcontrollers.
With the nested interrupts being automatically handled by processor hardware and
availability of programmable priority levels in the NVIC, priority level of the exceptions
can be rearranged for best system performance.

22.5 Differences between Various Cortex®-M Processors
22.5.1 Overview

Today there are six processors in the Cortex-M processor family. In Chapter 1, Section
1.2.4dARMÒ Cortex-M Processor Seriesdalready covered the overview of different
Cortex-M processors. In this section we will cover additional technical details
(Table 22.11).
Table 22.11: High-level architecture comparison of the Cortex®-M processors

                    Cortex-M0   Cortex-M0+   Cortex-M1     Cortex-M3   Cortex-M4   Cortex-M7
 Architecture       ARMv6-M     ARMv6-M      ARMv6-M       ARMv7-M     ARMv7E-M    ARMv7E-M
 Pipeline stage     3           2            3             3           3           6
 Bus architecture   Von         Von          Harvard       Harvard     Harvard     Harvard
                    Neumann     Neumann      (using TCM)
 Performance        0.9         0.95         0.8           1.25        1.25        2.14
 (DMIPS/MHz)
 Floating point     e           e            e             e           Single      Single
                                                                       precision   precision þ
                                                                                   double
                                                                                   precision
 Floating point     e           e            e             e           FPv4        FPv5
 architecture

In terms of system level aspects, the main differences among the Cortex-M processors are
shown in Figure 22.2.
The Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors have higher performance than the
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors due to extra instructions, various differences in
the bus level architecture and processor’s pipeline (e.g., superscalar support in the Cortex-
M7 processor). However, the additional capabilities also increase power consumption.

DMIPS/MHz

2.14
                                       Superscalar high      Double precision
                                                                                   Caches
                                                                                                   TCM              Full data     Cortex-M7
                                         performance          floating point                    interfaces        trace option
1.25
                                                   Cortex-M3                                                                 Cortex-M4
0.9                                                                        32-bit Thumb            Up to 240                 Floating Point
       Cortex-M0+
0.8                          Cortex-M0                                      instructions           interrupts                 Unit (FPU)
                                                      Thumb               Bit-band feature
              MPU              Low power                                                       Hardware divide             SIMD instructions
                                                  instruction set         (except Cortex-M7)

         Instruction          Deterministic                                   Bit field
                                                      NVIC                                           MPU                   Saturated maths
        trace (MTB)         interrupt latency                               processing
             Single                                                       Multi-processor      More debug and
                            Low gate count            Debug                                                                Single cycle MAC
            Cycle I/O                                                        support            trace features

       Low cost microcontrollers, 8-bit / 16-      Cortex-M1               High performance microcontrollers,          Digital Signal Controllers,
       bit processor replacement, ultra low            FPGA              low power / low cost microcontrollers,            high quality audio
        power or mixed signal applications         optimizations              embedded systems with high                  processing, highly
                                                                                 reliability requirements              precise industrial / motor
                                                       TCM
                                                                                                                                 controls
                                                      FPGA
                                                   applications,
                                                    emerging
                                                   applications

                                                          Figure 22.2
                                                The CortexÒ-M processor family.

So it is important to understand the requirements of the targeted applications (e.g., battery
life vs performance) and the characteristics of the microcontroller products when selecting
the processor for your projects.

22.5.2 Programmer’s Model

The ARMv7-M architecture (including ARMv7E-M) is a superset of the ARMv6-M
architecture. So processors based on ARMv7-M architecture provide all the architectural
features available in the ARMv6-M. In addition to that, the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and
Cortex-M7 processors provide various additional features.
For the programmer’s model, unprivileged mode (Unprivileged Threaddwhen not
executing exception handlers) is optional in ARMv6-M and is not available in the Cortex-
M0 processor at all. This is always available in ARMv7-M architecture. The unprivileged
thread mode has limited access to the processor configuration registers (e.g., NVIC,
SysTick), and an optional memory Protection Unit (MPU) can be used to block programs
running in user threads from accessing certain memory regions (Figure 22.3).
Apart from the operation modes being different, the ARMv7-M architecture also has
additional interrupt masking registers. The BASEPRI register allows interrupts of certain
priority level or lower to be blocked, and the FAULTMASK provides additional fault
management features.

                                                                             Registers
                                                                                R0
                                                                                R1
                       Exception                  Privileged                    R2
                         exit                      Handler
                                                                                R3
                                                                                R4
                                 Exception
                                                                Exception       R5
  Start                                                                         R6
                    Privileged                    Exception
 (reset)
                     Thread                          exit                       R7
                                                                                R8
                                                                                R9
                   Program of                                                  R10
                                         Unprivileged
                   CONTROL
                                           Thread                              R11
                    register
                                                                               R12
                                                                            R13 (MSP)    R13 (PSP)
                                                                             R14 (LR)

                     Optional in ARMv6-M             Available in            R15 (PC)
                  (not available in Cortex-M0)        ARMv7-M                 Special
                                                                             Registers
                                                                             PRIMASK
                                                                            FAULTMASK          Interrupt Mask
                                                                                                  Registers
                                        Additional bit fields                BASEPRI
                                          in ARMv7-M                        CONTROL      Control Register
                                                                              xPSR       Program Status Registers

                                            Figure 22.3
           Programmer’s model differences between ARMv6-M and ARMv7-M architectures.

The control register in the Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors also has an additional bit
(bit[2]dFloating Point Context Active, FPCA) to indicate if current executing context has
been using floating point operations.
The xPSR in the ARMv7-M architecture also has a number of additional bits to allow an
interrupted multiple load/store instruction to be resumed from the interrupted transfer, and
to allow an instruction sequence (up to four instructions) to be conditionally executed.
And when DSP extension is present (i.e., Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors), there are
also additional bit field (GE[3:0]dGreat Than or Equal flags) for some of the SIMD
(Single Instruction Multiple Data) operations.
Finally, the ARMv7-M architecture supports unaligned data transfers for a limited range of
load and store instructions, while ARMv6-M architecture does not.

22.5.3 NVIC and Exceptions

The NVIC in the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors supports up to 240
interrupts. The number of priority levels is also configurable by the chip designers, from 8
levels to 256 levels (in most cases 8 levels to 32 levels). The priority level settings can

also be optionally configured into preemption priority (for nested interrupt) and subpriority
(use when multiple interrupts of same preempt priority happening at the same time) by
software.
The differences of the NVIC features in the Cortex-M processors are shown in
Table 22.12.

Table 22.12: NVIC features comparison

                                Cortex®-M0/   Cortex-    Cortex-M3/
                                M1            M0+        M4             Cortex-M7
 Maximum number of              32            32         240            240
 interrupts
 Non-Maskable Interrupt         Y             Y          Y              Y
 (NMI)
 Number of programmable         4             4          8 to 256       8 to 256
 priority levels
 Priority grouping              e             e          Y              Y
 Vector Table Offset Register   e             Optional   Y              Y (VTOR reset value can be
                                                                        nonzero)
 SysTick timer                  Optional      Optional   Y              Y
 Software Trigger Interrupt     e             e          Y              Y
 Register
 Interrupt Active Status        e             e          Y              Y
 Registers
 Register R/W                   32-bit only   32-bit only 8/16/32-bit   8/16/32-bit
 Dynamics Priority Level        e             e           Y             Y
 change
 Fault Exceptions               1             1          4              4
 Debug Monitor exception        e             e          Y              Y

There are a number of differences, but in terms of software porting across different
Cortex-M processors it is often quite straightforward, as shown in Table 22.13. One of the
major differences is that some of the NVIC registers in ARMv7-M can be accessed using
byte or half-word accesses, whereas in ARMv6-M it is limited to 32-bit accesses. For
example, if an interrupt priority register needs to be updated, you need to read the whole
word (which consists of priority level settings for four interrupts), modify 1 byte, and then
write it back. In ARMv7-M architecture, this can be carried out using just a single-byte
size write to the priority level register. For users of the CMSIS device driver library, this
difference in the programmer’s model does not cause any software porting issue because
NVIC access functions in CMSIS-CORE have the same name and the function
implementations for each processor use the correct access method for ARMv6-M or
ARMv7-M accordingly.

Table 22.13: Handling of NVIC feature differences

 Key Differences                                            Software changes
 Software Trigger Interrupt Register                        In CortexÒ-M0/Cortex-M0þ processors, use Interrupt
 not available in ARMv6-M                                   Set Pending Register (ISPR) instead (supported by
                                                            CMSIS-CORE NVIC_SetPending(IRQn_t IRQn))
 Different register access size                             Use CMSIS-CORE NVIC control functions instead
 requirements
 Dynamic priority level change                              Disable IRQ temporarily when changing priority level

Cortex-M processors with ARMv7-M architecture have additional fault handlers with
programmable priority level. It allows the embedded systems to be protected by two levels
of fault exception handlers (Figure 22.4).

                       First level of fault handling             Second level of fault handling

                                  Bus Fault             Further fault
                                  exception            during handler
                                                                                            Further fault
                                                                                           during handler
                              Usage Fault                                Hard Fault
    Fault                                                                                                   Lock up
                               exception                                 exception

                              MemManage
                             Fault exception

                                                Figure 22.4
                       Multiple levels of fault handling in ARMv7-M architecture.

These additional fault handlers are programmable. By default they are disabled (and the
fault exception would trigger HardFault exception instead). If enabled, these additional
fault handlers can be used to handle specific range of fault events as shown in Table 22.14.
There is also a Debug Monitor exception in ARMv7-M architecture. This is for software-
based debug solution and is not needed for application code.

Table 22.14: Additional fault exceptions in the ARMv7-M architecture

 Exception types                  Usage
 Bus Fault                        Handling of bus error responses
 Usage Fault                      Handling of undefined instructions or illegal operations (e.g., attempt to
                                  switch to ARMÒ state which is not supported on CortexÒ-M processors)
 MemManage (Memory                Typically for use together with the memory protection unit, robust systems
 Management)                      can be built for embedded systems that required high reliability

22.5.4 Instruction Set

In addition to the Thumb instructions supported in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors, the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors also support a number
of additional 16-bit and 32-bit ThumbÒ instructions. These included the following:
•   Signed and unsigned divide instructions (SDIV and UDIV)
•   Compare and branch if zero (CBZ), compare and branch if not zero (CBNZ)
•   IF-THEN (IT) instructiondallows up to four subsequence instructions to be condition-
    ally executed based on the status in APSR
•   Multiply and accumulate instructions for 32-bit and 64-bit results
•   Count leading zero (CLZ)
•   Bit field processing instructions for bit order reversing, bit field insert, bit field clear, bit
    field extract
•   Table branch instructions (commonly used for switch statement in C)
•   Saturation operation instructions
•   Exclusive accesses for multiprocessor environments
•   Additional instructions that allow high registers (R8 and above) to be used in data
    processing, memory accesses, and branches.
These additional instructions allow faster processing of complex data like floating point
values. They also allow the Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors to be used
in audio signal processing applications, real-time control systems.
The Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors support a superset of the instructions in the
Cortex-M3. The additional instructions include the following:
•   A range of SIMD instructions
•   Saturation arithmetic operations
•   Additional DSP support instructions (various types of MAC operations)
•   Optional single precision floating point unit for Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors
•   Optional double precision floating point unit for Cortex-M7 processor.
When porting applications from ARMv7-M to ARMv6-M:
•   C/Cþþ programs only need to be recompiled to ensure that instructions that are not
    available are not used
•   The CMSIS-DSP libraries are available for all Cortex-M processors. So you can reuse
    the function calls to the CMSIS-DSP library. However, the processing time and memory
    size requirements would change.

22.5.5 System Level Features

There is a range of system level features differences among the various Cortex-M
processors, as shown in Table 22.15.

Table 22.15: System level features comparison

                                 Cortex®-M0 Cortex-M1 Cortex-M0+ Cortex-M3/M4 Cortex-M7
 SysTick Timer                   Optional    Optional   Optional      Y             Y
 OS support                      Y           Optional   Y             Y             Y
 Exclusive access interface      e           e          e             Y             Y
 Unaligned data support          e           e          e             Y             Y
 Big Endian                      Optional    Optional   Optional      Optional      Optional
 MPU                             e           e          Optional      Optional      Optional
                                                        (8 regions)   (8 regions)   (8 or 16 regions)
 Bit band                        e           e          e             Optional      e
 Sleep interface                 Y           e          Y             Y             Y
 Wakeup Interrupt Controller     Optional    e          Optional      Optional      Optional
 Event interface                 Y           e          Y             Y             Y
 Single cycle I/O                e           e          Optional      e             e
 TCM                             e           Optional   e             e             Optional

There are a number of features available on the ARMv7-M architecture that are not
available on ARMv6-M architecture.

Unaligned memory accessesdIn the ARMv6-M architecture, all the data transfer
operations must be aligned. This means a word-size data transfer must have address a
value divisible by 4, and half-word data transfer must occur at even addresses. The
ARMv7-M architecture allows many memory access instructions to generate unaligned
transfers. On the ARMv6-M (e.g., Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors), access of an
unaligned data has to be carried out by multiple instructions.

Exclusive accessesdThe ARMv7-M architecture supports instructions for exclusive
accesses, which is used for handling of shared data in multiprocessor systems such as
semaphore operations. The processor bus interface supports additional signals for
connecting to a system level exclusive access monitor unit on the bus system.

The Cortex-M3 and the Cortex-M4 processors have an optional system feature call bit
band. This feature creates 2-bit addressable memory regions called the bit-band regions.
The first bit-band region is in the first 1 MB of the SRAM region (from 0x20000000),
and the second one is the first 1 MB of the peripheral region (0x40000000). Using two
other memory address range called bit-band alias regions, each data bit in the bit-band
region can be individually accessed and modified. With the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ
processors, although the processors themselves do not have the bit-band feature, equivalent
functionality can be added to the system using bus level mapping components. So it is
possible for a Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ microcontroller to provide bit-band feature as in
Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4-based designs.

22.5.6 Debug and Trace Features

Compared to ARMv6-M architecture, the ARMv7-M architecture provides additional
debug and trace capabilities. In addition, the design of the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4
processors allows higher number of hardware breakpoint and data watchpoint comparators,
but of course the increase in debug functionalities means there is a trade off of larger
silicon size and power.
A comparison of the debug and trace features is show in Table 22.16.

Table 22.16: Debug and trace features comparison

                                    Cortex®-M0/M1 Cortex-M0+        Cortex-M3/M4     Cortex-M7
    Halt, resume, single stepping   Y              Y                Y                Y
    On the fly memory accesses      Y              Y                Y                Y
    Breakpoint comparators          Up to 4        Up to 4          Up to 8          Up to 8
    Software breakpoint             Y              Y                Y                Y
    Watchpoint comparators          Up to 2        Up to 2          Up to 4          Up to 4
    Instruction trace               e              Optional (MTB)   Optional (ETM)   Optional (ETM)
    Data trace                      e              e                Optional         Optional
    Event trace                     e              e                Optional         Optional
    Instrumentation (software)      e              e                Optional         Optional
    trace
    Profiling trace                 e              e                Optional         Optional

The Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7 processors support trace connection, which
allows a range of addition information to be sent to the debugger in real time to provide
more information about the program execution:
•     The optional ETM (Embedded Trace Macrocell) allows information about instruction
      execution to be captured so that the instruction execution sequence can be reconstructed
      on debugging hosts.
•     The optional DWT (Data Watchpoint and Trace) unit can be used to generate trace for
      watched data variables or access to memory ranges. The DWT can also be used to
      generate event trace, which shows information of exception entrance and exit, and
      profiling trace that provides statistical information about the program execution.
•     The optional ITM (Instrumentation Trace Macrocell) can be used by software to
      generate debug messages (e.g., printf) so that you do not need to use a device-specific
      UART for debug messages. This enables easier debug message generation: no need to
      set up the UART and I/O pins, which requires device-specific setup code, and do not
      require a separate connection as the trace interface supports multiple trace sources.
The trace data can be captured using a trace capturing device such as the KeilÒ
ULINKProÔ .

In addition to debug and trace, the breakpoint unit in the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4
processors can also be used for patching code in ROM (e.g., mask ROM). This feature is
called flash patch. For microcontroller devices based on flash memories this feature is not
required as the program code can be updated by reprogramming the flash.

22.6 General Software Modifications when Porting between
     Cortex®-M Processors
Typically porting an application from one Cortex-M microcontroller to another involves
quite a few modifications:
•   Replacing of device driver libraries and device-specific header files
•   Replace device-specific start-up code
•   Interrupt priority level changes (for example, when moving from a Cortex-M3 micro-
    controller device to a Cortex-M0 device, some of the priority levels are not available)
•   Peripheral driver code changesdunless CMSIS-Driver was used and is available for
    both devices
•   Program code changes due to differences in device’s system features (e.g., PLL, clock
    management, memory map)
•   Compilation option changes (e.g., processor type options, floating-point options)
•   Replace the embedded OS to a suitable version. Embedded OS typically contains small
    parts of codes that are written in assembly (e.g., context switching) and therefore needs
    different versions when switching between ARMv6-M and ARMv7-M.

22.7 Porting Software between Cortex®-M0/M0+ and Cortex-M1
In general, software porting between Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M1 processors is extremely
easy. Apart from peripheral programming model differences, there are very few required
changes.
Since both processors are based on the same instruction set, and the architecture version is
the same, the same software code can often be used directly when porting from one
processor to another. The only exception is when the software code uses sleep features.
Since the Cortex-M1 processor does not support sleep modes, application codes using WFI
and WFE would need to be updated.
There is also a small chance that the software needs minor adjustment due to execution
timing differences.
At the time of writing, there is no CMSIS software package available for the Cortex-M1
processor. However, you can use the same CMSIS-CORE header files for Cortex-M0 on
Cortex-M1 devices because they have almost the same architectural features.

22.8 Porting Software between Cortex®-M0/M0+ and Cortex-M3
Although there are a number of differences between Cortex-M0/M0þ processor
(ARMv6-M) and the Cortex-M3 processor (ARMv7-M), porting software between the two
processors is usually very easy. Since the ARMv7-M supports all features in the
ARMv6-M, applications developed for Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ can work on a Cortex-M3
microcontroller directly, apart from changes due to memory map, execution timing, and
peripheral differences (Figure 22.5).
Normally, when porting an application from Cortex-M0 to Cortex-M3 processor, you only
need to change the device driver library, change the peripheral access code, and update the
software for system features like clock speed, sleep modes, etc. For best performance, the
code should be recompiled to make the most of the richer instruction set.
Porting software from Cortex-M3 to Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor might require a
bit more effort. Apart from switching the device driver library and recompiling the code,
you also need to consider the following areas:
•   NVIC and SCB (System Control Block) registers in the ARMv6-M can only be
    accessed in word-size transfers. If any program code accesses these registers in byte-
    size transfers or half-word transfers, they need to be modified. If the NVIC and SCB are
    accessed by using CMSIS functions, switching the CMSIS compliant device driver to
    use Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor should automatically handle these differences.
•   Some exception priority levels in an application for Cortex-M3 processor are not
    available on the Cortex-M0/Cortex-M0þ processors. So the priority level configuration
    might need to be changed.
•   Exception priority grouping feature is not available in ARMv6-M. In ARMv7-M
    architecture, exception priority level registers can be partitioned into group priority and
    subpriority parts, with preemption based on group priority.

                                       Upward compatible
                        ARM
                     Cortex-M0                                   ARM
                         or                                    Cortex-M3
                     Cortex-M0+

                                         Simple porting,
                                           recompile

                   0.9 DMIPS/MHz                             1.25 DMIPS/MHz

                    Von Neumann                                Harvard bus
                     architecture                              architecture
                                        Figure 22.5
     Compatibility between the CortexÒ-M0/M0þ processor and the Cortex-M3 processor.

•     Some registers in the NVIC and the SCB in the Cortex-M3 processor are not available
      in the Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor. These included Interrupt Active Status
      Register, Software Trigger Interrupt Register, and some of the fault status registers. The
      Vector Table Offset Register (VTOR) is optional on the Cortex-M0þ processor, but is
      not available on the Cortex-M0 processor.
•     The CMSIS-CORE functions listed in Table 22.17 are available for ARMv7-M pro-
      cessors (including Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, and Cortex-M7) and are not available for
      Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors.
•     The bit-band feature in the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4 processors is not available in
      Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors. If the bit-band alias accesses are used in the
      application, and if the system design of the microcontroller does not offer any system
      level bit band wrapper, the code needs to be converted to use normal memory accesses
      and handle bit extract or bit modification by software.
•     If the application contains assembly code or embedded assembly code, the assembly
      code would likely to require modifications because many of the instructions on the
      Cortex-M3 processor are not available on ARMv6-M.
•     For C application code, some instructions such as hardware divide are not available in
      the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors. In this case the compiler will automatically
      call the C library to handle the divide operation.
•     Unaligned data transfer is not available in the ARMv6-M architecture.
•     Some instructions available in Cortex-M3 (e.g., exclusive accesses, bit field processing)
      are not available in the ARMv6-M architecture.
Some Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processor microcontrollers support a memory
remapping feature in order to allow the system to boot up with a boot loader with a
different vector table, or allow part of the SRAM to be used as vector table so that
exception vectors can be modified at runtime. This is a device-specific feature, and is more
likely to be found in the Cortex-M0-based microcontroller products because the
Cortex-M0 processor does not have VTOR. When migrating applications that use vector
table relocation feature on Cortex-M3 processor, it might be possible to use the
device-specific memory remapping feature for the same purpose.

Table 22.17: CMSIS-CORE interrupt functions in ARMv7-M that are not available in ARMv6-M

    CMSIS-CORE interrupt functions for Cortex®-M3/M4/M7 not available for Cortex-M0/M0+
    void NVIC_SetPriorityGrouping(uint32_t PriorityGroup)
    uint32_t NVIC_GetPriorityGrouping(void)
    uint32_t NVIC_GetActive(IRQn_Type IRQn)
    uint32_t NVIC_EncodePriority (uint32_t PriorityGroup, uint32_t PreemptPriority, uint32_t SubPriority)
    void NVIC_DecodePriority (uint32_t Priority, uint32_t PriorityGroup, uint32_t* pPreemptPriority,
    uint32_t* pSubPriority)

Applications that require the unprivileged thread mode or the MPU feature cannot be ported
to the Cortex-M0 processor because these features are not supported in the Cortex-M0
processor. However, you could use a Cortex-M0þ microcontroller device for such scenario.
Please note that some of the MPU control code might also need to be changed when
moving from ARMv7-M to ARMv6-M because of some small differences in the
programmer’s model. Please refer to Section 12.9 in Chapter 12 for more information.

22.9 Porting Software between Cortex®-M0/M0+ and
     the Cortex-M4/M7 Processor
Similar to Cortex-M3, the Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors are also based on the
ARMv7-M architecture. The Cortex-M4 processor is very similar to the Cortex-M3 in many
aspects: it has the same Harvard bus architecture, same system level features, same exception
types, and has approximately the same performance in term of Dhrystone DMIPS/MHz, etc.
The Cortex-M7 processor is a much more complex design with a longer 6-stage processor
pipeline, superscalar processing capability, and more memory system features.
In terms of the instruction set, the Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors have additional
instructions compared to the Cortex-M3 such as:
•   SIMD instructions,
•   saturation arithmetic instructions,
•   data packing and extraction instructions, and
•   optional floating-point instructions.
The floating-point support in the Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors is optional;
therefore not all Cortex-M4/M7 microcontrollers will support this feature. If the floating-
point unit is included, it includes an additional floating-point register bank and additional
registers, as well as extra bit fields in the control special register (Figure 22.6). The
floating-point unit can be turned on/off by software to reduce power consumption. The
xPSR special register in Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors also has additional bit
fields (GE flags) for the SIMD instructions.
Since there is no floating-point unit in Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors, if the
application code contains floating-point calculation, the calculation needs to be handled by
runtime software libraries and therefore can take a lot longer and require additional code
space. However, apart from that the code can just be recompiled and executed on the
Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0þ processors without any issue.
Some of the application codes designed for Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M7 processors make
use of the SIMD instructions and high DSP performance of these processors. Typically

                         Registers                             FPU register bank (Only for floating point option)
                            R0                                         S0              S1         D0
                            R1                                         S2              S3         D1
                            R2                                         S4              S5         D2
                            R3                                         S6              S7         D3
                            R4                                         S8              S9         D4
                            R5                                        S10              S11        D5
                            R6                                        S12              S13        D6
                            R7                                        S14              S15        D7
                            R8                                        S16              S17        D8
                            R9                                        S18              S19        D9
                            R10                                       S20              S21        D10
                            R11                                       S22              S23        D11
                            R12                                       S24              S25        D12
                        R13 (MSP)       R13 (PSP)                     S26              S27        D13
                         R14 (LR)                                     S28              S29        D14
                         R15 (PC)                                     S30              S31        D15

                                                                    FPSCR        FP Status and Control Register
   Some differences     Special registers
between ARMv6-M and        xPSR             Program Status Registers
      ARMv7-M
                         PRIMASK
                                                  Interrupt Mask                Special           Not available in
     Not available in   FAULTMASK                                                                   ARMv6-M
       ARMv6-M                                       Registers                 Registers
                         BASEPRI
   Some differences     CONTROL             Control Register
between ARMv6-M and
      ARMv7-M
                                       Figure 22.6
       Programmer’s model of CortexÒ-M4/Cortex-M7 processors with floating-point unit.

the DSP functions could have been implemented with precompiled DSP library code, or
handcrafted assembly code for best optimization. These codes cannot be used on the
Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor, and the operations have to be rewritten in C/Cþþ
and recompiled. Although it is possible to get it to work, the performance of running these
applications on Cortex-M0 or Cortex-M0þ processor would be much slower and therefore
some of the more demanding applications (e.g., real-time audio processing, or control
applications that require floating-point operations) are unsuitable for the Cortex-M0 and
Cortex-M0þ processors.
