                                                           Preface
Linux Kernel Debugging is a modern, up-to-date take on the key topic of kernel and kernel
module debugging. It covers in detail various powerful open source tools, as well as many
advanced techniques (far beyond printk!), to debug the kernel, kernel modules, and
device drivers. This is a key skill that the professional developer must learn and possess.

Who this book is for
This book is for Linux kernel developers, module, device driver authors, and testers
interested in debugging and enhancing their Linux systems at the level of the kernel.
System administrators who want to understand and debug the internal infrastructure
of their Linux kernels will also find this book useful. A good hold on C programming
and the Linux command line is necessary. Some experience with kernel (module)
development will certainly benefit you.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, A General Introduction to Debugging Software, begins this journey by covering
what debugging software actually entails, how it's really a mix of science and art. A few
select software "horror stories" will serve to underline the importance of careful design,
good (and secure) coding, and the ability to debug issues. On the more practical side, you
will then set up the required workspace on your Linux system (or VM) so that you can –
very importantly – work upon examples and assignments that will follow later.
Chapter 2, Approaches to Kernel Debugging, covers various approaches that can be taken
to perform debugging at the level of kernel code. This will give you the insight to select
the best, or the most viable, approach(es) depending on your particular situation and
system constraints.
Chapter 3, Debug via Instrumentation – printk and Friends, refreshes the basics of using
the common kernel printk() API. Next, we go into specifics of how to leverage it for
the express purpose of kernel/driver debug via the instrumentation approach. The heart of
this chapter – the kernel's powerful dynamic debug framework and how you can leverage
it even in production – is then covered in detail.
xvi   Preface

Chapter 4, Debug via Instrumentation – Kprobes, explains the kernel's powerfull Kprobes
framework, a means to – among other things – instrument the kernel and modules, by
hooking into pretty much any kernel or module function, even in production. This can
prove to be a practically useful way to debug systems during production.
Chapter 5, Debugging Kernel Memory Issues – Part 1, looks at memory bugs and
corruption – a very common issue when working with a language such as C. First, you'll
learn why this is, and, importantly, about the typical types of memory issues that tend to
arise in such systems. Next, you will learn how to tackle these memory issues head-on,
using the powerful compiler-based KASAN technology, as well as the kernel's compiler-
based UBSAN technology.
Chapter 6, Debugging Kernel Memory Issues – Part 2, continues the coverage of debugging
kernel memory issues. We delve in depth into the details of catching common memory
issues on slab (SLUB) memory and then detecting difficult kernel memory leakage bugs
with kmemleak. A detailed comparison between various memory corruption issues and
the appropriate tooling to detect them rounds off these two chapters.
Chapter 7, Oops! Interpreting the Kernel Bug Diagnostic, covers a key topic – what a kernel
"Oops" diagnostic message really is and, very importantly, how to interpret it in depth.
Along this interesting journey, you will generate a simple kernel Oops and understand
exactly how to interpret it. Further, several tools and techniques to help with this task will
be shown. Getting to the bottom of an Oops often helps pinpoint the root cause of the
kernel bug! A few actual Oops messages will also be pointed out.
Chapter 8, Lock Debugging, looks at an integral part of writing robust kernel or driver
code: locking. Unfortunately, it's really quite easy to land up with errors – deadlocks and
such – that are difficult to debug after the fact. This chapter skims over the basics of lock
debugging, instead spending the bulk of it on a really powerful modern tool that helps
uncover deep locking issues (data races) – the Kernel Concurrent Sanitizer (KCSAN).
Here, you'll learn how to configure the (debug) kernel for KCSAN, and how to use it in
detail. We round it off by delving into several actual instances of kernel bugs whose root
cause is locking issues.
Chapter 9, Tracing the Kernel Flow, introduces powerful technologies that allow you to
trace the flow of kernel code in detail, at the granularity of every function call made!
Usage of the primary kernel tracing infrastructure – ftrace – is covered first. You will then
learn how to use powerful frontends to ftrace: trace-cmd, the KernelShark GUI, and the
perf-tools collection. We wrap up this topic with an introduction to using LTTng (and
visualization with the TraceCompass GUI!) to perform kernel-level tracing and analysis.
                                                                               Preface   xvii

Chapter 10, Kernel Panic, Lockups, and Hangs, explains what kernel panic means precisely,
and about the code paths executed within the kernel when it panics. More importantly,
you'll learn how to write a custom kernel panic handler routine so that your code (also)
runs if and when the kernel does panic. Associated topics – detecting lockups and CPU /
work queue stalls, and hangs within the kernel – are covered as well.
Chapter 11, Using Kernel GDB (KGDB), introduces the powerful KGDB kernel source-level
debug framework. You will learn how to configure and set up KGDB, after which, you'll see
how to make use of it practically to debug kernel/module code at the level of the source,
setting breakpoints, hardware watchpoints, leveraging GDB Python scripts, and more.
Chapter 12, A Few More Kernel Debugging Approaches, rounds off this vast topic of
kernel debugging by introducing other approaches you can – and at times should – use.
This includes understanding what the powerful (though resource-intensive) Kdump/crash
tooling is, which can at times be a lifesaver. Then, we introduce you to why static analysis
is key, and the available tools for analyzing Linux kernel/module/driver code.
An introduction to code coverage and kernel testing frameworks follows. We round off
the discussion with an introduction to logging (via journalctl), kernel assertions, and
warning macros.

To get the most out of this book
We assume you're familiar with programming in C and are comfortable working on the
Linux command line (the shell). Even minimal experience writing kernel code or modules
(drivers) will certainly help as well, though it isn't mandatory.
In terms of the software workspace setup, we cover this in detail in Chapter 1, A General
Introduction to Debugging Software, in the Setting up the workspace section.
If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself
or access the code from the book's GitHub repository (a link is available in the next
section). Doing so will help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and
pasting of code.
Being software, and a pretty hands-on activity like debugging it, we highly recommend you
read the book in a hands-on manner, trying out the demos and examples covered as you
go. Be sure to work on the few exercises mentioned within the chapters as well. When you
finish this book, your real journey will just begin! With the key knowledge we're hoping,
indeed betting, you gain herein, it should be that much easier and sweeter an experience.
xviii   Preface

Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Linux-Kernel-Debugging. If there's an
update to the code, it will be updated in the GitHub repository.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots and diagrams used in
this book. You can download it here: https://packt.link/2zUIX.

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names,
filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles.
Here is an example: "The end result is the kernel configuration file saved as .config in
the root of the kernel source tree."
A block of code is set as follows:

  #include <linux/init.h>
  #include <linux/module.h>
  #include <linux/kernel.h>
  [...]
  static int __init printk_loglevels_init(void)

When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant
lines or items are set in bold:

      if (lotype & (1<<5)) {
         pr_emerg("CPU#%d: Possible thermal failure (CPU on fire
  ?).\n", smp_processor_id());
      }
                                                                               Preface     xix

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:

  sudo apt update
  sudo apt upgrade
  sudo apt install build-essential dkms linux-headers-$(uname –r)
  ssh -y

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For
instance, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: "Select
System info from the Administration panel."

        Tips or Important Notes
        Appear like this.

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at
customercare@packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of
your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content,
mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if
you would report this to us. Please visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata
and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet,
we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name.
Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise
in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit
authors.packtpub.com.
xx   Preface

Share Your Thoughts
Once you've read Linux Kernel Debugging, we'd love to hear your thoughts! Please click
here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we're
delivering excellent quality content.
