                    INTRODUCTION

            In my first job out of college as an entry-
            level electrical engineer, I once worked on
          an old design that had a timer circuit on it.
        Using a simple resistor and capacitor, the circuit
would wait for 50 milliseconds (ms) to elapse, then
trigger an action. We needed to change that 50 ms
timer to 60 ms, but this small change required a mon-
umental effort: we would have to physically remove
the capacitors and resistors from hundreds of circuit
boards and replace them with new ones.
    Fortunately, we had a team of field programmable gate array (FPGA)
designers who came to the rescue. With their help, we were able to imple-
ment the same functionality inside an FPGA. Then, in a matter of minutes,
we could change code to set the timer to any arbitrary value we wanted,
                    without having to touch a soldering iron. This faster pace of progress
                    excited me, and I quickly got hooked on FPGAs.
                         Eventually I transitioned to working with FPGAs full-time, and it was
                    around then that I started reading and responding to FPGA-related ques-
                    tions on Stack Overflow. Often these questions came from FPGA begin-
                    ners who were confused about basic concepts. I saw the same types of
                    questions asked again and again, and realized there wasn’t a single place
                    where people could learn about FPGAs in a simple, easy-to-understand way.
                    Sure, there were many online references for Verilog and VHDL, the two
                    most popular FPGA programming languages, but there was relatively little
                    information on what those languages were actually doing. What components
                    are really being created within your FPGA when you write a certain line of
                    code? How are things being wired up? What does it mean to run operations
                    in parallel versus serially?
                         Rather than continuing to answer the same questions over and over,
                    I started my own website, https://nandland.com, where I began writing longer
                    articles about FPGAs. As traffic grew, I started making YouTube videos as
                    well. I even created my own FPGA development board to provide hands-
                    on experience for beginners. In all these endeavors, my goal has been to
                    demystify FPGAs while making the information approachable and engag-
                    ing for those just starting out. Writing this book has allowed me to delve
                    even deeper into the subject, to build a solid foundation for anyone inter-
                    ested in exploring the exciting world of FPGA design.

     Who Is This Book For?
                    I’ve tried to make this book as accessible as possible so that a broad range
                    of people will be able to read and understand the material. The intended
                    audience is anyone who is curious about how digital programmable logic
                    works and how FPGAs can be used to solve a wide variety of problems.
                    Maybe you’re a college student who encountered FPGAs in a class and was
                    left intrigued but confused, or someone in the electronics industry who
                    has been exposed to FPGAs at work. Perhaps you’re a tinkerer or hardware
                    hacker, or a software developer interested in programming at a much lower
                    level than you’re used to. This book is very approachable for all of these
                    groups.
                         I’m assuming you’ve had at least some exposure to a conventional pro-
                    gramming language, like Python, C, or JavaScript. It will be helpful if you
                    understand concepts like functions, conditional statements (if...else),
                    loops, and other basic programming techniques. You don’t need any prior
                    experience with Verilog or VHDL, however; this book will introduce the
                    basics of these languages.
                         FPGAs lie at the intersection of hardware and software, so having some
                    interest in electronics is helpful. We’ll sometimes discuss concepts like volt-
                    age and current within the FPGA. Here again, it will be useful if you’ve had
                    some basic introduction to these terms, but it won’t be required to get value
                    out of those sections.

xx   Introduction
What This Book Isn’t
        This book isn’t intended to teach you every facet of Verilog or VHDL. As
        I said earlier, there are many online resources if that’s your goal. Instead,
        my aim is to teach you how FPGAs work so you can understand what your
        Verilog or VHDL is doing, and thus make more intelligent choices about
        your designs. That said, we will look at a large amount of code throughout
        the book. All of it is thoroughly explained, so you won’t need prior expe-
        rience with these programming languages to follow along. You’ll gain a
        strong base of Verilog and VHDL knowledge as you read, and the confi-
        dence to augment that knowledge through independent study.
             The book includes various projects that you’ll be able to carry out on
        real hardware using the iCE40 line of FPGAs from Lattice Semiconductor.
        I’ve focused on these comparatively cheap, simple FPGAs to make the
        hands-on parts of the book as accessible as possible. More expensive FPGAs
        have many extra bells and whistles; they’re very cool, but they can be over-
        whelming for beginners. iCE40 FPGAs are still highly capable, but with
        fewer of these high-end features available. As such, this book won’t explore
        sophisticated features like SerDes and hard-core processors in a hands-on
        way, nor will we dwell on the more complicated FPGA tools required to
        use them. We will discuss some of these features at a high level, however, so
        you’ll gain the background knowledge to work with them if you choose to
        upgrade to a fancier FPGA.

What’s in the Book?
        This book combines high-level discussion, detailed code examples, and
        hands-on projects. Each code listing is shown in both Verilog and VHDL, so
        whichever language you want to use for FPGA development, you’ll be able
        to follow along. There’s also an extensive glossary at the end of the book for
        your reference. Here’s what you’ll find in each chapter:
            Chapter 1: Meet the FPGA   Introduces FPGAs and talks about their
            strengths and weaknesses. Being an engineer is about knowing which
            tool to use in which scenario. Understanding when to use an FPGA—
            and when not to—is crucial.
            Chapter 2: Setting Up Your Hardware and Tools   Gets you set up
            with the Lattice iCE40 series of FPGAs. You’ll download and install the
            FPGA tools and learn how to run them to program your FPGA.
            Chapter 3: Boolean Algebra and the Look-Up Table   Explores one of
            the two most fundamental FPGA components: the look-up table (LUT).
            You’ll learn how LUTs perform Boolean algebra and take the place of
            dedicated logic gates.
            Chapter 4: Storing State with the Flip-Flop   Introduces the second
            fundamental FPGA component: the flip-flop. You’ll see how flip-flops
            store state within an FPGA, giving the device memory of what hap-
            pened previously.

                                                                         Introduction   xxi
                          Chapter 5: Testing Your Code with Simulation   Discusses how to write
                          testbenches to simulate your FPGA designs and make sure they work
                          correctly. It’s hard to see what’s going on inside a real physical FPGA,
                          but simulations let you investigate how your code is behaving, find bugs,
                          and understand strange behaviors.
                          Chapter 6: Common FPGA Modules   Shows how to create some basic
                          building blocks common to most FPGA designs, including multiplexers,
                          demultiplexers, shift registers, and first in, first out (FIFO) and other
                          memory structures. You’ll learn how they work and how to combine
                          them to solve complex problems.
                          Chapter 7: Synthesis, Place and Route, and Crossing Clock Domains  
                          Expands on the FPGA build process, with details about synthesis and
                          the place and route stage. You’ll learn about timing errors and how to
                          avoid them, and how to safely cross between clock domains within your
                          FPGA design.
                          Chapter 8: The State Machine   Introduces the state machine, a com-
                          mon model for keeping track of the logical flow through a sequence of
                          events in an FPGA. You’ll use a state machine to implement an interac-
                          tive memory game.
                          Chapter 9: Useful FPGA Primitives   Discusses other important FPGA
                          components besides the LUT and the flip-flop, including the block
                          RAM, the DSP block, and the phase-locked loop (PLL). You’ll learn
                          different strategies for harnessing these components and see how they
                          solve common problems.
                          Chapter 10: Numbers and Math   Outlines simple rules for working
                          with numbers and implementing math operations in an FPGA. You’ll
                          learn the difference between signed and unsigned numbers, fixed-
                          point and floating-point operations, and more.
                          Chapter 11: Getting Data In and Out with I/O and SerDes   Examines
                          the input/output (I/O) capabilities of an FPGA. You’ll learn the pros
                          and cons of different types of interfaces and be introduced to SerDes, a
                          powerful FPGA feature for high-speed data transmission.
                          Appendix A: FPGA Development Boards   Suggests some FPGA devel-
                          opment boards that you can use for this book’s projects.
                          Appendix B: Tips for a Career in FPGA Engineering   Outlines strate-
                          gies for finding an FPGA-related job, in case you want to pursue FPGA
                          design professionally. I’ll make suggestions on how to build a good
                          resume, prepare for interviews, and negotiate for the best-possible
                          job offer.

       What You’ll Need
                       Although not strictly required, I recommend having a development board
                       with a Lattice iCE40 FPGA so you can complete the book’s hands-on proj-
                       ects. There’s nothing more satisfying than learning about a concept and

xxii    Introduction
        then being able to implement that concept on real hardware. Chapter 2
        discusses what to look for in a development board and exactly what you’ll
        need for the book’s projects in more detail. Briefly, the development board
        should have a USB connection and peripherals like LEDs, push-button
        switches, and a seven-segment display. Appendix A describes some develop-
        ment boards that will work.
             The software tools for working with iCE40 FPGAs run best on Windows.
        If you don’t have a Windows computer, I recommend running the tools
        inside a Windows virtual machine. We’ll discuss installing these tools in
        Chapter 2.

Online Resources
        The code presented in this book is available online via a GitHub repository.
        You can access it at https://github.com/nandland/getting-started-with-fpgas.
        You’ll also find more information and FPGA project ideas online at
        https://nandland.com.

                                                                      Introduction   xxiii
