                               1
                    MEET THE FPGA

              An FPGA, short for field programmable gate
             array, is a highly capable type of integrated
            circuit, an electronic circuit in a single pack-
        age. The field programmable part of the name
indicates that FPGAs can be reprogrammed when in
the field (that is, without having to return them to the
manufacturer). The gate array part indicates that an
FPGA is made up of a two-dimensional grid featuring
a large number of gates, fundamental units of digital
logic that we’ll discuss in depth in Chapter 3.
    The name is actually a bit of an anachronism. The reality is that some
FPGAs aren’t field programmable, and most are no longer just an array of
simple gates. In fact, they’re much more sophisticated than that. Despite
these exceptions, the name has stuck over the years, and it highlights a
unique characteristic of FPGAs: their incredible flexibility. An FPGA’s uses
                are limited only by the designer’s imagination. Other digital programmable
                devices, such as microcontrollers, are designed with a specific set of capa-
                bilities; you can only do something if that feature is built in. By contrast, an
                FPGA’s array of gates (or the more modern equivalent) is like a blank slate
                that you can program, and reprogram, and reprogram to do almost any-
                thing you want, with fewer restrictions. This freedom doesn’t come without
                trade-offs, however, and FPGA development demands a unique set of skills.
                     Learning how to work with FPGAs requires a different style of thinking
                from traditional computer programming. Traditional software engineer-
                ing, like programming in C, for example, is serial: first this happens, then
                this happens, and finally this happens. This is because C is compiled to run
                on a single processor, or CPU, and that CPU is a serial machine. It processes
                one instruction at a time.
                     FPGAs, on the other hand, work in parallel: everything is happening
                at the same time. Understanding the difference between serial and parallel
                programming is fundamental to working with FPGAs. When you can think
                about solving a problem using parallel methods, your overall problem-­
                solving skills will increase. These skills will also translate to other, non-
                FPGA applications; you’ll begin to see problems differently than if you were
                only thinking about them serially. Learning how to think in parallel rather
                than serially is a critical skill for becoming an FPGA engineer, and it’s one
                you’ll develop throughout this book.
                     FPGAs are a lot of fun to work with. When you create an FPGA design
                using Verilog or VHDL (more on these languages later in this chapter),
                you’re writing code at the lowest possible level. You’re literally creating the
                physical connections, the actual wires, between electrical components and
                input/output pins on your device. This allows you to solve almost any digital
                problem: you have complete control. It’s a much lower level of program-
                ming than working with a microcontroller that has a processor, for exam-
                ple. For this reason, learning about FPGAs is an excellent way to become
                familiar with hardware programming techniques and better understand
                how exactly digital logic works in other applications. You’ll gain a newfound
                respect for the complexities of even the simplest integrated circuits once
                you start working with FPGAs.
                     This first chapter sets you up for diving deeper into FPGAs by pro-
                viding some background information. We’ll briefly cover the history of
                FPGAs, from their initial creation in the 1980s through today, and explore
                some of their common uses. We’ll also consider how FPGAs compare to
                other common digital components, such as microcontrollers and application-
                specific integrated circuits (ASICs). Finally, we’ll discuss the differences
                between Verilog and VHDL, the two most popular languages for working
                with FPGAs.

    A Brief History of FPGAs
                The very first FPGA was the XC2064, created by Xilinx in 1985. It was very
                primitive, with a measly 800 gates, a fraction compared to the millions of

gate operations that can be performed on today’s FPGAs. It was also rela-
tively expensive, costing $55, which adjusted for inflation would be around
$145 today. Still, the XC2064 kicked off an entire industry, and (alongside
Altera) Xilinx has remained one of the dominant companies in the FPGA
market for more than 30 years.
     Early FPGAs like the XC2064 were only able to perform very simple
tasks: Boolean operations such as taking the logical OR of two input pins
and putting the result onto an output pin (you’ll learn much more about
Boolean operations and logic gates in Chapter 3). In the 1980s, this type
of problem required a dedicated circuit built of OR gates. If you also
needed to perform a Boolean AND on two different pins, you might have
to add another circuit, filling up your circuit board with these dedicated
components. When FPGAs came along, a single device could replace many
discrete gate components, lowering costs, saving component space on the
circuit board, and allowing the design to be reprogrammed as the require-
ments of the project changed.
     From these humble beginnings, the capabilities of FPGAs have increased
dramatically. Over the years, the devices have been designed with more
hard intellectual property (IP), or specialized components within the FPGA
that are dedicated to performing a specific task (as opposed to soft com-
ponents that can be used to perform many tasks). For example, hard IP
blocks in modern FPGAs let them interface directly with USB devices, DDR
memory, and other off-chip components. Some of these capabilities (like
a USB-C interface) would simply not be possible without some dedicated
hard IP to do the job. Companies have even placed dedicated processors
(called hard processors) inside FPGAs so that you can run normal C code
within the FPGA itself.
     As the devices have evolved, the FPGA market has undergone many
mergers and acquisitions. In 2020, the chip-making company AMD
purchased Xilinx for $35 billion. It’s plausible that this purchase was
a response to its main competitor Intel’s 2015 acquisition of Altera for
$16.7 billion. It’s interesting that two companies focused predominantly on
CPUs decided to purchase FPGA companies, and there’s much speculation
as to why. In general, it’s thought that as CPUs mature, dedicating some
part of the chip to FPGA-like reprogrammable hardware seems to be an
idea worth pursuing.
     Apart from Xilinx and Altera (which from here on I’ll be calling by
their parent company names, AMD and Intel, respectively), other com-
panies have carved out their own niches within the FPGA market. For
example, Lattice Semiconductor has done well for itself making mostly
smaller, less expensive FPGAs. Lattice has been happy to play on its own
in this lower end of the market, while letting AMD and Intel slug it out at
the higher end. Today, the open source community has embraced Lattice
FPGAs, which have been reverse-engineered to allow for low-level hack-
ing. Another medium-sized player in the FPGA space, Actel, was acquired
by Microsemi in 2010 for $430 million. Microsemi itself was acquired by
Microchip Technology in 2018.

    Popular FPGA Applications
                In their modern, highly capable and flexible form, FPGAs are used in
                many interesting areas. For example, they’re a critical component in the
                telecommunications industry, where they’re often found in cell phone tow-
                ers. They route internet traffic to bring the internet to your smartphone,
                allowing you to stream YouTube videos on your bus ride to work.
                     FPGAs are also widely used in the finance industry for high-frequency
                trading, where companies use algorithms to automatically buy and sell
                stocks incredibly quickly. Traders have found that if you can execute a
                stock purchase or sale slightly quicker than the competition, you can gain
                a financial edge. The speed of execution is paramount; a tiny bit of latency
                can cost a company millions of dollars. FPGAs are well suited to this task
                because they’re very fast and can be reprogrammed as new trading algo-
                rithms are discovered. This is an industry where milliseconds matter, and
                FPGAs can provide an advantage.
                     FPGAs are used in the defense industry as well, for applications like
                radar digital signal processing. FPGAs can process received radar reflec-
                tions using mathematical filters to see small objects hundreds of miles
                away. They’re also used to process and manipulate images from infrared
                (IR) cameras, which can see heat rather than visible light, allowing military
                operatives to see people even in complete darkness. These operations are
                often highly math-intensive, requiring many multiplication and addition
                operations to happen at parallel—something that FPGAs excel at.
                     Another area where FPGAs have found a niche is in the space industry:
                they can be programmed with redundancies to hedge against the effects of
                radiation bombardment, which can cause digital circuits to fail. On Earth,
                the atmosphere protects electronics (and people) from lots of solar radia-
                tion, but outer space doesn’t have that lovely blanket, so the electronics on
                satellites are subjected to a much harsher environment.
                     Finally, FPGAs are also getting interest from the artificial intelligence
                (AI) community. They can be used to accelerate neural nets, another mas-
                sively parallel computational problem, and thus are helping humans attack
                issues that weren’t solvable using traditional programming techniques:
                image classification, speech recognition and translation, robotics control,
                game strategy, and more.
                     This look at popular FPGA applications is far from exhaustive. Overall,
                FPGAs are a good candidate for any digital electronics problem where high
                bandwidth, low latency, or high processing capability is needed.

    Comparing Common Digital Logic Components
                Despite how far they’ve come since their early days and the wide range
                of applications they’re used for, FPGAs are still a relatively niche technol-
                ogy compared to other digital logic components like microcontrollers
                and ASICs. In this section, we’ll compare these three technologies. You’ll
                see why FPGAs are a good solution for some problems but not others,

and how they have tough competition from other devices, especially
microcontrollers.

FPGAs vs. Microcontrollers
Microcontrollers are everywhere. If you aren’t an embedded software engi-
neer, you may not realize how many toys, tools, gadgets, and devices are
controlled with small and inexpensive microcontrollers: everything from
TV remote controls to coffee makers to talking toys. If you’re an electron-
ics hobbyist, you might be familiar with the Arduino, which is powered by a
small microcontroller from Atmel (now Microchip Technology, the same
company that owns what used to be Actel). Millions of Arduinos have been
sold to hobbyists around the world. They’re cheap, fun, and relatively easy
to work with.
     So why are microcontrollers everywhere, but not FPGAs? Why isn’t
there an FPGA controlling your coffee maker or making your Elmo doll
come to life? The main reason is cost. The consumer electronics industry,
which uses the largest number of microcontrollers overall, is incredibly sen-
sitive to cost. Consumers like you and I want the least expensive products we
can possibly buy, and the companies that make those products will shave off
every penny possible to make that happen.
     Microcontrollers come in seemingly endless varieties, with each one
designed for a very specific purpose. This helps companies drive costs
down. For example, if your product needs one analog-to-digital converter
(ADC), two USB interfaces, and at least 30 general purpose input/output
(GPIO) pins, there’s a microcontroller with exactly those specifications.
What if you realize you only need one USB interface? There’s probably a
different microcontroller with those specifications, too. With such variety,
there’s no need to pay for extra features. Companies can find a microcon-
troller with the bare minimum of what they need, and save money in the
process.
     FPGAs, on the other hand, are much more general. With a single FPGA,
you might create five ADC interfaces and no USB interface, or three USB
and no ADC interfaces. You pretty much have a blank slate at your disposal.
As you’ll learn, however, FPGAs need to have many internal wires (called
routing) to support all these different possibilities, and all that routing adds
cost and complexity. In many cases, you’ll end up paying more for extra fea-
tures and flexibility that you don’t need.
     Another contributing factor to cost is quantity. If you buy 10 million
microcontrollers, which is not unrealistic in the field of consumer elec-
tronics, you’ll pay less per chip than you would if you only bought 100,000.
FPGAs, meanwhile, are typically produced and sold in relatively low quan-
tities, so they cost more per unit. It’s a bit of a chicken-and-egg situation,
where FPGAs could be less expensive if there were more of them, but for
there to be more of them, they would have to be less expensive. If the costs
were the same as with microcontrollers, would there be more FPGAs in use?
I think it’s likely that there would be, but FPGAs are also more complicated
to use, so that works against them as well.

                     Since microcontrollers are designed for specific purposes, they can
                be very easy to set up. You can get a basic design up and running on a micro-
                controller in a few hours. By contrast, you need to program everything inside
                the FPGA, and this is very time-consuming. Although there are some hard
                IP blocks to get you started, the majority of the device is programmable
                logic—that blank slate we talked about—that you need to design yourself.
                Writing all the code to do what you need also takes longer in a language
                like Verilog or VHDL than C, which is commonly used to program micro-
                controllers. With C, you’re writing code at a higher level, so you can do
                more with a single line. With Verilog and VHDL you’re writing at a much
                lower level: individual gates and wires are literally being created with your
                code. You can think of low-level programming like working with individual
                LEGO bricks and high-level programming like working with precon-
                structed LEGO sets. This adds complexity, which adds time, which also
                increases costs. Engineers want the simplest solution, and most often a
                microcontroller is simpler than an FPGA.
                     Another factor to consider is how much power the device consumes.
                Many electronic devices run off batteries, and it’s critical to maximize their
                lifetime by making the devices as low-power as possible. The more power
                they use, the more often you’ll have to change the batteries, which is some-
                thing nobody wants to do. Again, since a microcontroller is designed for a
                specific use, it can be optimized to draw incredibly little power, enabling a
                single AAA battery to power a Bluetooth mouse for months, for example.
                FPGAs, with all their routing resources, are simply unable to compete with
                microcontrollers in terms of power consumption. That’s not to say you can’t
                use an FPGA in a battery-powered application, but head-to-head the micro-
                controller will win that battle every time.
                     Summarizing, microcontrollers almost always dominate in terms of
                cost, ease of use, and power consumption. So why would anyone use an
                FPGA over a microcontroller? There are other factors to consider, such as
                speed and flexibility, and here the tables turn in favor of the FPGA.
                     When I say speed, I mean two things: bandwidth and computations.
                Bandwidth is the rate of data transfer across a path. FPGAs can have incred-
                ibly large bandwidth, much more than any microcontroller could ever attain.
                They can process hundreds of gigabits per second with no trouble at all. This
                might be useful, for example, when driving multiple 4K displays. FPGAs are
                often used in video editing hardware that requires enormous amounts of
                bandwidth to keep up with the data streams. Their high bandwidth allows
                them to move tremendous amounts of data from various external interfaces
                (USB-C, Ethernet, ADCs, memories, and more) at very fast rates.
                     As for computational speed, the number of mathematical computations
                an FPGA can perform in a second dwarfs anything a microcontroller can
                do. A microcontroller usually has just one processor, and with all computa-
                tions going through the same processor, the number of computations that
                can be performed each second is limited. An FPGA, on the other hand, can
                run many computations in parallel. For example, you can run hundreds
                of multiplication operations at the same time, something that simply isn’t
                possible with a microcontroller. This might be useful when running large

mathematical filters on data, which often involve many multiplication and
addition operations occurring at very fast rates.
     The other major benefit of an FPGA is its flexibility. I said micro­
controllers come in endless varieties, but of course, this is a slight exag-
geration. If your design has some particularly exotic requirement—say, if
it needs 16 ADC interfaces—there might not be any microcontroller in the
world that will meet your needs. FPGAs are much less limited. As I’ve men-
tioned, an FPGA is like a blank slate that can be programmed to do almost
anything, providing you with tremendous flexibility to tackle a wide range
of digital logic problems.
     When you have an engineering problem, you need to choose the best
tool possible to solve it. Often a microcontroller works very well, but occa-
sionally it simply won’t work due to speed or flexibility issues. In those situ-
ations, an FPGA is a good candidate. However, there’s also another kind of
device worth considering: an ASIC.

FPGAs vs. ASICs
An ASIC is a type of integrated circuit designed for a particular use. Unlike
an FPGA, which can suit any number of uses, an ASIC is designed to be
really good at one thing. You might think that it would always be better to
have the flexibility of an FPGA, but there are trade-offs to consider. We’ve
already compared FPGAs to microcontrollers in terms of cost, ease of use,
power, speed, and flexibility. Let’s now compare FPGAs and ASICs along
those same lines.
     ASICs are incredibly expensive to make in low quantities because they
have a large nonrecurring engineering (NRE) cost: you need to pay a lot of
money up front to a semiconductor foundry (or fab) to get that first ASIC
chip. Often the NRE on an ASIC design can run into the millions of dol-
lars. Whether or not you choose to design an ASIC highly depends on how
many chips you’ll need. If you’re making low quantities of something, even
into the tens of thousands, it’s unlikely you’ll ever be able to recover the up-
front cost of an ASIC. If you need millions of chips, however, then an ASIC
starts to become an attractive option, since each chip after the first one is
very cheap (often under $1). Compare that to an FPGA, where a single chip
often costs more than $10, and you start to see that FPGAs just don’t make
financial sense in large volumes. Generalizing, in smaller quantities FPGAs
usually win against ASICs, but in larger quantities they can’t compete
as well.
     An area where FPGAs always win out over ASICs is in terms of ease of
use. The process of designing an ASIC is very complicated. Plus, you need
to make sure your design is free of bugs before you go to the fab to make the
chip, or you’ll have wasted your NRE. Most FPGAs, on the other hand, can
be fixed in the field (hence field programmable), so even if you find a bug
after shipping your product to customers, you can update the code and
remedy the issue. That’s simply not possible with an ASIC. Therefore, you
must spend significant engineering time and effort verifying that your ASIC
design is as bug-free as possible before getting it fabricated. There’s actually

                an entire discipline called verification engineering that does just this, some-
                thing we’ll explore in more detail in Chapter 5.
                     One large benefit to an ASIC is that it can be optimized for low power.
                ASICs are finely tuned for their specific application; they have what they
                need and no more. Meanwhile, recall that an FPGA has a significant num-
                ber of wires and interconnections, which give it its flexibility but mean it
                uses more power. A further advantage ASICs have over FPGAs is that they
                can use fabrication techniques that optimize them for low power at the
                transistor level. For a real-life example, when Bitcoin was new, people were
                using their home computers (CPUs) to mine it. This draws a lot of power
                per Bitcoin mined. Eventually, people realized that FPGAs could be pro-
                grammed to mine Bitcoins, using less power than CPUs. Electrical power
                is expensive, so mining Bitcoins with FPGAs was more profitable. Further
                down the line, people realized that ASICs could mine Bitcoins even faster
                and using even less power than FPGAs. It became worth the up-front cost to
                create an ASIC dedicated to Bitcoin mining, because the cost savings from
                the lower power consumption were so significant. Today, Bitcoins are mined
                almost exclusively with ASICs.
                     When it comes to speed, FPGAs and ASICs both have large bandwidth
                and can move lots of data around. They’re also both very capable at math
                operations, particularly multiplication and addition, and both can do those
                operations in parallel. ASICs have a small edge in this category: because
                they’re built specifically for one purpose, they can often run a bit faster
                than FPGAs.
                     FPGAs, on the other hand, offer significantly more flexibility than
                ASICs. Having flexibility in what your design can do is very valuable, espe-
                cially if you’re working on a project that isn’t clearly defined. Unlike ASICs,
                which are fixed, FPGAs can be reprogrammed over and over again, with
                features and functionality added or removed. Additionally, ASICs take a
                long time to design, make, and verify, but you can get started with an FPGA
                right away, so the speed of progress can be faster.
                     In general, ASICs win against FPGAs on cost when the volumes are very
                high, but not when they’re low. They beat FPGAs on power consumption
                and have a slight edge on speed, but they lose to FPGAs on flexibility and
                ease of use. In reality, though, ASICs and FPGAs often go hand in hand.
                When a company wants to design an ASIC, it will typically start by design-
                ing a prototype with an FPGA, and then produce the ASIC. This method
                allows engineers to work with the hardware sooner and gain confidence in
                the product, prior to spending millions of dollars on a custom chip. The
                engineers can work through the bugs in the Verilog or VHDL code using
                the FPGA prototype, and fix issues when it’s inexpensive and simpler to do
                so. This code isn’t throwaway code either, since the same Verilog or VHDL
                used on an FPGA can be used to create an ASIC.

                FPGAs vs. Microcontrollers vs. ASICs
                That was a lot to take in, so let’s briefly summarize what we’ve just discussed
                about FPGAs, microcontrollers, and ASICs. Table 1-1 provides an overview

       of where each type of device sits on the scale across different parameters.
       There are always exceptions, but the table provides a good generalization.

Table 1-1: Comparing an FPGA vs. a Microcontroller vs. an ASIC
                                   FPGA              Microcontroller        ASIC
        Cost (low quantities)      Moderate          Cheap                  Expensive
        Cost (high quantities)     Moderate          Cheap                  Cheap
        Speed                      Fast              Moderate               Fast+
        Power                      Moderate          Low                    Low
        Flexibility                High              Low                    None
        Ease of use                Medium            Easy                   Difficult

            Cost is often the dominant factor in why a microcontroller or an ASIC
       is chosen over an FPGA for large-volume applications. They’re simply
       cheaper, and that counts in industries that are highly sensitive to cost.
       When performance is the most important consideration and the high ini-
       tial cost and level of complexity are acceptable, ASICs are often preferred.
       The sweet spot for FPGAs is applications that are low volume but require
       high speed in terms of either bandwidth or computations, or require a very
       flexible and unique design (like having 16 ADCs to interface to).
            Ultimately, FPGAs, microcontrollers, and ASICs are three tools in the
       engineer’s toolbox. When looking at the requirements of your particular
       problem, you’ll need to decide which of these tools provides the best solu-
       tion. You wouldn’t use a hammer to turn a screw; knowing which tool to use
       for which application is critical to becoming a strong engineer. The act of
       examining multiple possibilities and selecting a technical solution is often
       referred to in engineering as a trade study.
            I love FPGAs, but when I look at a technical problem, often the right
       solution is a microcontroller: they’re easy to use and inexpensive. A micro-
       controller isn’t always the right solution, though. Sometimes you need more
       speed, or the problem is one that microcontrollers just aren’t designed for.
       Selecting the right tool for your problem will make solving the problem
       much more enjoyable. And as you’ll hopefully see, working with FPGAs
       is certainly enjoyable! It’s like working with LEGO or building a house in
       Minecraft. Using simple, low-level building blocks, you can create some-
       thing wonderfully complex.

Verilog and VHDL
       As I’ve mentioned, there are two main languages for working with FPGAs
       (and ASICs): Verilog and VHDL. These languages are known as hardware
       description languages (HDLs) because they’re used to define the behavior
       of digital logic circuits. Though syntactically Verilog and VHDL may look
       similar to traditional programming languages, it’s important to realize that

                 HDLs are a different beast entirely. When you write your FPGA code with
                 an HDL, you’re working directly with wires, logic gates, and other discrete
                 resources on the FPGA, whereas when you code with a traditional pro-
                 gramming language you don’t have that same low level of control over your
                 device. Understanding the logic behind your Verilog or VHDL code and
                 knowing what FPGA components you’re instantiating with that code is a
                 critical skill for a digital designer, and something we’ll return to through-
                 out the book.
                      FPGA beginners often wonder if it’s better to learn Verilog or VHDL.
                 There’s no right answer; it really depends on your situation. To help you
                 make that decision, let’s compare and contrast the two languages to identify
                 some reasons why you might select one over the other.

       NOTE      All the code examples in this book will be shown in both Verilog and VHDL, back-to-
                 back, so whichever language you choose, you’ll be able to follow along.

                     VHDL stands for VHSIC Hardware Description Language, and VHSIC,
                 the acronym within an acronym, stands for Very High-Speed Integrated
                 Circuit. In full, VHDL is the Very High-Speed Integrated Circuit Hardware
                 Description Language—quite a mouthful! It was developed by the United
                 States Department of Defense (DoD) in 1983 and borrows many features
                 and syntax from another DoD-developed language called Ada. VHDL, like
                 Ada, is strongly typed.
                     If you’ve never worked with a strongly typed language, it can be a bit
                 challenging at first. Strong typing forces the designer to be very explicit
                 with their code. For example, in a weakly typed language like Python or C,
                 you can add a variable defined as an integer to a variable defined as a float
                 without any problem. A strongly typed language like VHDL, however, would
                 never allow something like this. When adding two numbers in VHDL, their
                 widths (number of bits) and types need to match exactly, or the syntax
                 checker will throw some cryptic error. Until you understand the strong
                 type checking that the language is performing, it can be cumbersome to
                 get what you need done as a beginner. When sorting out these issues in
                 VHDL, you often need to create intermediary signals of the correct type,
                 or use lots of type conversions throughout your code. This is one of several
                 reasons VHDL often requires much more typing (on your keyboard, that is)
                 than Verilog to perform the same functionality. If you want to use VHDL, it
                 helps to be a fast typist.
                     Compared to VHDL, Verilog looks more similar to a software lan-
                 guage like C, which makes it easier for some people to read Verilog code
                 and understand what it’s doing. Also, Verilog is weakly typed. It allows you
                 to write code that’s wrong, but more concise. It would have no problem
                 adding a float to an integer, even if the result of that addition might be
                 incorrect.
                     Another interesting point of comparison is that Verilog is case sensitive
                 but VHDL is not. This means that a variable called RxDone isn’t the same as
                 a variable called rxDone in Verilog, but VHDL treats them as the same. It
                 might seem odd that strongly typed VHDL isn’t case sensitive while weakly

typed Verilog is, but that’s just the way history turned out. In my experi-
ence, Verilog’s case sensitivity can create issues that are hard to diagnose.
You might think two signals are the same, but the code sees them as differ-
ent due to a capitalization discrepancy.
    Ultimately, none of these points is the most important factor, though.
You should choose between Verilog and VHDL based on which language
you’re more likely to use in school or at work. If your university uses Verilog,
learn Verilog! If companies where you might want to work use VHDL, learn
VHDL! The breakdown of who uses VHDL versus Verilog is highly depen-
dent on where in the world you’re living. If you compare VHDL and Verilog
using Google Trends, you can start to get a pretty good idea of which lan-
guage you should be learning first.
    When you look at the overall search volumes for the two terms through-
out the world, you’ll find that “Verilog” tends to have more searches than
“VHDL.” Maybe that’s because it’s used more often, or maybe people have
more trouble with Verilog and need to look up solutions online more than
they do with VHDL. In any case, it’s more revealing to break down the
trends on a country-by-country basis. Figure 1-1 shows some examples.

Figure 1-1: Verilog vs. VHDL search volumes in selected countries

     India and the United States have the largest volumes of Google searches
for the two terms, but while VHDL and Verilog appear to be roughly equal
in popularity in India, Verilog is slightly more popular in the United States
than VHDL. In fact, I know from personal experience that in the United
States the defense industry favors VHDL, while the commercial industry
favors Verilog. Notice that in Germany and France, VHDL is significantly
more popular than Verilog. If you are from either of these two countries,
I would highly recommend learning VHDL first! Conversely, in China and
South Korea Verilog is much more popular than VHDL, so adjust your pri-
orities accordingly.
     In general, VHDL and Verilog are equally capable languages. You
should choose which language to learn based on what suits your location
and circumstances.

     Summary
                 This chapter introduced you to FPGAs and provided you with an overview
                 of their history and common applications. We compared FPGAs with micro-
                 controllers and ASICs and saw where each type of integrated circuit really
                 shines. You learned that FPGAs excel at applications that aren’t cost sensi-
                 tive, but where high speed, maximum flexibility, or unique interfaces are
                 required. Finally, we looked at the two most popular hardware description
                 languages used to work with FPGAs, Verilog and VHDL, and discussed how
                 to choose the right language for you and your situation.

