                              2
             SE T T ING U P YOU R
           HAR DWARE AND TOOL S

            This chapter walks you through the process
            of choosing an FPGA development board
          and setting up the associated software tools
        that you’ll need to translate your Verilog or
VHDL code into physical circuits on your FPGA. You’ll
learn about the features to look for in a board, down-
load and install the tools you need to work with it, and
test them out by designing your first FPGA project to
target your development board. This project will also
give you an overview of the main steps in the FPGA
development process.
     An FPGA development board isn’t strictly required to use this book.
You can still learn from the projects without a board, and you can always
test your Verilog or VHDL code by running it through a free online FPGA
simulator tool like EDA Playground (a topic we’ll cover in Chapter 5).
                 However, there’s something satisfying about writing some code, program-
                 ming it to a development board, and seeing the results in action—even
                 when it does something as simple as blinking an LED. For this reason,
                 I highly recommend that you have an FPGA development board on hand
                 when learning about FPGAs.

     Choosing an FPGA Development Board
                 An FPGA development board (or dev board) is a printed circuit board (PCB)
                 with an FPGA on it that allows you to program the FPGA with your Verilog
                 or VHDL code and test it out. The board may also have peripherals on it
                 that are connected to the FPGA, such as LEDs, switches, and connectors
                 for linking the FPGA to other devices. FPGA development boards range
                 from devices the size of a pack of gum that cost less than $100 to laptop-size
                 devices that cost thousands of dollars. With such a wide range of options,
                 there are many factors you should consider when choosing a development
                 board, including price, ease of use, and enjoyability:
                 Cost
                    For an FPGA beginner, I recommend starting off with an inexpensive
                    development board. Larger, more expensive boards often have many
                    extra features, like SerDes and DDR memory, that are unnecessary and
                    potentially overwhelming for new users. You can always invest in one of
                    these more sophisticated boards as your skills mature and you grow out
                    of your first board.
                 Simplicity
                    The board you start out with and the software required to work with it
                    should be simple to use. It’s challenging enough to learn how an FPGA
                    works; if you also have to learn how to use a complicated design tool,
                    the process becomes even more difficult. I recommend focusing on
                    boards built around Lattice Semiconductor’s iCE40 family of FPGAs,
                    since these FPGAs are compatible with a lightweight and simple set of
                    software tools: iCEcube2 and Diamond Programmer. These programs
                    are streamlined to do the minimum required to build your FPGA, with-
                    out all the bells and whistles of more advanced programs. You’ll learn
                    how to use both of them in this chapter.
                 Fun
                       An FPGA development board should be fun to use, with peripherals
                       like LEDs, push buttons, and seven-segment displays that you can take
                       advantage of in different projects. Some cheaper boards cut costs by
                       removing peripherals; they just have an FPGA and nothing else. FPGA
                       development is much more fun and interesting when you can interface
                       the FPGA with other devices.
                     Keep these factors in mind as you consider the development boards
                 available on the market.

Requirements for the Book
        You’ll get the most value out of this book if you follow along with the proj-
        ects and program your own development board. To go through the projects
        exactly as written, you’ll need your development board to have the follow-
        ing features (Appendix A lists a few boards that meet these requirements,
        or can meet them with a few modifications):
        Lattice iCE40 FPGA
            iCE40 FPGAs have emerged as the best option for FPGA beginners.
            They’ve been available for many years at affordable prices, while pro-
            viding enough resources to support interesting projects. The iCE40
            architecture is relatively simple, with few distracting bells and whis-
            tles, so you can focus on what’s important. As I mentioned earlier,
            iCE40 FPGAs are compatible with the free, easy-to-use iCEcube2 and
            Diamond Programmer software tools, which we’ll explore in this chap-
            ter. The iCE40 family is also compatible with open source FPGA tools,
            if you want to avoid proprietary software altogether.
        USB
           Your development board should have a USB interface to power and
           program the board. This way, all you need is one USB cable and you’re
           ready to go. Older FPGA development boards often require an external
           programmer (a separate piece of hardware that can itself cost hundreds
           of dollars), so make sure simple built-in USB programming is possible
           with the board you choose.
        LEDs
           The book’s projects assume that your board has four LEDs. These are
           a convenient way to get output from the FPGA. For example, our first
           project later this chapter will involve lighting up the LEDs, which allows
           you to get immediate feedback that you’ve successfully programmed
           the FPGA. There’s nothing more satisfying than getting that first LED
           to light up!
        Switches
            For each of the four LEDs, you’ll need a corresponding push-button
            switch. These switches provide input to the FPGA, allowing you to easily
            change the state of the board.
        Seven-Segment Display
            Your board will need one seven-segment display to implement the
            memory game project in Chapter 8. This kind of display provides a fun
            way to output data. Lighting up individual LEDs is one thing, but light-
            ing up numbers and letters on a seven-segment display is much more
            engaging.
        If your development board doesn’t meet all these requirements, don’t
        worry: you can still work through this book’s projects with a few

                 adjustments. For example, if you’d prefer to work with a board built around
                 a different kind of FPGA, you can. As we’ll discuss in later chapters, there
                 are advanced features that vary from one FPGA to another, but the code
                 for this book’s projects is general enough that it should work on any
                 modern FPGA. That’s part of the beauty of Verilog and VHDL: they’re
                 FPGA-agnostic.
                      Do be aware that if you aren’t working with an iCE40 FPGA, however,
                 you’ll need to use a different set of software tools than the ones discussed in
                 this chapter. Each FPGA company provides its own tools specifically aimed
                 at its FPGAs. For example, AMD (Xilinx) has Vivado, and Intel (Altera) has
                 Quartus. If your board has an FPGA from one of these companies, look
                 online for resources about using the appropriate software.
                      If you don’t have all the necessary peripherals for the projects in this
                 book, you have a few options. First, you can modify the projects’ Verilog or
                 VHDL code to use fewer LEDs and switches. This will work in most cases,
                 although the memory game project in Chapter 8 will be less satisfying the
                 fewer LEDs and switches you use.
                      Alternatively, many FPGA development boards, including some of the
                 boards discussed in Appendix A, have connection points for wiring up your
                 own peripherals. In particular, look for a development board with a Pmod
                 (peripheral module) connector. Pmod is a standard connector made
                 famous by Digilent for attaching accessory boards with extra peripherals—
                 not just the ones used in this book, but also devices like temperature sen-
                 sors, accelerometers, audio jacks, microSD cards, and more. If you’ve ever
                 worked with Arduino Shields, it’s the same concept. If your board has a
                 Pmod connector, that will greatly expand the range of projects you can
                 work on with your FPGA.

     Setting Up Your Development Environment
                 To use the iCE40 FPGA on your development board, you’ll need to install
                 two software tools on your computer: iCEcube2 and Diamond Programmer.
                 These free tools from Lattice Semiconductor are designed specifically for
                 working with iCE40 FPGAs. This section walks you through the process of
                 setting them up. If you’re on Windows, you’ll have the easiest time, since the
                 tools are designed for the Windows operating system. For Linux or macOS
                 users, I recommend creating a Windows virtual machine on your computer,
                 then running the Lattice tools in that. There are many tutorials online
                 for setting up a Windows virtual machine using VirtualBox or a similar
                 product.

                 iCEcube2
                 iCEcube2 is Lattice’s free integrated development environment (IDE) for
                 turning the VHDL or Verilog code you write on your computer into a file
                 that the FPGA can be programmed with. It’s much easier to use than other
                 IDEs like Vivado, Quartus, or even Lattice Diamond (not to be confused

       with Diamond Programmer), Lattice’s tool for working with more sophis-
       ticated FPGAs. Their compatibility with iCEcube2 is part of what makes
       iCE40 FPGAs an especially good choice for beginners. Those other pro-
       grams are all several gigabytes in size and extremely complicated. They
       have many bells and whistles, most of which you won’t need when you’re get-
       ting started. By contrast, iCEcube2 is more streamlined, making it a more
       straightforward tool for learning about FPGAs.
            To download and install iCEcube2, follow these steps:

        1. Visit https://latticesemi.com/icecube2 or search the internet for “iCEcube2
           download.”
        2. Find the download link for the latest Windows version of iCEcube2,
           whether you’re running Windows natively or in a virtual machine. If
           you’re a Linux user, you may be tempted to download the Linux version
           instead, but I wouldn’t recommend it. That version is buggy; you might
           have success, or you might not.
        3. When you click the download link, you’ll be asked to create an account
           on the Lattice website. You must create an account to get a license for
           this tool. Make sure to use a real email address, as they’ll email you the
           free license. Once you create an account, you should be able to down-
           load the software.
        4. You’ll need to request a license, which is free for hobbyists and similar
           users but can take a couple days to arrive in an email. Follow the steps
           in the “Licensing” section of the iCEcube2 page to start the process.
        5. You’ll need your computer’s MAC address to obtain the license. To find
           it on Windows, open a command prompt by clicking the Start button
           and searching for “cmd.” Then enter ipconfig /all at the command line.
           You should see something like this:

           C:\> ipconfig /all
           --snip--
           Ethernet adapter Local Area Connection:

              Connection-specific DNS Suffix . :
              Description . . . . . . . . . . . : Intel(R) Ethernet Connection I217-V
              Physical Address. . . . . . . . . : 38-D3-21-F5-A3-09
              DHCP Enabled. . . . . . . . . . . : Yes
              Autoconfiguration Enabled . . . . : Yes

        6. Your MAC address is the 12-digit hexadecimal number next to
           Physical Address. Make a note of this MAC address as it will be required
           for the license request process.
        7. Launch the iCEcube2 installer once it finishes downloading and point
           it to your license file.

NOTE   If you already installed iCEcube2 before obtaining the license, you can use the pro-
       gram LicenseSetup.exe in the same folder where you installed the tool to point it at
       your license file.

                     When it’s done installing, launch iCEcube2. The main window will look
                  something like Figure 2-1.

Figure 2-1: The iCEcube2 main window

                      Click around to get a feel for the program. We’ll explore it in more
                  detail later in this chapter with a project that will take you through the
                  entire FPGA build process.

                  Diamond Programmer
                  Diamond Programmer is a free standalone programming tool from Lattice
                  that takes the output of iCEcube2 and uses it to program your FPGA via
                  your development board’s USB connection. More sophisticated software
                  tools like Vivado and Quartus have a built-in programmer, so you don’t
                  need to download a separate program. It’s unfortunate that iCEcube2
                  doesn’t have one built in, but such is the life of an iCE40 FPGA designer!
                  Here’s how to install Diamond Programmer:

                   1. Go to https://www.latticesemi.com/diamond or search the internet for “lat-
                      tice diamond software” to locate the download page.
                   2. The Software Downloads section has many download links to choose
                      from. Find and click the link for the latest version of Programmer
                      Standalone 64-bit for Windows.

     WARNING      Be sure to download Programmer Standalone and not Diamond or the Programmer
                  Standalone Encryption Pack. The latter isn’t needed.

                   3. Diamond Programmer doesn’t require a license, so simply run the
                      installer once it downloads.

                     You’re now ready to dive into your first FPGA project, where you’ll learn
                  how to work with these tools and program your FPGA.

Project #1: Wiring Switches to LEDs
          In this project, you’ll get familiar with the build process by creating a sim-
          ple FPGA design: when you press one of the push-button switches on your
          FPGA development board, one of the LEDs should light up. The project
          assumes that you have four switches and four LEDs, so you’ll design and
          program your FPGA to wire up each switch to one of the LEDs. (As men-
          tioned earlier, you can adapt the project to use fewer switches and LEDs if
          needed.) Figure 2-2 shows a diagram of what we want to do.

          SW1                                  D1

          SW2                                  D2

          SW3                                  D3

          SW4                                  D4
                              FPGA

Figure 2-2: The Project #1 block diagram

               On the left we have the board’s four switches, labeled SW1 through
          SW4. By default, these will be open (not connected), meaning the corre-
          sponding input pin of the FPGA will have a low voltage when the switch isn’t
          pressed, due to an onboard pull-down resistor. When you press a switch
          down, the FPGA will see a high voltage present at the input pin connected
          to that switch. On the output side we have four LEDs, labeled D1 through
          D4. We want to create an FPGA that will connect the switches and LEDs
          such that, for example, when the user presses SW1, the D1 LED illumi-
          nates. We’ll literally be creating a physical wired connection between the
          SW1 input and the D1 output using our FPGA. In other words, with FPGAs
          you’re programming at such a low level that you’re creating wires between
          pins, throughout your device.
               To implement this project, we’ll go through four main steps. These
          steps, summarized in Figure 2-3, form the main phases of the FPGA build
          process.

                                                     Place
                                                                            Program
                Design             Synthesis          and
                                                                              FPGA
                                                     route

Figure 2-3: The FPGA build process

                     You’ll familiarize yourself with the steps at a high level through this
                 project. Then you’ll expand your knowledge of each step throughout the
                 book. The four steps are:

                  1. Design. In this step, you write the Verilog or VHDL code that describes
                     how the FPGA will function. You might also write tests to ensure that
                     your code will work as you intend, a concept we’ll discuss in Chapter 5.
                  2. Synthesis. The synthesis process is what turns your code into low-level
                     components that perform the actual functionality on your FPGA. It’s
                     similar to how a compiler in a programming language like C turns your
                     C code into Assembly instructions. In this book, we’ll use iCEcube2 as a
                     synthesis tool.
                  3. Place and route. This process will take your synthesized design and
                     map it to the physical layout of your specific FPGA. It will wire up
                     (route) the connections between components, including connecting
                     the input and output pins to the inner FPGA components. Creating
                     links between pins and signals in your code is one of the purposes of
                     the physical constraints file. You’ll see how to write a constraint file in this
                     project. iCEcube2 handles the place and route step at the same time
                     that it handles synthesis.
                  4. Programming. This is where you take the output of the previous steps
                     and load it onto your physical FPGA. The programming file literally
                     creates wired connections between pins and FPGA components, and
                     within the FPGA itself. This project will simply create wires between
                     pins, but in future projects we’ll use other FPGA components as well.
                     The programming step happens within Diamond Programmer.

                     All the projects in this book will follow this same basic process. As you
                 work on later projects, refer back to this section if you need a refresher on
                 using iCEcube2 and Diamond Programmer.

                 Writing the Code
                 Let’s design an FPGA that links the switch inputs to the LED outputs using
                 Verilog or VHDL. Hopefully by this point you’ve chosen which language
                 you want to learn; I suggest focusing on just one for now, but you can always
                 pick up the other later. All of this book’s code examples are shown in both
                 languages, so you can compare and contrast the code as well.
                      I’ve had success writing FPGA code with Visual Studio Code (VS Code),
                 a free tool from Microsoft. You can download extensions that will enable
                 Verilog or VHDL syntax highlighting and other useful features, like the
                 ability to tie to GitHub repositories directly from the code editor. You could
                 also write your code directly in iCEcube2, but I wouldn’t recommend it, as it
                 doesn’t have syntax highlighting.
                      Whatever tool you choose, enter the following Verilog or VHDL code
                 and save it on your computer. Take note of the filename and location, as
                 you’ll need it later. All of the code in this book is also available in the book’s
                 GitHub repository, https://github.com/nandland/getting-started-with-fpgas.

Verilog 1 module Switches_To_LEDs
        2 (input i_Switch_1,
            input i_Switch_2,
            input i_Switch_3,
            input i_Switch_4,
          3 output o_LED_1,
            output o_LED_2,
            output o_LED_3,
            output o_LED_4);

            4 assign o_LED_1 = i_Switch_1;
              assign o_LED_2 = i_Switch_2;
              assign o_LED_3 = i_Switch_3;
              assign o_LED_4 = i_Switch_4;

            endmodule

   VHDL     library ieee;
            use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;

          1 entity Switches_To_LEDs is
              port (
              2 i_Switch_1 : in std_logic;
                i_Switch_2 : in std_logic;
                i_Switch_3 : in std_logic;
                i_Switch_4 : in std_logic;
              3 o_LED_1    : out std_logic;
                o_LED_2    : out std_logic;
                o_LED_3    : out std_logic;
                o_LED_4    : out std_logic);
            end entity Switches_To_LEDs;
            architecture RTL of Switches_To_LEDs is
            begin

            4 o_LED_1 <= i_Switch_1;
              o_LED_2 <= i_Switch_2;
              o_LED_3 <= i_Switch_3;
              o_LED_4 <= i_Switch_4;

            end RTL;

                Let’s consider broadly how this code is structured, since all our projects
           will follow this same general format. The design for an FPGA is encapsu-
           lated inside one or more modules (in Verilog) or entities (in VHDL). These
           modules/entities define the interface to a block of code. The interface has
           signals, which can be inputs or outputs. At the highest level of your FPGA,
           these signals will connect to physical pins on your device, thereby creating
           the interfaces to other components, such as switches and LEDs.
                To create a module in Verilog, you use the module keyword and provide
           a descriptive name—in this case, Switches_To_LEDs 1. Inside the module, the
           first thing you do is declare all the input 2 and output 3 signals, enclosed

                 in a set of parentheses. Then comes the code for what you want the module
                 to actually do, which we’ll discuss in detail momentarily, followed by the
                 endmodule keyword.
                       Looking at the VHDL version, the first thing you might notice is that
                 it’s a bit longer than the Verilog version. This is typical; VHDL generally
                 takes more typing to accomplish the same task compared to Verilog. Some
                 of the extra length comes at the very beginning of the listing, where we
                 specify which VHDL library and package we’ll be using. In this case, we use
                 the std_logic_1164 package from the ieee library. We need this to get access
                 to the std_logic data type, which is commonly used to represent binary val-
                 ues (0, 1) within your FPGA. Get used to including this library and package.
                 You’ll need it for every VHDL design you create.
                       Whereas in Verilog you declare the inputs and outputs and code the
                 actual logic of the module as part of the same code block, in VHDL you do
                 this with two separate code blocks. This is another reason why the VHDL
                 version is longer. First, you use the entity keyword to declare the VHDL
                 entity 1, giving it a name and specifying its inputs 2 and outputs 3. Then,
                 in a separate code block, you use the architecture keyword to declare the
                 architecture of the entity, which is the code that defines the entity’s function-
                 ality. You’ll almost always have a single entity/architecture pair in a VHDL
                 file, with the entity describing the input/output interface and the architec-
                 ture describing the functionality.
                       Now that we’ve covered the structure of the code, let’s look at the
                 specifics. In both the Verilog and VHDL versions, we define the four
                 input signals 2 corresponding to the four switches: i_Switch_1, i_Switch_2,
                 i_Switch_3, and i_Switch_4. In Verilog, these inputs will be defined as 1 bit
                 wide (a single 0 or 1) by default, whereas in VHDL we explicitly define
                 them as std_logic, which is a 1-bit-wide data type. We similarly define
                 the four outputs, o_LED_1, o_LED_2, o_LED_3, and o_LED_4, for the four LEDs 3.
                 Notice that I like to precede my input signal names with i_ and my output
                 signal names with o_. This helps me to keep track of which direction each
                 signal is going in.

       NOTE      You can define your inputs and outputs in any order, but it’s customary to put
                 inputs first.

                     Finally, we define the logic of the design—the code that actually does
                 the work—by assigning the inputs to the outputs 4. For example, we take
                 the value on input i_Switch_1 and assign it to the output o_LED_1. When the
                 FPGA is built, this will create a physical wire between these two pins. In
                 Verilog we use the assign keyword, which requires the = for the actual signal
                 assignment. In VHDL, we can just use the <= assignment to create the wire
                 between the input and the output.

                 Creating a New iCEcube2 Project
                 Once you have the coding done, it’s time to bring the design into iCEcube2
                 so you can build it. Open iCEcube2 and select FileNew Project. You’ll be

       taken to a window asking for information about your FPGA board, as shown
       in Figure 2-4. Let’s review the settings in this window.

Figure 2-4: The iCEcube2 New Project window

            For the Project Name, give your project whatever name you like, and for
       the Project Directory, choose where on your computer you want it saved. Next,
       you need to tell the tool which FPGA you’re using. It needs to know how many
       resources the FPGA has, which pins go where, and everything about how it
       works to properly turn your code into something compatible with your spe-
       cific device. To do this, select iCE40 from the Device Family drop-down, then
       choose your FPGA’s specific device name and package from the Device and
       Device Package drop-downs. For example, if you were using the Nandland Go
       Board (one of the boards discussed in Appendix A), you would choose HX1K
       for the device and VQ100 for the package, then select 3.3 from the topBank,
       leftBank, bottomBank, and rightBank drop-downs. This tells the tool that all
       the pins on the device operate at 3.3 volts. Everything else in the window can
       remain at the default settings. Click Next when you’re done.

NOTE   You’ll use these same settings for every single project, so you can refer back to this sec-
       tion each time you create a new project.

             You’ll be taken to another dialog that prompts you to add the Verilog
       or VHDL source file that you created previously. Go ahead and add your
       file, or click Finish to skip this step for now. If you choose to skip adding

                   your file from the dialog, you can do so later by expanding the Synthesis
                   Tool menu on the left side of the main iCEcube2 project window, right-
                   clicking Design Files, and selecting Add Files, as shown in Figure 2-5.

Figure 2-5: Adding
                   Verilog or VHDL source
                   files to your project

                       This Design Files menu also makes it possible to add additional files
                   to an existing project after it’s been created, or to remove and replace files
                   that you’ve added previously.

                   Adding Pin Constraints
                   The next step in the build process is to add the pin constraints to your proj-
                   ect. These constraints, which you declare in a .pcf (physical constraints file)
                   file (sometimes referred to as pin constraint file), tell the tool which signals
                   in your Verilog or VHDL code will be connected to which physical pins on
                   your FPGA. This information is critical to the place and route stage of the
                   build process, when the output of the synthesis process is mapped to the
                   physical resources on your FPGA. The tool needs to know which pins are
                   connected to the switches and LEDs so all the wires in the design can be
                   routed to where they need to go.
                        Each FPGA manufacturer has its own keywords for writing constraints.
                   To declare a pin constraint for Lattice’s iCEcube2, you use the set_io ­keyword,
                   followed by the name of one of the signals in your design, followed by
                   the corresponding pin number on the FPGA itself. Here’s an example
                   of what the physical constraint file should look like for this project, but
                   keep in mind that the actual pin numbers will vary depending on your
                   development board. As an example, these pin numbers would work for the
                   Nandland Go Board:

                   # LED pins:
                 1 set_io o_LED_1 56
                   set_io o_LED_2 57
                   set_io o_LED_3 59
                   set_io o_LED_4 60

                   # Push-button switches:
                   set_io i_Switch_1 53
                   set_io i_Switch_2 51
                   set_io i_Switch_3 54
                   set_io i_Switch_4 52

           Each line maps one of the signals in our code to one of the pins on
       the FPGA. For example, we set the Verilog/VHDL signal o_LED_1 to be con-
       nected to pin 56 on the FPGA 1. The signal names you use in the physical
       constraint file must match the signal names in your Verilog/VHDL code
       exactly. If the names don’t match, the tool won’t know which signal goes to
       which physical pin on the device.

NOTE   Notice that comments in the physical constraint file are preceded with a # symbol—an
       octothorpe, pound sign, or hashtag, depending on your age.

            When setting your pin constraints, you’ll need to look at the reference
       schematic for your FPGA development board. The schematic contains the
       wiring diagram for the circuit board. It tells you which pin of the FPGA is
       connected to which LED, button, connector pin, or other device. Learning
       how to read this basic schematic information is a critical skill for an FPGA
       designer, as setting pin constraints is a common task.
            To add the physical constraint file to your project, find the P&R Flow
       section in the menu on the left side of the iCEcube2 project window, expand
       Add P&R Files, and right-click Constraint Files. Then click Add Files
       and select your .pcf file. Once you do this, you’ll see the file listed under
       Constraint Files.
            Forgetting to add a physical constraint file is a common mistake when
       working with FPGAs. If you don’t add one, the tool won’t warn you about
       it. Instead, they’ll just connect the signals in your code to randomly chosen
       pins on your device. This will almost certainly be wrong, and your design
       won’t work as you expect.

       Running the Build
       You’re now ready to run the build in iCEcube2. To do this, simply click
       ToolRun All. This will execute both the synthesis and place and route
       processes, creating the FPGA image file that you’ll use to program the
       FPGA. iCEcube2 generates a report for each of these steps, visible under
       the Reports section. You’re welcome to explore these reports to see what
       type of information they contain; we’ll dive into the details in future
       chapters.

       Connecting Your Development Board
       You now need to connect your board to your computer to program the
       FPGA. Take a minute to make sure this connection works and that your
       computer recognizes the device. With the board unplugged, open up
       Device Manager in Windows and expand the Ports (COM & LPT) section.
       Now go ahead and plug in the board via USB. You should see two devices
       labeled “USB Serial Port (COMX)” pop up, as shown in Figure 2-6. The spe-
       cific COM port index numbers don’t matter. If this works for you, then your
       board is connected to your computer and you’re ready to go.

Figure 2-6: Viewing the board
                 connection in Device Manager

                      If you don’t see the USB serial ports in Device Manager, there are a few
                 troubleshooting techniques to try. First, check if your board has a power LED
                 for indicating when it’s on. If it does, but that LED isn’t illuminated, you don’t
                 have power, so check that the USB cable is firmly plugged into the board and
                 into your computer. If the LED is illuminated, then the next most likely issue
                 is the USB cable itself. Some Micro-USB cables are “charge only,” meaning
                 they don’t have the wires that allow for data transfer. Get another cable that
                 you know works to transfer data to and from a computer.

                 Programming the FPGA
                 The final step in the process is to program your design to your FPGA using
                 Diamond Programmer (from the Programmer Standalone download earlier).
                 An FPGA development board typically features an integrated circuit that turns
                 its USB connection into the SPI interface, which Diamond Programmer uses
                 to program a flash memory chip installed on the board. Once that’s done, the
                 FPGA will boot up from the flash, and you’ll see the fruits of your labor!
                      With your board connected, open up Diamond Programmer to get
                 started. You’ll be greeted with the dialog shown in Figure 2-7. Click OK to
                 create a new project.

Figure 2-7: The Diamond Programmer dialog

     Once you click OK, the tool will try to scan the board to automatically
identify which FPGA is connected. It will fail. That’s fine; we can manually
tell Diamond Programmer which FPGA to target from the next screen,
which is shown in Figure 2-8.

Figure 2-8: The Diamond Programmer device selection screen

     Set the Device Family to iCE40 and choose your specific FPGA from
the Device drop-down, as shown in Figure 2-8. Next, double-click the
field under Operation. You’ll be greeted with a new window, shown in
Figure 2-9. Note that you may need to change the access mode to SPI Flash
Programming to see the contents shown here.

Figure 2-9: The Diamond Programmer
Device Properties window

   This window lets you tell Diamond Programmer how to program your
FPGA. In the Device Operation section, set the access mode to SPI Flash

                 Programming. For the SPI Flash Options section, you’ll have to consult the
                 programming guide for your development board to determine which SPI
                 flash device is used. For the Go Board, for example, you’d set the family to
                 SPI Serial Flash, the vendor to Micron, and the device to M25P10, as shown
                 in Figure 2-9.
                      Finally, in the Programming Options section, click the three dots
                 next to the Programming File box and choose the .bin file to program to
                 the FPGA. This is the file you generated using iCEcube2, located in the
                 /<Project_Name>_Implmnt/sbt/outputs/bitmap/ subdirectory inside the directory
                 where you saved your iCEcube2 project. Leave all the other settings on their
                 defaults, and click OK to close this window. Now you’re ready to program.
                      Open the Design menu and select Program. If everything was done
                 correctly, you should see INFO — Operation: successful after a few seconds.
                 This means that your SPI flash has been programmed and your FPGA is
                 running! Try pushing each switch on your board. You should see the cor-
                 responding LED light up when the button is held down. Congratulations,
                 you’ve built your first FPGA project!

       NOTE      I recommend saving your Diamond Programmer project so you can reuse the settings
                 for the other projects in the book. All you’ll have to do is select a different .bin file to
                 program to the FPGA.

                      If the programming fails, you might get a CHECK_ID error like this:

                 ERROR — Programming failed.
                 ERROR — Function:CHECK_ID
                 Data Expected: h10 Actual: hFF
                 ERROR — Operation: unsuccessful.

                      If you see this error, go to the Cable Settings section in the right pane
                 of Diamond Programmer and change your port from FTUSB-0 to FTUSB-1,
                 as shown in Figure 2-10.

Figure 2-10: Troubleshooting
                 a CHECK_ID error

                     Once you make the change, try to program your device again. This
                 time it should work.

     Summary
                 In this chapter, you created an FPGA development environment and learned
                 how to work with a development board. Through your first project, you

learned about the main steps in the FPGA development process: design,
where you write code for the FPGA using Verilog or VHDL; synthesis, where
you translate that code into FPGA components; place and route, where you
map the synthesized design to the resources on your specific FPGA; and
programming, where the design is physically transferred to the FPGA. We’ll
explore these concepts in more detail later in the book, but as you work
through other projects, remember that you can refer back to this chapter if
you need a refresher on the basics of using your FPGA tools.

