    BOOLEAN ALGEBR A AND THE
                             3
         L O O K- U P T A B L E

            Boolean algebra is a field of mathematics
            and logic essential to understanding how
           to work with devices like FPGAs. In Boolean
        algebra, the input and output values are all true
or false, which we can equate with 1s and 0s, or high
and low voltages. Instead of operations like multiplica-
tion and division, Boolean algebra has operations such
as AND, OR, and NOT. Each of these operations takes
in some number of 0s and 1s as input, evaluates them,
and produces a 0 or 1 as an output. Algebra class
would have been much simpler if it had been about
Boolean algebra!
    You may have encountered Boolean operations in other programming
languages, such as C or Python. For example, you might want your program
                 to write to a file only if the user chooses to do so and the filename is valid.
                 Similarly, inside an FPGA, you’ll often want to check multiple inputs to
                 determine the state of an output. Let’s say you want to turn on an LED
                 when either of two switches is pressed. An FPGA can make this happen
                 using an OR operation: if either one switch or the other (or both) provides a
                 1 as an input, the FPGA provides a 1 as an output to the LED, and the LED
                 lights up.
                      Boolean algebra makes tasks like this possible. But more importantly,
                 Boolean algebra describes all the underlying operations on data in your
                 FPGA. String together enough Boolean operations and you can do math,
                 store data, and more. You can do a surprising amount by manipulating 1s
                 and 0s.
                      In this chapter, we’ll explore how to represent simple Boolean opera-
                 tions with logic gates, and we’ll see how these gates can be combined into
                 more complicated Boolean equations. Then we’ll explore how FPGAs actu-
                 ally perform logic operations by combining the functionality of different
                 logic gates into a single device called a look-up table. As you’ll see, look-up
                 tables are one of the most important components in an FPGA.

     Logic Gates and Their Truth Tables
                 When designing FPGAs, we represent simple Boolean operations with logic
                 gates, devices that take in electrical signals as inputs, perform a Boolean
                 operation on them, and produce the appropriate electrical signal as an
                 output. There are different logic gates corresponding to all the different
                 Boolean operations, such as AND, OR, NOT, XOR, and NAND. Each of
                 these logic gates can be described with a truth table, a table that lists all the
                 possible input combinations for a Boolean algebra equation and shows the
                 corresponding outputs.
                      We’ll discuss some common logic gates and examine their truth tables
                 next. But first, it’s important to understand what the 1s and 0s in the truth
                 tables we’ll be looking at actually mean. Inside an FPGA, digital data is
                 represented by voltages: 0 volts for a 0, and some higher-than-zero voltage,
                 called the core voltage, for a 1. The core voltage depends on the specific
                 FPGA, but often is around 0.8 to 1.2 volts. When we talk about a signal
                 being high, we mean that the signal is at the core voltage and represents a
                 data value of 1. Likewise, a low signal is at 0 volts and represents a data value
                 of 0. With this in mind, let’s look at some logic gates.

                 AND Gates
                 An AND gate is a logic gate whose output is high when all its inputs are high.
                 We’ll use the example of a two-input AND gate, but AND gates can have
                 any number of inputs. For a two-input AND gate, the output is high when
                 input A and input B are both high, hence the name AND gate. Table 3-1
                 shows the truth table for this AND gate. Notice that the output is a 1 only
                 when both inputs are a 1.

Table 3-1: Truth Table for a Two-Input
       AND Gate
        Input A      Input B      Output Q
        0            0            0
        0            1            0
        1            0            0
        1            1            1

           In a truth table, the rows are usually arranged in increasing decimal
       order, based on the inputs. In the case of the AND truth table, the first row
       shows when input A = 0 and input B = 0, which is represented as b00, which
       means 00 in binary, or 0 in decimal. Next comes b01 (decimal 1), then b10
       (decimal 2), then b11 (decimal 3). If the AND gate had additional inputs,
       then there would be more rows in our truth table that we would have to fill
       out. In the case of a three-input AND gate, for example, there would be
       eight rows, going from b000 to b111, or 0 to 7 in decimal.

NOTE   The output of a logic gate is denoted with a Q. This convention comes from the
       English mathematician Alan Turing, who used the letter Q to denote states in
       his famous Turing machines. The Q stood for quanta, which is a discrete state
       (such as 0 or 1), rather than something that can have a continuous range
       of values.

           Each logic gate has a distinctive symbol for use in schematics. A two-
       input AND gate is drawn as shown in Figure 3-1. The symbol depicts the
       inputs A and B going into the gate on the left, and the output Q emerging
       on the right.

       A
                         Q
       B

Figure 3-1: The AND
       gate symbol

            As we continue our exploration of logic gates, most of the gates we’ll
       look at will have two inputs and one output. As with AND gates, it’s pos-
       sible that these other types of gates could have additional inputs, but for
       simplicity we’ll stick to the two-input versions. (The exception is the NOT
       gate, which can only have one input and one output.) For brevity, I’ll omit
       the words two-input from this point forward when referring to a given
       logic gate.

       OR Gates
       An OR gate (Figure 3-2) is a logic gate whose output is high when either of
       the inputs is high; that is, when either input A or input B is high.

                 A
                                   Q
                 B

Figure 3-2: The OR
                 gate symbol

                      Table 3-2 shows the truth table for an OR gate.

Table 3-2: Truth Table for an OR Gate
                  Input A      Input B          Output Q
                  0            0                0
                  0            1                1
                  1            0                1
                  1            1                1

                     Notice that when both inputs are high, the OR gate’s output is high as
                 well. All that matters to an OR gate is that at least one of the inputs is high,
                 which is also the case when both inputs are high.

                 NOT Gates
                 A NOT gate (Figure 3-3) has a single input and a single output. This kind of
                 gate simply inverts the input (the output is not the input), so it’s also known
                 as an inverter.

                 A              Q

Figure 3-3: The NOT
                 gate symbol

                     Notice the bubble at the tip of the triangle in the NOT gate symbol,
                 which indicates inversion. It also appears in the NAND gate, which we’ll
                 look at later, and can even appear on some inputs. The truth table for a
                 NOT gate is shown in Table 3-3.

Table 3-3: Truth Table for a
                 NOT Gate
                  Input A              Output Q
                  0                    1
                  1                    0

                     As the truth table indicates, whatever the input value to the gate is, the
                 output is the opposite.

XOR Gates
The output of an XOR gate (pronounced “ex-or,” short for exclusive or) is
high when either of the inputs is high, but not both. In other words, the
gate checks for exclusively one or the other input being high. The symbol
for an XOR gate is shown in Figure 3-4.

A
              Q
B

Figure 3-4: The XOR
gate symbol

    The symbol looks like that of an OR gate, but the extra line on the left
side of the gate sets it apart. Table 3-4 shows the XOR gate’s truth table.

Table 3-4: Truth Table for an XOR Gate
 Input A      Input B      Output Q
 0            0            0
 0            1            1
 1            0            1
 1            1            0

    Though this type of gate might not seem particularly useful at first
blush, it comes up more often than you might expect. For example, XOR
gates are used for generating a cyclic redundancy check (CRC), a way to vali-
date data to verify the integrity of transmitted information.

NAND Gates
A NAND gate (short for not and) has the opposite output of an AND gate.
You can infer this from the NAND gate’s schematic symbol, shown in
Figure 3-5: it looks exactly like an AND gate, except with a bubble on the
output to indicate an inversion.

A
               Q
B

Figure 3-5: The NAND
gate symbol

     The output of the NAND gate is thus the same as an AND gate, but
inverted. If both input A and input B are high, output Q will be low. In
all other cases, output Q will be high. This is shown in the truth table in
Table 3-5.

Table 3-5: Truth Table for a NAND Gate
                 Input A       Input B        Output Q
                 0             0              1
                 0             1              1
                 1             0              1
                 1             1              0

                     NAND gates are commonly used in USB flash drives, solid state drives
                 (SSDs), and other types of data storage devices. They also inspired the name
                 of my website, https://nandland.com.

                 Other Gates
                 We’ve explored the most common types of logic gates here to give you an
                 idea of how they work, but this isn’t an exhaustive list. There are other types
                 as well, such as NOR (short for not or) and XNOR (exclusive not or) gates.
                 Additionally, as mentioned previously, though we focused on the two-input
                 versions here, all of these gates (with the exception of NOT) can have more
                 than two inputs. This section was just intended to get you comfortable with
                 the standard logic operations from Boolean algebra. Next, we’ll explore how
                 these operations can be combined to make more complicated expressions.

     Combining Gates with Boolean Algebra
                 You’ve seen how individual logic gates work. However, often you’ll want to
                 write code that’s more complex than just a single logic operation. The good
                 news is that you can chain together multiple logic gates to represent more
                 elaborate Boolean equations, and use Boolean algebra to determine the
                 outcome.
                     In Boolean algebra, each logic operation has its own symbol. One com-
                 mon set of symbols is shown in Table 3-6. For example, * represents an
                 AND operation, and + represents an OR operation. These symbols make it
                 easier to write more elaborate Boolean algebraic equations.

Table 3-6: Boolean Algebra
                 Symbols
                 Symbol            Meaning
                 *                 AND
                 +                 OR
                 ‘                 NOT
                 ^                 XOR

                    Boolean algebra also has its own order of operations. To solve a Boolean
                 equation, first you evaluate NOTs, then ANDs, and finally ORs. As in

conventional algebra, you can use parentheses to bypass the order of opera-
tions; anything in parentheses will be evaluated first.
    You now know everything you need to write and evaluate Boolean
equations with more than one logic operation, such as Q = A * B + A‘.
In plain language, you’d read this as “The output Q equals A and B or
not A.” Table 3-7 shows the truth table for this equation.

Table 3-7: Truth Table for A * B + A’
 Input A     Input B      Output Q
 0           0            1
 0           1            1
 1           0            0
 1           1            1

   Figure 3-6 shows the circuit equivalent of this equation, created by
combining logic gates.

B
A
                                  Q

Figure 3-6: The circuit diagram
for A * B + A’

      As you can see, we still have only two inputs, but because those inputs
go through three different logic operations, the possible outputs of our
truth table are more interesting than they were for individual logic gates.
Let’s consider what happens with this equation when both inputs are 0, the
first row of our truth table. The equation has no parentheses, so first we
look at NOT A, which evaluates to 1. Then we perform the AND operation
of A and B, which evaluates to 0. Finally, we OR the results of both of those
expressions, giving us an output of 1. Considering the other possible inputs,
you should see that any time A is 0, or any time A and B are both 1, the out-
put Q will be 1. Otherwise, the output will be 0.
      While this example featured two inputs, it’s possible to have Boolean
equations with any number of inputs. Each input increases the number of
rows in the truth table by a factor of 2: for one input there are two truth
table rows, for two inputs there are four rows, for three inputs there are
eight rows, and so on. In mathematical terms, for n inputs, there are
2n truth table rows.
      To demonstrate, let’s consider an example equation with three inputs:
Q = A + (C * B′). Note that the parentheses indicate that the operation C AND
NOT B occurs prior to the OR operation. In fact, that follows the regular
Boolean algebra order of operations, but the parentheses make the equation a
little easier to read. The truth table with three inputs is shown in Table 3-8.

Table 3-8: Truth Table for A + (C * B’)
                  Input A     Input B     Input C       Output Q
                  0           0           0             0
                  0           0           1             1
                  0           1           0             0
                  0           1           1             0
                  1           0           0             1
                  1           0           1             1
                  1           1           0             1
                  1           1           1             1

                      The corresponding circuit is shown in Figure 3-7.

                 A

                                                    Q
                 B

                 C
Figure 3-7: The circuit diagram
                 for A + (C * B’)

                       To generate this truth table, first we should perform the operation
                 inside the parentheses. This is C AND NOT B. Within the parentheses, the
                 highest precedence is the inversion applied to B, which is then ANDed with
                 C. In all, the part of the equation in parentheses evaluates to high when C
                 is high and B is low, and since the remainder of the equation is an OR oper-
                 ation, we also know that the overall output will be high when C is high and
                 B is low. This case occurs on the second line of the truth table. It also occurs
                 on the sixth line of the truth table, so we can fill those in with a 1. Finally, con-
                 sider the A on the other side of the OR operation. When it’s high, as in the
                 last four lines of the truth table, the output will be high. We can fill in the
                 remaining lines with a 0 to complete the truth table.
                       Combining logic operations to perform more complicated functional-
                 ity is common throughout programming. In FPGAs, this same capability is
                 possible by chaining together simple logic gate functions.

     The Look-Up Table
                 So far we’ve been learning about individual logic gates, but it might sur-
                 prise you to find out that these logic gates don’t physically exist inside an
                 FPGA. There isn’t a bank of AND gates and OR gates that you can just
                 pull from and wire together to create your Boolean algebra logic. Instead,
                 there’s something much better: look-up tables (LUTs). These are devices

       that can be programmed to perform any Boolean algebra equation you
       can think of, regardless of the specific logic gate(s) involved. If you need an
       AND gate, a LUT can do it. If you need an XOR gate, a LUT can do that
       too. A single LUT can also evaluate an equation involving multiple logic
       gates, like the ones we considered in the previous section. Any truth table
       you can think of, a LUT can produce. This is the power of the look-up table.

NOTE   Early programmable logic devices like Programmable Array Logic (PAL) did actually
       have banks of AND and OR gates. With FPGAs, these have been superseded by the
       more capable LUTs.

            LUTs are classified by the number of inputs they can accept. For exam-
       ple, there are two-, three-, four-, five-, and even six-input LUTs on the newest
       FPGAs. Most LUTs produce a single output. Figure 3-8 shows what a three-
       input LUT (often referred to as LUT-3) looks like.

       IN1
       IN2         LUT-3         OUT1
       IN3

Figure 3-8: A three-input LUT

            This LUT is a blank slate that can be programmed to perform any
       Boolean algebra operation with three inputs and one output. For example,
       look back at the circuit drawn in Figure 3-7 to represent the Boolean equation
       Q = A + (C * B′). Drawing the circuit for that equation required three logic
       gates—a NOT gate, an AND gate, and an OR gate—but we can replace those
       three gates with our single three-input LUT. The same LUT could also be
       programmed to represent the equation Q = (A + B + C)′, or Q = (A + B)′ * C.
            What happens if we have a Boolean algebra equation with more than
       three inputs? That’s just fine, as LUTs can be chained together to perform
       very long sequences of logic. In fact, the typical FPGA contains hundreds or
       even thousands of LUTs, all ready to be programmed to carry out whatever
       logic operations you need. This is why look-up tables are one of the two
       most important components to understand inside of an FPGA: they per-
       form the logical operations of your code. The other key component is the
       flip-flop, which we’ll talk about in the next chapter.
            Although we’ve been drawing truth tables and logic gate diagrams
       here, in the real world you’ll rarely define FPGA operations this way. Instead,
       you’ll write code. Often, the code you write is at a higher level than indi-
       vidual logic gates: you might write code to compare two numbers, or incre-
       ment a counter, or check if a condition is true, and the synthesis tools then
       break down that code into the necessary Boolean logic operations and
       assign those operations to LUTs. However, the purpose of this book is to
       teach you how FPGAs work so you understand them, and at a fundamental
       level, FPGAs work by performing Boolean algebra. Once you know how

                 FPGAs work, you’ll be able to use Verilog or VHDL with a deeper under-
                 standing of what you’re creating with your code. This will help you create
                 efficient and reliable FPGA designs.

                                               LOGIC MINIMIZ ATION

                     You’ll often hear about logic minimization techniques such as De Morgan’s
                     law, Karnaugh maps, and the Quine–McCluskey algorithm in connection to
                     Boolean algebra. These are mathematical tricks to simplify Boolean algebra
                     equations to take up fewer computing resources. I feel that knowing the ins
                     and outs of these techniques isn’t necessary to begin learning about FPGAs,
                     however. Yes, LUTs are limited and should be used optimally, but there are
                     entire software tools responsible for minimizing logic resource usage for you.
                     Specifically, synthesis tools, which we’ll discuss in more detail in Chapter 7,
                     perform this task so you don’t have to. I’ve spent weeks of my life learning
                     about Karnaugh maps and performing Quine–McCluskey by hand, and I can
                     tell you that I’ve never needed to use this knowledge as a professional FPGA
                     engineer. All you need to do is write the VHDL or Verilog and let the software
                     tools work their magic.

     Project #2: Lighting an LED with Logic Gates
                 You’re now ready to combine everything you’ve learned about Boolean logic
                 and look-up tables in a real-world example on your FPGA development
                 board. This project should illuminate an LED, but only when two switches
                 are pushed at the same time. In other words, you’re using your first LUT by
                 implementing an AND gate. Figure 3-9 shows the block diagram for this
                 project.

                                         LUT
                 SW1

                                                            D1

                 SW2

                                        FPGA

Figure 3-9: The Project #2 block diagram

                    This project turns the entire FPGA into one single AND gate. This
                 might be overkill for a very capable FPGA, but it’s an excellent way to

          visualize how a LUT works in the real world. Table 3-9 shows the truth table
          corresponding to the project.

Table 3-9: Truth Table for Project #2
           SW1             SW2             D1
           0               0               0
           0               1               0
           1               0               0
           1               1               1

              This truth table looks exactly like the one we created for the AND gate,
          but the column labels have been replaced to represent two switches and an
          LED on your development board. As expected, the output D1 is only high
          when inputs SW1 and SW2 are both high.

          Writing the Code
          Implementing an AND gate uses very few resources: three connections
          (two input and one output) and a single LUT. Let’s look at the Verilog and
          VHDL to get that LED to light up:

Verilog   module And_Gate_Project
           (input i_Switch_1,
            input i_Switch_2,
            output o_LED_1);

          1 assign o_LED_1 = i_Switch_1 & i_Switch_2;

          endmodule

 VHDL     library ieee;
          use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;

          entity And_Gate_Project is
            port (
          	 i_Switch_1 : in std_logic;
          	 i_Switch_2 : in std_logic;
          	 o_LED_1      : out std_logic);
          end entity And_Gate_Project;

          architecture RTL of And_Gate_Project is
          begin
            1 o_LED_1 <= i_Switch_1 and i_Switch_2;
          end RTL;

              We begin by defining our inputs as i_Switch_1 and i_Switch_2, and our
          output as o_LED_1. Then we continuously assign the output with the AND of

                   the two inputs 1. In Verilog the symbol for an AND operation is &, whereas
                   in VHDL and is a reserved keyword.

                   Building and Programming the FPGA
                   You’re now ready to run your Verilog or VHDL through the build process
                   discussed in Chapter 2. The synthesis tool will generate a report outlining
                   the resource utilization on your FPGA. Here’s the most interesting part of
                   the report:

                   --snip--
                   Resource Usage Report for And_Gate_Project

                   Mapping to part: ice40hx1kvq100
                   Cell usage:
                   SB_LUT4         1 use

                 1 I/O ports: 3
                   I/O primitives: 3
                   SB_IO          3 uses

                   I/O Register bits:                  0
                   Register bits not including I/Os:   0 (0%)
                   Total load per clock:

                   Mapping Summary:
                 2 Total LUTs: 1 (0%)

                       This report tells us that three I/O ports (input/output ports, or pins,
                  meaning connections to the outside world) on the FPGA have been used
                  to implement our circuit design 1 and, most importantly, that we’ve used
                  a single LUT 2. That (0%) on the last line is indicating the resource utiliza-
                  tion on the FPGA. On this particular FPGA there are over 1,000 LUTs avail-
                  able for usage, and we’re only making use of 1 of them. Since the synthesis
                  report is showing one LUT with 0 percent resource utilization, the tool
                  must be doing some rounding down here (1 / 1,000 = 0.1).
                       Go ahead and program your development board, and notice that the
                  LED only illuminates when the two switches are held down together. The
                  LUT is working!
                       Feel free to change the code around to implement a different Boolean
                  operation than AND. For example, you could create an OR gate or an
                  XOR gate using the | or ^ symbols in Verilog, or the or or xor keywords in
                  VHDL. You could also try stringing together several operations to make
                  the LED light up based on whatever crazy Boolean algebra equation you
                  can think of, or try adding in more switch inputs or more LED outputs to
                  implement more complicated truth tables. You can check that the synthesis
                  tools are really generating the correct LUTs based on your code by writing
                  out your own truth table using the switches as inputs and the LED as the
                  output, then testing all possible switch combinations to see if they work as
                  expected.

Summary
      In this chapter you’ve learned about one of the two most important compo-
      nents of an FPGA: the look-up table. You’ve seen how a LUT can implement
      any Boolean algebra equation with a given number of inputs, from simple
      logic gates like AND, OR, NOT, XOR, and NAND to more complex equa-
      tions that combine these gates. In the next chapter, we’ll focus on the other
      crucial FPGA component: the flip-flop.

