        USEFUL FPGA PRIMITIVES
                               9
            So far, you’ve learned about the two most
            fundamental FPGA components: the LUT
           and the flip-flop. These general-purpose com-
        ponents are the main workhorses in your FPGA,
but there are also other dedicated components that are
commonly used in FPGA designs for more specialized
tasks. These components are usually called primitives,
but they’re also sometimes referred to as hard IP or cores.
     Working with primitives helps you get the most out of your FPGA. In
fact, a lot of modern FPGA development revolves around linking together
these pre-existing primitives, with custom code added as needed for
application-specific logic. In this chapter, we’ll explore three important
primitives: the block RAM (BRAM), the digital signal processor (DSP)
block, and the phase-locked loop (PLL). You’ll learn what role each one
plays within an FPGA and see how to create them through your Verilog or
VHDL code, or with assistance from your build tools.
                        The primitives we’ll discuss are especially important on higher-end
                   FPGAs, more advanced than the iCE40 FPGAs we’ve focused on so far.
                   With these feature-rich FPGAs, the companion GUI software has become a
                   critical piece of the build process. These GUIs are more complicated than
                   the iCEcube2 tool we’ve been working with, and a large part of the com-
                   plexity stems from the creation and wiring up of these primitives. Once you
                   have an understanding of how the primitives work, however, you’ll be better
                   equipped to start working with these more advanced tools and to take full
                   advantage of the common built-in features of professional-grade FPGAs.

      How to Create Primitives
                   There are a few different ways to create an FPGA primitive. Up to this
                   point, we’ve been writing Verilog or VHDL and letting the synthesis tools
                   decide for us how to translate that code into primitives. We trust the tools
                   to understand when we want to create a flip-flop or a LUT. This is called
                   inference, since we’re letting the tools infer (or make an educated guess
                   about) what we want based on our code.
                        In general, the tools are able to understand our intentions quite well.
                   However, there are some primitives that the synthesis tools won’t be able
                   to infer. To create those, you need to use another method: you can either
                   explicitly instantiate the primitive in your code or use the GUI built into
                   most synthesis tools to automate the creation process.

                   Instantiation
                   Instantiation is the creation of a primitive from a code template written by
                   the FPGA manufacturer. When you instantiate a primitive component, it
                   looks like you’re instantiating a Verilog or VHDL module—but in this case,
                   the module you’re instantiating isn’t one you’ve created. Rather, it’s built
                   into the tools for your specific FPGA. The actual module code behind these
                   primitives is often unavailable to view; it’s part of the secret sauce that the
                   FPGA vendors like to keep to themselves.
                        Let’s look at an example of how to instantiate a block RAM (we’ll talk
                   more about these primitives later in the chapter):

Verilog

RAMB18E1 #(
  // Address Collision Mode: "PERFORMANCE" or "DELAYED_WRITE"
  .RDADDR_COLLISION_HWCONFIG("DELAYED_WRITE"),
  // Collision check: Values ("ALL", "WARNING_ONLY", "GENERATE_X_ONLY" or "NONE")
  .SIM_COLLISION_CHECK("ALL"),
  // DOA_REG, DOB_REG: Optional output register (0 or 1)
  .DOA_REG(0),
  .DOB_REG(0),
  // INITP_00 to INITP_07: Initial contents of parity memory array
.INITP_00(256'h0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000),
--snip--

.INIT_3F(256'h0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000),
  // INIT_A, INIT_B: Initial values on output ports
  .INIT_A(18'h00000),
  .INIT_B(18'h00000),
  // Initialization File: RAM initialization file
  .INIT_FILE("NONE"),
  // RAM Mode: "SDP" or "TDP"
  .RAM_MODE("TDP"),
  // READ_WIDTH_A/B, WRITE_WIDTH_A/B: Read/write width per port
  .READ_WIDTH_A(0),                   // 0-72
  .READ_WIDTH_B(0),                   // 0-18
  .WRITE_WIDTH_A(0),                  // 0-18
  .WRITE_WIDTH_B(0),                  // 0-72
  // RSTREG_PRIORITY_A, RSTREG_PRIORITY_B: Reset or enable priority ("RSTREG" or "REGCE")
  .RSTREG_PRIORITY_A("RSTREG"),
  .RSTREG_PRIORITY_B("RSTREG"),
  // SRVAL_A, SRVAL_B: Set/reset value for output
  .SRVAL_A(18'h00000),
  .SRVAL_B(18'h00000),
  // Simulation Device: Must be set to "7SERIES" for simulation behavior
  .SIM_DEVICE("7SERIES"),
  // WriteMode: Value on output upon a write ("WRITE_FIRST", "READ_FIRST", or "NO_CHANGE")
  .WRITE_MODE_A("WRITE_FIRST"),
  .WRITE_MODE_B("WRITE_FIRST")
)
RAMB18E1_inst (
  // Port A Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port A data
  .DOADO(DOADO), 1              // 16-bit output: A port data/LSB data
  .DOPADOP(DOPADOP),            // 2-bit output: A port parity/LSB parity
  // Port B Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port B data
  .DOBDO(DOBDO),                // 16-bit output: B port data/MSB data
  .DOPBDOP(DOPBDOP),            // 2-bit output: B port parity/MSB parity
  // Port A Address/Control Signals: 14-bit (each) input: Port A address and control signals
  // (read port when RAM_MODE="SDP")
  .ADDRARDADDR(ADDRARDADDR),    // 14-bit input: A port address/Read address
  .CLKARDCLK(CLKARDCLK),        // 1-bit input: A port clock/Read clock
--snip--

VHDL

RAMB18E1_inst : RAMB18E1
generic map (
  -- Address Collision Mode: "PERFORMANCE" or "DELAYED_WRITE"
  RDADDR_COLLISION_HWCONFIG => "DELAYED_WRITE",
  -- Collision check: Values ("ALL", "WARNING_ONLY", "GENERATE_X_ONLY" or "NONE")
  SIM_COLLISION_CHECK => "ALL",
  -- DOA_REG, DOB_REG: Optional output register (0 or 1)
  DOA_REG => 0,
  DOB_REG => 0,
  -- INITP_00 to INITP_07: Initial contents of parity memory array
  INITP_00 => X"0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
--snip--
  INIT_3F => X"0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",

 -- INIT_A, INIT_B: Initial values on output ports
 INIT_A => X"00000",
 INIT_B => X"00000",
 -- Initialization File: RAM initialization file
 INIT_FILE => "NONE",
 -- RAM Mode: "SDP" or "TDP"
 RAM_MODE => "TDP",
 -- READ_WIDTH_A/B, WRITE_WIDTH_A/B: Read/write width per port
 READ_WIDTH_A => 0,              -- 0-72
 READ_WIDTH_B => 0,              -- 0-18
 WRITE_WIDTH_A => 0,             -- 0-18
 WRITE_WIDTH_B => 0,             -- 0-72
 -- RSTREG_PRIORITY_A, RSTREG_PRIORITY_B: Reset or enable priority ("RSTREG" or "REGCE")
 RSTREG_PRIORITY_A => "RSTREG",
 RSTREG_PRIORITY_B => "RSTREG",
 -- SRVAL_A, SRVAL_B: Set/reset value for output
 SRVAL_A => X"00000",
 SRVAL_B => X"00000",
 -- Simulation Device: Must be set to "7SERIES" for simulation behavior
 SIM_DEVICE => "7SERIES",
 -- WriteMode: Value on output upon a write ("WRITE_FIRST", "READ_FIRST", or "NO_CHANGE")
 WRITE_MODE_A => "WRITE_FIRST",
 WRITE_MODE_B => "WRITE_FIRST"
)
port map (
  -- Port A Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port A data
  DOADO => DOADO, 1               -- 16-bit output: A port data/LSB data
  DOPADOP => DOPADOP,             -- 2-bit output: A port parity/LSB parity
  -- Port B Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port B data
  DOBDO => DOBDO,                 -- 16-bit output: B port data/MSB data
  DOPBDOP => DOPBDOP,             -- 2-bit output: B port parity/MSB parity
  -- Port A Address/Control Signals: 14-bit (each) input: Port A address and control signals
  -- (read port when RAM_MODE="SDP")
  ADDRARDADDR => ADDRARDADDR,     -- 14-bit input: A port address/Read address
  CLKARDCLK => CLKARDCLK,         -- 1-bit input: A port clock/Read clock
--snip--

                       This code is an example of instantiation of a RAMB18E1 component
                  (a type of block RAM) from an AMD FPGA. The code makes the block
                  RAM available for use by wiring its internal signals to signals external to
                  the block RAM: for example, it wires the block RAM’s internal DOADO signal,
                  a 16-bit output, to an external signal of the same name 1. I’ve omitted
                  many more lines of code that make similar connections. It’s not important
                  that you understand the details of this code; it’s just to demonstrate what
                  instantiation looks like. Clearly a block RAM is a complicated component,
                  with many bells and whistles available to you. Instantiation specifies every
                  single input and output of the primitive and allows you to set them exactly
                  as you want. However, it also requires that you have a deep knowledge of the
                  primitive being instantiated. If you connect it improperly, it won’t work as
                  intended.
                       If you wanted to, it would be possible to instantiate, rather than infer,
                  even a simple component like a flip-flop. Here’s what AMD’s Verilog

          template looks like for instantiating a single flip-flop (which AMD calls an
          FDSE):

Verilog   FDSE #(
             .INIT(1'b0) // Initial value of register (1'b0 or 1'b1)
          ) FDSE_inst (
             .Q(Q),      // 1-bit data output
             .C(C),      // 1-bit clock input
             .CE(CE),    // 1-bit clock enable input
             .S(S),      // 1-bit synchronous set input
             .D(D)       // 1-bit data input
          );

 VHDL     FDSE_inst : FDSE
          generic map (
             INIT => '0') -- Initial value of register ('0' or '1')
          port map (
             Q => Q,      -- Data output
             C => C,      -- Clock input
             CE => CE,    -- Clock enable input
             S => S,      -- Synchronous set input
             D => D       -- Data input
          );

              Notice that this primitive has the normal connections we’d expect
          from a flip-flop, including the data output (Q), the clock input (C), the
          clock enable (CE), and the data input (D). After instantiating this flip-flop,
          you could then make use of these connections in your code. If you had to
          instantiate every single flip-flop in your entire FPGA, however, it would take
          quite a lot of code!

NOTE      I found the templates for the RAM18E1 block RAM and the FDSE flip-flop in
          AMD’s online Libraries Guide, which contains the templates for all primitives
          throughout AMD FPGAs. Every FPGA manufacturer has a similar resource where
          you’ll find the instantiation templates for its primitives.

              The benefit of instantiating a primitive is that it gives you exactly what
          you want. You don’t need to trust the synthesis tools to guess at what you’re
          trying to do. However, there are clearly some downsides. As you’ve just seen,
          instantiation takes more code than inference. It also requires you to wire up
          every connection correctly, or the design won’t function as intended. This
          means you need to understand the primitive at a deep level. Finally, each
          primitive needs to be instantiated using a dedicated template specific to
          your FPGA vendor, or sometimes specific to just a subset of devices within
          a family of FPGAs. For example, the RAMB18E1 block RAM component
          we instantiated earlier only exists on AMD FPGAs; Intel and Lattice FPGAs
          have their own block RAMs. Therefore, instantiation makes your code less
          portable than writing more generic Verilog or VHDL where the tools can

                  just infer the primitive based on which FPGA you’re targeting. Next, we’ll
                  look at the alternative: using the GUI.

                  The GUI Approach
                  Every FPGA vendor has its own GUI or IDE for FPGA development, and
                  that GUI will have a section allowing you to view the library of avail-
                  able primitives for your FPGA. You can select a primitive that you want
                  to add to your project, and the tool will walk you through the process.
                  Additionally, the GUI explains how the primitive works and what each set-
                  ting controls. Figure 9-1 shows an example of creating a block RAM using
                  the Lattice Diamond GUI. As mentioned in Chapter 2, this is Lattice’s
                  IDE for working with higher-end FPGAs with features like the primi-
                  tives discussed in this chapter. (The iCEcube2 IDE doesn’t have a GUI
                  for creating primitives, since it’s designed to work primarily with simpler
                  FPGAs.)

Figure 9-1: Instantiating a block RAM with a GUI

                       The block diagram on the left side of the window visually demon-
                  strates the block RAM’s inputs and outputs. In the configuration section
                  on the right, it’s clear which selections for the primitive are mutually exclu-
                  sive. These are represented with radio buttons, like Initialize to All 0’s
                  or Initialize to All 1’s. We can also tell which options can be enabled or

       disabled. These are represented by checkboxes, like Enable Output Register
       or Enable Output ClockEn. In addition, there’s a convenient Help button in
       the bottom-right corner that can guide you through some of these decisions
       if you’re unsure what to pick.
            Once you’ve configured a primitive with a GUI, you’ll get an instantia-
       tion template that you can drop into your Verilog or VHDL code, much
       like the one we looked at in the previous section. The template will be
       customized to the exact settings that you picked in the GUI so you can
       wire up your primitive without having to make any guesses about how to
       configure it.
            Compared to direct instantiation, the GUI method is more approach-
       able for beginners. You’re much less likely to make a mistake using the GUI,
       since you have the menus to guide you, but you can still control exactly what
       you get, just like with instantiation. There is an important downside to this
       approach, however. If you need to change a setting in your primitive, then
       you need to open the GUI and run through the whole process again. This
       might not sound like a big deal, but if your design features many primitives
       created using a GUI, making adjustments can become quite tedious and
       time-consuming.

The Block RAM
       A block RAM (BRAM) is a dedicated memory storage component built into
       your FPGA. Next to LUTs and flip-flops, block RAMs are the third most
       common FPGA primitive. We touched briefly on block RAMs in Chapter 6,
       when we discussed common memory modules like RAMs and FIFOs. As I
       mentioned in that chapter, when you need a memory over a certain size, it
       will be created using a block RAM instead of flip-flops.
            Creating memory for storing data is an incredibly common task in
       FPGAs. You might use a block RAM for storing read-only data, like cali-
       bration values, or you might regularly write data to a block RAM from an
       off-chip device like an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and then read
       from it later. Block RAMs are also commonly used to buffer data between
       a producer and a consumer, including when sending data between clock
       domains. In this case, the block RAM can be configured as a FIFO, with
       features specially designed to handle the metastability issues that arise
       when crossing between domains (we discussed how you can transmit data
       across cross clock domains back in Chapter 7).
            The number of block RAMs available, and the specific features of each
       block RAM, will vary from FPGA to FPGA and vendor to vendor. You should
       always consult your FPGA’s datasheet and memory guide for details particu-
       lar to your model. As an example, Figure 9-2 shows a datasheet highlighting
       the block RAMs on Intel’s Cyclone V line of FPGAs.

Figure 9-2: Block RAMs on the Cyclone V product line

                       Intel refers to block RAMs as memory blocks. The first of the highlighted
                  lines in the datasheet is telling us how many of these memory blocks are
                  available on each of three FPGA models: 176 on the 5CEA2 FPGA, 308 on
                  the 5CEA4, and 446 on the 5CEA5 part. The next line on the datasheet
                  shows the total number of kilobits (Kb) of block RAM storage available.
                  Each memory block holds 10Kb (hence the M10K in the name), so there
                  are 1,760Kb of BRAM storage on the 5CEA2 FPGA, 3,080Kb on the 5CEA4,
                  and 4,460Kb on the 5CEA5.
                       You might be surprised by how little storage that really is. Even the larg-
                  est amount, 4,460Kb, is less than a megabyte! Consider the fact that you can
                  get a 32-gigabyte MicroSD card, which has thousands of times more stor-
                  age space, for around $10, and you’ll start to appreciate that FPGAs aren’t
                  designed for storing data in any significant quantity. Rather, block RAMs
                  are there to buffer data on the FPGA for temporary usage. If you need to
                  store large amounts of data, you’ll have to use an external chip to do that.
                  MicroSD cards, DDR memory, SRAM, and flash memory are common
                  examples of chips that an FPGA might interface to in order to expand its
                  memory storage and retrieval capabilities.
                       You should also notice in Figure 9-2 that block RAMs are the fourth
                  item in the Cyclone V datasheet’s list of FPGA resources, after LEs, ALMs,
                  and registers. Those are the terms that Intel uses to describe LUTs and flip-
                  flops (LE stands for logic element and ALM for Adaptive Logic Module).
                  While you may not always need many block RAMs for your application, this
                  prime position in the datasheet highlights that block RAMs are often one
                  of the most significant primitive components to take into consideration
                  when choosing an FPGA.

                  Features and Limitations
                  There are some common features and some limitations that are helpful to
                  keep in mind when working with block RAMs. First, block RAMs usually
                  come in only one size on an FPGA; 16Kb per block RAM is common. This
                  one-size-fits-all approach means that if you only need to use 4Kb out of the

16Kb, you’ll still use up an entire block RAM primitive. There’s no way to
divide a single block RAM component into multiple memories, and in that
way, block RAMs can be limiting.
     In other ways, however, block RAMs can be quite flexible. You can store
data in whatever width you like: for example, with a 16Kb block RAM you
can store data that’s 1 bit wide and 16,384 bits (214) deep, or 8 bits wide
and 2,048 deep, or 32 bits wide and 512 deep, among other possibilities. It’s
also possible to create memories that are larger than a single block RAM.
For example, if you needed to store 16 kilobytes (KB) of data, that would
use up eight individual block RAMs (16Kb × 8 = 16KB). The tools are smart
enough to cascade the block RAMs and make them look like one large
memory, rather than eight individual components that you need to index
into individually.
     Other common features include error detection and correction, where
the block RAM has some extra bits reserved to detect and correct any errors
that might occur within the memory itself (that is, when a 1 changes to a 0,
or vice versa). If that happens in your memory, a value could be completely
corrupted and produce very strange behavior when the FPGA tries to ana-
lyze it.
     Error detection and correction are two separate but related processes:
the FPGA can detect some number of bit errors and notify you about their
presence, and, separately, it can automatically correct some number of bit
errors. The number of bit errors that can be corrected is usually less than
the number of bit errors that can be detected. The important thing here
is that error detection and correction within a block RAM are performed
automatically, without you having to do anything.
     Many block RAMs can also be initialized to default values. This can
be a useful feature if you need to store a large number of initial values
or if you want to create read-only memory (ROM). Pushing those values
to a block RAM rather than taking up flip-flops for data storage can be a
valuable way to save resources. We touched on this idea back in Chapter 7,
when we were looking at parts of Verilog and VHDL that are synthesizable
and not synthesizable. Even though reading from a file is normally not
synthesizable—remember that there’s no filesystem on an FPGA unless
you create it yourself—we can read data from files as part of the synthesis
process to preload a block RAM with default values. Again, I recommend
consulting the memory guide for your particular FPGA to find out which
features it supports.

Creation
When using a block RAM in your design, I generally recommend inferring
it. As you saw in Chapter 6, when we create a two-dimensional memory
element, the tools will easily recognize it. Whether or not this memory
gets pushed to a block RAM depends on its size. Again, the synthesis tool
is smart about this: it knows how many bits of memory you’re creating,
and if it’s above some threshold, then it will be pushed to a block RAM.

                     Otherwise, the tool will just use flip-flops. For example, if you’re creating
                     a memory that holds 16 bytes, it will likely be pushed to flip-flops. You only
                     need 16 × 8 = 128 bits of memory, so it doesn’t make much sense to use an
                     entire 16Kb block RAM for this small quantity of data.
                         At which point the tools will start pushing memory to block RAMs
                     instead of using flip-flops is highly dependent on the situation. To find
                     out what your tool decided for a particular design, consult your utilization
                     report after synthesis. Here’s an example:

                     --snip--
                     Number of registers:    1204 out of 84255 (1%)
                     --snip--
                     Number of LUT4s:        1925 out of 83640 (2%)
                     --snip--
                   1 Number of block RAMs:   3 out of 208 (1%)

                          The utilization report lists the number of block RAMs required 1, just
                     as it lists the number of flip-flops (registers) and LUTs (LUT4s, or four-
                     input LUTs in this case). If you see that no block RAMs are being used,
                     then your memory was inferred as flip-flops instead. As a reminder, I always
                     recommend double-checking your utilization report to make sure the tools
                     are inferring what you expect.
                          If you’re wary of trying to infer large memory elements, or you’re con-
                     fused about which features you may or may not want to take advantage of in
                     your block RAM, then creating it with a GUI is your best option. The GUI
                     will guide you through the process, so for beginners it’s very helpful. Using
                     the GUI is also the best way to ensure that you’re using a FIFO correctly
                     when crossing clock domains, as it can help you handle the complexities
                     involved.

      The Digital Signal Processing Block
                    Digital signal processing (DSP) is a catch-all term for performing math-based
                    operations on signals within a digital system. Often these math operations
                    need to happen very fast and in parallel, which makes FPGAs an excellent
                    tool for the job. Since DSP is such a common FPGA application, another
                    kind of FPGA primitive, the DSP block, exists for this purpose. DSP blocks
                    (also known as DSP tiles) specialize in performing mathematical operations,
                    in particular multiply–accumulate (MAC), which is an operation where a mul-
                    tiplication is followed by an addition. Before we look more closely at these
                    primitives, however, it’s worth taking a step back to discuss the difference
                    between analog and digital signals.

                     Analog vs. Digital Signals
                     An analog signal is a continuous signal representing some physical mea-
                     surement. A common example is the audio signal stored on a vinyl record

(a big black shiny thing that has music on it, sometimes seen in old mov-
ies or new hipster bars). The record is etched with a continuous groove
that mirrors the continuous waveform of the audio. Then a record player
reads that waveform with a needle and amplifies the resulting signal to
play back the sound. The information is always analog; no conversion is
needed.
     Digital signals, on the other hand, aren’t continuous. Rather, they con-
sist of discrete measurements at individual points in time, with gaps in
between. A common example is the audio signal stored on a CD, where the
sound is represented as a series of 1s and 0s. If you have enough discrete
measurements, you can fill in the gaps to create a reasonably accurate
approximation of an analog signal from those digital values. A CD player
reads those digital values and rebuilds an analog waveform from them. The
result is always an approximation of the original analog signal, however,
which is why some audiophiles prefer the true analog signal of a record to
digital media like CDs and MP3s.
     Within your common FPGA fabric, like LUTs and flip-flops, data is
represented digitally. So what do you do if you have some analog signal that
you need to bring into your FPGA? This is the purpose of an ADC: it con-
verts an analog signal into a digital one by sampling it, or recording its value,
at discrete points in time. Figure 9-3 shows how this works.

   s(t)

                                                         t

Figure 9-3: Digital sampling of an analog signal

    The undulating line moving from left to right in the figure represents
a continuous analog signal, and the dark points along that line represent
the individual samples taken of that signal to convert it into a digital form.
Notice that the samples are taken at regular time intervals. The frequency
at which the analog signal is sampled is called the sampling frequency or
sampling rate. The higher the sampling rate, the more accurately we can
represent an analog signal, because it’s easier to connect the discrete dots
into something that looks like the original waveform. However, a higher

                  sampling rate also means that we have more data that we have to process:
                  each dot represents some number of bits of digital data, so the more dots
                  you have, the more bits you’re working with.

                  Common DSP Tasks
                  FPGAs commonly take an analog signal as input, digitize it, and then
                  do some math to process that digital data. As an example, let’s say we
                  have an audio signal that we’ve sampled within our FPGA. Let’s further-
                  more assume that the recorded data was too quiet, so when it’s played
                  back it’s hard to hear. How can we manipulate the digital signal such
                  that the output volume is louder? One simple thing we can do is multiply
                  every digital value by some constant, say 1.6. This is called applying gain
                  to a signal. How would we accomplish this within an FPGA? It’s quite
                  simple:

                  gain_adjusted <= input_signal * 1.6;

                       We take the input_signal, multiply every discrete digital value in that
                  signal by 1.6, and store the result in the gain_adjusted output. Here is where
                  the DSP primitive comes into play. When we write code like this, the synthe-
                  sis tools will see that we’re performing a multiplication operation and infer
                  a DSP block for us automatically.
                       Applying gain to an input signal doesn’t require parallel process-
                  ing. There’s only one multiplication operation per data sample, and the
                  data samples can be processed one after the other. Often, however, you’ll
                  need to perform many mathematical operations in parallel by running
                  several DSP blocks simultaneously. A common example is creating a filter,
                  a system that performs mathematical operations on a signal to reduce
                  or enhance certain features of the input signal. A low-pass filter (LPF),
                  for instance, keeps the frequency components of a signal that are below
                  some cutoff while reducing the frequencies that are above that cutoff,
                  which can be useful for removing high-frequency noise from an input
                  signal. Lowering the treble slider on your audio system is a real-world
                  example of applying a low-pass filter, since it will reduce high frequencies
                  within the audio. The details of implementing a digital LPF are beyond
                  the scope of this book, but since it requires many multiplication and
                  addition operations all occurring at the same time, FPGAs are well suited
                  for the task.
                       Another example of parallel math that might be performed in an
                  FPGA is processing video data to create a blur effect. Blurring video
                  involves replacing individual pixel values with the average value of a
                  group of neighboring pixels. This requires performing math on the
                  many pixels in an image at the same time, and this must happen quickly
                  since the video data consists of many images per second. An FPGA is
                  very capable of performing these parallel mathematical operations using
                  DSP blocks.

Features
DSP blocks are versatile primitives, providing many features that facilitate
different math operations. You won’t always need every feature for your
application—most often, you’ll just be performing a multiplication or addition
operation—but for more complicated scenarios, the DSP block can be set up
to solve a wide range of problems. Figure 9-4 provides a detailed look at a DSP
block in an FPGA from AMD. Each manufacturer’s DSP primitive is a bit differ-
ent, but this example is representative of the typical features available.

Figure 9-4: Block diagram of a DSP primitive

    This diagram actually shows a simplified version of the DSP block. It’s
not critical to understand the complete anatomy of the primitive, but it’s
worth pointing out a few things. First, notice that this DSP block can take
up to four inputs and has two outputs. This allows for more applications
than simply multiplying two numbers together: for example, MAC, where
the result of a multiplication is fed back into the input at the next clock
cycle for an addition operation.
    Toward the left-hand side of the block diagram, you can see a pre-adder
block. This can be enabled if an addition operation is requested prior to
another mathematical operation. To the right of this, near the middle of
the diagram, is a circle with an X in it. This is the multiplier, which is the
heart of the DSP block. It performs multiplication operations at very high
speeds. To its right is a circle labeled ALU, short for arithmetic logic unit,
which can perform more operations, like addition and subtraction. Finally,
there are built-in output registers that can be enabled to sample the outputs
and help meet timing at fast data rates.
    Like the number of block RAMs, the number of DSP blocks available to
you will vary from FPGA to FPGA. Some higher-end FPGAs have thousands of
DSP blocks inside them; again, you should consult your FPGA’s datasheet for
details specific to your model. As an example, Figure 9-5 highlights the infor-
mation on DSP blocks in the datasheet for Intel’s Cyclone V product line.

Figure 9-5: DSP blocks on Cyclone V FPGAs

                       Notice that the DSP block information comes just below the block RAM
                  information, again pointing to the importance of these primitives in FPGA
                  development. The 5CEA2 FPGA has 25 DSP blocks, but that increases to 66
                  for the 5CEA4 and 150 for the 5CEA5. Each DSP block has two multipliers,
                  so on the second highlighted line we can see that there are twice as many
                  18 × 18 multipliers (where 18 is the width of the inputs) as there are DSP
                  blocks.

       NOTE       If there aren’t any DSP blocks available on your FPGA, that doesn’t mean you can’t
                  perform these types of operations. Multiplication and addition operations will just
                  be implemented with LUTs, rather than with dedicated DSP blocks. We’ll discuss this
                  further in Chapter 10.

                  Creation
                  As with block RAMs, I generally recommend using inference to create DSP
                  blocks. Most of the multiplication operations you’ll need to do will require
                  two inputs and one output, as you saw earlier when we applied gain to a
                  signal. It’s simple enough to write the relevant code in Verilog or VHDL
                  and let the tools handle the rest. Remember to check your synthesis report
                  to ensure that you’re getting what you expect, but I’ve had good luck with
                  the synthesis tools understanding my intent with addition and multiplica-
                  tion and pushing those operations to DSPs where relevant. The user guides
                  for your particular FPGA will also provide you with suggestions on how to
                  write your Verilog or VHDL code to help ensure the tools understand your
                  intentions.
                       If you have more complicated needs for your DSP blocks, or if you want
                  to explore all of the features and capabilities internal to them, then you
                  should probably create them using a GUI to ensure you get what you want.
                  Figure 9-6 shows an example of creating a multiplier within the Lattice
                  Diamond GUI.

Figure 9-6: Creating a DSP block with a GUI

           One thing to highlight here is the Block Implementation drop-down
       menu. You can change this from DSP to LUT to use look-up tables rather
       than a DSP block to perform this multiplication operation. As mentioned
       previously, LUTs and DSPs are both capable of performing math opera-
       tions, including multiplication. With the DSP block, however, you’ll save
       LUT resources, and you’ll be able to run the math operation at much
       faster clock rates, since you’ll be using a dedicated primitive highly opti-
       mized for math.

The Phase-Locked Loop
       The phase-locked loop (PLL) is a primitive commonly used as the main clock
       generator for your entire FPGA. Very often, you’ll have an external clock
       chip that runs at some frequency. On some FPGAs, you can simply use
       that input clock to feed all of your synchronous logic directly, as we’ve
       done in this book’s projects. In this case, your logic frequency will be
       fixed at the frequency of whatever external clock you picked. But what
       happens if you need to change that frequency? Without a PLL, you would
       need to physically remove the external clock chip and replace it with a dif-
       ferent component that generates the clock frequency you want to switch
       to. With a PLL, however, you can generate a different clock frequency
       inside your FPGA by changing a few lines of code, without requiring a new
       external component.
           PLLs also make it easy to have multiple clock domains in your FPGA
       design. Say you have some external memory that runs at 100 MHz, but
       you want your main logic to run at 25 MHz. You could purchase a second
       external clock and feed that into your FPGA, but a better solution is to

                   use a PLL, since this primitive can generate multiple clock frequencies
                   simultaneously.
                       Not all FPGAs have a PLL, but many have at least one, and
                   some have several. The datasheet will tell you what’s available. As an
                   example, Figure 9-7 highlights the PLLs available on Intel’s Cyclone V
                   product line.

Figure 9-7: PLLs on the Cyclone V product line

                       The 5CEA2 and 5CEA4 FPGAs both have four PLLs, while the 5CEA5
                   has six. Given that each PLL can generate multiple clocks, that should be
                   more than enough for all your clocking needs.

                   How It Works
                   A PLL serves as the source of your clock distribution throughout your FPGA
                   by taking a single clock input, often called the reference clock, and generating
                   one or more clock outputs from it. The input clock comes from a dedicated
                   external component, and the outputs can run at completely different fre-
                   quencies from the input clock and from one another. The block diagram in
                   Figure 9-8 shows the most common signals on a PLL.

                                                    Output clock 1
                        Input clock                 Output clock 2
                                                         ...
                           Reset
                                           PLL      Output clock N

                                                       Locked

Figure 9-8: Common PLL signals

                       The PLL typically takes two inputs: a clock signal and a reset. The reset
                   input will stop the PLL from running when it’s asserted.

     On the output side, the PLL has some number of output clocks in
the range 1 to N, with the maximum number depending on the FPGA.
The output clocks can be of different frequencies, depending on what
you need for your design. These frequencies are achieved by taking the
input reference clock and multiplying and/or dividing it to get the desired
value. For example, say you have a 10 MHz input reference clock, and
you want a 15 MHz output clock. The PLL would multiply the reference
clock by 3 (giving you 30 MHz), then divide it by 2 to get down to 15 MHz.
The multiplication and division terms must be integers, so it’s important
to realize that you can’t get any arbitrary frequency out of the PLL. It
isn’t possible to get a π MHz clock output from a 10 MHz clock input, for
example, since π is an irrational number that can’t be expressed as the
ratio of two integers.
     Besides varying the frequency of the output clock(s), a PLL can also
vary their phase. A signal’s phase is its current position along the repeating
waveform of the signal, measured as an angle from 0 to 360 degrees. It’s
easiest to picture what this means by comparing two signals that share a fre-
quency but aren’t aligned in time. Figure 9-9 demonstrates some common
phase shifts of a clock signal.

Clk

Clk+90°

Clk+180°

Clk+270°

Figure 9-9: Common phase shifts

     As this figure shows, shifting the phase of a clock signal results in
moving the location of its rising edges. Compare the first rising edge of
Clk (which has no phase shift) with the first rising edge of Clk+90° (which
is phase-shifted by 90 degrees). The rising edge of Clk+90° is delayed
by one-quarter of a clock period relative to Clk. Each increment of
90 degrees shifts the signal by another quarter period. Continuing the
example in the figure, we have Clk+180°, which is delayed by 90 degrees
from Clk+90° and 180 degrees from Clk. Notice that Clk+180° is actually the
same waveform that you would get if you took the Clk signal and inverted
it by swapping the highs and lows. Finally, Clk+270° is delayed by three-
quarters of a clock period relative to the original Clk signal. If you went
a full 360 degrees, you’d be back to your original signal. This example
has demonstrated positive phase shifts, but phase can also be negative,
meaning the signal is shifted backward in time compared to the other.
Of course, you can shift the phase by any arbitrary angle, not just in
90-degree steps.

       NOTE       Creating clocks with phase shifts isn’t very common in simple designs, but it can be
                  useful in some applications. For example, it might be important for interfacing to
                  external components, like some off-FPGA memory.

                       Returning to the block diagram in Figure 9-8, a PLL also typically has
                  a locked output signal, which tells any module downstream that the PLL is
                  operating and you can “trust” the clocks. It’s a common design practice
                  to use this locked signal as a reset to other modules relying on the PLL’s
                  clocks. When the PLL isn’t locked, the modules downstream of the PLL are
                  held in a reset state until the PLL is locked and ready, meaning the output
                  clocks can be used by other modules in your FPGA design. When the PLL’s
                  reset input is driven high its locked output will go low, putting the down-
                  stream modules back into a reset condition.
                       If you’re going to use a PLL in your design, it’s a good idea to use
                  only the PLL’s outputs for all your clocking needs. Even if part of your
                  design runs at the same clock frequency as the external reference clock,
                  you shouldn’t use the external clock directly to drive that part of the
                  design. Instead, have the PLL output a clock signal at the same frequency
                  as the external reference. By only using the PLL’s outputs, you can
                  tightly control the relationships between the output clocks. Additionally,
                  you can confidently use the locked output of the PLL for your reset
                  circuitry, knowing it reflects the state that all clocks in your design are
                  operational.

                  Creation
                  The PLL is one primitive that I recommend using a GUI to create, since
                  the synthesis tools won’t be able to infer a PLL. Instantiation is also pos-
                  sible, but it’s prone to errors. You need to choose PLL settings that are
                  compatible with one another for the PLL to work successfully, and during
                  instantiation it’s easy to pick settings that won’t work. If you had a 10 MHz
                  reference clock and you wanted to generate one 15 MHz output and a sepa-
                  rate 89 MHz output, for example, that simply might not be possible, but you
                  might miss that fact during instantiation.
                       When you create a PLL using the GUI, you tell it your input reference
                  clock and desired output clock frequencies, and the tool will tell you if it
                  can find a solution that works. Continuing the 10/15/89 MHz example, the
                  GUI might tell you that the closest value to 89 MHz that it can give you is
                  90 MHz (since 90 MHz is a multiple of both 10 MHz and 15 MHz, this is
                  likely to work). Then it’s up to you to decide whether 90 MHz will work for
                  your design or if you really need 89 MHz, in which case you might need to
                  use a separate PLL or change your reference clock. Figure 9-10 shows an
                  example of the PLL GUI within Lattice Diamond.

Figure 9-10: Creating a PLL with a GUI

    As you can see, the GUI helps guide us through the PLL creation pro-
cess. In this case, we have a 30 MHz reference on CLKI, and we’re setting the
desired output frequencies to 30 MHz on CLKOP, 60 MHz on CLKOS, 15 MHz
on CLKOS2, and 89 MHz on CLKOS3. Notice that for each clock except CLKOS3,
the actual frequency on the far right matches the desired frequency. For
CLKOS3, when I first tried to create an 89 MHz clock with 0.0 percent toler-
ance, I got the error message shown in Figure 9-11.

Figure 9-11: Actionable feedback from
invalid PLL settings

     Not until I changed the tolerance to 2.0 percent did the error message
go away; the tool had selected an actual frequency of 90 MHz, which is
within 2.0 percent of the requested frequency. This type of guidance isn’t
provided if you try to instantiate your PLL directly.
     Another helpful feature of the GUI is the PLL block diagram, shown
in the left half of Figure 9-10. This diagram will be updated if you modify
the inputs or outputs. For example, if we disabled CLKOS3, that output would

                   disappear from the block diagram to reflect that we only want to output
                   three clock signals. This is useful to ensure you’re creating what you expect.
                   Notice that there’s also a separate Phase tab near the top of the window,
                   which allows us to specify phase shifts on our output clocks.
                       After designing a PLL in the GUI, you can run your design through the
                   normal synthesis process. The utilization report will confirm you’re getting
                   a PLL, as it’s one of the main primitives highlighted in the report. Here’s an
                   example:

                   --snip--
                   Number of PLLs:   1 out of 4 (25%)

                       This indicates one PLL is being used out of four available on this par-
                   ticular FPGA.

      Summary
                   The majority of your Verilog and VHDL code will be dedicated to creating
                   LUTs and flip-flops, which are the two most fundamental FPGA compo-
                   nents. However, as you’ve seen in this chapter, FPGAs also contain other
                   primitive components, such as block RAMs, DSP blocks, and PLLs, that add
                   specialized functionality. Block RAMs add dedicated memory, DSP blocks
                   enable high-speed parallel math operations, and PLLs allow you to gener-
                   ate different internal clock frequencies. With a combination of these FPGA
                   building blocks, you’ll be able to solve a wide range of problems efficiently.

