                          11
 G E T T I N G DATA I N A N D O U T W I T H
             I /O A N D S E R D E S

            Throughout this book, we’ve focused on the
            internals of FPGAs, and that’s typical of the
           FPGA design process. FPGA design largely
        centers around writing Verilog or VHDL code
targeting internal components like flip-flops, LUTs,
block RAMs, and DSP blocks. But what’s going on at
the edge of the device, where data enters and exits
the FPGA?
    There’s a surprising amount of complexity involved in getting data into
and out of an FPGA. In my experience, this is where most of the trickier
FPGA design problems occur. Understanding how the input/output (I/O)
works will help you tackle those problems. You’ll be able to spend less time
worrying about external interfaces, and more time solving the internal task
at hand.
    Working with I/O is where the boundary between being a “software
person” and a “hardware person” lies. You need to understand the details
                    of the electrical signals that you’re interfacing to in order to configure
                    the FPGA pins correctly. What voltage do they operate at? Are the signals
                    single-ended or differential? (And what does that even mean?) How can you
                    use double data rate or a serializer/deserializer to send data at very high
                    speeds? This chapter answers these questions and more. Even if you don’t
                    have an electrical engineering background, you’ll learn the fundamentals
                    of interfacing FPGAs to the outside world.

      Working with GPIO Pins
                    Most pins on the FPGA are general purpose input/output (GPIO) pins, meaning
                    they can function as a digital input or output. We’ve used these pins in the
                    book’s projects to take in signals from push buttons and output signals to
                    light up LEDs, but we haven’t worried about the details of how this actually
                    works. In this section, we’ll look at how GPIO pins interface with an FPGA
                    and how they can be made to input data, output data, or both.
                        When I was first getting into FPGA design, I had no idea of the nuances
                    involved in pin configuration. There are many knobs to turn and settings
                    to play with. Having a thorough understanding of your GPIO pins is impor-
                    tant, especially for high-speed designs, because maintaining signal integrity
                    and performance throughout your design starts at the pins.

                    I/O Buffers
                    GPIO pins interface with an FPGA through buffers, electronic circuit ele-
                    ments that isolate their input from their output. These buffers are what
                    allow you to configure some pins as inputs and others as outputs. As you’ll
                    see soon, they even allow you to toggle a pin between input and output
                    while the FPGA is running. Figure 11-1 shows a simplified block diagram of
                    a GPIO pin interface on an Intel FPGA, to illustrate how a buffer serves as
                    an intermediary between the pin and the internal FPGA logic.

                       GPIO            Buffer
                            OE

                          Output
                           path

                           Input
                            path

Figure 11-1: A simplified GPIO block
                    diagram

                        The box on the right-hand side of the image (with the X inside it) rep-
                    resents the physical pin. Immediately to the left of the pin is a block labeled
                    Buffer, which represents the I/O buffer. It contains two main components,
                    represented by triangles. The triangle pointing to the right is the output

buffer; it pushes data out to the pin. The triangle pointing to the left is the
input buffer; it sends data from the pin into the FPGA.
     On the far left of the diagram is a block labeled GPIO, representing
the internal FPGA logic that interacts directly with the pin via the buffers.
The main path to notice here is OE, which stands for output enable. This
turns the output buffer on or off to control whether the pin will function
as an output or an input. When OE is high, the output buffer will drive the
pin with whatever data is present on the output path. If data on the output
path is low, the pin will be low, and if data on the output path is high, the
pin will be high. When OE is low, the pin is configured as an input, so the
output buffer stops passing its input to its output. At this point the buffer’s
output becomes high impedance (also called hi-Z or tri-state), meaning it will
accept very little current. A high-impedance output buffer no longer affects
anything happening on the pin. Instead, the pin’s state is governed by what-
ever external signal is coming in. The input buffer is free to read that signal
and pass it along to the input path for use inside the FPGA.
     Table 11-1 shows a truth table for an output buffer, summarizing this
behavior.

Table 11-1: Truth Table for an Output Buffer
 Input             OE              Output
 0                 0               Z
 1                 0               Z
 0                 1               0
 1                 1               1

     Looking at this table, we can see that when OE is high, the value on
the buffer’s input is simply passed to its output. However, when OE is low,
the buffer’s output is high impedance (conventionally represented by a Z),
regardless of the value on the input.
     In the projects in this book, we’ve defined the input and output signals
at the top level of the design code. Inputs are represented with the keyword
input (Verilog) or in (VHDL), while outputs are indicated by the keyword
output (Verilog) or out (VHDL). When building the FPGA, the synthesis
tools see which signals are defined for each direction and set up the buffers
accordingly. If the signal is an input, OE will be set low. If the signal in an
output, OE will be set high. Then, during the place and route process, the
physical constraints file maps the signals to the specific pins on the FPGA.
This is how GPIO pins get configured as dedicated input or output pins for
your design.

Bidirectional Data for Half-Duplex Communication
While most pins in a design are typically fixed as either input or output,
a GPIO pin can be configured to be bidirectional, meaning it can switch
between functioning as input and output within the same design. When

                   the FPGA needs to output data through the bidirectional pin, it drives the
                   OE signal high, then puts the data to transmit onto the output path. When
                   the FPGA needs to receive data as input through the bidirectional pin, it
                   drives OE low. This puts the output buffer into tri-state (high impedance),
                   enabling the FPGA to listen to the data on the pin and pass it to the input
                   path. When a pin is configured to be bidirectional like this, it’s acting as a
                   transceiver, as opposed to just a transmitter or just a receiver.
                         Bidirectional pins are useful for half-duplex communication, where two
                   devices exchange data using a single, shared transmission line (one pin).
                   Either device can serve as a transmitter, but only one device can transmit at
                   a time, while the other receives. This is in contrast to full-duplex communi-
                   cation, where both devices can transmit and receive data at the same time.
                   Full-duplex communication requires two transmission lines (two pins), one
                   for sending data from device 1 to device 2 and the other for sending data
                   from device 2 to device 1, as opposed to the single transmission line of half-
                   duplex communication.
                         A common example of half-duplex communication is a two-way radio.
                   The speaker is only able to transmit when they hold down the button on the
                   radio. When the speaker is transmitting, the listener is unable to transmit,
                   so the speaker and listener must agree whose turn it is to talk. This is why
                   people always say “Over” in the movies when they’re talking on walkie-talkies;
                   it’s a signal that the speaker is done talking and the listener is now free to
                   respond.
                         With a physical wire, if the two sides don’t take turns sharing the com-
                   munication channel, then there can be a data collision. This collision can
                   corrupt the data, so nobody receives anything. To avoid this the devices
                   must agree on a protocol, a set of rules governing communication. The
                   protocol determines how a device can initiate a transaction, establishes
                   well-defined locations in time for other devices on the line to talk back (the
                   equivalent of saying “Over”), and so on. Some protocols are even able to
                   handle data collisions by detecting when data is corrupted and resending
                   the corrupted data, though this requires additional complexity.
                         Half-duplex communication is usually more complicated than using
                   dedicated transmit and receive channels, but it’s still quite common. I2C
                   (or I2C, pronounced “eye-squared-see” or “eye-two-see” and short for inter-
                   integrated circuit), for example, is a widely used half-duplex protocol. Countless
                   unique integrated circuits—including ADCs, DACs, accelerometers, gyro-
                   scopes, temperature sensors, microcontrollers, and many others—use I2C
                   to communicate, since it’s relatively simple to implement and, thanks to its
                   half-duplex nature, requires a very low pin count. Only two pins, clock and
                   data, are used in I2C, which is why you may also see it referred to as TWI
                   (two-wire interface).

                   A Bidirectional Pin Implementation
                   Let’s look at how to code a bidirectional pin using Verilog or VHDL. As you
                   examine this code, refer to Figure 11-2 to see how the signals in the code
                   match the block diagram from Figure 11-1:

Verilog 1 module bidirectional(inout io_Data,
            --snip--
          2 assign w_RX_Data = io_Data;
          3 assign io_Data   = w_TX_En ? w_TX_Data : 1'bZ;
            --snip--

 VHDL     entity bidirectional is
          1 port (io_Data : inout std_logic,
            --snip--
          2 w_RX_Data <= io_Data;
          3 io_Data   <= w_TX_Data when w_TX_En = '1' else 'Z';
            --snip--

              We declare the bidirectional pin (io_Data) with the keyword inout in
          both Verilog and VHDL 1. At this point we can imagine that we’re at the
          pin, as indicated by the label io_Data in Figure 11-2. We’ll need to map this
          signal to one of the FPGA’s pins in our physical constraints file. For the
          input functionality, we simply use an assignment to drive w_RX_Data with the
          data from the pin 2. On the output side, we selectively enable the output
          buffer using the signal w_TX_En 3. We use the ternary operator in Verilog
          or a conditional assignment in VHDL. The data driven onto io_Data will
          either be w_TX_Data or high impedance (indicated by 1'bZ in Verilog or 'Z'
          in VHDL), depending on the state of the output enable signal (w_TX_En).
          This code pattern is very common for bidirectional data. Synthesis tools are
          smart enough to recognize it and infer an I/O buffer.

             GPIO              Buffer
                          w_TX_En
                  OE

                Output   w_TX_Data      io_Data

                 path

                 Input     w_RX_Data
                 path

Figure 11-2: A labeled bidirectional
          interface

              One thing you might notice is that any data driven out on w_TX_Data will
          be received on w_RX_Data, since they’re connected together through io_Data.
          You’ll need to address this elsewhere in the code by telling your receiver to
          ignore any data on io_Data when w_TX_En is high. Otherwise, your FPGA will
          be hearing itself talk.

          Electrical Characteristics
          There are many different electrical characteristics that you can specify
          for each individual GPIO pin. We’re going to talk about three: operating

                   voltage, drive strength, and slew rate. We’ll also look at the electrical differ-
                   ences between single-ended and differential data transmission.
                       As you read, keep in mind that these aren’t the only pin settings you
                   can control. For example, you also may be able to set pins to be open drain,
                   include a pull-up or pull-down resistor or a termination resistor, and much
                   more. The I/O of your FPGA can be configured in many, many ways,
                   depending on which GPIO properties are built into the device itself. If you
                   need to implement anything other than simple signal interfaces, it’s worth
                   exploring the relevant datasheets to ensure you’re working correctly with
                   your I/O buffers. All of the specific information about your FPGA’s I/O can
                   usually be found in the I/O user guide, which is a great reference for details
                   on what types of electronics your FPGA is capable of interfacing to.

                   Operating Voltage
                   The operating voltage specifies what voltage the pin will be driven to for a
                   logic 1 output and sets the expected voltage for a logic 1 input. Most com-
                   monly, FPGA pins use 0 V to represent a 0 and 3.3 V to represent a 1. This
                   standard is called LVCMOS33 (LVCMOS is short for low-voltage complementary
                   metal oxide semiconductor). Another standard you might come across is 0 V to
                   represent a 0 and 5 V to represent a 1. This is called TTL, short for transistor–
                   transistor logic. TTL is less common in FPGAs these days, since many don’t
                   allow voltages as high as 5 V internally. There’s also the LVCMOS25 stan-
                   dard, which uses 0 V to represent a 0 and 2.5 V to represent a 1.
                        LVCMOS33, LVCMOS25, and TTL are all examples of single-ended I/O
                   standards, meaning the signals involved are referenced to ground. As you’ll
                   see soon, there are also differential standards, where the signals aren’t ref-
                   erenced to ground. There are many more single-ended standards than the
                   three I’ve mentioned. A typical FPGA supports about a dozen single-ended
                   I/O standards.
                        One important note about setting your operating voltage is that all
                   signals on a single bank need to be at the same operating voltage. A bank is
                   a group of pins that all operate with a common reference voltage, usually
                   called VCCIO. You might have eight banks on your FPGA, and each bank
                   can use a unique operating voltage. For example, you might configure
                   bank 1 to use 1.8 V, bank 2 to use 3.3 V, and bank 3 to use 2.5 V. What’s crit-
                   ical is that all the pins within a single bank are operating at the same volt-
                   age. You can’t put an LVCMOS33 pin on the same bank as an LVCMOS25
                   pin, because the former requires a VCCIO of 3.3 V while the latter requires
                   a VCCIO of 2.5 V. When doing your schematic review, always check to make
                   sure that the signals on each bank share the same reference voltage. If you
                   try to mix voltages in the same bank, the place and route tool will likely
                   generate an error, or at least a very strong warning.

                   Drive Strength
                   The drive strength of a pin determines how much current (in milliamps, or
                   mA) can be driven into or out of the pin. For example, a pin set to an 8 mA

drive strength will be capable of sinking or sourcing up to 8 mA of current.
The drive strength can be changed on an individual pin basis and should
be high enough to match the needs of the circuit you’re interfacing to. Most
often, the drive strength settings can be left at the default for all of the pins
on your FPGA. Unless you have some high current needs, it’s unlikely you’ll
need to modify the default settings.

Slew Rate
The slew rate sets the rate of change allowed for an output signal. It’s usually
specified in qualitative terms, such as fast, medium, or slow. The slew rate set-
ting affects how quickly a pin can change from a 0 to a 1 or from a 1 to a 0.
Like drive strength, the slew rate can often be left at the default setting for
each of your pins. The exception is if you’re interfacing to some component
that requires very fast data rates, in which case you might want to select
the fastest option. However, selecting a faster slew rate can increase system
noise, so it’s not recommended to slew faster unless you really need it.

Differential Signaling
Differential signaling is a method of sending data where you have two signals
that aren’t referenced to ground, but rather to each other. As I hinted ear-
lier, this is in contrast to single-ended signaling, where you have one data sig-
nal referenced to ground. Figure 11-3 illustrates the difference.

         Device 1                                             Device 2

 w_TX_Data                                                            w_RX_Data

        Device 1                                              Device 2
                                                          –
w_TX_Data                                                             w_RX_Data
                                                          +

Figure 11-3: Single-ended vs. differential interfaces

     The top half of the figure shows a single-ended configuration: we have
device 1 transmitting data to device 2 on a single wire, and another wire
for the ground path. There’s no data on this ground wire, but it’s needed
to maintain a consistent ground reference between the devices. Data is sent
as a voltage on the data wire: 0 V for a 0 or some other value (such as 3.3 V)
for a 1, depending on the operating voltage. If we wanted to add another
data path, we could just add another single wire between the two devices;
the ground reference can work for multiple data paths.
     The bottom half of the image shows a differential configuration. Here,
we don’t have a ground reference passed between the devices. Instead, we

                   have a pair of data lines. Notice the bubble at the start of the upper line,
                   on the output of device 1’s transmit buffer. This looks like the bubble we
                   saw when looking at NOT gates and NAND gates back in Chapter 3, and
                   it’s a common indication that we have a differential pair. If the difference
                   between the + and – terminals on the receiver is a positive voltage above
                   some threshold, then the signal is decoded as a 1; if the difference is a nega-
                   tive voltage below some threshold, then the signal is decoded as a 0. The
                   details depend on the differential standard. For example, TIA/EIA-644,
                   more commonly called LVDS (low-voltage differential signaling), specifies that
                   there should be a difference of about +/– 350 millivolts (mV) between the
                   two wires. This voltage is quite a bit lower than most single-ended signals
                   use, meaning the system can operate at less power, which is one advantage
                   of differential communication over single-ended communication. A typical
                   FPGA supports about the same number of differential standards as single-
                   ended standards (a dozen or so).
                         One disadvantage you might have picked up on is that differential
                   communication requires twice as many wires for every data path. In the
                   case of single-ended data transfer, there’s just one wire for each data path
                   we want to create. If we want 10 data paths, we need 10 wires (and usually
                   at least 1 ground wire). To create the same 10 data paths with differential
                   signaling, we’d need 20 wires (but no ground wires). This extra wiring costs
                   money and will require a larger connector. Still, differential signals have
                   some unique properties that may make this trade-off worthwhile in certain
                   applications.
                         One important advantage is that differential signals are much more
                   immune to noise, or electromagnetic interference (EMI), than single-ended sig-
                   nals. EMI is a phenomenon caused by changing electrical and magnetic
                   fields—for example, from a nearby microwave oven, cell phone, or power
                   line—that can cause disturbances in other systems. You can think of a wire
                   that carries data as a small antenna that receives all sorts of unwanted elec-
                   trical signals, creating noise that shows up as a voltage blip on the wire. A
                   large enough voltage blip on a single-ended signal could corrupt the data,
                   causing a 0 to turn into a 1, or a 1 into a 0. With a differential signal, how-
                   ever, the voltage blip will affect both wires equally, meaning the voltage
                   difference between the wires will remain constant. Since it’s the voltage dif-
                   ference, and not the exact value of the voltage itself, that matters, the noise
                   is effectively canceled out.
                         An additional benefit of differential communication is that the trans-
                   mitter and the receiver can be referenced to different ground voltages and
                   still send and receive data reliably. It might seem strange, but ground isn’t
                   always exactly 0 V. The ground in a system can be affected by noise, just
                   as data lines can be, so problems can arise when you rely on ground as a
                   source of truth throughout your system. In particular, it’s difficult to main-
                   tain a common ground reference for two devices that are far apart, which
                   is why differential signals are often used to send data over long distances.
                   For example, RS-485, a differential electrical standard, can send data at
                   10 megabits per second (Mb/s) over a distance of nearly 1 mile, which
                   would be impossible with a single-ended signal. Even at closer distances,

there are situations where one system might not be referenced to ground at
all. Instead, it might be floating or isolated from a ground reference. To com-
municate with an isolated system, you need a method of communication
that doesn’t rely on a shared ground reference; differential communication
is one such method.
      Differential signals are also able to send data at faster rates than single-
ended signals. When a transmitter needs to change from a 0 to a 1, it must
drive the line all the way from the voltage corresponding to a 0 to the volt-
age corresponding to a 1, and that process takes some amount of time (the
slew rate). The bigger the difference between the voltages, the more current
must be driven onto the line, and the longer the process will take. Since
single-ended protocols typically require wider voltage swings between a 0
and a 1, they’re inherently slower than differential protocols. For example,
the LVCMOS33 voltage swing of 3.3 V is much greater than the LVDS volt-
age swing of +/– 350 mV. For this reason, almost all high-speed applica-
tions use differential signals. We’ll get into more detail about this later in
the chapter when we discuss SerDes, but interfaces like USB, SATA, and
Ethernet all use differential signals for the highest possible data rates.

How to Modify Pin Settings
If you want to specify the operating voltage, drive strength, or slew rate
values for your pins, or control which pins are for single-ended signals and
which are for differential signals, the place to do it is your physical con-
straints file. Recall that this file lists how the pins on your FPGA connect to
the signals in your design. In addition to specifying the pin mapping, you
can also add these other parameters to further define the I/O behavior.
Here’s an excerpt from a Lattice constraint file that includes some addi-
tional parameters:

LOCATE COMP "o_Data" SITE "A13";
IOBUF PORT "o_Data" IO_TYPE=LVCMOS33 DRIVE=8 SLEWRATE=FAST;

     The first line maps the signal o_Data to the pin A13. The second line sets
the operating voltage to LVCMOS33, the drive strength to 8, and the slew rate
to FAST. You should refer to the constraints user guide for your particular
FPGA to see how to set these parameters; the syntax isn’t universal across
devices. You can also use the GUI in your IDE to set these parameters with-
out having to learn the exact syntax required.

Faster Data Transmission with Double Data Rate
Sending data quickly is where FPGAs can really shine, and one way to
speed up transmission is to use double data rate (DDR). Up until this point,
I’ve stated that the signals in your FPGA should be synchronized to the
rising edges of the clock. With double data rate, however, signals change
on the rising and falling edges of the clock. This enables you to send
twice the amount of data with the same clock frequency, as shown in
Figure 11-4.

                      Clk

                     SDR      D0       D1      D2

                     DDR    D0 D1 D2 D3 D4 D5

Figure 11-4: Single vs. double
                    data rate

                         As you can see, with single data rate, where data is sent on each
                    rising clock edge, you’re able to move three bits of data (D0 through D2)
                    during three clock cycles. In comparison, with double data rate, where
                    data is sent on both rising and falling edges, you can send six bits of data
                    (D0 through D5) during the same three clock cycles. This technique is
                    known for its use in LPDDR memory, short for low-power double data rate, a
                    type of RAM commonly found in computers, smartphones, and other elec-
                    tronics. Changing the data on both edges of the clock increases the band-
                    width of the memory.
                         You need to create double data rate output (ODDR) buffers anywhere
                    you want to use DDR for data transfer. The details vary between FPGA
                    manufacturers, but I generally recommend creating these ODDR buffers
                    directly within your Verilog or VHDL, using instantiation, since they aren’t
                    terribly complicated to configure. As an example, let’s take a look at an
                    instantiation template for an ODDR buffer from AMD’s Virtex-7 Library
                    User Guide:

       Verilog       ODDR #(
                     .DDR_CLK_EDGE("OPPOSITE_EDGE"),
                     .INIT(1'b0), // Initial value of Q: 1'b0 or 1'b1
                     .SRTYPE("SYNC") // Set/reset type: "SYNC" or "ASYNC"
                     ) ODDR_inst (
                   1 .Q(Q), // 1-bit DDR output
                     .C(C), // 1-bit clock input
                     .CE(CE), // 1-bit clock enable input
                     .D1(D1), // 1-bit data input (positive edge)
                     .D2(D2), // 1-bit data input (negative edge)
                     .R(R), // 1-bit reset
                     .S(S) // 1-bit set
                     );

          VHDL       ODDR_inst : ODDR
                     generic map(
                     DDR_CLK_EDGE => "OPPOSITE_EDGE",
                     INIT => '0', -- Initial value for Q port ('1' or '0')
                     SRTYPE => "SYNC") -- Reset type ("ASYNC" or "SYNC")
                     port map (
                   1 Q => Q, -- 1-bit DDR output
                     C => C, -- 1-bit clock input
                     CE => CE, -- 1-bit clock enable input
                     D1 => D1, -- 1-bit data input (positive edge)

         D2 => D2, -- 1-bit data input (negative edge)
         R => R, -- 1-bit reset input
         S => S -- 1-bit set input
         );

              It’s not critical to understand every line here. The most important con-
         nection is the output pin itself 1   ; this is where the ODDR block is connected
         to the pin. The two data inputs, D1 and D2, will be used in an alternating pat-
         tern to drive the data to the output pin. D1 is driven on rising (or positive)
         edges and D2 on falling (or negative) edges.
              Double data rate allows you to speed up data transmission, but if you
         really want to get your data flying, some FPGAs have a specialized type of
         interface called SerDes that allows for even speedier input and output. We’ll
         examine this exciting FPGA feature next.

SerDes
         A SerDes, short for serializer/deserializer, is a primitive of some (but not all)
         FPGAs responsible for inputting or outputting data at very high speeds, into
         the gigabits per second (Gb/s). At a high level, it works by taking a parallel
         data stream and converting it into a serial data stream for high-speed trans-
         mission. On the receiving end, the serial data is converted back to parallel.
         This is how the FPGA can exchange data with other devices at very fast data
         rates. It may sound counterintuitive that sending data serially, one bit at a
         time, is faster than sending data in parallel, several bits at a time, but that’s
         the magic of SerDes. We’ll discuss why this works soon.
              SerDes primitives are sometimes called SerDes transceivers, which reflects
         that they can send and receive data. That said, SerDes transceivers are
         almost always full-duplex, meaning they don’t have to switch back and
         forth between being a transmitter and a receiver like we saw previously with
         bi­directional communication. You usually set up one data path as a trans-
         mitter out of your FPGA, and another as a receiver into your FPGA.
              SerDes transceivers help FPGAs excel at sending or receiving very
         large amounts of data at a rate that wouldn’t be possible with other
         devices. This is a killer feature that makes FPGAs attractive for use cases
         such as receiving data from a video camera. A high-resolution camera
         might have a pixel space of 1,920×1,080, with 32 bits of data per pixel, and
         new images captured at a rate of 60 Hz. If we multiply those numbers,
         that translates to 3.9Gb of uncompressed raw data per second—quite a
         lot!—and some cameras can go even higher, up to 4K and 120 Hz. SerDes
         transceivers allow an FPGA to receive an absolute firehose of data and
         unpack it in such a way that the FPGA can process it correctly. Another
         common use case is networking, where you have Ethernet packets fly-
         ing around at hundreds of gigabits per second. You might have multiple
         SerDes transceivers working together on a single device to route packets
         correctly, again at very fast data rates that wouldn’t be possible to achieve
         on a standard I/O pin.

                        At its heart, SerDes revolves around converting between parallel and
                   serial data. To understand why this conversion is necessary, we need to take
                   a closer look at the differences between serial and parallel data transfer.

                   Parallel vs. Serial Communication
                   Parallel communication means we’re using multiple communication channels
                   (usually wires) to send data, with the data split up across the different chan-
                   nels. Serial communication means we’re sending the data on a single channel,
                   one bit at a time. Figure 11-5 illustrates the difference.

                     TX
                               Parallel interface
                                                                 RX
                     Clk                                     Clk
                     D7                    0                 D7
                     D6                    1                 D6
                     D5                    1                 D5
                     D4                    0                 D4
                     D3                    0                 D3
                     D2                    0                 D2
                     D1                    1                 D1
                     D0                    1                 D0

                     TX         Serial interface                 RX
                     Clk                                     Clk
                             D7 D6 D5 D4 D3 D2 D1 D0
                     Out                                     In
                              0 1    1   0 0 0     1   1

Figure 11-5: Parallel vs. serial interfaces

                        The top half of the figure shows an 8-bit-wide synchronous parallel
                   interface. Synchronous means that we have a clock signal sent between the
                   devices, and the data is aligned with the clock. With this interface, we
                   can send a whole byte of data on a single clock cycle, with one bit on each
                   of the eight wires. In this case, we’re sending the value 01100011, or 0x63.
                   While we have eight parallel data paths in this example, you could theo-
                   retically create a parallel interface with any width—you could have a 2-bit-
                   wide interface, a 32-bit-wide interface, a 64-bit-wide interface, or any other
                   arbitrary size.
                        The bottom half of the figure shows the same data transfer of the value
                   01100011, but it’s sent in a synchronous serial stream. Once again, there’s a
                   clock signal shared between the devices, but now the data is sent across a
                   single wire, one bit per clock cycle. This way, it takes eight clock cycles to
                   send 0x63, rather than just one clock cycle in the parallel case.
                        Since parallel communication allows you to send multiple bits in a sin-
                   gle clock cycle, it might seem logical that transmitting data in parallel will
                   always allow you to send more data per unit time than sending the data seri-
                   ally. In fact, parallel data transfer runs up against some serious limitations

as the bandwidth increases. The physics can’t easily scale to support today’s
high-speed data needs, which is why parallel interfaces are far less common
today than they used to be.
     If you’re old enough to remember the days of ribbon printers, those
would connect to your computer using an LPT port, which is a type of par-
allel interface. Another example was the old PCI bus that was a common
way to plug devices like modems and sound cards into your desktop mother-
board. Neither of these interfaces is used very much anymore; they couldn’t
keep up with our need for faster data.
     To illustrate why, let’s consider how your data transfer speed (or band-
width) is calculated on a parallel interface like PCI. The first version of
PCI operated at a clock rate of 33 MHz and was 32 bits wide, meaning there
were 32 individual data wires that needed to be connected between two
devices. Multiplying the numbers out, we get 1,056Mb/s, or 132 megabytes
per second (MB/s), of bandwidth. This was sufficient for the computing
needs of the 1990s, but the demand for more data soon began to increase.
We wanted better graphics cards, for example, and the bus to support
that data transfer needed to grow accordingly. PCI designers answered
the demand by doubling the clock rate to 66 MHz, which doubled the
total bandwidth from 132MB/s to 264MB/s. That bought a few years, but
it wasn’t enough, so PCI next doubled the width of the connector from 32
bits to 64 bits, meaning now we have 64 data wires. This provided around
528MB/s of bandwidth, which again bought a few years, but still it wasn’t
enough.
     By this time, PCI was reaching a point of diminishing returns. There
are only two ways to increase data throughput with a parallel interface like
PCI: make the bus wider or increase the clock speed. At 64 bits wide, PCI
connectors were already a few inches long. To go any wider—say, to
128 bits—the connectors would need to be enormous. Routing all those
connections in the circuit board gets very challenging, too. It simply doesn’t
make sense to continue to widen the bus.
     There are also big challenges with increasing the clock speed. When
you have a wide data bus and you’re sending a clock signal alongside the
data, as in the synchronous parallel interface in Figure 11-5, you need to
maintain a tight relationship between the clock and the data. The clock
will be fed into the clock input of each flip-flop on the receiving side: for
a 128-bit-wide bus, for example, there are 128 individual flip-flops that
all need that same clock. With so many parallel flip-flops, however, you
start to run into problems with clock skew, a phenomenon where the
same clock arrives at different times to each flip-flop due to propagation
delay.
     As we discussed in Chapter 7, signals don’t travel instantly; rather,
there’s some delay, and the longer the signals have to travel (that is,
the longer the wire) the longer the propagation delay becomes. With a
128-bit-wide bus, the distance the clock signal travels to get to the bit-0
flip-flop can be quite different from the distance the clock signal trav-
els to get to the bit-127 flip-flop. As the clock frequency increases, this

                   difference can create enough clock skew to trigger metastable conditions
                   and corrupt the data.
                       Clearly, parallel communication has issues. There are fundamental
                   limits to how fast you can go and how many bits you can send at once.
                   Ultimately, the problem comes down to the need to send a separate clock
                   signal alongside the data. The solution is to send the clock and the data
                   together, serially, as part of a single combined signal.

                   Self-Clocking Signals
                   Combining the clock and the data into one signal gives you something
                   called a self-clocking signal. The process of creating this signal is sometimes
                   referred to as embedding the clock in the data, and it’s the key technique that
                   makes high-speed serial data transfer via SerDes possible. If you send the
                   clock and the data together as one signal, then the issue of clock skew is
                   no longer a problem, since your clock is received exactly when your data is
                   received; they’re the same signal! With clock skew out of the picture, you’re
                   able to increase the clock frequency (and therefore the data frequency)
                   tremendously.
                       There are many different systems, called encoding schemes, for embed-
                   ding the clock in the data. Common ones include Manchester code, High-
                   Level Data Link Control (HDLC), and 8B/10B. We’ll focus on Manchester
                   code, since it’s a relatively simple encoding scheme, to illustrate one way
                   to create a self-clocking signal. Figure 11-6 shows how Manchester code
                   works.

                                Clk

                              Data

                   Manchester
                    (as per IEEE 802.3)

Figure 11-6: Embedding the clock in the data with Manchester code

                       To implement Manchester code, you take the XOR (exclusive OR)
                   of the clock and data signals, producing a new signal that combines the
                   two. In any given clock period, the data signal will be a 1 or a 0, while the
                   clock signal is a 1 for the first half of the period and a 0 for the second
                   half of the period. The resulting Manchester code signal thus changes
                   halfway through the clock period as well, in response to the transition
                   in the clock signal. Depending on the data value in that period, the
                   Manchester signal will either be low then high (when the data is a 1)
                   or high then low (when the data is a 0). Table 11-2 is a truth table for
                   the Manchester signal based on the different data/clock combinations.

You can use this table to understand the Manchester signal pattern in
Figure 11-6.

Table 11-2: Truth Table for Manchester Code
                            Manchester
Data          Clock         encoding
0             0             0
0             1             1
1             0             1
1             1             0

      This is simply a truth table for a two-input XOR logic gate, where the
inputs are the data and clock signals. As we discussed in Chapter 3, XOR
performs the operation either/or, but not both, so the output is high when
exactly one input is high, but not when both or neither are high. Looking at
the waveforms in Figure 11-6, notice that whenever the clock and data are
both high, the encoded value is low. The encoded value is also low when the
clock and data are both low, and it’s high when only one of the two is high.
      The Manchester encoded signal allows you to send the clock and data
signals together on a single wire. As mentioned previously, this is the key
enabler of high-speed serial data transfer. You no longer need to worry
about the alignment of the clock to the data, because the clock is the data and
the data is the clock.
      On the receiving side, you need to separate the clock back out from
the data, a process called clock data recovery (CDR). This is achieved using
an XOR gate and some small, additional logic at the receiver. Then you
can use the recovered clock as your clock input to a flip-flop, and feed the
recovered data into the data input of that same flip-flop. This way you have
perfect synchronization between the clock and the data. The issue of clock
skew that we saw with parallel data goes away, enabling you to crank up the
data rates far beyond what parallel data transfer could ever achieve.
      Manchester code is just one way to generate a self-clocking signal, and
it’s a simple encoding scheme. It isn’t used for modern, more complicated
SerDes applications, but it does have some features that are critical. For
one, the Manchester encoded signal is guaranteed to transition on each
clock cycle. If you’re sending a continuous stream of 0s in the data, for
example, there will still be transitions in the encoded signal. These tran-
sitions are essential for performing CDR on the receiving side. Without
guaranteed transitions, the receiver wouldn’t be able to lock onto the input
stream. It wouldn’t know if the data was being sent at 3 gigabits per second
(Gb/s), or 1.5Gb/s, or if it was running at all.
      Another important feature of Manchester code is that it’s DC balanced,
meaning there are an equal number of highs and lows in the resulting
data stream. This helps maintain signal integrity and overcome non-ideal
conditions on the wire during high-speed data transfer. We normally con-
sider wires to be perfect conductors, but in reality they aren’t; every wire

                     has some capacitance, inductance, and resistance. At slow data rates these
                     don’t matter much, but when we get into the Gb/s range, we need to con-
                     sider these effects. For example, since there’s some capacitance in the wire,
                     it makes sense that the wire can be charged up like a capacitor. When a
                     wire becomes slightly charged, for example to a high state, then it requires
                     more energy to discharge it to a low state. Ideally, you don’t want to charge
                     up your wires at all: in other words, you want to maintain a DC balance.
                     Sending an equal number of high and low transitions in SerDes is critical to
                     maintaining good signal integrity, and all clock and data encoding schemes
                     have this feature.

                     How SerDes Works
                     Now that we’ve covered the speed advantages of serial communication
                     over parallel communication and examined how to combine the clock
                     and data into one signal, we’re ready to look at how SerDes actually works.
                     Figure 11-7 shows a simplified block diagram of a SerDes interface.

                            Serializer (TX)            Channel              Deserializer (RX)

             Data        Parallel to                                    –              Serial to   Data
              in           serial                                                      parallel     out
                                                                        +
                          encoder                                                      decoder

                                         Output                         Input
                                         stage                          stage
               Clk                                                                                 Clk
               in          PLL                                                           CDR       out

Figure 11-7: A simplified SerDes block diagram

                          Looking at the image as a whole, we have a serializer on the left that
                     acts as a transmitter, and a deserializer on the right that acts as a receiver.
                     We have clock and data signals going into the serializer on the left, and
                     clock and data signals coming out of the deserializer on the right. That’s
                     really all we’re trying to do with SerDes: send some data and a clock sig-
                     nal from a transmitter to a receiver. However, doing this at fast data rates
                     requires a lot more functionality than we’ve seen in simpler input and out-
                     put buffers.
                          First, notice that there’s a phase-locked loop on the transmit side, in
                     the lower-left corner of Figure 11-7. Usually this is a dedicated PLL specific
                     to the SerDes transceiver that uses a reference clock (Clk In) to generate
                     the clock that will run the serializer. This clock dictates the overall rate at
                     which your SerDes will run. The data that you actually want to send (Data
                     In) comes into the SerDes block in parallel. I’ve drawn four lines here, but
                     there could be any number of wires. The serializer takes the output of the
                     PLL and the parallel data, encodes it using an encoding protocol, and gen-
                     erates a serial data stream at the desired SerDes rate. For example, if you
                     have a parallel interface that takes 4 bits at a time at a 250 MHz clock rate,

       then the serializer will generate a serialized version of this data that can be
       transferred at 1Gb/s, four times that speed.

NOTE   Depending on the encoding scheme, the actual serial stream will likely be running at
       above 1Gb/s. For example, the 8B/10B scheme takes 8-bit data and encodes it into
       10-bit data. It does this for two purposes: to ensure transitions in the clock so we can
       do clock data recovery at the receiver, and to maintain a DC balance. Going from
       8-bit data to 10-bit data adds a 20 percent overhead, however, so to send data at a
       rate of 1Gb/s we need to send the actual serial stream at 1.2Gb/s.

            The output stage is next. Notice that the output stage contains a differ-
       ential output buffer. For the reasons discussed previously, such as the ability
       to send data at high rates, at lower power, and with noise immunity, SerDes
       transceivers use differential data. The output stage also performs some
       extra signal conditioning to improve the signal integrity. Once the signal is
       as conditioned as it can be, it passes through the data channel.
            Sending data at high speeds requires optimizations in all parts of the
       data path, including the data channel itself. For copper wires, the imped-
       ance of the material must be controlled to ensure good signal integrity. The
       channel can also be made from a different material than copper. For exam-
       ple, fiber optics can be used, where light rather than electricity is sent down
       thin glass or plastic wires. Fiber optics provides excellent signal integrity
       and is immune to EMI, but it’s a more expensive solution than traditional
       copper wires.
            On the receive side, the input stage performs its own signal condition-
       ing to extract the best-quality signal possible. The data is then sent to both
       a CDR block and the serial-to-parallel conversion and decoder block. The
       CDR recovers the clock signal from the data stream, and then the deserial-
       izer uses that extracted clock to sample the data. It might seem a bit odd
       that you can recover the clock and then use that clock to sample data from
       the same signal, but that’s the magic of how SerDes works! Finally, at the
       output side, the data is again converted to parallel. Continuing with the
       previous example, you would recover your 250 MHz data stream across the
       four parallel output wires.
            This example referred to a 1Gb/s data rate, but that isn’t really that fast
       anymore. As data rates keep increasing, we need to keep optimizing each
       part of this whole process. Maintaining high signal integrity is critical for
       SerDes applications. At fast data rates, small resistances, capacitances, and
       inductances can affect the signal integrity of the line. Passing data through
       a connector (for example, a USB plug) causes small imperfections in the
       data path that affect the signal integrity too, so optimizing every aspect of
       the process becomes critical.
            SerDes is one of the killer features of modern FPGAs, but there’s a lot
       of complexity involved. As you’ve just seen, something as simple-sounding
       as high-speed data transfer involves a number of steps, including serializing
       data, transmitting it, receiving it, and then deserializing it again. Even with
       that process, we’re fighting physics to get data to travel at faster and faster
       rates.

      Summary
                   To be a successful FPGA designer, it helps to have a strong understand-
                   ing of I/O. This is where the FPGA engineer works at the intersection of
                   electrical engineering and software engineering. This chapter explained
                   how FPGAs use buffers to bring data in and send data out and explored
                   some of the more common settings that FPGA designers need to be aware
                   of when configuring I/O, including the operating voltage, drive strength,
                   and slew rate. You learned about the difference between single-ended and
                   differential communication, and you saw how DDR uses both rising and
                   falling clock edges to send data more quickly. We also explored SerDes, a
                   powerful input/output feature that allows FPGAs to excel at high-speed
                   data applications.

