    FPG A DE V ELOPMENT BOARDS
                               A
            This appendix lists a few example FPGA
            development boards that you can use to
          work on the projects in this book. A dev
        board that you can program is a valuable
learning tool. There’s nothing more satisfying than
blinking LEDs, pushing buttons, and interfacing to
external devices! You can certainly learn a lot from
this book without completing the practical examples.
But to really unlock its value I recommend purchasing
a board, such as one of the devices mentioned here,
and working through all of the projects using physical
hardware.
    In Chapter 2 we discussed some criteria for selecting a board, includ-
ing the features required to complete the book’s projects as written. In
                    particular, I recommend choosing a board with a Lattice iCE40 FPGA, a
                    USB connection, and peripherals such as LEDs, push buttons, and a seven-
                    segment display. The boards covered here either meet these requirements
                    off-the-shelf or allow you to meet them by connecting a few extra peripher-
                    als. There are other boards that will work, too; you can use any of these or
                    use these recommendations as a starting point for your own research.

      The Nandland Go Board
                    I created the Nandland Go Board (Figure A-1) as a part of a successful
                    Kickstarter campaign in 2016 to fill a gap in the market: a lack of FPGA
                    development boards that were fun, affordable, and easy to use for begin-
                    ners. I designed the board with many peripherals, to allow for a wide range
                    of interesting projects. The Go Board has everything you need to work on
                    all of the projects in this book without any modifications.

                                         FPGA     Four LEDs

                       VGA
                                                                   Two
                                                                   seven-
                                                                   segment
                                                                   displays

                                                                      PMOD
                         USB

                        Power
                                                   Four switches
                     programming
                    communication

                    Figure A-1: The Nandland Go Board

                         The FPGA on the Go Board is an iCE40 HX1K, which is small com-
                    pared to modern AMD and Intel FPGAs but powerful enough to create the
                    game Pong on a VGA monitor. The board has four LEDs, four push-button
                    switches, two seven-segment displays, a Pmod connector, a VGA connec-
                    tor, and a USB connector for power, programming, and communication.
                    At about $65 at the time of writing, it’s an affordable board that will allow
                    you to try many different projects in either Verilog or VHDL. It’s available
                    through https://nandland.com.

      The Lattice iCEstick
                    Lattice designed the iCEstick FPGA development board to be plugged
                    directly into the USB port of a computer, like a thumb drive. It has the
                    same FPGA as the Go Board (an iCE40 HX1K), but it’s a bit more limited in
                    terms of built-in peripherals. There are five LEDs available, a Pmod connec-
                    tor, and an IrDA transceiver for sending and receiving infrared data.

256    Appendix A
            At the time of writing the iCEstick is priced at around $50, and it
        can be purchased directly from Lattice’s website (https://latticesemi.com) or
        through electronics distributers such as Digi-Key (https://digikey.com). To
        use this development board for the projects in this book, you’ll need to
        make use of the Pmod connector to expand its capabilities. At a minimum,
        I would recommend purchasing a breakout board with additional button
        inputs; for example, Digilent (https://digilent.com) sells a Pmod module with
        four push-button switches.
            The iCEstick doesn’t have enough Pmod connectors to interface to a
        seven-segment display and a button module at the same time for the state
        machine project in Chapter 8. However, if you want to implement the seven-
        segment display portion of the project, you can connect an individual dis-
        play using some of the 16 through-hole I/O connections on the sides of the
        board.

The Alchitry Cu
        The Alchitry Cu is similar to the iCEstick in that it’s a relatively simple
        board with a single FPGA and connectors, and not many on-board periph-
        erals. The difference is that the Alchitry Cu has many more connectors
        available, so you can interface to more peripherals. Additionally, it uses
        a larger FPGA, the iCE40 HX8K, which has more resources available for
        larger, more complicated projects.
             The Alchitry Cu can be paired with the Alchitry Io Element Board to
        expand its capabilities: the Io mounts directly on top of the Cu, similar
        to an Arduino shield, and adds 4 seven-segment displays, 5 push buttons,
        24 LEDs, and 24 switches. This option is the most expensive of the three
        discussed here; the Cu and Io together cost around $85 as of this writing.
        You can purchase the boards at https://sparkfun.com.

Switching Between Boards
        As I mentioned in Chapter 2, the beauty of Verilog and VHDL is that
        they’re FPGA-agnostic. The code that you write for one development board
        will translate very well to another board, often with no modifications
        needed, provided you aren’t using device-specific hard IP features like the
        ones discussed in Chapter 9. This makes it quite natural to start your FPGA
        journey on a low-cost, easy-to-use iCE40-based board like the ones described
        here, and then level up to a fancier development board as you gain experi-
        ence. You’ll be able to take all the projects you developed for your first board
        and port them to a new, more advanced board with minimal revision.

                                                                FPGA Development Boards   257
