            TIPS FOR A CAREER IN
                                B
             FPGA ENGINEERING

            Perhaps this book has whetted your appe-
            tite for FPGA design to the point where
           you’re considering making a career out of it.
        Working with FPGAs is a truly rewarding job:
you get to wake up each day and solve interesting and
relevant problems. Just as designing FPGAs takes prac-
tice, applying for jobs is a skill that you can refine. This
appendix discusses strategies for getting a great job as
an FPGA engineer.
     I’ve been on both sides of the job search process, as both an interviewee
and an interviewer, so I’ve identified some techniques that work to secure a
fulfilling job, and I also understand what employers are looking for. In this
appendix, I’ll share some tips first on how to improve your resume so you
can land an interview, then on how to perform well during the interview to
boost your chances of getting the job. Finally, we’ll discuss how to negotiate
for your best possible offer.
      The Resume
                    The purpose of a resume is to get you in the door for an interview. That’s
                    really it. Once you’re in the door, your resume’s work is complete. In my
                    career, I’ve reviewed hundreds of resumes while trying to fill job positions,
                    and only a small fraction of them have led to an interview. Let’s explore
                    some techniques you can use to get your resume to stand out.

                    Keep It Short
                    A good engineer knows how to quickly show what’s important and what
                    isn’t. Demonstrate that by getting straight to the point in your resume. If
                    you have less than five years’ experience, there’s no reason why your resume
                    should be longer than a single page. Many job seekers think that a longer
                    resume will make them seem more experienced, but padding your resume
                    with fluff will only do you a disservice. Recruiters know filler when they see
                    it. For example, a sentence like “Coordinated with teams from around the
                    world to share responsibilities and tasks” means absolutely nothing. Cut out
                    the fat, and get to the meat.
                         Instead of including empty platitudes, use your resume to highlight
                    tangible skills, successes, and achievements. If you have no previous work
                    experience, that’s fine, but you’ll need to demonstrate your qualifications
                    in other ways. For example, describe specific skills you picked up and tech-
                    nologies you learned about in undergraduate classes. If you worked on a
                    large project with a group, that should likely get its own section on your
                    resume.

                    Include Academic Information
                    Many companies require a four-year undergraduate degree in engineer-
                    ing as a minimum qualification for a job, so your resume should include
                    information about your education. However, one of the things that I like
                    most about engineering is that it’s very much a meritocracy. What counts
                    most isn’t which school you went to; it’s your knowledge and competency.
                    This means that you shouldn’t worry if you didn’t go to the most presti-
                    gious private school (and if you did, it may not give you the leg up that
                    you expect). When I’m looking at resumes, I usually don’t even look at
                    what school the applicant attended. I’m much more interested in seeing
                    evidence of what they’ve learned and what they’ve accomplished with that
                    knowledge.
                          People often wonder if they should include their GPA on their
                    resume. Personally, I would recommend including it if it’s above a 3.0,
                    and leaving it off if it’s below that. Some companies have GPA require-
                    ments (they won’t even look at your resume if your GPA isn’t listed, or if
                    it’s below some threshold), but this appears to have become less common
                    in recent years. Hiring managers understand that being a successful engi-
                    neer doesn’t always correlate with having the best grades in your philoso-
                    phy class.

     If you don’t have an undergraduate degree in engineering, your job
hunt will be more challenging. Not all companies have a degree require-
ment, though. Smaller companies, in particular, are often less strict about
their minimum requirements. You may be able to compensate for the lack
of relevant educational experience by highlighting your practical experi-
ence. Be sure to describe projects you’ve worked on that illustrate your mas-
tery of the field.

Tailor Your Resume to the Job Description
A job description details all the roles and responsibilities that the company
expects the new hire to take on. The company is describing their ideal
candidate, so you should try to reflect those ideals as much as possible
through your resume. This means you should be prepared to tweak your
resume for each job you apply for. Highlight areas that match the needs of
the company, and consider removing areas that are less of a match. Include
relevant buzzwords and specific technologies that you have experience with.
Acronyms, in particular, stand out and are eye-catching.
    Think about your resume from the hiring manager’s perspective. The
job description is a list of elements that they’re looking for. Don’t make it
hard for them to find those elements. The more keywords from the job
description that show up prominently in your resume, the better. However,
keep in mind that you should be able to back up anything you put down
on your resume with detailed knowledge during an interview. There’s no
better way to bomb an interview than demonstrating that you’ve made false
claims of proficiency.
    To illustrate how to tailor your resume, let’s assume most of your expe-
rience has been in Verilog, but you also understand VHDL. An FPGA job
description will typically state which language the company uses. If you
come across a job that requires VHDL, you should adjust your resume to
highlight your VHDL projects. It might even be worth converting some of
your Verilog code to VHDL to hone your skills. As another example, the
company might want someone with image processing experience. In this
case, you should add a bullet to your resume identifying any work you’ve
done in this area. Conversely, if the job posting is from a company building
a wireless product, highlight anything you’ve done with wireless commu-
nication instead. Make sure you’re specific when highlighting your skills:
“FPGA experience with BLE over UART” is much better than “Worked with
wireless communications.”

Critiquing an Example Resume
Let’s look at an example resume for a recent college graduate named
Russell Merrick to see what can be improved. Figure B-1 shows my actual
resume when I was applying for my first job after college.

Russell Merrick                                                 contact@nandland.com

EDUCATION
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA. May 2007
             Bachelor of Science in EE
             GPA 3.630/4.000
             Background in Engineering Management

COURSEWORK
Electronics, Computer Systems, Communications and DSP, Semiconductors, Fields and Waves,
Probability and Random Statistics, Management, Marketing, Accounting, Finance.

RELATED WORK EXPERIENCE
Intern, Core IT – Architecture and Planning, Summer 2006
             Designed help documents for wireless home router setup
             Configured routers and IPS Sensors for use in corporate network to prevent against
              spyware and malicious attacks
             Built servers for use in test lab

Resident Assistant (RA), Fall 2006 - Spring 2007
             Orchestrated the development of a community through programs and events
             Learned conflict resolution by dealing with a range of issues and problems
             Balanced school work with RA responsibilities and engagements

HONORS AND AWARDS
             Vice President of Tau Beta Pi Engineering Honors Society Spring 2005 - 2007
             Recipient of Simon and Satenig Ermonian Scholarship

ABILITIES
Proficient with Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Publisher, C++, JAVA, Verilog, Assembly,
MySQL, Circuit Maker, Quartus II, AVR Studio, and PSPICE

Figure B-1: An example resume

     It wasn’t horrible, but in hindsight there’s certainly a lot of room for
improvement. The biggest problem is that there isn’t enough technical
content or eye-catching buzzwords. I learned a lot about engineering in
college, but based on this resume, you wouldn’t know it. I didn’t include
any details of specific projects that I worked on during my undergrad edu-
cation that would demonstrate my experience; all I did was list the titles of
the courses I took. Additionally, I went into significant detail about non-
engineering work that wasn’t relevant to the job I was applying for. Let’s fix
it up.
     First, we can remove “Background in Engineering Management”
from the Education section. At the time, I thought that having completed
some management classes would be an asset, but I quickly realized that as
an entry-level employee, you’re at the bottom of the totem pole. There’s
nobody to manage, so your leadership skills aren’t relevant. Someday in the
future you may advance to the point that you have people working under
you, but that certainly wasn’t going to be the case in the job I was going for
at the time. By the same token, I would remove “Management, Marketing,
Accounting, Finance” from the Coursework section. It’s just not very rel-
evant for an entry-level FPGA engineer.
     In the Related Work Experience section, I describe a brief internship
I had working in information technology (IT). This was a valuable experi-
ence for me because it taught me one important lesson: I didn’t want to
work in IT! Here, it would be helpful to use more buzzwords and concrete
detail. I worked with Linux computers and Cisco routers, for example, but I
didn’t write that anywhere on my resume.
     The other work experience item, about my time as an RA, could be
pared down. It’s too long and not especially relevant to FPGA work. The
Abilities section can likewise be trimmed. It’s taken for granted that job
applicants can use Microsoft Word at this point, so don’t bother including
it. With these cuts, there will be more room to highlight some technical
projects I worked on as part of my degree.
     Now let’s look at an improved version of the resume. The version in
Figure B-2 implements these suggested changes.

Russell Merrick                                                  contact@nandland.com

EDUCATION
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA. May 2007
             BS in Electrical Engineering
             GPA 3.630/4.000

RELATED WORK EXPERIENCE
Intern, Core IT – Architecture and Planning, Summer 2006
             Managed hundreds of IBM Pentium Xeon Servers via Ubuntu SSH
             Configured Cisco 2800 Routers and IPS Sensors for hacker prevention

UNDERGRADUATE PROJECTS
Analog IR Transceiver, Electronics II
             Built power-amplifier for Infra-red transceiver
             Picked LDO and Switching power supplies for voltage regulation
             Designed Butterworth Low-Pass filter

Microcontroller Motor Control Project, Computer Engineering Lab
             Implemented PID control of Brushless DC motor in C
             UART commands forwarded to Atmel Microcontroller

Resident Assistant (RA), Fall 2006 - Spring 2007
             Learned conflict resolution by interacting with unique individuals

HONORS AND AWARDS
             Vice President of Tau Beta Pi Engineering Honors Society
             Recipient of Simon and Satenig Ermonian Scholarship

ABILITIES
C, C++, JAVA, Verilog, Assembly, MySQL, Circuit Maker, Quartus II, AVR Studio, PSPICE

Figure B-2: An example resume, improved

            This revised version is a big improvement. I’ve added a section detailing
        a few projects I worked on to illustrate through concrete examples what I
        learned in college. In describing these projects, I’ve named many specific
        technologies that I worked with, like UART, PID, LDO, IR, and so on.
        Acronyms like these help to grab the attention of the hiring manager. I’ve
        also cut parts that were too general, while getting more specific in other
        sections, such as the description of my IT internship. With this new and
        improved resume, past Russell could have gotten so many more interviews!

The Interview
        Your resume is all about getting your foot in the door, but the interview is
        where you really need to shine in order to beat the competition and secure
        the job. An interview is really just an oral test, and as with all tests, it helps
        to be prepared. You should practice implementing the tips in this section
        until you’re comfortable with them. As awkward as it might feel, find a
        friend or relative to try out these skills with. It really makes a difference
        practicing out loud, with another person, as opposed to in your head.

        Show Your Enthusiasm
        Beyond proving your technical qualifications, an interview is an opportu-
        nity to demonstrate your enthusiasm for the job at hand. To do this, it’s
        useful to research the company beforehand. Make sure you understand the
        company’s products, as well as the overall industry they’re part of. This way
        you can impress the interviewers with your level of engagement and your
        knowledge of the problems the company faces. You might even have some
        ideas for solutions to a few of these problems!
             It also never hurts to contact people at the company directly in advance
        of an interview. You might think this would be annoying to the people hir-
        ing at the company, but it can be hard for them to tell which resumes are
        submitted by people who are responding to every single job posting they
        come across, and which people are really excited about the specific open
        position. I’ve had job applicants reach out to me on LinkedIn or via email
        directly, and I’m always impressed when a candidate takes this extra step. It
        shows they’re really interested in the job and driven to achieve their goals.
             The most driven candidate I’ve ever come across literally started a
        podcast about the space industry to get a job working for my company. He
        wrote, edited, and published a dozen episodes, just so he could get his foot
        in the door. I’m not suggesting you need to create a podcast to get a job at
        your dream company, but just know that nobody has ever been turned away
        for excess enthusiasm.

        Anticipate Questions
        As you prepare for an interview, it helps to anticipate the sorts of questions
        that will be asked. The first thing I recommend doing is reviewing the job
        description. The topics mentioned there are the ones that are most likely

                   to come up in the interview, as they’re the ones the hiring manager is most
                   interested in for that particular position. You probably won’t have experi-
                   ence in every single area mentioned in the job description, and that’s totally
                   fine. However, I recommend doing some research and learning a bit about
                   any topic you’re unfamiliar with, so you at least have some background if
                   that topic comes up in conversation. Make sure you can also speak fluently
                   about anything that you highlight on your resume as a skill.
                       The job description is always a good place to start, but if you’re looking
                   for more ways to prepare, here’s a list of some common questions that come
                   up in interviews for FPGA-related positions:
                   •   Describe the difference between a flip-flop and a latch.
                   •   Why might you choose an FPGA over a microcontroller?
                   •   What does a for loop do in synthesizable code?
                   •   What is the purpose of a PLL?
                   •   Describe the difference between inference and instantiation.
                   •   What is metastability, and how would you prevent it?
                   •   What is a FIFO?
                   •   What is a block RAM?
                   •   Describe how a UART works, and where might one be used.
                   •   What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous logic?
                   •   What is a shift register?
                   •   Describe some differences between Verilog and VHDL.
                   •   What should you be concerned about when crossing clock domains?
                   •   Describe setup and hold time. What happens if they are violated?
                   •   What is the purpose of a synthesis tool?
                   •   What happens during the place and route process?
                   •   What are SerDes transceivers and where are they used?
                   •   What is the purpose of a DSP block?
                       If I were interviewing someone for an intro-level FPGA job, I would
                   absolutely ask these types of questions. The good news is that each of them
                   has been answered in this book. So study up and crush that job interview!

                   Pivot
                   When you don’t know the answer to a question, I suggest you pivot by giving
                   the interviewer some information that you do know that’s relevant in some
                   way. For example, let’s say that you only have experience using SVN for ver-
                   sion control, and you’ve never used Git. If the interviewer asks, “How would
                   you create a branch in Git?” don’t just say, “I don’t know, I’ve never used
                   Git before.” That answer won’t be sufficient. Instead, you could say some-
                   thing like, “Well, I haven’t used Git for version control yet, but in SVN I use
                   branches to track independent lines of development—for example, when I

        fix a bug or add a feature. In SVN, this can be done with the command
        SVN COPY.”
             This is a fantastic answer. Despite not having the information the
        interviewer was looking for, you’ve demonstrated that you understand the
        purpose of branching and have experience with it. Interviewers get that you
        won’t know all the answers, and that new tools and skills can be learned on
        the job. Always take the opportunity to explain what you know about a ques-
        tion posed to you, even if you don’t know the complete answer.

The Job Offer and Negotiation
        At this point, you’ve beaten the competition and the hiring manager has
        decided to make you a job offer. Congratulations, you’re a professional
        engineer now! It’s time to celebrate. Then, once you’ve calmed down, I
        always recommend that you ask for a better offer. You’re probably thinking,
        “But Russell, that’s ungrateful. I should be happy that I got any offer at all.
        What if they pull my offer because I asked them to do better?”
             Here’s a life lesson that you can take from this book: it never hurts to
        ask. Checking into a hotel? Ask if they have any room upgrades available.
        Buying something expensive from a store? Ask if they have any coupons
        or discounts that could be applied. Got your first job offer? Ask if they can
        increase the salary, stock options, or sign-on bonus. The company will never
        take back a job offer if you’re polite and professional, but every single time
        I’ve asked a company for a better offer, they’ve given it. HR will never give
        you their best offer first. They expect that a little negotiation will be a part
        of the process. They want to get you to work for as little money as possible
        (without insulting you, of course). They always leave money on the table,
        but it’s up to you to get that money. So be polite, but don’t be afraid to ask if
        there’s any way that they can increase the offer.

Summary
        My goal in writing this book is to spread the knowledge that I’ve accu-
        mulated over my career as an engineer. I hope the book will help you
        strengthen your FPGA skills and become a world-class performer. Shoot
        me a message when you’ve made it. You’ve got this!

