                             GLOSSARY

application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)   An integrated circuit that’s custom-
ized for a particular use, rather than a general use.
bidirectional  Describes an FPGA pin that can both send and receive data,
often in half-duplex communication.
blocking assignment   An assignment that prevents the execution of the next
statement until the current assignment is executed. The blocking assign-
ment operator is = in Verilog and := in VHDL, but in VHDL you can only
create blocking assignments on variables, not signals.
block RAM   A common FPGA primitive used for larger pools of memory
storage and retrieval.
Boolean algebra   Equations where inputs and outputs are represented with
true/false, or high/low, or 1/0 only.
buffer  An electronic circuit element that isolates its input from its output.
clock  A digital signal that steadily alternates between high and low at a
fixed frequency, coordinating and driving the activity of an FPGA.
clock data recovery (CDR)   The process of extracting the clock and data signals
from a combined clock/data signal sent through SerDes. The extracted
clock signal can be used to sample the data at the SerDes receiver.
                 clock enable (to a flip-flop)   Labeled En, an input that allows the flip-flop out-
                 put to be updated when active. When the clock enable is inactive, the flip-
                 flop will retain its output state.
                 clock input (to a flip-flop)   Labeled >, the input that takes in a clock signal,
                 allowing a flip-flop to work.
                 combinational logic   Logic for which the outputs are determined from the
                 present inputs, with no memory of past states (also called combinatorial
                 logic). Combinational logic generates LUTs within an FPGA.
                 constraints  Rules about your FPGA that you provide to the synthesis and
                 place and route tools, such as the pin locations for signals and the clock fre-
                 quencies used in your design.
                 core voltage   The voltage at which an FPGA performs all of its internal digi-
                 tal processing.
                 data input (to a flip-flop)   Labeled D, the input to a flip-flop that will be propa-
                 gated to the output, usually on the rising edge of the clock.
                 data output (from a flip-flop)   Labeled Q, the output of the flip-flop, usually
                 updated on the rising edge of the clock.
                 datasheet  A collection of information about an electronic component.
                 FPGAs often have several datasheets, and more complicated FPGAs can
                 have a few dozen.
                 DC balance   Sending an equal number of high and low bits, in order to
                 improve digital signal integrity in high-speed communications.
                 debounce  A technique for removing bounces or glitches to get a stable signal.
                 Often used on mechanical switches, which can introduce glitches when a
                 switch is toggled.
                 demultiplexer (demux)   A design element that can select a single input to one
                 of several outputs.
                 device under test (DUT)   The block of code being tested by a testbench. Also
                 called the unit under test (UUT).
                 differential signaling   A method of transmitting electrical signals with two
                 wires by evaluating the difference between them. A reference to ground
                 isn’t required.
                 digital filter   A system that performs mathematical operations on a digital
                 signal to reduce or enhance certain features of that signal.
                 double data rate (DDR)   Sending data on both the rising and falling edges of
                 each clock cycle. Allows for twice the data throughput compared to single
                 data rate (SDR).
                 drive strength   A setting that controls the level of source or sink current
                 (in mA) for a pin.

270   Glossary
DSP block   A primitive used to accelerate math operations for digital signal
processing (DSP), in particular multiplication and addition, in an FPGA.
Also called a DSP tile.
duty cycle   The percentage of time a signal is high versus low. Clock signals
usually have a 50 percent duty cycle.
edge  The point at which a signal, such as a clock, transitions from one
state to another. A transition from low to high is called a rising or positive
edge, and a transition from high to low is called a falling or negative edge.
edge detection   The process of finding either a rising edge or a falling edge
and triggering some action based on that edge.
electromagnetic interference (EMI)   A phenomenon caused by changing electri-
cal and magnetic fields (for example, from a nearby microwave oven, cell
phone, or power line) that can cause disturbances in other systems.
event  An action that a state machine responds to, such as a timer expiring,
a button being pressed, or some input trigger.
first in, first out (FIFO)   A common type of buffer, where the first word writ-
ten is the first word read out.
flip-flop  The critical component inside an FPGA responsible for storing
state. Uses a clock as an input and passes the signal from its data input to its
data output, usually on the rising edge of the clock. Also called a register.
FPGA  Short for field programmable gate array, a digital circuit that can be
programmed with Verilog or VHDL to solve a wide array of digital logic
problems.
FPGA development board   A printed circuit board (PCB) with an FPGA on it
that allows you to program the FPGA and test your code.
frequency  The number of cycles (high/low alternations) per second of a
signal (such as a clock signal), measured in hertz (Hz).
full-duplex  A communication mode between two systems where data can be
sent and received at the same time.
generics  Used in VHDL to make code more flexible and reusable by over-
riding behaviors of low-level code at a higher level. Equivalent to param-
eters in Verilog.
GPIO  A general purpose input/output pin, which serves to interface an
FPGA to other components on a circuit board.
guard condition   A Boolean expression that determines the flow of opera-
tions in a state machine. Can be drawn in a state machine diagram using a
diamond.
GUI creation   The process of using the GUI in an FPGA development tool to
create your primitives. This is often the best approach to creating primitives
for beginners, as it’s the least error prone.

                                                                     Glossary   271
                 half-duplex  A communication mode between two systems where only one
                 system can send data at a time. Also referred to as bidirectional data transfer.
                 hard IP   A component within your FPGA dedicated to a particular task, such
                 as a block RAM, PLL, or DSP block. Also called a primitive.
                 high impedance   The state of a buffer in which the output accepts very little
                 input current, which effectively shuts the output off and disconnects it from
                 the circuit.
                 hold time   The amount of time the input to a flip-flop should be stable after
                 a clock edge to avoid a metastable condition.
                 inference  The process of creating a primitive using Verilog or VHDL and
                 trusting the synthesis tools to understand your intent.
                 integrated circuit (IC)   Often referred to as a chip, a type of electronic circuit in
                 a single package.
                 linear feedback shift register (LFSR)   A special type of shift register that pro-
                 duces pseudorandom patterns by passing certain flip-flops through a logic
                 gate and sending the result back into the input.
                 logic analyzer   A tool used for debugging that analyzes many digital signals
                 at once.
                 logic gates   Devices that perform common Boolean operations like AND,
                 OR, and XOR. Each type of logic gate has a distinctive symbol.
                 look-up table (LUT)   A dedicated component inside an FPGA that performs all
                 Boolean logic operations.
                 metastability  A condition in which the output of a flip-flop is unstable and
                 unpredictable for a period of time.
                 microcontroller  A small computer on an integrated circuit, with a CPU and
                 external peripherals that can be programmed using a language like C.
                 multiplexer (mux)   A design element that can select several inputs to a single
                 output.
                 non-blocking assignment   An assignment in Verilog or VHDL using <=, where
                 these statements execute at the same instant in time. Commonly used to
                 create sequential logic (flip-flops) on an FPGA.
                 operating voltage   The voltage at which a 1 or a 0 appears on a GPIO pin.
                 Common values for a 1 are 3.3 V, 2.5 V, and 1.8 V.
                 parallel communication   A method of transmitting data where multiple bits are
                 sent simultaneously.
                 parameters  Used in Verilog to make code more flexible and reusable by
                 overriding behaviors of low-level code at a higher level. Equivalent to gener-
                 ics in VHDL.

272   Glossary
period  The time between rising edges of a clock cycle, often measured in
nanoseconds. A clock’s period is calculated as 1 ÷ frequency.
phase  The characteristic of a signal that describes the current position of
its waveform, or its relationship in time to another signal.
phase-locked loop (PLL)   A primitive commonly used as the main clock genera-
tor for an FPGA. It can generate multiple clock signals at different frequen-
cies and manage the relationships between them.
physical constraint file   A file that maps the signals in your design to physical
pins on the FPGA.
place and route   The design tool that takes your synthesized design and maps
it to physical locations on your specific FPGA. Also performs timing analy-
sis, which reports if a design can run successfully at the requested clock
frequency.
primitive  A component within your FPGA dedicated to a particular task,
such as a block RAM, PLL, or DSP block. Also called hard IP.
primitive instantiation   Directly creating a primitive FPGA component by
using its template. This method allows you to get exactly the primitive you
want, without relying on the tools to make any assumptions for you.
propagation delay   The amount of time it takes for a signal to travel from a
source to a destination.
protocol  A system of rules defining how two or more devices communicate.
random-access memory (RAM)   Memory that can be accessed in any order,
often from one port (single-port) or two ports (dual-port).
register  Another word for a flip-flop.
routing  Wiring inside an FPGA that gives it its flexibility, but at a higher
dollar cost. Also called interconnect.
sampling  The process of converting an analog signal into a digital signal by
taking discrete measurements of it over time.
self-checking testbench   A testbench that automatically reports if a design
is behaving as expected, without your having to inspect the resulting
waveform.
self-clocking signal   A signal that uses an encoding scheme to combine a clock
and data signal together, such that separate clock and data paths can be
merged into a single interface. This technique is essential for SerDes.
sequential logic   Logic for which the outputs are determined both from pres-
ent inputs and previous outputs (also called synchronous logic). Sequential
logic generates flip-flops in an FPGA.
SerDes (serializer/deserializer)   An FPGA primitive used to send data at
high rates between a transmitting and receiving device. Parallel data is

                                                                       Glossary   273
                 converted to serial data and embedded with a clock signal before trans-
                 mission. On the receiving end, the clock and data signals are extracted,
                 and the serial data is converted back to parallel.
                 serial communication   A method of transmitting data where bits are sent one
                 at a time.
                 set/reset  An input that, when active, will reset the flip-flop to a default value.
                 setup time   The amount of time the input to a flip-flop should be stable
                 before a clock edge to avoid a metastable condition.
                 shift register   A chain of flip-flops where the output of one flip-flop is con-
                 nected to the input of the next.
                 sign bit   The most significant bit in a signed number that indicates whether
                 the number is negative (sign bit is 1) or positive (sign bit is 0).
                 signed  Refers to a signal that can hold positive or negative data.
                 sign extension   The operation of increasing the number of bits of a binary
                 number while preserving the number’s sign and value.
                 simulation  The process of using a computer to inject test cases into your
                 FPGA code to see how the code responds.
                 single data rate (SDR)   Sending data on only one edge of each clock cycle,
                 most often the rising edge.
                 single-ended signaling   A method of transmitting electrical signals where one
                 wire carries the signal, which is referenced to ground.
                 slew rate   The rate of change allowed for an output signal, usually specified
                 in qualitative terms, such as fast, medium, or slow.
                 state  In a state machine, a status where the system is waiting to execute a
                 transition. A state can be changed when an event triggers a transition, or if
                 the state itself creates a transition to another state.
                 state machine   Sometimes called a finite state machine (FSM), a method of con-
                 trolling the flow through a sequence of operations inside an FPGA.
                 synthesis  The design tool that turns your VHDL or Verilog code into low-
                 level components within your FPGA, such as LUTs, flip-flops, and block
                 RAMs. Similar to a compiler for a programming language like C.
                 system on a chip (SoC)   An integrated circuit that combines many components
                 of an electronic system into a single package. For example, an FPGA that
                 has a dedicated CPU might be considered an SoC.
                 SystemVerilog  A programming language that is a superset of Verilog, with
                 added features that make it useful for verification.
                 testbench  Test code that exercises your FPGA design code in a simula-
                 tion environment so you can analyze the design to see if it’s behaving as
                 expected.

274   Glossary
timing errors   An output of the place and route process that shows signals
that might be subject to metastability issues, which could cause your FPGA
design to behave unpredictably.
trade study   The act of selecting a technical solution in engineering by
examining multiple possibilities and weighing each by its strengths and
weaknesses.
transceiver  A device that can both transmit and receive communications.
transition  The action of moving from one state to another in a state machine.
truth table   A table representation of a Boolean equation, listing all possible
input combinations and the corresponding outputs.
two’s complement   A mathematical operation that converts between positive
and negative binary numbers. To take the two’s complement, you invert the
bits and add 1.
unit under test (UUT)   The block of code being tested by a testbench. Also
called the device under test (DUT).
universal asynchronous receiver transmitter (UART)   An interface where data is
transmitted or received asynchronously, meaning without the use of a clock.
Common for exchanging low data rate information, for example between
an FPGA and a computer.
unsigned  Refers to a signal that can hold only positive data, not negative data.
utilization report   An output of the synthesis tool that tells you what percent-
age of your FPGA resources you’ve used up.
verification  The process of thoroughly testing an FPGA or ASIC design to
ensure it’s working as intended.
waveform  A feature of an FPGA simulation tool that shows a visual repre-
sentation of the signals in your test environment over time.

                                                                     Glossary   275
