                                                                        1
             The Working Environment

The OCaml language is available for use with the main operating systems
(Linux, macOS, Windows). It can be obtained at the following address:

                           https://ocaml.org/

The site contains installation instructions for these systems. Once you have
installed OCaml, you will have access to the following tools: an interpreter,
ocaml; two compilers, ocamlc and ocamlopt; and a package manager, opam.
We briefly present these four tools below.

1.1    The Compiler and the Interpreter
The OCaml system includes two compilers: ocamlc and ocamlopt. The first
generates portable code, independent of the hardware architecture; the second
generates more efficient native code (X86, ARM, etc.). You can use either
of these two tools to compile the programs given in this book. The system
also includes an interactive version, namely, the program ocaml. This is an
interpreter or toplevel that executes a read-eval-print loop (REPL).
4                                         Chapter 1. The Working Environment

1.2         A First OCaml Program
We illustrate the use of these tools with a simple program that displays the
message Hello world! on the screen. It can be written as follows:
    let () = print_string "Hello world!\n"
This is itself a complete program. We will go into the details of such programs in
the next chapter. If the program is stored in a file hello.ml, it can be compiled
from within a terminal1 using ocamlc, as follows:

    > ocamlc hello.ml

We can then execute the resulting binary, a.out, with the expected result:
    > ./a.out
    Hello world!
The binary can be given a different name using the compiler’s -o option:
    > ocamlc -o hello hello.ml
    > ./hello
    Hello world!
   To use the interpreter, it suffices to type the command ocaml in a terminal.
The program then displays a prompt in the form of the character #, prompting
the user to enter an expression.

    > ocaml
    OCaml version 4.14.0
    #

To be evaluated, the expression must end with two semicolons ;; followed by a
carriage return. The toplevel verifies that the expression is syntactically correct
and well-typed. It then evaluates the expression and displays the result. Thus,
in order to display the message Hello world! on the screen, it suffices to type:
    1
        The symbol > designates the terminal prompt from which commands are launched.
1.3. Programming Environments                                                   5

  > ocaml
  OCaml version 4.14.0

  # let () = print_string "Hello world!\n";;
  Hello world!
  #

   In addition to the result, the toplevel also displays the type inferred by
OCaml for the expression that has been entered. For example, if you enter the
mathematical expression 1+4×2, the interpreter returns the following response:

  # 1 + 4 * 2;;
  - : int = 9
  #

This shows that the expression is of type int (the type of integers), and that its
result is 9. From now on, we will present the expression entered by the user and
the interpreter’s response against a gray background . Thus, the evaluation of
the preceding expression will be presented, as follows:
  # 1 + 4 * 2 ;;
  - : int = 9
   To exit the toplevel, type the command #quit, as follows:

  # #quit;;
  >

A simpler way to do this is to press the keys ctrl and D simultaneously.

1.3    Programming Environments
As with many other programming languages, you can work with OCaml using
your preferred text editor (Emacs, Visual Studio Code, etc.). The text editor
may be configured with OCaml-specific syntax coloring, error highlighting, and
so forth.
6                                 Chapter 1. The Working Environment

   In this text, we will use the tool dune to automate the compilation process.
This tool can be obtained via the opam package manager, and can be installed
by typing the following command in a terminal:

    > opam install dune

Another solution is to use the tool make. This requires writing a configuration
file (Makefile) specific to OCaml.

Online Environments
There are also online solutions for using OCaml without installing it on your
machine. One example is the online interpreter TryOCaml, available at the
following address:

                        https://try.ocamlpro.com/

Another example is the website

                            https://replit.com/

which offers online environments for a number of languages, among them OCaml.

1.4     Installing OCaml Libraries
The community of OCaml users has developed a number of OCaml libraries.
The easiest way to install them is to use the package manager opam. In the next
chapter, we will use a graphics library, which may be installed as follows:

    > opam install graphics

We will explain later how to use this library and, more generally, any library
installed using opam.
