                                                                                8
                                                  Disjoint Sets

This chapter presents an imperative data structure that solves the problem
of partitioning a finite set into disjoint subsets, called “classes.” We wish to
determine whether two elements belong to the same class and merge two classes
into one. It is these two operations that give the structure its name: union-find.

8.1     The Basic Idea
Without loss of generality, we may assume that the set to be partitioned consists
of the n integers {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}. Program 71 (see page 313) gives the signature
of such a structure. The operation create n constructs a new partition of
{0, 1, . . . , n − 1} in which each element forms a class by itself. The operation
find determines the class of an element by returning one of the integers as a
distinguished representative. In particular, we can determine if two elements are
in the same class by comparing the result given by find for each one. Finally,
the operation union merges two classes of the partition, modifying the data
structure in place.
    The basic idea is to link the elements of a class between themselves. In each
class, these links form a graph in which all paths lead to the representative,
312                                                        Chapter 8. Disjoint Sets

                                        3          4

                                    5       7      6

                                    1       0      2

              Figure 8.1: A partition of {0, 1, . . . , 7} into two sets.

which is the only element linked to itself. Figure 8.1 illustrates a situation in
which the set {0, 1, . . . , 7} is partitioned into two classes, whose representatives
are respectively 3 and 4.
    It is possible to represent such a structure using individually allocated nodes
(see exercise 8.5). Nevertheless it is simpler, and often more efficient, to use
an array that links each integer to another integer of the same class. These
links lead to the class representative, which is associated with itself in the array.
Thus, the partition of figure 8.1 is represented by the following array:

                            0   1               ···        7
                            7   5   6       3    4 3   4   3

     The find operation simply follows the links until the representative is found.
The union operation begins by finding the representatives of both elements and
then links them together. We propose two improvements in the interest of
efficiency. The first involves performing path compression during the search
carried out by find: All the elements found along the path traversed to reach
the representative are linked directly to it. The second consists in keeping track
of the rank of each representative, that is, the maximum length of a path in its
class. This information is stored in a second array and is used by the function
union to choose the representative for the union of the classes.
8.2. Implementation                                                              313

  Program 71 — Signature of the union-find structure.

  module type UnionFind = sig
    type t
    val create : int -> t
    val find : t -> int -> int
    val union : t -> int -> int -> unit
  end

8.2     Implementation
We now describe the code of the union-find structure. The type t is a record
containing two arrays: rank, containing the rank of each class; and link, con-
taining the links between elements.
  type t = {
    rank: int array;
    link: int array;
  }
The information contained in rank is only meaningful for those elements i that
are representatives, that is, for which link.(i) = i. Initially, each element
forms a class in itself (that is, it is its own representative), and the rank of every
class is 0.
  let create n =
    { rank = Array.make n 0;
      link = Array.init n (fun i -> i) }
The function find computes the representative of an element i. It is naturally
written as a recursive function. We begin by calculating the element p linked
to i in the array t.link. If it is i itself, i is the class representative, and we
are done.
  let rec find t i =
314                                        Chapter 8. Disjoint Sets

 Program 72 — Union-find structure.

 type t = {
   rank: int array;
   link: int array;
 }

 let create n =
   { rank = Array.make n 0;
     link = Array.init n (fun i -> i) }

 let rec find t i =
   let p = t.link.(i) in
   if p = i then
     i
   else begin
     let r = find t p in
     t.link.(i) <- r;
     r
   end

 let union t i j =
   let ri = find t i in
   let rj = find t j in
   if ri <> rj then begin
     if t.rank.(ri) < t.rank.(rj) then
       t.link.(ri) <- rj
     else begin
       t.link.(rj) <- ri;
       if t.rank.(ri) = t.rank.(rj) then
         t.rank.(ri) <- t.rank.(ri) + 1
     end
   end
8.2. Implementation                                                          315

    let p = t.link.(i) in
    if p = i then
      i
   Otherwise, we recursively compute the representative r of p with find t p.
However, before returning r, we perform path compression, that is, we link i to
r directly.
    else begin
      let r = find t p in
      t.link.(i) <- r;
      r
    end
This way, the next time we call find on i, we will immediately find r.
   The operation union merges the classes of two elements, i and j. We begin
by calculating their representatives, ri and rj, respectively. If they are equal,
there is nothing more to be done.
  let union t i j =
    let ri = find t i in
    let rj = find t j in
    if ri <> rj then begin
Otherwise, we compare the ranks of the two classes. If that of ri is strictly less
than that of rj, we make rj the representative of the union.
       if t.rank.(ri) < t.rank.(rj) then
         t.link.(ri) <- rj
The rank does not have to be updated for this new class. Indeed, only the paths
in the previous class of ri have had their lengths increased by one unit, and this
new length does not exceed the rank of rj. When the rank of rj is smaller, we
proceed symmetrically.
       else begin
         t.link.(rj) <- ri;
316                                                 Chapter 8. Disjoint Sets

When the two classes have the same rank, we choose one of the two repre-
sentatives arbitrarily as the representative of the union (here, ri). The rank
information must then be updated, because in this case the length of the longest
path in the class may increase by one unit.

          if t.rank.(ri) = t.rank.(rj) then
            t.rank.(ri) <- t.rank.(ri) + 1
        end
      end

Importantly the function union uses the function find, and therefore performs
path compression even in the case when i and j belong to the same class. The
complete code of the union-find structure is given in program 72 (see page 314).

Complexity

We can show that, thanks to path compression and the rank associated with
each class, a sequence of m find and union operations, performed on a structure
containing n elements, is executed in O(m α(n, m)) total time, where α is a
function that grows extremely slowly. In fact, it grows so slowly that we may
consider it to be constant for all practical purposes, given the constraints that
memory and time impose on the values of n and m. We may therefore assume
that each operation takes amortized constant time. This analysis is complex
and lies beyond the scope of this book. A detailed explanation may be found in
Introduction to Algorithms [7, chap. 22].

      For Further Information
  The data structure presented in this chapter is attributed to McIlroy and
  Morris [3], and its complexity has been analyzed by Tarjan [23].
8.3. Exercises                                                              317

8.3    Exercises
8.1 The signature of the union-find structure is constraining because it re-
quires prior knowledge of the number of elements. For greater flexibility, we
may wish to add new elements dynamically, and without any restriction on the
number of elements. The signature of such a structure could be the following:
  type t
  val create: unit -> t
  val add: t -> int
  val find: t -> int -> int
  val union: t -> int -> int -> unit
The function create creates an empty structure. The function add adds a new
element and returns it. (Elements are always integers). The signatures of find
and union remain unchanged. Implement such a data structure using resizeable
arrays (see section 4.1 Resizeable Arrays).
8.2 Extend the union-find structure with an operation num_classes that re-
turns the total number of classes.
  val num_classes: t -> int
Ensure that num_classes executes in constant time by keeping track of this
value as an additional field of the record.
8.3 Extend the union-find structure with an operation iter_classes that
permits the traversal of the set of all class representatives.
  val iter_classes: (int -> unit) -> t -> unit
Ensure that iter_classes executes in time proportionate to the total number
of classes.
8.4 If the elements are not consecutive integers, we can replace the two arrays
rank and link by a pair of hash tables. Reimplement the operations create,
find, and union using this idea.
8.5 Instead of using arrays, another way of implementing the union-find struc-
ture consists in representing each class directly as an acyclic graph whose nodes
318                                                   Chapter 8. Disjoint Sets

are records containing the values rank and link. Each node is of the following
type:
  type elt = { mutable rank: int; mutable link: elt }
If we wish to keep track of extra information for each element, we may use the
following type instead:
  type ’a elt =
    { mutable rank: int; mutable link: ’a elt; data: ’a }
It is no longer necessary to keep track of any global information in the union-
find structure, because each node contains all the necessary information. The
signature of the union-find structure is then modified as follows:
  type ’a elt
  val create_node: ’a -> ’a elt
  val find: ’a elt -> ’a elt
  val union: ’a elt -> ’a elt -> unit
The function create_node constructs a class consisting of a single element, that
is, a record whose field link points to itself. Write the operations make, find,
and union. Note: The comparison of values of type ’a elt must be done using
physical equality.
8.6 Replace the arrays rank and link with persistent arrays (see section 4.4
Persistent Arrays), and write a persistent union-find structure with the following
signature:
  type t
  val create: int -> t
  val find: t -> int -> int
  val union: t -> int -> int -> t
Note: To perform path compression, it is convenient to modify the contents of
the field link using side effects. We accordingly define the following type:
  type t = { rank: int A.t; mutable link: int A.t }
Here, the type A.t is the type of persistent arrays, and the mutability of the field
link can be used to record the effect of path compression before returning the
8.3. Exercises                                                                319

result of the function find. Although the data structure is modified by a side
effect, the modification cannot be observed: the representative of each element
remains the same.
8.7 The union-find structure can be used to efficiently construct a perfect
maze, that is, one in which there is one and only one path between any two
cells. Here is an example of such a maze:

You may proceed as follows: Create a union-find structure whose elements are
the different cells. The idea is that two cells are in the same class if and only
if they are linked by a path. Initially, all the cells of the maze are separated
from each other by walls. Next, consider all pairs of adjacent cells (vertically
and horizontally) in random order. For each pair (c1 , c2 ), compare the classes
of the cells c1 and c2 . If they are identical, there is nothing more to be done.
Otherwise, delete the wall that separates c1 and c2 , and merge the two classes
using union. Write code that constructs a maze using this method.
    Hint: The easiest way to traverse all pairs of adjacent cells in random order
is by constructing an array containing all pairs, and then mixing them randomly
using the Knuth shuffle (exercise 2.11, page 134).
    Justify that at the end of the construction every cell is linked to every other
cell by a single path.
8.8 The aim of this exercise is to color the connected components of a black-
and-white image using different colors. A connected component is formed by
pixels that have the same color as their neighbors. Two pixels are neighbors if
they have a common border.
   For example, in the following image of 6 × 6 pixels, there are two white
connected components, and four black ones.
320                                                 Chapter 8. Disjoint Sets

    A black-and-white image is represented by a matrix of booleans. To compute
its connected components, we use a union-find structure to group neighboring
pixels having the same color in a single class. Write a function that takes as
argument a matrix of booleans and returns a union-find structure containing its
equivalence classes.
    To assign a different color to each connected component, use a hash table
that associates a different color with each representative. Write a function that
displays the image with its connected components colored. Assume that you are
given a function new_color of type unit -> color and a function draw_pixel
of type int -> int -> color -> unit.
