                                                                         13
                                      Graph Algorithms

In this chapter, we present graph algorithms. These algorithms are independent
of the underlying graph data structure. They can be used, in particular, with all
the graph structures of chapter 7. Below, we will take as given a module G whose
signature includes at least the types, functions, and modules of program 98.
Graphs are of type graph, and their vertices are of type vertex. The function
iter_vertex iterates over the vertices of a given graph, applying a function
passed as argument to each of them. The function iter_succ iterates over the
successors of a given vertex. The module H provides a hash table structure with
vertices as keys.

13.1     Breadth-First Search
The first traversal that we present is called breadth-first search (BFS). It con-
sists in exploring the graph by moving outwards “in concentric circles,” from
a particular vertex s, called the root. We first traverse the vertices that are
exactly one arc away from the root s, then those situated two arcs away, and
so forth. Consider, for example, the graph on the left in figure 13.1. Beginning
from vertex 5, we first visit vertices 4 and 1, which are directly linked to vertex 5.

  Program 98 — Minimal signature of a graph structure.

      type graph
      type vertex
      val iter_vertex: (vertex -> unit) -> graph -> unit
      val iter_succ: (vertex -> unit) -> graph -> vertex -> unit
      module H: HashTable with type key = vertex

We then visit vertices 0, 6 and 2, followed by vertex 7, and finally vertex 3. The
graph, with distances to the root indicated as exponents, is shown on the right.

              0       1     2      3             02    11     22    34

              4       5     6      7             41    50     62    73

                    Figure 13.1: Breadth-first search of a graph.

    We write breadth-first search as a function iter_bfs that takes as arguments
a graph g, a root s, and a function f that will be applied to the elements of g
as these are discovered. We begin by creating a hash table that will contain the
vertices already discovered by the traversal.
  let iter_bfs f g s =
    let visited = H.create () in

The search itself is based on the use of a queue into which vertices are inserted
as they are discovered. The idea is that, at any point in time, the queue will
contain the vertices situated at distance d from the root, followed by the vertices
situated at distance d + 1:

          ←       vertices at distance d   vertices at distance d + 1    ←

    This is the concretization of our notion of “concentric circles,” more precisely
of the two consecutive concentric circles that are being considered. This property
is crucial for the correctness of breadth-first search1 . Here, we use the module
Queue to implement the queue. Initially, it contains only the root. It is useful
to write a function add that adds a vertex simultaneously in the hash table and
the queue. We begin by using it on the root s.
       let queue = Queue.create () in
       let add w = H.add visited w (); Queue.add w queue in
       add s;
Another important property is that each vertex contained in the queue is also
contained in the table visited, which the function add guarantees in an obvious
manner. We use a loop to examine vertices in the order in which they are
discovered, until all vertices reachable from the root have been examined. As
long as the queue is not empty, we extract the first element v of the queue and
apply the visitor function f to it.
       while not (Queue.is_empty queue) do
         let v = Queue.pop queue in
         f v;
For each successor w of v not yet found, that is, not contained in the table
visited, we use add to add it to both the queue and the table.
         iter_succ (fun w -> if not (H.mem visited w) then add w) g v
       done
This completes the while loop and the function iter_bfs. The complete code
is given in program 99 below.
    This code applies equally well to undirected and directed graphs. Note that
some vertices may not be discovered by this algorithm. These are the vertices v
for which there is no path between the root and v. In other words, breadth-first
search determines the set of vertices that can be reached from the root and
even determines their minimal distance from the root in number of arcs (see
exercise 13.1).
  1
      For a detailed proof of the correctness of breadth-first search, consult [7, chap. 23].

  Program 99 — Breadth-first search.

      let iter_bfs f g s =
        let visited = H.create () in
        let queue = Queue.create () in
        let add w = H.add visited w (); Queue.add w queue in
        add s;
        while not (Queue.is_empty queue) do
          let v = Queue.pop queue in
          f v;
          iter_succ (fun w -> if not (H.mem visited w) then add w) g v
        done

    The complexity of breadth-first search is easy to determine. Each vertex
is placed in the queue at most once and is therefore examined at most once.
Each arc is considered at most once, when its starting vertex is examined. For a
graph with N vertices and E arcs, the complexity is therefore O(N + E), which
is optimal. The complexity in space is O(N ), since the queue, like the hash
table, may contain (almost) all vertices in the worst case.
    There is another way to implement breadth-first search, without using a
queue. As noted above, the queue has a very particular structure, with vertices
at distance d followed by vertices at distance d + 1. We see, therefore, that
the queue structure is not really necessary. All we need are two “buckets,” one
containing the vertices at distance d, and the other, those at distance d + 1. We
may concretize these, for instance, using lists. When we are done with bucket
d, we swap the two buckets. This does not affect the complexity.

13.2     Depth-First Search
The second graph traversal that we present is depth-first search (DFS). It uses a
backtracking algorithm: As long as we can follow an arc, we do so, and when it is
no longer possible, we backtrack. As with breadth-first search, we mark vertices

as they are discovered, to avoid getting stuck in a cycle. Consider the example of
the graph on the left in figure 13.2. We begin a depth-first search from vertex 2.
Two arcs come out of this vertex, 2 → 4 and 2 → 5. We arbitrarily choose
to consider the arc 2 → 5 first and, accordingly, proceed to vertex 5. No arc
comes out of 5, so we cannot continue. We therefore backtrack to vertex 2, and
consider the second outgoing arc, 2 → 4. From 4, we can only follow the arc
4 → 3. Similarly, from 3, we can only follow the arc 3 → 1. Two arcs emerge
from vertex 1: 1 → 0 and 1 → 4. We choose to follow the arc 1 → 4 first. It leads
to a vertex that has already been visited. We therefore backtrack. Returning
to 1, we consider the other arc, 1 → 0, which leads to 0. From there, the only
outgoing arc leads to 3, which has also already been visited. We therefore return
to 0, then to 1, then to 3, then to 4, and finally to 2. The traversal is complete.
If we redraw the graph with the order in which the vertices were discovered as
exponents, we get the graph on the right in figure 13.2.

            0         1         2             05         14        20

            3         4         5             33         42        51

                  Figure 13.2: Example of depth-first search.

    As with breadth-first search, we will make use of a hash table containing the
vertices already discovered.
  let iter_dfs f g s =
    let visited = H.create () in
Depth-first search is written as a recursive local function visit taking a vertex v
as argument. Its code is a few lines long:
     let rec visit v =
       if not (H.mem visited v) then begin
         H.add visited v ();
         f v;

  Program 100 — Depth-first search.

      let iter_dfs f g s =
        let visited = H.create () in
        let rec visit v =
           if not (H.mem visited v) then begin
             H.add visited v ();
             f v;
             iter_succ visit g v
           end
        in
        visit s

          iter_succ visit g v
        end
If vertex v has already been discovered, there is nothing more to be done. Oth-
erwise, we mark it and visit it with the function f. Then, we consider each
successor w, recursively triggering a depth-first search on each one. One detail
is crucial: We added v to the table visited before considering its successors.
This is what keeps us from getting stuck in a cycle. To conclude the function
iter_dfs, we have only to call visit on the root s:
      in
      visit s
The complete code is given in program 100.
     The complexity is O(N + E), by the same logic as in case of breadth-first
search. Space complexity is subtler since it is the stack of recursive calls that con-
tains the vertices being visited, and that plays the role of the queue in breadth-
first search. Since in the worst case all the vertices can be present in the stack
or hash table, it follows that the space complexity is O(N ).
     Like breadth-first search, depth-first search allows us to determine the set
of vertices that can be reached from the root s. Figure 13.3 illustrates another

example, where depth-first search is triggered from vertex 1. Vertices 2 and 5
are not discovered. In particular, depth-first search, like breadth-first search, is
a way to determine the existence of a path between a particular vertex, namely,
the root, and other vertices of the graph. If that is the only objective (if,
for example, the minimal distance does not interest us), depth-first search is
generally more efficient. Indeed, its memory use (that is, the call stack) is often
inferior to that of breadth-first search. The typical example is that of a tree, in
which memory use is limited to the height of the tree for depth-first search, but
could be as large as the entire tree in case of breadth-first search. Depth-first
search has many other applications that lie beyond the scope of this book. See,
for example, Introduction to Algorithms [7].

                              03        10          2

                              32        41          5

                    Figure 13.3: Another depth-first search.

13.3     Shortest Path
We consider here graphs whose arcs are labeled with weights (representing dis-
tances, for example). We seek the shortest path between two vertices, where the
length is no longer the number of arcs but rather the sum of weights along the
path. Thus, if we consider the weighted graph of figure 13.4, the shortest path
from vertex 2 to vertex 0 is of length 5. This is the path 2 → 4 → 3 → 1 → 0,
which is shorter than the path 2 → 1 → 0, of length 6, even if the latter contains
fewer arcs. Similarly, the shortest path from vertex 2 to vertex 5, via vertex 4,
is of length 2.
    As with breadth- and depth-first search, we take as given a vertex s, from
which we seek to determine the shortest paths to the other vertices. We also
require the weight of each arc. One possibility is to modify the graph structure

                                     2           4
                                 0           1           2
                                     1           1
                             1           1           3
                                     1           1
                                 3           4           5

                  Figure 13.4: Example of a weighted graph.

to include this. Here, however, we take as given a weight function weight of the
following type, where weights are of type float:

  val weight: graph -> vertex -> vertex -> float

This function will only be called with arguments g, x, and y if there is an arc
between x and y in the graph g.
    We present two algorithms to solve the problem. The first, Dijkstra’s al-
gorithm, assumes that the weights are always non-negative. The second, the
Bellman-Ford algorithm, involves no such hypothesis regarding the weights.

Dijkstra’s Algorithm

Dijkstra’s algorithm is a generalization of breadth-first search. Here, too, we
proceed in “concentric circles.” The difference is that the radii of these circles
represent distance in terms of total weight rather than number of arcs. Thus,
in the example above, starting from the root 2, we first reach the vertices at
distance 1 (namely, 4), then those at distance 2 (namely, 3 and 5), then those at
distance 3 (namely, 1), and finally those at distance 5 (namely, 0). A possible
complication is that we may reach a vertex at a certain distance (for example,
vertex 5 with the arc 2 → 5), and then later find a shorter path by taking
different arcs (for example, 2 → 4 → 5). A queue no longer suffices as it did in
breadth-first search. Instead, we will use a priority queue (see chapter 6). The
priority queue will contain the vertices already found, ordered by distance from
the root. When a better path to a vertex is found, the vertex is reinserted in

the queue with a higher priority, that is, a shorter distance2 .
    We now describe the code of Dijkstra’s algorithm. To implement the priority
queue, we assume a functor PriorityQueue, parametrized by a type t equipped
with a total order. (Such functors were presented in chapter 6.) Here, the type t
will be that of pairs (v, d), where v is a vertex and d is its distance from the
root. The order on these pairs is that obtained by comparing the distances. We
introduce the following module:
  module VertexDistance = struct
    type t = vertex * float
    let compare (_, d1) (_, d2) = Stdlib.compare d1 d2
  end
It only remains to apply the functor PriorityQueue to the module VertexDistance,
that is:
  module P = PriorityQueue(VertexDistance)
We assume here that the module P provides a function create to construct a new
priority queue, a function add to add an element, and a function extract_min
that removes and returns the smallest element for the order defined by the
function compare.
    We now arrive at the code of the algorithm itself. We write it as a function
dijkstra that takes as arguments a graph g, a root s, and a function f. The
function f will be applied to elements of g as their shortest distance to s is
determined, the vertex being passed to f as first argument, and its distance
as second argument. We begin by creating a hash table that will contain the
vertices already reached by the traversal.
  let rec dijkstra f g s =
    let visited = H.create () in
We also create a hash table, distance, and the priority queue, queue. The hash
table will contain the distance currently known for each vertex.
   2
    Another solution would be to use a priority queue structure where it is possible to modify
the priority of an element already in the queue. Such structures exist but are complex to
implement and, although asymptotically better, do not necessarily bring any practical gains.
The solution presented here is a good compromise.

      let distance = H.create () in
      let queue = P.create () in
It is convenient to introduce a function add that will add a vertex to both these
data structures at the same time. We begin by applying it to the root s.
      let add v d = H.replace distance v d; P.add queue (v, d) in
      add s 0.;
We will see below why H.replace is preferred over H.add. We then continue
with a loop as long as the queue is not empty.
      while not (P.is_empty queue) do
We extract the first element of the queue, u, together with the distance to the
root, du. If the vertex u is already in visited, then we have already determined
the distance of s to u, and there is nothing more to be done.
        let (u, du) = P.extract_min queue in
        if not (H.mem visited u) then begin
This situation can indeed occur when a first path is found and another, shorter,
path is found subsequently. The latter then passes before the former in the
priority queue. When the longer path finally comes out of the queue, it should
be ignored. If the vertex is not in visited, however, that means that we have
just found a shortest path from s to u, which we indicate by adding u to the
table visited and by applying the visitor function f to u and du.
          H.add visited u ();
          f u du;
Next, we will examine all arcs emerging from u. For each arc u → v, the distance
to v obtained by following the corresponding arc is the sum of the distance du
and the arc weight, that is, weight u v. Several scenarios are possible for
the vertex v. Either it is the first time that it is reached, or it was already
in distance. In the latter case, we may have decreased the distance to v by
passing through u. If so, it suffices to use the function add to update the tables.
We handle each successor v in the function visit below:

          let visit v =
            let d = du +. weight g u v in
            if not (H.mem distance v) || d < H.find distance v then
              add v d
   It only remains to apply this function to all arcs emerging from u, which
concludes the body of the while loop.
         in
         iter_succ visit g u
       end
     done
Once we exit the while loop, all vertices that may be reached from s have been
visited. The complete code is given in program 101 above.
    Figure 13.5 shows the result of Dijkstra’s algorithm on the graph given in the
previous example, with 2 as root. The graph is drawn with the final distances
obtained for each vertex as exponents. In this example, all vertices have been
reached by the traversal. As for the breadth- and depth-first searches, this is
not always the case: only vertices for which there is a path from the root will
be reached.

Complexity
Let us evaluate the cost of Dijkstra’s algorithm in the worst case. The priority
queue can contain up to E elements, because the algorithm visits each arc at
most once, and each arc can lead to the insertion of an element in the queue.
Assuming that the priority queue operations add and extract_min have loga-
rithmic cost (as is the case for the priority queues described in chapter 6), each
operation on the queue will have cost O(log E), that is, O(log N ), since E ≤ N 2 .
The total cost is therefore O(E log N ).

Bellman-Ford Algorithm
We present here a second solution to the shortest path problem, this time with-
out assuming that the weights are non-negative. Omitting this assumption

 Program 101 — Shortest path (Dijkstra’s algorithm).

      module VertexDistance = struct
        type t = vertex * float
        let compare (_, d1) (_, d2) = Stdlib.compare d1 d2
      end
      module P = PriorityQueue(VertexDistance)

      let rec dijkstra f g s =
        let visited = H.create () in
        let distance = H.create () in
        let queue = P.create () in
        let add v d = H.replace distance v d; P.add queue (v, d) in
        add s 0.;
        while not (P.is_empty queue) do
          let (u, du) = P.extract_min queue in
          if not (H.mem visited u) then begin
             H.add visited u ();
             f u du;
             let visit v =
               let d = du +. weight g u v in
               if not (H.mem distance v) || d < H.find distance v then
                 add v d
             in
             iter_succ visit g u
          end
        done

                                  2          4
                            05         13        20
                                 1          1
                            1         1          3
                                  1          1
                            32         41        52

                  Figure 13.5: Result of Dijkstra’s algorithm.

introduces a subtlety. If the graph contains a cycle with strictly negative total
weight, and if this cycle can be reached from the root, then none of the vertices
that can be reached from the cycle will have a shortest path because we can
take this cycle as many times as we wish, reducing the total weight of the path
each time. The Bellman-Ford algorithm computes the shortest paths from the
root and detects any negative cycle that may be reached from the root.
    This algorithm consists in repeating the following operation N times: Con-
sider each arc u → v of the graph and determine if taking it will reduce the
distance currently known between the source and v. The idea is that a shortest
path between s and v cannot contain more than N − 1 arcs, without which this
path would contain a cycle, which we could remove from the path if it is of
non-negative weight. This is why N iterations suffice.
    Let us now write the code of the Bellman-Ford algorithm. We begin by
defining a function iter_edge that traverses all the arcs of a graph g.
  let iter_edge f g =
    iter_vertex (fun u ->
      iter_succ (fun v -> f u v (weight g u v)) g u) g
For each arc u → v, the function iter_edge applies the function f to the vertices
u and v, and the distance of the arc u → v given by the function weight.
   The function bellman_ford takes a graph g and a root vertex s as argu-
ments. It begins by creating a hash table h containing the known distances for
each vertex.
  let bellman_ford g s =
    let h = H.create () in

We begin by initializing this table, giving s distance 0 and every other vertex
an infinite distance.
      iter_vertex (fun v -> H.add h v max_float) g;
      H.add h s 0.;
   We use here the constant max_float to represent an infinite distance. Then
we repeat the following operation N − 1 times: We examine each arc, using a
for loop and the function iter_edge.
      for i = 1 to nb_vertex g - 1 do
        iter_edge (fun u v w ->
For each arc u → v, we compute the distance d from the root to v that is
obtained by taking this arc. If it is smaller than the best distance currently
known, we record it.
          let d = H.find h u +. w in
          if d < H.find h v then H.replace h v d
Once this for loop is complete, we redo the operation an N -th and final time.
This time, the shortest paths can only be improved by the presence of a negative
cycle. We will signal this case by raising an exception.
      done;
      iter_edge (fun u v w ->
        if H.find h u +. w < H.find h v then
          raise NegativeCycle
This completes the Bellman-Ford algorithm. We can return the table h that
gives the distance of each vertex to the source. This is what is done in pro-
gram 102.
    We illustrate the Bellman-Ford algorithm with an example. Consider the
graph of figure 13.6, for which we seek to determine the distances from vertex 5.
The table to the right of the graph gives the distance found for each vertex
after each step. Initially, all the vertices are at an infinite distance, except the
root 5. At each step, we assume the vertices are traversed in the order of their
numbering. We observe, for example, that the distance to vertex 2 initially

 Program 102 — The Bellman-Ford algorithm.

   let iter_edge f g =
     iter_vertex (fun u ->
       iter_succ (fun v -> f u v (weight g u v)) g u) g

   exception NegativeCycle

   let bellman_ford g s =
     let h = H.create () in
     iter_vertex (fun v -> H.add h v max_float) g;
     H.add h s 0.;
     for i = 1 to nb_vertex g - 1 do
       iter_edge (fun u v w ->
         let d = H.find h u +. w in
         if d < H.find h v then H.replace h v d
       ) g
     done;
     iter_edge (fun u v w ->
       if H.find h u +. w < H.find h v then
         raise NegativeCycle
     ) g;
     h

                                             vertex     distance after i steps
             0
                   1
                            1
                                1
                                         2     0       ∞ ∞ 2 -3 -3 -3
                    1            1
                                               1       ∞    1 -3 -3 -3 -3
        -1              1            3         2       ∞    3 2 -2 -2 -2
             3
                   2
                            4
                                -4
                                         5     3       ∞ ∞ -2 -2 -2 -2
                                               4       ∞ -4 -4 -4 -4 -4
                                               5       0    0 0 0 0 0

                 Figure 13.6: Illustration of the Bellman-Ford algorithm.

takes the value 3 (the arc 5 → 2), then the value 2 (passing through vertex 1),
and finally the value -2 (passing through the vertices 4 and 1). After that, it
no longer varies. More generally, we observe here that none of the distances is
improved during the last two steps of the algorithm. In particular, there is no
negative cycle.

Complexity
The cost of the Bellman-Ford algorithm in the worst case is easy to evaluate. We
perform exactly N passes, and each pass examines each of the E arcs once and
only once. The complexity is therefore O(EN ), that is, O(N 3 ) in the worst case.
In practice, however, we can significantly improve performance by observing that
many arcs are examined unnecessarily when the distance from the root to the
starting vertex has not been modified. Another simple optimization consists in
stopping once a pass has not improved any of the distances. The complexity in
the worst case remains, nevertheless, the same.

13.4     Minimum spanning tree
We consider here an undirected graph whose arcs are labeled with weights. We
also assume that the graph is connected, that is, that each pair of vertices is
linked by a path. A spanning tree is a subset of the arcs, that does not contain
a cycle, and that links all vertices together. It is easy to convince ourselves that

such a tree exists. For example, a depth-first search beginning at an arbitrary
vertex will determine such a tree: it is formed by all the arcs that led to the
discovery of a new vertex.
     We seek then to solve the problem of finding a spanning tree whose total
weight is minimal. We present here a solution known as Kruskal’s algorithm.
This algorithm consists in traversing the arcs in increasing order of weight. For
each arc u − v, we determine if a cycle is created by adding the arc to the set
of arcs already selected to form the spanning tree. If this is so, we ignore the
arc. Otherwise, we select it. Once all the arcs have been examined, the set of
selected arcs form a minimum spanning tree (see exercises 13.24 and 13.25).
     To implement this algorithm, we need to find an efficient means to determine
if selecting a new arc introduces a cycle among the already selected arcs. Luckily,
there is a simple solution to this problem, in the form of the structure of disjoint
sets studied in chapter 8. Indeed, it suffices to construct an initial structure in
which each vertex constitutes a class by itself. For any selected arc u − v, we
merge the classes of u and v. This materializes the fact that there now exists a
path between every pair of vertices in the new class. To test if an arc introduces
a cycle, it suffices therefore to test whether its extremities belong to the same
class.
     Let us now write the code for Kruskal’s algorithm, as a function spanning_tree
that takes a graph as argument and returns a minimum spanning tree in the
form of a list of arcs. We take as given a module UF for the structure of disjoint
sets (see chapter 8), with the following signature:
  module UF: sig
    val create : vertex list -> t
    val find : t -> vertex -> vertex
    val union : t -> vertex -> vertex -> unit
  end
We assume there is a function vertices that returns the list of vertices of a
graph. Such a function is easy to obtain from iter_vertex. Similarly, we
assume there is a function edges that returns the list of all arcs of a graph, each
arc being a triple (x, y, w), where w is the weight of the arc x − y. Here, too,
this function is easy to obtain from iter_edge and weight.

   The code of Kruskal’s algorithm begins by creating a union-find structure
based on the list of vertices of the graph:
  let spanning_tree g =
    let uf = UF.create (vertices g) in
Next, we sort the list of arcs of the graph in increasing order of weight, using
the library function List.sort. The comparison used here is that of weights,
with the usual order on floating-point numbers, that is, Stdlib.compare.
      let compare (_,_,w1) (_,_,w2) = Stdlib.compare w1 w2 in
      let edges = List.sort compare (edges g) in
The list of arcs selected to form the spanning tree is stored in a local reference st.
      let st = ref [] in
We then write a function cover that examines an arc (u,v,w) and determines
if it should be selected. For this, we compare the classes of vertices u and v
using the function UF.find. If they are different, we add the arc to the list st
and merge the two classes, using the function UF.union.
      let cover ((u, v, w) as e) =
        if UF.find uf u <> UF.find uf v then begin
          UF.union uf u v;
          st := e :: !st
        end
Finally, it only remains to examine each arc of the list edges using this function,
and then return the resulting list.
      in
      List.iter cover edges;
      !st
The code of Kruskal’s algorithm is given in program 103.
   We illustrate Kruskal’s algorithm with an example. Consider the graph on
the top left of figure 13.7. Arcs are considered in increasing order of weight,
as presented in the table on the right in the figure. For each arc, we indicate

  Program 103 — Kruskal’s algorithm.

    let spanning_tree g =
      let uf = UF.create (vertices g) in
      let compare (_,_,w1) (_,_,w2) = Stdlib.compare w1 w2 in
      let edges = List.sort compare (edges g) in
      let st = ref [] in
      let cover ((u, v, w) as e) =
         if UF.find uf u <> UF.find uf v then begin
           UF.union uf u v;
           st := e :: !st
         end
      in
      List.iter cover edges;
      !st

if it is selected (column “added”) and the resulting partition in the union-find
structure. The spanning tree obtained in the end is illustrated at the bottom
left of the figure. Its total weight is -2. It is important to note that arcs of the
same weight may be considered in any order. Thus, we have examined here the
arc 0 − 1 before the arc 1 − 4, but we could equally have done it the other way
around. The spanning tree would have been different, but its total weight would
have been the same.
     A number of variations and optimizations are possible. Exercise 13.26 thus
proposes interrupting the arc traversal once we have selected N − 1 arcs. Simi-
larly, exercise 13.27 proposes using a priority queue rather than a sorting algo-
rithm. Be that as it may, the key idea remains the use of the disjoint-set data
structure.

Complexity
The cost of Kruskal’s algorithm is split between that of sorting the set E of arcs
and that of examining each arc. The first cost is O(E log E) in the worst case, if

          1           2            weight   arc   added   vertex partition
      0           1            2
          0            3                                  {0}, {1}, {2}, {3}, {4}, {5}
 -1           1            5         -4     4−5    yes    {0}, {1}, {2}, {3}, {4, 5}
      3
          4
                  4
                      -4
                               5     -1     0−3    yes    {0, 3}, {1}, {2}, {4, 5}
                                      0     0−4    yes    {0, 3, 4, 5}, {1}, {2}
                                      1     0−1    yes    {0, 1, 3, 4, 5}, {2}
          1           2               1     1−4    no     {0, 1, 3, 4, 5}, {2}
      0           1            2      2     1−2    yes    {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
 -1
          0
              1
                       3
                           5          3     1−5    no     {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
                                      4     3−4    no     {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
          4           -4
      3           4            5      5     2−5    no     {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}

                      Figure 13.7: Illustration of Kruskal’s algorithm.

we use a sorting algorithm of optimal complexity (see chapter 12). The second
cost is O(E) if we consider that the operations on the union-find structure
are constant time (see chapter 8). The complexity of Kruskal’s algorithm is
therefore O(E log E).

13.5          Exercises
Breadth-first Search
13.1 Modify the function iter_bfs to compute the distance, in number of
arcs, between the root and each vertex discovered by the traversal. A sim-
ple approach consists in associating this distance with each vertex in the table
visited. Return this table as the result of the function iter_bfs.
13.2 Modify the function iter_bfs so as to return a shortest path between
the root and the vertex, for each vertex discovered by the traversal. For each
vertex discovered, store the vertex that led to it, for instance, in a hash table.
We can then recover the path from the vertex discovered to the root “by going
backwards.”
13.3 Write a function that performs a breadth-first traversal of the nodes of
a tree by imitating the breadth-first search of a graph.

13.4 Implement a cursor for binary trees (see section 9.3 Cursors) correspond-
ing to breadth-first search.
13.5 Use the previous exercise to write a program that colors a graph with k
colors without using the same color for two vertices linked by an arc. Proceed
by backtracking, using the persistent nature of the cursor to backtrack. If no
color assignment is possible, raise the exception Not_found.

Depth-first Search

13.6   Redo exercise 13.2 for depth-first search.
13.7 In many applications of depth-first search, we wish to traverse all the
vertices of the graph and not merely those that can be reached from a vertex s.
Using the function iter_vertex that traverses all vertices of the graph, modify
the function iter_dfs so that every vertex of the graph is visited exactly once.
13.8 For an undirected graph, a connected component is a maximal set of
vertices pairwise linked by a path. Explain how the variant of depth-first search
proposed in the previous exercise determines the connected components of an
undirected graph. Write the corresponding code.
13.9 Rewrite the function iter_dfs using a while loop rather than a recursive
function. Hint: Use a stack containing the vertices from which the depth-first
search is to be performed. The code should resemble that of a breadth-first
search, with the stack replacing the queue. There is, however, a difference in
the treatment of the vertices already visited. Show that the vertices are not
necessarily visited in the same order as in the recursive version.
13.10 Depth-first search can be modified to detect the presence of a cycle in
the graph. When the function iter_dfs comes across an already visited vertex,
we do not know a priori if we have found a cycle. It could be that the vertex
has already been reached by a parallel path. Instead of two states (reached/not
reached), the marking of the vertices should therefore be modified to use three:
reached/being visited/visited. Write a function has_cycle that determines the
presence of a cycle in a graph. Modify the function so that it returns the list of
vertices of the cycle found, if any.

13.11 Let G be a directed graph that does not contain a cycle. We call such
graphs directed acyclic graphs (DAG). A topological sort of G is a traversal of
its vertices compatible with the arcs, that is, where a vertex x is visited before
a vertex y if there is an arc x → y. Modify program 100 so that it performs a
topological sort, in the form of a function with the following type:
  topological_sort: (vertex -> unit) -> graph -> unit
Use a stack to which a vertex v is added once the call to visit v terminates.
Once the depth-first search is completed, apply the function passed as argument
to all the elements of the stack.
13.12 For a directed graph, a strongly connected component is any maximal
set of vertices pairwise linked by a path. Kosaraju-Sharir’s algorithm computes
the set of strongly connected components of a graph G, in time O(N + E), using
two depth-first searches. It proceeds as follows:
  • We begin by constructing the transposition GR of the graph G, that is,
    the graph having the same vertices as G but with the arcs reversed (see
    exercise 7.1).
  • Next, we traverse the vertices of GR according to a topological sort (see
    previous exercise). For each vertex v, we perform a depth-first search in G,
    starting from v, if v is not already part of a strongly connected component.
    All the vertices that are reached by this search are then placed in a new
    component.
Write a function scc: graph -> vertex list list that uses this algorithm
to compute the strongly connected components of a graph.
13.13 We can use depth-first search to construct a perfect maze in an n × m
grid. A perfect maze is one in which there is one and only one path between
any two cells. We begin by considering the graph in which all cells of the grid
are linked to their neighbors:

We then perform a depth-first search beginning from an arbitrary vertex (for
example, the top left one). When we traverse the successors of a vertex, we do
so in random order. Once the traversal is completed, the maze is obtained by
declaring that we can pass from one vertex to another if the corresponding arc
was taken during the depth-first search. Exercise 8.7 proposes another way of
constructing a perfect maze.
13.14 We consider here the problem of playing peg solitaire. This is a game
of patience consisting of 32 pegs on a board with 33 holes. Initially, the pegs
occupy all the holes, except the one at the center of the board.

A peg can be removed from the board by having one of the four adjacent pegs
jump over it, provided that the hole where the peg is to land is empty. Here are
two possible moves starting from the initial position.

The aim of the game is to arrive at a situation in which there is only one peg
remaining, which occupies the central position.

We can easily solve this problem using depth-first search on a graph in which
each vertex represents a board configuration.

  • A board configuration can be represented by an integer whose (i + 7j)-
    th bit indicates the presence of a peg at position (i, j) for 0 ≤ i, j < 7.
    Assuming a 64-bit machine, we let type state = int. Define two con-
    stants, initial and final, representing respectively the initial and final
    configurations of the game.

  • A move can be represented by two configurations, the first one indicating
    the two pegs involved (the one that is moved and the one jumped over),
    and the second indicating the final position of the peg that was moved.
    For example, the first move above is represented as follows:

      Let type move = state * state. Construct a list containing the 88 pos-
      sible moves (independent of what the configuration may be).

  • Write a function possible_move to test if a move is possible in a given
    configuration and a function move that performs the move, if one is possi-
    ble. Derive from it a function iter_succ that traverses all possible moves
    in a given configuration.

  • Modify the function iter_dfs of program 100 to interrupt the traversal
    once the configuration final is reached and return the path found, as in
    exercise 13.6 above.

  • Finally, write a function print that displays a configuration on the screen,
    and use it to display the solution found, in the form of 32 successive
    configurations.

Note: The problem of peg solitaire is one of the problems discussed in the book
by Cousineau and Mauny The Functional Approach to Programming [9, page
216].
13.15 In the preceding exercise, depth-first search was a good solution because
all the paths were of the same length. When this is not the case, and if we seek
a path of minimal length, it is necessary to turn to breadth-first search instead.
However, this may require a lot of memory. In this case, Iterative deepening
search (IDS) offers a solution that has low memory requirements, but which is
still able to find a path of minimal length. The idea is to execute successive
depth-first searches, limited to maximal depths that are larger and larger.
  • Explain why we can no longer memoize the vertices already visited during
    the depth-first searches. Consider the following graph and assume that we
    traverse it beginning at vertex 0.

                                 0         2         3

                                 1

  • Implement iterative deepening search as a function ids: (vertex ->
    bool) -> graph -> vertex -> unit that stops once it reaches a vertex
    that satisfies the function passed as argument.

  • In case of the traversal of a complete binary tree starting at the root,
    show that iterative deepening search is no costlier than breadth-first and
    depth-first searches.

Shortest Paths
13.16 Generalize the function dijkstra for distances of an arbitrary type, for
example in the form of a functor.
13.17 Redo exercise 13.2 for Dijkstra’s algorithm. Note: When a path is
improved, the corresponding table must be updated.

13.18 Redo the steps of the Bellman-Ford algorithm, illustrated in figure 13.6,
assuming that the weight of the arc 0 → 4 is -3.
13.19 Warshall’s algorithm (exercise 7.6) can be easily adapted to compute
all shortest paths in a graph. This is the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. Let
V = {0, . . . , N − 1}. Initially, the distance di,j between vertices i and j equals
the weight of the corresponding arc, if there is one, and is otherwise ∞. The
algorithm then computes the minimal distance di,j from i to j in O(N 3 ) time
as follows:
                        for k from 0 to N − 1
                          for i from 0 to N − 1
                             for j from 0 to N − 1
                                di,j ← min(di,j , di,k + dk,j )

Write a function that implements this algorithm. How can we treat the general
case, when vertices are not necessarily the integers 0, . . . , N − 1?
13.20 Although Dijkstra’s algorithm allows us to find a path of minimal cost,
it may visit a number of vertices in the graph unnecessarily. Suppose we use
Dijkstra’s algorithm to find the shortest path (in terms of distance) between
two cities on a road network. The algorithm will explore the network in larger
and larger concentric circles centered around the starting city, until it reaches
the destination city. If we take the example of the French road network, and if
we seek the shortest path between Paris and Nice, it is likely that almost all the
cities of France will have been visited before Nice is reached.
     The A? algorithm allows us to solve this problem through a finer control of
the order in which vertices are visited. This control takes the form of a heuristic
that estimates the distance remaining between a vertex and the destination.
The A? algorithm is identical to Dijkstra’s algorithm, except that the queue
no longer uses distance to the source as priority, but rather the sum of this
distance and the value given by the heuristic. If the heuristic is admissible, that
is, if it never overestimates the remaining distance, then the A? algorithm will
find the shortest path. An admissible heuristic for the road-network example
is the distance as a crow flies. If the heuristic always returns zero, we recover
Dijkstra’s algorithm.

    Let us consider the example of an infinite grid in which each point is linked
to its eight direct neighbors.

The cost here is the Euclidean distance,
                                   √         that is, four neighbors are at distance 1,
and the other four at distance 2. We can therefore use as heuristic the Eu-
clidean distance p  between the point in question (x, y) and the destination point
(xd , yd ), that is, (x − xd )2 + (y − yd )2 .

                                                           99 102 103

                                            86   87   91   95 101

                                       80   82   84   93 100

                             96   74   78   83   92   97

                        94   71   75   81   90   98

                        70

                        64   54   41   28   16   13   10   11   14   25   36

                        65   47   35   24   12   8    7    9    20   32   44

                        68   52   33   21   6    4    5    18   27   39   48

                        76   56   38   19   3    2    17   23   34   45   58

                        88   59   43   26   1    15   22   31   42   49   62   79

                             73   55   40   29   30   37   46   57   63   89

                                  66   60   50   51   53   61   67

                                            69   72   77   85

   The figure above shows the result of the A? algorithm finding a path from
point (0, 0), labelled 1, to point (5, 10), labelled 103, the black nodes being
excluded from the grid. As we see, only 103 nodes were visited. Dijkstra’s

algorithm would also have found the shortest path, but the total number of
visited nodes would have been much larger (over 800).
    Assume we are given a function heuristic: graph -> vertex -> vertex -> float,
and implement the A? algorithm by modifying the code of program 101. Apply
this to the preceding example and verify that we do indeed arrive at the result
of the figure above.
13.21 “French solitaire” differs from that of exercise 13.14, called “English
solitaire,” by virtue of four additional pegs present in positions (1, 1), (5, 1),
(1, 5), and (5, 5).

French solitaire is, surprisingly, much harder to solve than English solitaire.
Furthermore, there exist combinations of starting/final configurations that do
not admit of a solution, for example, the configuration in which the central peg
is removed at the start and the last peg must be placed at the center3 . We will
accordingly loosen the conditions on the positions of the initial and final pegs.
    One approach to solving French solitaire consists in using the A? algorithm
presented in the preceding exercise. Modify the code of exercise 13.14 as follows:

   • Add the 8 new moves linked to the 4 new pegs to the the list of all possible
     moves.

   • Write a heuristic function that evaluates how “compactly” pegs are laid
     out on the board. Given the representation of the grid as an integer,
     we may compute a rough approximation by counting the number of bit
   3
    It is only recently that we have rediscovered how French solitaire was played in the 18th
century: Initially, all cells contain a peg, and the player removes a peg of her choice. This
peg can then be placed back on the board at any moment during the game. With these rules,
there is then a solution in which the central peg is taken out at the start and the final peg is
placed in the center. Here, however, we maintain the same rules as in English solitaire.

      inversions, that is, the number of times that we pass from a 1 bit to a
      0 bit, and vice versa.

  • Finally, replace depth-first search with the A? algorithm. Here is an exam-
    ple of initial and final configurations for which there exists a solution.

                                           ...

As in exercise 13.14, present the solution by displaying all successive configura-
tions of the board.
13.22 It is possible to combine the ideas of iterative deepening search (exer-
cise 13.15) and the A? algorithm (exercise 13.20), to obtain an algorithm known
as IDA? (iterative deepening A? ). The idea is as follows: At each iteration, we
execute a depth-first search of all the states where the heuristic does not exceed
a given threshold, without seeking to memoize already visited states. Once the
search is over, we take as the new threshold the smallest value of the heuristic
obtained during the previous search. In other words, each iteration pushes the
threshold of the heuristic a little further until a path is found or no vertex takes
a value greater than the threshold. To initiate the process, it suffices to take
as initial threshold the heuristic for the root vertex. As with the A? algorithm,
an admissible heuristic, that is, one that never overestimates the remaining dis-
tance, guarantees that IDA? will find a shortest path. The IDA? algorithm was
discovered by Korf [17] in 1985.
    Assume we are given a function heuristic: graph -> vertex -> vertex -> float,
and modify the code of exercise 13.15 to implement the IDA? algorithm. The
following exercise proposes an application of this algorithm.
13.23 A good application of the IDA? algorithm proposed in the preceding
exercise is the game of fifteen. The game consists in a 4 × 4 grid containing 15
tiles, numbered from 1 to 15. The sixteenth position is empty, and we may place
in it one of the adjacent tiles. Initially, the tiles are scrambled, for example as
follows:

                                         14   1     9     6
                                         4    8    12     5
                                         7    2     3
                                         10   11   13     15

The aim is to place the tiles in increasing order4 .

                                              1     2     3
                                         4    5     6     7
                                         8    9    10     11
                                         12   13   14     15

To solve the game, we will use the following heuristic: For each tile, we compute
the distance that separates it from its final position, in terms of number of rows
and columns. This is called the Manhattan distance. In the preceding example,
tile 7 is initially at distance 4 from its final position because it has to be moved
up by one row, and right by three columns. For a given configuration, we then
take the sum of the Manhattan distances of the fifteen tiles, which is a lower
bound on the number of moves that remain to be done. This is an admissible
heuristic, and we will thus be able to find a smallest solution. Solve the game
using the IDA? algorithm. The example of the game of fifteen is presented in
the article by Korf that introduced the IDA? algorithm.

Minimum Spanning Tree
13.24 Show that the set of arcs returned by Kruskal’s algorithm does indeed
form a tree.
13.25 Show that the result of Kruskal’s algorithm is indeed a minimum span-
ning tree.
13.26 Improve the code of program 103 so that it stops as soon as N − 1 arcs
have been added to the spanning tree.
  4
      Not all initial configurations admit a solution.

13.27 Reimplement program 103 using a priority queue rather than a sorting
algorithm. How does it differ from the previous exercise?
