         Preface

         The notion of templates in C++ is over 30 years old. C++ templates were already documented in
         1990 in “The Annotated C++ Reference Manual” (ARM; see [EllisStroustrupARM]), and they had
         been described before then in more specialized publications. However, well over a decade later, we
         found a dearth of literature that concentrates on the fundamental concepts and advanced techniques of
         this fascinating, complex, and powerful C++ feature. With the first edition of this book, we wanted
         to address this issue and decided to write the book about templates (with perhaps a slight lack of
         humility).
            Much has changed in C++ since that first edition was published in late 2002. New iterations of
         the C++ standard have added new features, and continued innovation in the C++ community has
         uncovered new template-based programming techniques. The second edition of this book therefore
         retains the same goals as the first edition, but for “Modern C++.”
            We approached the task of writing this book with different backgrounds and with different inten-
         tions. David (aka “Daveed”), an experienced compiler implementer and active participant of the C++
         Standard Committee working groups that evolve the core language, was interested in a precise and
         detailed description of all the power (and problems) of templates. Nico, an “ordinary” application
         programmer and member of the C++ Standard Committee Library Working Group, was interested in
         understanding all the techniques of templates in a way that he could use and benefit from them. Doug,
         a template library developer turned compiler implementer and language designer, was interested in
         collecting, categorizing, and evaluating the myriad techniques used to build template libraries. In
         addition, we all wanted to share this knowledge with you, the reader, and the whole community to
         help to avoid further misunderstanding, confusion, or apprehension.
            As a consequence, you will see both conceptual introductions with day-to-day examples and de-
         tailed descriptions of the exact behavior of templates. Starting from the basic principles of templates
         and working up to the “art of template programming,” you will discover (or rediscover) techniques
         such as static polymorphism, type traits, metaprogramming, and expression templates. You will also
         gain a deeper understanding of the C++ standard library, in which almost all code involves templates.
            We learned a lot and we had much fun while writing this book. We hope you will have the same
         experience while reading it. Enjoy!

This page intentionally left blank
         Acknowledgments for the Second
         Edition

         Writing a book is hard. Maintaining a book is even harder. It took us more than five years—spread
         over the past decade—to come up with this second edition, and it couldn’t have been done without
         the support and patience of a lot of people.
            First, we’d like to thank everyone in the C++ community and on the C++ standardization com-
         mittee. In addition to all the work to add new language and library features, they spent many, many
         hours explaining and discussing their work with us, and they did so with patience and enthusiasm.
            Part of this community also includes the programmers who gave feedback for errors and possible
         improvement for the first edition over the past 15 years. There are simply too many to list them all,
         but you know who you are and we’re truly grateful to you for taking the time to write up your thoughts
         and observations. Please accept our apologies if our answers were sometimes less than prompt.
            We’d also like to thank everyone who reviewed drafts of this book and provided us with valuable
         feedback and clarifications. These reviews brought the book to a significantly higher level of quality,
         and it again proved that good things need the input of many “wise guys.” For this reason, huge
         thanks to Steve Dewhurst, Howard Hinnant, Mikael Kilpeläinen, Dietmar Kühl, Daniel Krügler,
         Nevin Lieber, Andreas Neiser, Eric Niebler, Richard Smith, Andrew Sutton, Hubert Tong, and Ville
         Voutilainen.
            Of course, thanks to all the people who supported us from Addison-Wesley/Pearson. These days,
         you can no longer take professional support for book authors for granted. But they were patient,
         nagged us when appropriate, and were of great help when knowledge and professionalism were
         necessary. So, many thanks to Peter Gordon, Kim Boedigheimer, Greg Doench, Julie Nahil, Dana
         Wilson, and Carol Lallier.
            A special thanks goes to the LaTeX community for a great text system and to Frank Mittelbach
         for solving our LATEX issues (it was almost always our fault).

        xxvi                                                          Acknowledgments for the Second Edition

        David’s Acknowledgments for the Second Edition
        This second edition was a long time in the waiting, and as we put the finishing touches to it, I am
        grateful for the people in my life who made it possible despite many obligations vying for attention.
        First, I’m indebted to my wife (Karina) and daughters (Alessandra and Cassandra), for agreeing to
        let me take significant time out of the “family schedule” to complete this edition, particularly in the
        last year of work. My parents have always shown interest in my goals, and whenever I visit them,
        they do not forget this particular project.
            Clearly, this is a technical book, and its contents reflect knowledge and experience about a pro-
        gramming topic. However, that is not enough to pull off completing this kind of work. I’m therefore
        extremely grateful to Nico for having taken upon himself the “management” and “production” as-
        pects of this edition (in addition to all of his technical contributions). If this book is useful to you and
        you run into Nico some day, be sure to tell him thanks for keeping us all going. I’m also thankful to
        Doug for having agreed to come on board several years ago and to keep going even as demands on
        his own schedule made for tough going.
            Many programmers in our C++ community have shared nuggets of insight over the years, and I
        am grateful to all of them. However, I owe special thanks to Richard Smith, who has been efficiently
        answering my e-mails with arcane technical issues for years now. In the same vein, thanks to my
        colleagues John Spicer, Mike Miller, and Mike Herrick, for sharing their knowledge and creating an
        encouraging work environment that allows us to learn ever more.

        Nico’s Acknowledgments for the Second Edition
        First, I want to thank the two hard-core experts, David and Doug, because, as an application pro-
        grammer and library expert, I asked so many silly questions and learned so much. I now feel like
        becoming a core expert (only until the next issue, of course). It was fun, guys.
           All my other thanks go to Jutta Eckstein. Jutta has the wonderful ability to force and support
        people in their ideals, ideas, and goals. While most people experience this only occasionally when
        meeting her or working with her in our IT industry, I have the honor to benefit from her in my
        day-to-day life. After all these years, I still hope this will last forever.

        Doug’s Acknowledgments for the Second Edition
        My heartfelt thanks go to my wonderful and supportive wife, Amy, and our two little girls, Molly
        and Tessa. Their love and companionship bring me daily joy and the confidence to tackle the greatest
        challenges in life and work. I’d also like to thank my parents, who instilled in me a great love of
        learning and encouraged me throughout these years.
           It was a pleasure to work with both David and Nico, who are so different in personality yet comple-
        ment each other so well. David brings a great clarity to technical writing, honing in on descriptions
        that are precise and illuminating. Nico, beyond his exceptional organizational skills that kept two
        coauthors from wandering off into the weeds, brings a unique ability to take apart a complex techni-
        cal discussion and make it simpler, more accessible, and far, far clearer.

         Acknowledgments for the First
         Edition

         This book presents ideas, concepts, solutions, and examples from many sources. We’d like to thank
         all the people and companies who helped and supported us during the past few years.
             First, we’d like to thank all the reviewers and everyone else who gave us their opinion on early
         manuscripts. These people endow the book with a quality it would never have had without their input.
         The reviewers for this book were Kyle Blaney, Thomas Gschwind, Dennis Mancl, Patrick Mc Killen,
         and Jan Christiaan van Winkel. Special thanks to Dietmar Kühl, who meticulously reviewed and
         edited the whole book. His feedback was an incredible contribution to the quality of this book.
             We’d also like to thank all the people and companies who gave us the opportunity to test our
         examples on different platforms with different compilers. Many thanks to the Edison Design Group
         for their great compiler and their support. It was a big help during the standardization process and the
         writing of this book. Many thanks also go to all the developers of the free GNU and egcs compilers
         (Jason Merrill was especially responsive) and to Microsoft for an evaluation version of Visual C++
         (Jonathan Caves, Herb Sutter, and Jason Shirk were our contacts there).
             Much of the existing “C++ wisdom” was collectively created by the online C++ community. Most
         of it comes from the moderated Usenet groups comp.lang.c++.moderated and
         comp.std.c++. We are therefore especially indebted to the active moderators of those groups, who
         keep the discussions useful and constructive. We also much appreciate all those who over the years
         have taken the time to describe and explain their ideas for us all to share.
             The Addison-Wesley team did another great job. We are most indebted to Debbie Lafferty (our
         editor) for her gentle prodding, good advice, and relentless hard work in support of this book. Thanks
         also go to Tyrrell Albaugh, Bunny Ames, Melanie Buck, Jacquelyn Doucette, Chanda Leary-Coutu,
         Catherine Ohala, and Marty Rabinowitz. We’re grateful as well to Marina Lang, who first sponsored
         this book within Addison-Wesley. Susan Winer contributed an early round of editing that helped
         shape our later work.

        xxviii                                                         Acknowledgments for the First Edition

        Nico’s Acknowledgments for the First Edition
        My first personal thanks go with a lot of kisses to my family: Ulli, Lucas, Anica, and Frederic
        supported this book with a lot of patience, consideration, and encouragement.
           In addition, I want to thank David. His expertise turned out to be incredible, but his patience was
        even better (sometimes I ask really silly questions). It is a lot of fun to work with him.

        David’s Acknowledgments for the First Edition
        My wife, Karina, has been instrumental in this book coming to a conclusion, and I am immensely
        grateful for the role that she plays in my life. Writing “in your spare time” quickly becomes erratic
        when many other activities vie for your schedule. Karina helped me to manage that schedule, taught
        me to say “no” in order to make the time needed to make regular progress in the writing process,
        and above all was amazingly supportive of this project. I thank God every day for her friendship and
        love.
           I’m also tremendously grateful to have been able to work with Nico. Besides his directly visible
        contributions to the text, his experience and discipline moved us from my pitiful doodling to a well-
        organized production.
           John “Mr. Template” Spicer and Steve “Mr. Overload” Adamczyk are wonderful friends and
        colleagues, but in my opinion they are (together) also the ultimate authority regarding the core C++
        language. They clarified many of the trickier issues described in this book, and should you find an
        error in the description of a C++ language element, it is almost certainly attributable to my failing to
        consult with them.
           Finally, I want to express my appreciation to those who were supportive of this project without
        necessarily contributing to it directly (the power of cheer cannot be understated). First, my par-
        ents: Their love for me and their encouragement made all the difference. And then there are the
        numerous friends inquiring: “How is the book going?” They, too, were a source of encouragement:
        Michael Beckmann, Brett and Julie Beene, Jarran Carr, Simon Chang, Ho and Sarah Cho, Christophe
        De Dinechin, Ewa Deelman, Neil Eberle, Sassan Hazeghi, Vikram Kumar, Jim and Lindsay Long,
        R.J. Morgan, Mike Puritano, Ragu Raghavendra, Jim and Phuong Sharp, Gregg Vaughn, and John
        Wiegley.

         About This Book

         The first edition of this book was published almost 15 years ago. We had set out to write the definitive
         guide to C++ templates, with the expectation that it would be useful to practicing C++ programmers.
         That project was successful: It’s been tremendously gratifying to hear from readers who found our
         material helpful, to see our book time and again being recommended as a work of reference, and to
         be universally well reviewed.
             That first edition has aged well, with most material remaining entirely relevant to the modern C++
         programmer, but there is no denying that the evolution of the language—culminating in the “Modern
         C++” standards, C++11, C++14, and C++17—has raised the need for a revision of the material in
         the first edition.
             So with this second edition, our high-level goal has remained unchanged: to provide the definitive
         guide to C++ templates, including both a solid reference and an accessible tutorial. This time, how-
         ever, we work with the “Modern C++” language, which is a significantly bigger beast (still!) than the
         language available at the time of the prior edition.
             We’re also acutely aware that C++ programming resources have changed (for the better) since the
         first edition was published. For example, several books have appeared that develop specific template-
         based applications in great depth. More important, far more information about C++ templates and
         template-based techniques is easily available online, as are examples of advanced uses of these tech-
         niques. So in this edition, we have decided to emphasize a breadth of techniques that can be used in
         a variety of applications.
             Some of the techniques we presented in the first edition have become obsolete because the C++
         language now offers more direct ways of achieving the same effects. Those techniques have been
         dropped (or relegated to minor notes), and instead you’ll find new techniques that show the state-of-
         the-art uses of the new language.
             We’ve now lived over 20 years with C++ templates, but the C++ programmers’ community still
         regularly finds new fundamental insights into the way they can fit in our software development needs.
         Our goal with this book is to share that knowledge but also to fully equip the reader to develop new
         understanding and, perhaps, discover the next major C++ technique.

        xxx                                                                                    About This Book

        What You Should Know Before Reading This Book
        To get the most from this book, you should already know C++. We describe the details of a partic-
        ular language feature, not the fundamentals of the language itself. You should be familiar with the
        concepts of classes and inheritance, and you should be able to write C++ programs using compo-
        nents such as IOstreams and containers from the C++ standard library. You should also be familiar
        with the basic features of “Modern C++”, such as auto, decltype, move semantics, and lambdas.
        Nevertheless, we review more subtle issues as the need arises, even when such issues aren’t directly
        related to templates. This ensures that the text is accessible to experts and intermediate programmers
        alike.
           We deal primarily with the C++ language revisions standardized in 2011, 2014, and 2017. How-
        ever, at the time of this writing, the ink is barely dry on the C++17 revision, and we expect that most
        of our readers will not be intimately familiar with its details. All revisions had a significant impact on
        the behavior and usage of templates. We therefore provide short introductions to those new features
        that have the greatest bearing on our subject matter. However, our goal is neither to introduce the
        modern C++ standards nor to provide an exhaustive description of the changes from the prior ver-
        sions of this standard ([C++98] and [C++03]). Instead, we focus on templates as designed and used
        in C++, using the modern C++ standards ([C++11], [C++14], and [C++17]) as our basis, and we
        occasionally call out cases where the modern C++ standards enable or encourage different techniques
        than the prior standards.

        Overall Structure of the Book
        Our goal is to provide the information necessary to start using templates and benefit from their power,
        as well as to provide information that will enable experienced programmers to push the limits of the
        state-of-the-art. To achieve this, we decided to organize our text in parts:
        • Part I introduces the basic concepts underlying templates. It is written in a tutorial style.
        • Part II presents the language details and is a handy reference to template-related constructs.
        • Part III explains fundamental design and coding techniques supported by C++ templates. They
           range from near-trivial ideas to sophisticated idioms.
        Each of these parts consists of several chapters. In addition, we provide a few appendixes that cover
        material not exclusively related to templates (e.g., an overview of overload resolution in C++). An
        additional appendix covers concepts, which is a fundamental extension to templates that has been
        included in the draft for a future standard (C++20, presumably).
           The chapters of Part I are meant to be read in sequence. For example, Chapter 3 builds on the
        material covered in Chapter 2. In the other parts, however, the connection between chapters is con-
        siderably looser. Cross references will help readers jump through the different topics.
           Last, we provide a rather complete index that encourages additional ways to read this book out of
        sequence.

         How to Read This Book                                                                              xxxi

         How to Read This Book
         If you are a C++ programmer who wants to learn or review the concepts of templates, carefully read
         Part I, The Basics. Even if you’re quite familiar with templates already, it may help to skim through
         this part quickly to familiarize yourself with the style and terminology that we use. This part also
         covers some of the logistical aspects of organizing your source code when it contains templates.
            Depending on your preferred learning method, you may decide to absorb the many details of
         templates in Part II, or instead you could read about practical coding techniques in Part III (and refer
         back to Part II for the more subtle language issues). The latter approach is probably particularly
         useful if you bought this book with concrete day-to-day challenges in mind.
            The appendixes contain much useful information that is often referred to in the main text. We have
         also tried to make them interesting in their own right.
            In our experience, the best way to learn something new is to look at examples. Therefore, you’ll
         find a lot of examples throughout the book. Some are just a few lines of code illustrating an abstract
         concept, whereas others are complete programs that provide a concrete application of the material.
         The latter kind of examples will be introduced by a C++ comment describing the file containing the
         program code. You can find these files at the Web site of this book at http://www.tmplbook.com.

         Some Remarks About Programming Style
         C++ programmers use different programming styles, and so do we: The usual questions about where
         to put whitespace, delimiters (braces, parentheses), and so forth came up. We tried to be consistent
         in general, although we occasionally make concessions to the topic at hand. For example, in tutorial
         sections, we may prefer generous use of whitespace and concrete names to help visualize code,
         whereas in more advanced discussions, a more compact style could be more appropriate.
            We do want to draw your attention to one slightly uncommon decision regarding the declaration
         of types, parameters, and variables. Clearly, several styles are possible:
             void foo (const int &x);
             void foo (const int& x);
             void foo (int const &x);
             void foo (int const& x);
         Although it is a bit less common, we decided to use the order int const rather than const int for
         “constant integer.” We have two reasons for using this order. First, it provides for an easier answer
         to the question, “What is constant?” It’s always what is in front of the const qualifier. Indeed,
         although
             const int N = 100;
         is equivalent to
             int const N = 100;
         there is no equivalent form for
             int* const bookmark;            // the pointer cannot change, but the value pointed to can

        xxxii                                                                                          About This Book

        that would place the const qualifier before the pointer operator *. In this example, it is the pointer
        itself that is constant, not the int to which it points.
           Our second reason has to do with a syntactical substitution principle that is very common when
        dealing with templates. Consider the following two type declarations using the typedef keyword:1
            typedef char* CHARS;
            typedef CHARS const CPTR;              // constant pointer to chars
        or using the using keyword:
            using CHARS = char*;
            using CPTR = CHARS const;                  // constant pointer to chars
        The meaning of the second declaration is preserved when we textually replace CHARS with what it
        stands for:
            typedef char* const CPTR;         // constant pointer to chars
        or:
              using CPTR = char* const;                // constant pointer to chars
        However, if we write const before the type it qualifies, this principle doesn’t apply. Consider the
        alternative to our first two type definitions presented earlier:
            typedef char* CHARS;
            typedef const CHARS CPTR;              // constant pointer to chars
        Textually replacing CHARS results in a type with a different meaning:
           typedef const char* CPTR;             // pointer to constant chars
        The same observation applies to the volatile specifier, of course.
          Regarding whitespaces, we decided to put the space between the ampersand and the parameter
        name:
           void foo (int const& x);
        By doing this, we emphasize the separation between the parameter type and the parameter name.
        This is admittedly more confusing for declarations such as
           char* a, b;
        where, according to the rules inherited from C, a is a pointer but b is an ordinary char. To avoid
        such confusion, we simply avoid declaring multiple entities in this way.
           This is primarily a book about language features. However, many techniques, features, and helper
        templates now appear in the C++ standard library. To connect these two, we therefore demonstrate

        1   Note that in C++, a type definition defines a “type alias” rather than a new type (see Section 2.8 on page 38).
            For example:
               typedef int Length; // define Length as an alias for int
               int i = 42;
               Length l = 88;
               i = l;                    // OK
               l = i;                    // OK

         The C++11, C++14, and C++17 Standards                                                               xxxiii

         template techniques by illustrating how they are used to implement certain library components, and
         we use standard library utilities to build our own more complex examples. Hence, we use not
         only headers such as <iostream> and <string> (which contain templates but are not particu-
         larly relevant to define other templates) but also <cstddef>, <utilities>, <functional>, and
         <type_traits> (which do provide building blocks for more complex templates).
            In addition, we provide a reference, Appendix D, about the major template utilities provided by
         the C++ standard library, including a detailed description of all the standard type traits. These are
         commonly used at the core of sophisticated template programming

         The C++11, C++14, and C++17 Standards
         The original C++ standard was published in 1998 and subsequently amended by a technical corri-
         gendum in 2003, which provided minor corrections and clarifications to the original standard. This
         “old C++ standard” is known as C++98 or C++03.
            The C++11 standard was the first major revision of C++ driven by the ISO C++ standardization
         committee, bringing a wealth of new features to the language. A number of these new features
         interact with templates and are described in this book, including:
         • Variadic templates
         • Alias templates
         • Move semantics, rvalue references, and perfect forwarding
         • Standard type traits
         C++14 and C++17 followed, both introducing some new language features, although the changes
         brought about by these standards were not quite as dramatic as those of C++11.2 New features
         interacting with templates and described in this book include but are not limited to:
         • Variable templates (C++14)
         • Generic Lambdas (C++14)
         • Class template argument deduction (C++17)
         • Compile-time if (C++17)
         • Fold expressions (C++17)
         We even describe concepts (template interfaces), which are currently slated for inclusion in the forth-
         coming C++20 standard.
            At the time of this writing, the C++11 and C++14 standards are broadly supported by the major
         compilers, and C++17 is largely supported also. Still, compilers differ greatly in their support of the
         different language features. Several will compile most of the code in this book, but a few compilers
         may not be able to handle some of our examples. However, we expect that this problem will soon be
         resolved as programmers everywhere demand standard support from their vendors.

         2    The committee now aims at issuing a new standard roughly every 3 years. Clearly, that leaves less time
             for massive additions, but it brings the changes more quickly to the broader programming community. The
             development of larger features, then, spans time and might cover multiple standards.

            xxxiv                                                                               About This Book

               Even so, the C++ programming language is likely to continue to evolve as time passes. The experts
            of the C++ community (regardless of whether they participate in the C++ Standardization Committee)
            are discussing various ways to improve the language, and already several candidate improvements
            affect templates. Chapter 17 presents some trends in this area.

            Example Code and Additional Information
            You can access all example programs and find more information about this book from its Web site,
            which has the following URL:
                 http://www.tmplbook.com
More errata on https://github.com/JamesHuang-TW/Errata_for_Cpp_Books/blob/main/errata_for_Cpp_Templates_Complete_Guide.pdf

            Feedback
            We welcome your constructive input—both the negative and the positive. We worked very hard to
            bring you what we hope you’ll find to be an excellent book. However, at some point we had to stop
            writing, reviewing, and tweaking so we could “release the product.” You may therefore find errors,
            inconsistencies, and presentations that could be improved, or topics that are missing altogether. Your
            feedback gives us a chance to inform all readers through the book’s Web site and to improve any
            subsequent editions.
               The best way to reach us is by email. You will find the email address at the Web site of this book:
                 http://www.tmplbook.com
            Please, be sure to check the book’s Web site for the currently known errata before submitting reports.
            Many thanks.

