         Part I
         The Basics
         This part introduces the general concepts and language features of C++ templates. It starts with a
         discussion of the general goals and concepts by showing examples of function templates and class
         templates. It continues with some additional fundamental template features such as nontype template
         parameters, variadic templates, the keyword typename, and member templates. Also it discusses
         how to deal with move semantics, how to declare parameters, and how to use generic code for
         compile-time programming. It ends with some general hints about terminology and regarding the
         use and application of templates in practice both as application programmer and author of generic
         libraries.

         Why Templates?
         C++ requires us to declare variables, functions, and most other kinds of entities using specific types.
         However, a lot of code looks the same for different types. For example, the implementation of the
         algorithm quicksort looks structurally the same for different data structures, such as arrays of ints
         or vectors of strings, as long as the contained types can be compared to each other.
             If your programming language doesn’t support a special language feature for this kind of generic-
         ity, you only have bad alternatives:
         1. You can implement the same behavior again and again for each type that needs this behavior.
         2. You can write general code for a common base type such as Object or void*.
         3. You can use special preprocessors.
         If you come from other languages, you probably have done some or all of this before. However, each
         of these approaches has its drawbacks:
         1. If you implement a behavior again and again, you reinvent the wheel. You make the same mistakes,
             and you tend to avoid complicated but better algorithms because they lead to even more mistakes.
         2. If you write general code for a common base class, you lose the benefit of type checking. In
             addition, classes may be required to be derived from special base classes, which makes it more
             difficult to maintain your code.

ensurehelveticaisembedded_()
        2

        3. If you use a special preprocessor, code is replaced by some “stupid text replacement mechanism”
            that has no idea of scope and types, which might result in strange semantic errors.
        Templates are a solution to this problem without these drawbacks. They are functions or classes that
        are written for one or more types not yet specified. When you use a template, you pass the types as
        arguments, explicitly or implicitly. Because templates are language features, you have full support
        of type checking and scope.
            In today’s programs, templates are used a lot. For example, inside the C++ standard library almost
        all code is template code. The library provides sort algorithms to sort objects and values of a specified
        type, data structures (also called container classes) to manage elements of a specified type, strings
        for which the type of a character is parameterized, and so on. However, this is only the beginning.
        Templates also allow us to parameterize behavior, to optimize code, and to parameterize information.
        These applications are covered in later chapters. Let’s first start with some simple templates.

ensurehelveticaisembedded_()
