Chapter 1

History of the TPM

A Trusted Platform Module, also known as a TPM, is a cryptographic coprocessor that
is present on most commercial PCs and servers. In terms of being present in computers,
TPMs are nearly ubiquitous, but until recently they’ve been mostly invisible to users due
to lack of compelling applications that use them. That situation is rapidly changing. With
the recent awarding of Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) certification to
various TPM designs, and recommendations from the President’s Council of Advisors
that the United States government begin using TPMs to defend the nation’s computers,
the TPM has become a strategic asset for computer owners to defend their cryptographic
assets. It is still true that very few people know enough about TPMs to use them in an
advantageous manner, a situation that motivated the writing of this book. This chapter
introduces you to TPMs, starting with TPM 1.1b, and describes the history of TPM 2.0’s
predecessors.

Why a TPM?
In the 1990s, it became increasingly obvious to people in the computer industry that
the Internet was going to change the way personal computers were connected, and
that commerce was going to move toward this environment. This immediately led to a
realization that there was a need for increased security in personal computers. When
PCs were first designed, little thought was given to their security, so the hardware did not
support it. Additionally, software was designed without any thought to security—ease of
use was the main driving force in software development.
     The computer engineers who got together to develop the first TPMs—and who were
part of what came to be known as the Trusted Computing Group (TCG)—were trying to
reverse this trend and create a hardware anchor for PC system security on which secure
systems could be built. Cost pressures dictated that any such solution had to be very
cheap. The result was a hardware TPM chip intended to be physically attached to the
motherboard of a PC. The TPM command set was architected to provide all functions
necessary for its security use cases, detailed in Chapter 3; but anything not absolutely
necessary was moved off chip to software, to keep the cost down. As a result, the
specification was hard to read, because it wasn’t obvious how commands were to be used
when a lot of the logic was left to software. This started a trend in unreadability that has
continued through all the updates to the specification.

     Hardware security is not an easy topic to begin with, and it doesn’t help to have
a specification that is hard to understand. A good starting place to understand this
technology is the history of its development.

History of Development of the TPM Specification
from 1.1b to 1.2
The first widely deployed TPM was TPM 1.1b, which was released in 2003. Even at this
early date, the basic functions of a TPM were available. These included key generation
(limited to RSA keys), storage, secure authorization, and device-health attestation. Basic
functionality to help guarantee privacy was available through the use of anonymous
identity keys, based on certificates that could be provided with the TPM; owner
authorization was required to create those identity keys. A new network entity called a
privacy certificate authority (CA) was invented to provide a means to prove that a key
generated in the TPM came from a real TPM without identifying which TPM it came from.
      Areas of dynamic memory inside the TPM, called Platform Configuration
Registers (PCRs), were reserved to maintain the integrity of a system’s boot-sequence
measurements. PCRs, together with identity keys, could be used to attest to the health of
the system’s boot sequence. This began the building of a secure architecture based on the
TPM anchor, one of the key aims of the TCG.
      One specific non-goal of the TCG was making the TPM design immune to physical
attacks. Although such capabilities are possible, it was decided to leave physical
protections to the manufacturers as an area where they could differentiate. Any software
attacks are within scope for TPM-based security, however.
      In a manner similar to smart-card chips attached to the motherboard, IBM PCs
were the first to use TPMs (similar security coprocessors had been used in mainframe
computers for decades). HP and Dell soon followed suit in their PCs, and by 2005 it was
difficult to find a commercial PC that did not have a TPM.
      One drawback of TPM 1.1b was incompatibilities at the hardware level. TPM vendors
had slightly different interfaces, requiring different drivers, and package pinouts were not
standardized. TPM 1.2 was developed from 2005–2009 and went through several releases.
Its initial improvements over 1.1b included a standard software interface and a mostly
standard package pinout.
      The TCG realized that although TPM 1.1b protected keys against attackers who did not
know a key’s authorization password, there was no protection against an attacker trying one
password after another in an attempt to guess a correct password. Attackers who do this usually
try passwords from a dictionary of common passwords; this is known as a dictionary attack.
The TPM 1.2 specification required that TPMs have protection against dictionary attacks.
      Privacy groups complained about the lack of implementations of privacy CAs. This
led to the inclusion in TPM 1.2 of new commands for a second method of anonymizing
keys to help address this concerns—direct anonymous attestation (DAA)—and a method
of delegating key authorization and administrative (owner-authorized) functions.

      It turned out that shipping a machine with a certificate for its TPM’s endorsement
keys on the hard disk was in many case impractical, because IT organizations often
erased the hard disk when they received it and installed their own software load. When
they did so, the certificate was deleted. In order to provide a solution, a small amount of
nonvolatile RAM (usually about 2KB) was added in TPM 1.2; it had specialized access
controls along with a small number of monotonic counters.
      The 1.1b specification had a means of copying migratable keys from one TPM to
another TPM in case a machine died or needed to be upgraded. This process required the
approval of the key owner and the TPM owner. It was designed with the assumption that
an IT administrator would be the TPM owner and the user would be the key owner. But in
1.2, the user needed to be able to use the TPM owner authorization to mitigate dictionary
attacks and create NVRAM, which made this design impractical. Therefore, in 1.2,
another technique was designed to let users create keys that could only be migrated by a
designated third party. Such keys could be certified to this effect and hence were called
Certified Migratable Keys (CMKs).
      Signing keys are often used to sign contracts, and having a timestamp of when the
signing takes place is useful. The TCG considered putting a clock into the TPM, but the
problem was that the TPM loses power whenever the PC is turned off. Although putting
a battery in the TPM is possible, it is unlikely that the increased function would be worth
the higher cost. Therefore the TPM was given the ability to synchronize an internal
timer with an external clock and then to sign with the value of the internal timer. As an
example, this combination could be used to determine when a contract was signed. This
functionality also lets the TPM be used to distinguish how much time elapsed between
two signature operations performed by the TPM.
      No changes were made to existing application programming interfaces in 1.2, which
preserved binary compatibility of software written to the 1.1b specification. A side effect
was that the TPM 1.2 specification became even more complex, because special cases
had to be used to maintain compatibility.
      Before TPMs became ubiquitous, security coprocessors such as smart cards were
used by some applications to store keys to identify users and keys to encrypt data at rest.
TPMs are well equipped to take over this task. But they can do much more: because the
security coprocessor is integrated onto the system’s motherboard in the form of a TPM, it
has additional uses (such as device identification) that are detailed in Chapter 3.
      TPM 1.2 was deployed on most x86-based client PCs from 2005 on, began to appear
on servers around 2008, and eventually appeared on most servers. Just having hardware
does nothing, however—software needs to use it. In order to make use of the TPM
hardware, Microsoft supplied a Windows driver, and IBM open sourced a Linux driver.
Software began to be deployed, as described in Chapter 4.

How TPM 2.0 Developed from TPM 1.2
In early 2000, when the TCG was faced with the choice of a hash algorithm, it had two
choices: MD5, which was most widely deployed; and SHA-1, which was stronger and was
deployed widely, although not as widely as MD5. SHA-1 was the strongest commercial
algorithm at the time and could feasibly be used in a small, cheap package. This was a
fortunate choice, because MD5 weaknesses became apparent shortly afterward.

     Around 2005, cryptographers published the first significant attack on the SHA-1
digest algorithm. The TPM 1.2 architecture relied heavily on the SHA-1 algorithm and
had hard-coded SHA-1 everywhere. Although an analysis of the attack showed that it did
not apply to the ways SHA-1 was used in the TPM, a common axiom in cryptography is
that cryptographic algorithms only become weaker over time, never stronger. The TCG
immediately began work on a TPM 2.0 specification that would be agile with respect
to digest algorithms. That is, the specification would not hard-code SHA-1 or any other
algorithm, but rather would incorporate an algorithm identifier that would permit design
of a TPM using any algorithm without changing the specification. With this change (and
other changes allowing all cryptographic algorithms to be agile), the TCG hoped the new
specification could be the last major TPM specification to be released.
     The original mandate of the TPM 2.0 Work Group within the TCG was only that:
digest agility. However, even a cursory look at the TPM 2.0 specification shows that it’s far
more than TPM 1.2 plus an algorithm identifier. How did that happen?
     TPM 1.1b had carefully crafted structures so that serialized versions (the structures
translated into byte streams) were compact enough to be encrypted with a 2,048-bit RSA
key in a single encryption. That meant there were only 2,048 bits (256 bytes) to work
with. No symmetric encryption algorithms were required in the design, which kept the
cost down and avoided problems when exporting designs that could do bulk symmetric
encryption. RSA was the only required asymmetric algorithm, and performance required
that structures be encrypted in one operation.
     TPM 2.0 had to provide for digests that were larger than SHA-1’s 20 bytes, so it was
clear the existing structures were too large. An RSA key could not directly encrypt the
serialized structures in one operation. Using multiple operations to encrypt the structures
in blocks was impractical, because RSA operations are slow. Increasing the size of the
RSA key would mean using key sizes that were not widely used in the industry and would
also increase the cost, change the key structures, and slow the chip. Instead, the TPM
Work Group decided the specification had to use the common practice of encrypting a
symmetric key with the asymmetric key and the data with the symmetric key. Symmetric
key operations are well suited for encrypting large byte streams, because they are much
faster than asymmetric operations. Symmetric key encryption thus removed the barrier
on the size of structures. This freed the specification developers to use their creativity to
architect several functions that were distinct from TPM 1.2.
     It is said that the best designs come about when the architects make a design and
then, having learned all the problems they will encounter, throw away the first design and
start over with a second. TPM 2.0 gave the architects the opportunity to do this. However,
they still had to make sure that the opportunities for software development that were
enabled by the TPM 1.2 design were not lost with the new architecture.

History of TPM 2.0 Specification Development
The specification made slow but steady progress for several years, with features being
debated, added, and deleted. David Grawrock of Intel was the chair of the specification
committee; under his leadership, the group selected the major features of the design and
settled on a basic feature set and high-order design. At this point, the committee decided
to change all the structures to allow for algorithm independence in the specification—
this is called algorithm agility. All the authentication techniques were unified with

a technique originally called generalized authorization and now called enhanced
authorization (EA). This increased the flexibility of authorization while simultaneously
reducing the cost of the implementation and reducing the cognitive difficulty of
understanding the specification. All objects and entities use the same authentication
techniques. Many discussions took place regarding the problems created by having
algorithm flexibility while still allowing a user to determine precisely what algorithms
were used, both by a given key and also to protect the key, so the overall security of any
key held by the TPM could be determined.
     When Grawrock left the chairmanship due to changing responsibilities at
Intel, Microsoft contributed a full-time editor, David Wooten, and HP took over the
chairmanship. It was decided at this point that the specification should be compilable,
which drove Wooten to create an emulator while writing the specification. A compilable
specification has the advantage of much-reduced ambiguity: if there is doubt about how
the specification is supposed to work, it can be compiled into an authoritative emulator.
Additionally, the generalized authentication structure was moved from Polish notation
(such as used in a TI calculator) to Reverse Polish notation (such as used in an HP
calculator), which made implementing the specification easier (but made understanding
the specification harder). The committee decided to add multiple key hierarchies to
accommodate different user roles.
     Wooten worked tirelessly to develop an implementation of the specification and
provided strong leadership that drove the specification to its current feature set. When
HP’s Graeme Proudler stepped down from the chairmanship, David Challener of Johns
Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory formed a joint chairmanship first with Julian
Hammersly of AMD, and later with Ari Singer of DMI. Kenneth Goldman (of IBM) took
over the editorship from David Wooten after the first release, reprising a role he held for
many years with the TPM 1.2 specification.
     As new members joined the group over the years and began trying to understand the
specification, some of them, notably Will Arthur and Kenneth Goldman, dove deep into
the specification line by line. They submitted many bug and readability fixes to the TPM
Work Group, and most of those resulted in changes to the specification that enhanced its
consistency and readability. Even with these changes, it still is not easy reading, which led
to the original impetus for this book.

Summary
The TPM specification has been developed twice. The first time, it developed from 1.1b
to 1.2, evolving to incorporate capabilities as they came to be known to the specification
committee. This feature-creep form of evolution made the final specification very
complicated. In the second generation, TPM 2.0, after the cryptographic weaknesses
of SHA-1 caused the need for a change, the architecture was redesigned from scratch—
resulting in a much more integrated and unified design. The next chapter introduces the
cryptographic concepts that will be used throughout the rest of the book. A good high-level
understanding of these is imperative for you to understand TPM 2.0.

