Chapter 5

Navigating the Specification
The TPM 2.0 specification is not an easy read by any means. Although this is true of most
technical specifications, TPM 2.0 presents some unique challenges. The specification
is long—1,000 pages at last count—and written in a very concise and formal syntax that
often attaches significant functional meaning to what appear to be rather insignificant
punctuation marks. Part 2 of the specification was written to be parsed by code-generator
tools in order to generate C headers and some marshaling and unmarshalling functions,
which explains the emphasis on punctuation marks and the style of the specification’s
tables. At times, explanations of important concepts are tersely expressed and difficult to
find. Although technically correct, these explanations can be hard to follow. And while
the single-minded desire for conciseness and avoidance of redundancy at all costs in
writing the specification enhances maintainability, it also adversely affects readability.
The goal was a specification that was highly maintainable; we think the developers
succeeded admirably, perhaps even too well!
      On the other hand, from a technical perspective, the specification is very robust; the
information you need is there—the challenge is to find it. It’s like putting together a really
large puzzle; you have all the pieces, but they aren’t always where you expect them to be.
This chapter aims to help you put the pieces together much faster by passing on some
hard-earned lessons that we, the authors, have learned as we have negotiated this terrain.
We urge you to keep in mind that the specification is quite logical once you get used to it.
You will be assimilated!
      To summarize, learning TPM 2.0 isn’t a trivial task. But the good news for you is that
we intend to give you a huge boost.
      This chapter discusses the following:
       •    The high-level structure of the TPM 2.0 library specification
       •    Some definitions that are required to understand the specification
       •    The command schematic tables
       •    Some details of the data structures
       •    Table decorations
       •    Command schematic syntax

        •    Tips on where to find crucial and commonly used information
        •    Some other TPM 2.0-related specifications you need to
             know about
        •    Our strategies for learning the specification

■■Note This chapter doesn’t proceed through the four parts of the specification in
sequential order. That might seem logical, but having tried it, we can vouch that it’s not the
best way for newcomers to understand the specification. In order to jump-start your
understanding, we alter the order in a way that we hope enhances the learning process.

TPM 2.0 Library Specification: The Parts
The TPM 2.0 library specification is the most important and base-level specification for
TPM 2.0. This specification describes the core TPM 2.0 functionality that is common to all
TPM 2.0 implementations.
    The library specification consists of four parts:
        •    Part 1, Architecture: This lives up to its name and is the most
             important part to read in detail. In text form, it describes the
             TPM operation and much of the rationale behind the design.
             It also contains many of the practical details of how the TPM
             operates. For instance, this is the only place that describes how to
             create sessions, which are used to authorize, audit, and encrypt
             commands. As such, it describes all variations of session types in
             great detail.
        •    Part 2, Structures: This presents the data types, structures, and
             unions that are used by TPM 2.0, and is analogous to a description
             of data types in a programming guide. Included in the definitions
             are the error codes returned when commands fail.
        •    Part 3, Commands: This presents the TPM 2.0 commands, which
             are analogous to function descriptions in a programming guide.
             It describes the input and output parameters for each of the
             TPM 2.0 commands and the command-specific error conditions.
             The actions performed by the command are precisely described
             by the included C code. This code calls many supporting routines
             that aren’t in Part 3; these routines and their error codes are
             described in Part 4.

       •    Part 4, Supporting Routines: This section contains the code for the
            supporting routines called by the code in Part 3 as well as the error
            codes output by that code. This code explains the guts of the
            TPM 2.0 operation in excruciating detail. When stepping through
            the simulator code to understand why a particular error is
            occurring, you will spend a lot of time here. So, one way or another,
            you’re going to become familiar with significant parts of this code.

Some Definitions
Before we get started, some definitions are in order so that you can better understand the
specification. This is a good section to bookmark, because you’ll refer to these definitions
frequently as you read the specification and the rest of this book. Don’t get discouraged
if you’re unable to completely comprehend these definitions at first; aim for a high-level
understanding for the first reading, and then bookmark this section for future referral.

General Definitions
The following definitions pertain to both commands and responses:
       •    Authorization: Proves the right to access some entity in the TPM.
            TPM 2.0 uses three types of authorizations:
       •    Password authorization: this is a one shot clear text authorization.
            •    HMAC authorization: Uses a hash message authentication
                 code (HMAC) for the authorization. The HMAC key is derived
                 using a shared secret that is the basis of the authorization.
            •    Policy or enhanced authorization (EA): Uses policy
                 assertions that must be satisfied in order to authorize an
                 action on an object. Policy assertions are commands that are
                 sent to the TPM before the command being authorized.
            •    Session: As defined in the TPM 2.0 specification, a “collection
                 of TPM state that changes after each use.” Unfortunately, this
                 definition is too general and not very informative. A better
                 understanding of sessions comes from knowing how they are
                 used. Sessions are used for authorizations and per-command
                 actions (encryption, decryption, audit, and a few others) in
                 a session. In the case of HMAC and policy sessions, sessions
                 are created and then used for multiple commands. Password
                 authorizations are a special case of sessions that don’t carry
                 any state across multiple commands. The different types and
                 uses of sessions are discussed at length in later chapters; for
                 now it suffices to have a high-level understanding.
       •    Handle: An identifier that uniquely identifies a TPM resource that
            occupies TPM memory.

        •    Byte stream: On a command, the actual bytes sent to the TPM. On
             a response, the actual bytes received from the TPM.
        •    Canonicalized data: The command schematics in Part 3 describe
             the inputs and outputs from the TPM with C structures. These
             structures are often much larger than the data sent to the TPM. For
             instance, some structures contain unions consisting of elements
             of widely varying sizes. For a given instance of one of these unions,
             only the data required by the particular union element being
             used when sending the command is sent to the TPM. In addition,
             all data sent to and received from the TPM is in big-endian byte
             order. Data that meets these characteristics is canonicalized.
             The aggregation and ordering of all the canonicalized inputs to a
             command forms the byte stream sent to the TPM. Response data
             from the TPM is also in canonicalized format.
        •    Unmarshalled data: Data in its C structure format.
        •    Marshalled data: Data in its canonicalized form—that is, the form
             sent to or received from the TPM.

Definitions of the Major Fields of the Command
Byte Stream
The following items are described in the order in which they appear in the command
byte stream:
        •    Command header: A common area for all commands. It consists
             of the tag, commandSize, and commandCode fields, described next.
             •    tag: Identifies whether the command contains sessions—that
                  is, whether it contains an authorization area (defined shortly).
             •    commandSize: The size of the command byte stream,
                  including all fields of the header.
             •    commandCode: Identifies the TPM command to be executed,
                  and controls the interpretation of the rest of the command
                  byte stream.
        •    Handle area: Contains between zero and three handles as
             specified by the Part 3 command schematics.
        •    Authorization area: Contains command session data. Multiple
             sessions can be associated with a single command, so this area
             can contain the parameters for between zero and three sessions.
             It contains authorization information, per-command session use
             modifiers, and some session state information that needs to be
             communicated between the application and the TPM.
        •    Parameter area: Contains command-specific parameters as
             described in Part 3 of the specification.

Definitions of the Major Fields of the Response
Byte Stream
The following items are described in the order in which they appear in the response
byte stream:
        •    Response header: A common area for all responses. It consists of
             the tag, responseSize, and responseCode fields, as described
             next:
             •    tag: Identifies whether the response contains sessions.
             •    responseSize: The size of the response byte stream,
                  including all fields of the header.
             •    responseCode: Identifies the whether the TPM command
                  succeeded and, if not, what specific error occurred.
        •    Handle area: Contains between zero and three handles, as
             specified by the Part 3 response schematics.
        •    Parameter area: Contains the command-specific response
             parameters, as described in Part 3 of the specification.
        •    Authorization area: Contains response session data. Multiple
             sessions can be associated with a single command, so this area
             can contain the parameters for between zero and three sessions.
             It contains authorization information, per-command session use
             modifiers, and some session state information that needs to be
             communicated between the application and the TPM.

Getting Started in Part 3: the Commands
If you’re like most programmers, you’ll start in Part 3. Seriously, who has time to read a
lengthy specification? And after all, the goal is to just “Git ‘er done,” right? That’s typically
the mindset of busy engineers, and it’s actually a good approach, except that it will
quickly bring you face to face with some of the harsh realities of the TPM 2.0 specification.
In order to help you over some of the hurdles we’ve encountered when using the
specification, here are a few things you need to know before you delve into Part 3.
     The generic byte structure for all TPM 2.0 commands and responses is described
in Part 1 in the section titled “Command/Response Structure.” The Separators table
and Command Structure and Response Structure figures are particularly helpful. We
recommend that you place a bookmark at these sections in the specification, because
you’ll be referring to them often.
     To make this discussion a bit more practical, we describe in detail two types of
commands—a command without authorizations (TPM2_Startup) and a command with
authorizations (TPM2_Create)—and explain some of nuances of the command byte
stream. We start with TPM2_Startup, because it’s the first command that must be sent to
the TPM and is one of the simplest TPM 2.0 commands.

     If you look at the Part 3 section that describes the TPM2_Startup command, you see
three sections:
        •    “General Description”: Describes the command in text form,
             details some of the constraints on the inputs, and discusses error
             conditions.
        •    “Command and Response”: A data schematic for the inputs to
             the command (Command) and the outputs from the command
             (Response). We discuss these tables in detail in a moment.
        •    “Detailed Actions”: Contains code and a table of the error
             conditions that are returned by the command’s code (not
             including the ones sent by the supporting code).
     This three-part format is used for all commands. For the purposes of our current
topic, we mainly look at the Command and Response tables. For the TPM2_Startup
command, these tables are shown in Table 5-1 and Table 5-2.

Table 5-1. TPM2_Startup Command (Table 5 in Part 3 of the TPM 2.0 Specification)

      The Type column shows the data type for each field of the command. These types are
defined in Part 2 of the specification. The Name column is self-explanatory: it contains
the name of the parameter to be passed to or from the TPM. This is also the name of the
parameter in the Part 3 source code. The Description column describes the field along
with any field-specific requirements. TPM2_Startup has two field-specific requirements:
tag must be TPM_ST_NO_SESSIONS, and commandCode must be TPM_CC_Startup. The {NV}
is a table decoration that means the command may update nonvolatile memory inside the
TPM. (Table decorations are described in the Table Decorations section early in Part 3.)
      The format of the first three fields—tag, commandSize, and commandCode—is the same
for all commands. These fields form the command header.

    Following are explanations of the command fields:
       •    tag: Indicates whether the command has sessions. Because the
            TPM2_Startup command can never take sessions, this tag must
            always be set to TPM_ST_NO_SESSIONS.
       •    commandSize: The size in bytes of the entire command stream sent
            to the TPM.
       •    commandCode: Indicates which command is being sent. This tells
            the TPM how to interpret the rest of the command data.
    Now notice the line following the command code:

     This line indicates that any fields following are in the parameter area. In this case,
startupType is the only parameter in this area. In general, this area contains fields
that configure any command-specific parameters for the command. The meaning of
these lines and other table decorations are described in two sections of Part 3: “Table
Decorations” and “Handle and Parameter Demarcation.” You will want to refer to these
two sections frequently when reading Part 3 of the spec.

Table 5-2. TPM2_Startup Response (Table 6 in Part 3 of the TPM 2.0 Specification)

Type                         Name                                Description
TPM_ST                       Tag                                 see clause 6
UINT32                       responseSize
TPM_RC                       responseCode

    Following are explanations of the response fields:
       •    tag: Indicates whether the response has sessions. Because this
            command never has sessions, tag is always TPM_ST_NO_SESSIONS.
       •    responseSize: The size in bytes of the entire response byte
            stream.
       •    responseCode: Indicates whether the command passed or failed.
            TPM_RC_SUCCESS indicates passing. Other codes indicate failure.
   Notice that TPM2_Startup has no return parameters.
   Now we’ll look at a much more complicated command, TPM2_Create. This
command is used to create objects such as keys or data objects. Table 5-3 shows its
Command table.

Table 5-3. TPM2_Create Command (Table 19 in Part 3 of the TPM 2.0 Specification)

     Following are explanations of the command fields:
        •    tag: In this case, TPM_ST_SESSIONS to indicate that the command
             must have sessions. Another indication is the @ sign in front of the
             parentHandle handle name; this means an authorization session
             is required with this handle. More on that later.
        •    commandSize: Size of the total byte stream including authorization
             data.
        •    commandCode: The command code for this command.
   Note this separator. Now things get more interesting; this separator didn’t exist the
TPM2_Startup command:

     This line indicates that the following fields are in the handle area, as described in the
“Handle and Parameter Demarcation” section of Part 3. Handles are 32-bit references
to various entities in the TPM. parentHandle is the only handle parameter for this
command. Commands can take up to two handles in this area.
     Notice the @ character in front of parentHandle. This is a table decoration; it means
this handle requires that an associated authorization be included in the authorization
section. This and other table decorations are described in the “Table Decorations” section
early in Part 3.
     Also notice the “Auth Index: 1” text in the description. This indicates the ordering
of the authorization in the authorization section. In this case, the authorization for the
parentHandle must be the first authorization in the authorization section. All commands
that take authorizations can take up to three authorizations. When a command has an
@ sign in front of one or more handles, the command requires an authorization for each
such handle. In this case one authorization is required.

      Notice the Auth Role: USER text. This is a further qualification on the authorization,
which is described in the chapter on enhanced authorization. Auth roles are analogous
to privilege levels in an operating system. They control who can get access to
certain entities.
      Handles behave differently from parameters in a command: handles aren’t used
in computing the cpHash, which is a hash of the input parameters. This hash is used in
calculating HMACs and, in some cases, policy digests. The purpose of this separation is
to allow a resource manager to virtualize the handles in order to swap objects in and out
of the TPM, much like a virtual memory manager swaps memory contents between disk
drives and memory. Later chapters describe HMACs, policy digests, and the resource
manager in detail. For now, it’s sufficient to understand that handles and parameters are
separated into different fields in the byte stream in order to facilitate some key differences
in functionality.
      Now you see a line you’re familiar with from the Startup command. Again, it
indicates the start of the parameter area:

     But in this case, because tag is equal to TPM_ST_SESSIONS, indicating that this
command requires an authorization session, this separator also indicates where
the authorization data is inserted into the command byte stream. This command’s
authorization area can have between one and three sessions, all of which are inserted
here. We describe the authorization area in detail in chapter 13.
     This command takes four parameters: insensitive, inPublic, outsideInfo, and
creationPCR. Part 2 describes the data structure types for each of these.
     Table 5-4 shows the TPM2_Create command’s Response table.

Table 5-4. TPM2_Create Response (Table 20 in Part 3 of the TPM 2.0 Specification)

     Following are explanations of the response fields:
        •    tag, responseSize, and responseCode are as described earlier, except
             that if the command passes, tag is TPM_RC_SESSIONS to indicate the
             presence of sessions in the response. There are three cases here:
             •    If the command has no sessions, the response will have no
                  sessions. For this command, the tag is always set to
                  TPM_ST_NO_SESSIONS.
             •    If the command has sessions and returns success, the
                  response tag is TPM_ST_SESSIONS, indicating that the
                  response, too, has sessions.
             •    If the command has sessions but fails, the response tag is
                  TPM_ST_NO_SESSIONS. Failing commands never have sessions
                  or response parameters in their response.
      When the following line is present in a response schematic, it indicates the start of
the response handle area. In this command, there are no response handles, so this line
isn’t present:

     Now you see your old friend the parameter demarcation line:

     Unlike for the command data, for the response, this is simply the dividing line for
parameters; the authorization area isn’t located here, but appears later in the byte stream.
This command returns five response parameters: outPrivate, outPublic, creationData,
creationHash, and creationTicketNotice.
     The response authorization area is tacked on to the last line the in the schematic,
after all the parameters. This means the response authorization area is the last area in the
response byte stream.
     Now that we’ve described the overall command and response structures, we’ll
discuss some commonly used data types.

Data Details
If you’re writing low-level TPM code, this section is crucial to understand because the
majority of your bugs will be in this area. When debugging low-level TPM 2.0 code, you
need to understand this section in order to properly decode the byte streams being sent
to and received from the TPM. The important data concepts to understand are common
data structure constructs, canonicalization of the byte stream, and endianness.

Common Structure Constructs
This section describes some commonly used data structures. A good understanding of
these is vital because you will see them often.

TPM2B_XXX Structures
All structures that start with a TPM2B_ prefix are sized-byte buffers. Each sized-byte buffer
consists of a size and an array of size bytes. Table 5-5 shows a typical structure of this type.

Table 5-5. Definition of the TPM2B_DATA Structure (Table 71 in Part 2 of the TPM 2.0
Specification)
Parameter                           Type          Description
size                                UINT16        size in octets of the buffer field; may be 0
buffer[size]{:sizeof(TPMT_HA)}      BYTE          the buffer area that contains the
                                                  algorithm ID and the digest

       The corresponding C structure looks like this:

typedef struct {
    UINT16    size;                   /* ?size in octets of the buffer field;
                                          may be 0 */
    BYTE    buffer[sizeof(TPMT_HA)]; /* ?the buffer area that contains the
                                          algorithm ID and
                           the digest */
} TPM2B_DATA;

Structure with Union
A union is often contained within a structure and preceded by a union selector. Table 5-6
is an example.

Table 5-6. Definition of the TPMT_HA Structure (Table 69 in Part 2 of the TPM 2.0
Specification)
Parameter           Type                   Description
hashAlg             +TPMI_ALG_HASH         selector of the hash contained in the digest that
                                           implies the size of the digest
                                           NOTE The leading “+” on the type indicates that
                                           this structure should pass an indication to the
                                           unmarshaling function for TPMI_ALG_HASH
                                           so that TPM_ALG_NULL will be allowed if a use
                                           of a TPMT_HA allows TPM_ALG_NULL.
[hashAlg] digest TPMU_HA                   the digest data

    This structure has two elements: hashAlg, which is used as the selector for the
digest union. This is indicated by the brackets surrounding hashAlg in front of the digest
parameter. In Table 5-6, hashAlg is the selector for the digest union.
    The definition of TPM_HA is shown in Table 5-7.

Table 5-7. Definition of the TPMU_HA Union (Table 68 in Part 2 of the TPM 2.0
Specification)

Parameter                                  Type      Selector                  Description
sha1 [SHA1_DIGEST_SIZE]                    BYTE      TPM_ALG_SHA1
sha256 [SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE]                BYTE      TPM_ALG_SHA256
sm3_256 [SM3_256_DIGEST_SIZE]              BYTE      TPM_ALG_SM3_256
sha384 [SHA384_DIGEST_SIZE]                BYTE      TPM_ALG_SHA384
sha512 [SHA512_DIGEST_SIZE]                BYTE      TPM_ALG_SHA512
Null                                                 TPM_ALG_NULL

     In general, in a structure, when there is a parameter A that is enclosed in brackets
and is in front of parameter B’s name, parameter A is a selector for the type of parameter B.
In Table 5-7, if hashAlg is set to TPM_ALG_SHA1, then the union element is sha1
[SHA1_DIGEST_SIZE].
     The C code generated by Table 5-6 and Table 5-7 is as follows:

typedef struct {
    TPMI_ALG_HASH          hashAlg;
    TPMU_HA                digest;
} TPMT_HA;

typedef union {
    BYTE    sha1 [SHA1_DIGEST_SIZE];                  /* TPM_ALG_SHA1 */
    BYTE    sha256 [SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];              /* TPM_ALG_SHA256 */
    BYTE    sm3_256 [SM3_256_DIGEST_SIZE];            /* TPM_ALG_SM3_256 */
    BYTE    sha384 [SHA384_DIGEST_SIZE];              /* TPM_ALG_SHA384 */
    BYTE    sha512 [SHA512_DIGEST_SIZE];              /* TPM_ALG_SHA512 */
} TPMU_HA;

Canonicalization
The data that is sent to the TPM and received from the TPM is minimized to eliminate
any unnecessary bytes in the data stream. This guarantees maximum byte-stream
transfer rates to the TPM, because TPMs are often connected to rather slow interface
buses such as LPC and SPI. This minimized form of data is called canonical data and is
not equivalent to the C-like data structures described in Part 2 of the specification. This
concept is crucial to understand if you’re dissecting the data stream.

