
        •    A + character prefix to a value name in an enumeration means
             the value is a conditional type: it’s optional in an enumeration.
             Whether the optional value is allowed in a particular use of
             an enumeration is determined by whether the + character is
             appended to the type specification
        •    A null parameter in a union definition means the union can
             be empty.
        •    If a union member has no selector, it means the member is
             common to all the union types. The no-selector member is a
             superclass of the members that have selectors.
        •    {} specifies parameter limits. Read the “Parameter Limits” section
             for details.

Part 3: Table Decorations
The “Command Modifiers and Table Decorations” section in Part 3 describes the
special notation used in the command schematics in Part 3; this is another good area to
bookmark. We describe some of the more commonly used ones here, but please refer to
the section in the specification for a complete list:
        •    +: Similar to the notation used in Part 2 for conditional types.
             When appended to the type, indicates that the null value of the
             variable can be used.
        •    @r: When used as a prefix to the name of a handle parameter,
             indicates that an authorization is required for that handle. This
             also means the tag for the command must be TPM_ST_SESSIONS.
        •    +PP, +{PP}: Suffixes to TPM_RH_PLATFORM that indicate an
             authorization using this handle is or may be, respectively,
             required to have physical presence asserted.
        •    Auth Index: In the description, indicates the number of required
             handles. (From our viewpoint, this seems redundant. The order of
             the handles is already indicated by their order in the table.)
        •    Auth Role: In the description for a required handle, indicates
             the role of the authorization: USER, ADMIN, or DUP. These roles are
             described in detail in chapter 13.

Commonly Used Sections of the Specification
Following is a list of some of the most commonly used sections of the specification:
       •    Command codes are listed in Part 2, in the section
            “TPM_CC Listing.”
       •    Error codes are found in multiple places:
            •    Part 2, “TPM_RC (Response Codes),” lists all the response
                 codes.
            •    Part 1, “Response Code Details,” shows a flow chart for
                 decoding the error codes. A software decoder application
                 for automating this process is highly advised. After spending
                 months hand-decoding error codes, one of the authors wrote
                 one that he’s found extremely useful.
            •    Parts 3 and 4 describe the error codes returned by TPM
                 commands and the subroutines called by those commands.
                 A key point with respect to error codes is that Part 3 doesn’t
                 describe all the error codes that may be output when a TPM
                 command is executed. The command-specific code in Part 3
                 calls routines in Part 4, and these also output error codes.
                 This has tripped up many an unwary TPM 2.0 developer.
       •    The “Table Decorations” and “Handle and Parameter
            Demarcation” sections near the beginning of Part 3 are very
            helpful for understanding the Part 3 command tables. Don’t
            overlook these sections!
       •    To understand the data structures in Part 2, the “Notation” section
            is very helpful. It describes many of the obscure characters and
            what they mean. Don’t overlook these special characters!
       •    The various types of sessions and authorizations are described in
            the “Authorizations and Acknowledgements” section in Part 1.
            These aren’t described to this level anywhere else. It is crucial to
            know where this section is and refer to it often when decoding
            command and response byte streams.
       •    The handle types are described in the “TPM Handles” section of
            Part 1. Of particular interest is the most significant octet, which
            describes the type of resource being referred to by the handle. The
            “TPM_HT (Handle Types)” section in Part 2 describes the various
            types of handles.
       •    Names of various entities and how they are derived are described
            in the “Names” section of Part 1. This is crucial in order to
            understand how session HMACs and policy digests are created.

        •    To understand policy session operations, the following sections in
             Part 1 are very helpful:
             •    “Policy Example.”
             •    “Trial Policy Modification of Policies.”
             •    “TPM2_PolicySigned(), TPM2_PolicySecret(), and TPM2_
                  PolicyTicket().” This section provides details for these rather
                  complicated policy commands.

How to Find Information in the Specification
You can use a PDF reader to search all four parts of the specification. Sometimes the bit of
information you’re looking for isn’t where you might think it would be. For instance, even
though Part 1 isn’t normative and isn’t targeted at describing structures, it often has the
best descriptions of the functionality of certain data structures and their fields.
      If you have access to a TPM library header file, you may be able to use the header
to find a complete description of how the structure is used. The easiest way to do this is
as follows:
        1.   Find the data structure of interest in the C header file that
             describes the TPM 2.0 data structures.
        2.   A well-written instantiation of this header file lists the table
             number for the structure in comments above the data
             structure or type. Find this table number in Part 2 of the spec;
             the descriptive text above the table provides the additional
             information needed to understand the structure. This is one
             of the most useful tricks to know.

Strategies for Ramping Up on TPM 2.0
Engineers come in many flavors, so there are many approaches to cracking a specification
like TPM 2.0. As authors, we have different personalities and have used different
strategies to approach this spec. In this section we describes how we ramped up on
TPM 2.0 and what worked best for us. You may pick and choose from one or all three of
our approaches or develop your own. We hope our journeys will facilitate yours.

Will
I am the newbie of the bunch. I started working on TPM 2.0 in May 2012. I had worked
previously with TPM 1.2 but only with the functionality I needed to know for enabling
Intel Trusted Execution Technology (Intel TXT). This means I had never learned about
sessions and how they worked in TPM 1.2, and I didn’t know much about keys and key
management.

      As an engineer with product schedules to meet, my goal was to “Get ‘er done.” I
first tried to read through the spec but quickly bogged down in the massive quantities
of unfamiliar terms and what was, to me, confusing lingo. So, I started figuring out
which TPM 2.0 functions I needed and how to implement them. This led me to Part 3 of
the specification as a starting point. As I tried running my coded functions against the
simulator, I quickly ran into errors that I couldn’t explain, and this caused me to single-
step through the simulator. This was when I first understood the difference between
the canonical byte stream data that the TPM understands and the C structures used to
specify the inputs to TPM 2.0 commands. Painstakingly, I debugged all the functionality
needed for a TPM 2.0–enabled TXT prototype in order to meet my scheduled deliverable.
In parallel, I began to develop the TSS 2.0 system API code. This required a greater depth
of TPM 2.0 knowledge, which came as I simultaneously coded, read the specification,
and debugged through the simulator. To be honest, there were still parts of the spec that
resisted my attempts at comprehension—my only remedy was telephone consultations
with the TPM Working Group chairman, who was extremely helpful in answering my
questions about HMAC and policy sessions. As understanding dawned during my
consultations with him, we developed some graphical representations of the different
types of sessions and how they relate to each other, some of which appear in this book;
and thus my idea for this book was born.
      After completing much of the TSS system API development work, I had enough
knowledge to go back and do a deep dive through the specification; this was largely
motivated by the need to prepare training slides for an upcoming TPM 2.0 training
session I was slated to present at Intel. For three months, I read the spec from cover to
cover, and for the most part, it made sense. This wouldn’t have happened if I had tried
a deep dive from the very beginning. Here’s another tip, which may sound strange: I’ve
found it very effective to read the specification from my Kindle while exercising at the
gym. I think the physical exercise keeps me alert; if I did this at my desk, I would be
battling to stay awake. And 30 to 45 minutes per day seems to be the right amount of time
to make progress, stay alert, and avoid completely overloading my brain.
      To summarize my strategy:
       •    Initially read some of Parts 1, 2, and 3 but struggled to
            comprehend them. In spite of the difficulties, this initial read
            helped me get an overview of what’s different from TPM 1.2.
       •    Focused on a bare-bones TPM 2.0 development deliverable by
            beginning with the Part 3 descriptions of TPM 2.0 functions.
       •    Developed the TSS system API while reading the spec, developing
            code, debugging through the simulator, and consulting with an
            expert more or less in parallel.
       •    Did a deep dive through the spec by reading 30–45 minutes
            per day.
     Some final pieces of advice: start somewhere, and don’t sweat all the details at first.
Get a high-level understanding, and then keep digging progressively deeper. And don’t be
afraid to ask for help when you get stuck. I’m still learning myself.

Ken
I was involved with developing the specification from the start. My input takes the form of
advice, rather than a narrative of my own personal experience.
      The TPM specification combines the styles of both a user manual (Part 1) and a
reference manual (Parts 2 and 3). If you have no prior experience with a TPM, or just
TPM 1.2 experience, I recommend reading Part 1, or at least the sections relevant to your
application. Even if you don’t immediately grasp all its complexities, you will become
familiar with the technical jargon and the TPM features and gain some sense of how they
fit together.
      Once you know what you want to do and have some sense of the command flow,
Part 3 gives the details for each command. The description and command and response
tables should be sufficient. Users in general won’t have to read the code in Parts 3 and 4.
      I anticipate that most users won’t be constructing command streams. Middleware
libraries such as a TPM Software Stack (TSS) normally perform those tasks. If you’re
writing or needing to debug through such middleware, Part 2 gives the details for each
structure, with the names of the structure members, data types, and possible parameters.
The platform-specific specification goes further, describing the parameters for a TPM
implementation.
      Part 4 describes, in C code, the details of TPM operation. Application and
middleware developers should rarely have to refer to Part 4.

Dave
I was part of the development of TPM 1.2 and 2.0 from the start. I ramped up by first
reading Part 3. It made perfect sense to me, except that it omitted anything about how to
actually authorize a command. So for commands that did not require authorization, like
TPM2_GetRandom, Part 3 told me everything I need to know: what parameters needed to go
where, what size they were, and so on. The first parameter was a bit of a challenge until I
realized that it was always likely to be NO_SESSIONS, because I wasn’t going to be auditing
the TPM2_GetRandom command. The parameters are described in detail in Part 2 and were
mostly pretty easy to understand for commands that don’t require authorization.
      Next I dug into doing simple authorizations using the password session. This was
nice because the password session always exists, and I didn’t need to do any encryption/
decryption, salting, or auditing of the session. It was just a simple password, which was in
the clear. Reading the section “Password Authorizations” in Part 1 explained these easily.
I started by changing the basic passwords associated with taking ownership of the TPM.
      Next I tackled creating a key. This was a more complicated task, because I needed
to understand the unions for defining the algorithms and other parameters associated
with the key I was creating. I started with a key that only had a password authorization (as
opposed to a policy or HMAC authorization), because it was easier. Basically I created a
storage root key (SRK) for the TPM.
      Then I tackled policy authorizations. Because I wanted to create a signing key whose
password I could change, I created keys locked to the password of an NV index. That
meant I had to create an NV index; and I wanted one that couldn’t be removed and
re-created with a different password, which is what I did. See Chapter 14 later in this book
for a description of how I did this.

     I wanted to play with types of sessions, so I authorized a key using an HMAC. Then I
audited the command. After successfully auditing, I used a decrypt session to pass in the
password. Finally I used a salted HMAC session.
     Next I did a more complicated policy, using TPM2_PolicyOr and TPM2_PolicyAuthorize.
At this point I felt like I had a pretty good handle on how things worked.

Other TPM 2.0 Specifications
Platform specifications augment the library specification to enable the creation of TPM
definitions that are platform specific. They list what is mandatory, optional, or excluded;
define minimum and maximum values; add initialization and provisioning requirements;
and detail the physical interface.
     You may need to reference the following platform-specific specifications:
       •    TCG PC Client Platform TPM Profile (PTP) Specification: Defines
            platform specifics for PCs and server platforms.
       •    TPM 2.0 Mobile Reference Architecture: “[D]efines a reference
            architecture for the implementation of a TPM in modern mobile
            platforms using a Protected Environment (section 7). This type
            of TPM is known as a TPM Mobile” (TPM 2.0 Mobile Reference
            Architecture).

Summary
Although the climb is steep, you can ramp up on TPM 2.0 much more efficiently with a
good overview of the specification and some tips from early explorers. In this chapter
we’ve shared our somewhat hard-earned expertise to assist you. The assimilation process
has begun!
     The next chapter describes the commonly available execution environments. It
prepares you for the code examples that we present in later chapters.

