Chapter 11

NV Indexes

The TPM requires the use of nonvolatile memory for two general classes of data:
       •    Data structures defined by the TPM architecture.
       •    Unstructured data defined by a user or a platform-specific
            specification
      One use of TPM nonvolatile memory is for architecturally defined data, or fields
defined in the TPM library specification. This includes hierarchy authorization values,
seeds and proofs, and private data that the TPM won’t reveal outside its secure boundary.
It also includes counters, a clock, and more: nonvolatile data that the caller can read.
Nonvolatile memory can also hold structured data made persistent, such as a key.
      This section describes a second use of NV memory: unstructured platform or user-
defined space. This is sometimes called a user-defined index, because the user assigns an
index (a handle) to each area and accesses data using the index value.
      TPM 1.2 includes user-defined indexes that can hold unstructured data. The
user defines the size and attributes of the index. The user can write data without any
restriction on the data value. The TPM provides authorization, controlling access to the
index via a shared secret keyed-hash message authentication code (HMAC) key, Platform
Configuration Register (PCR) values, locality, and physical presence, and provides
various read and write locks.
      TPM 2.0 expands the 1.2 features in several ways:
       •    An index can have the state “uninitialized, not yet written.” Reads
            will fail until the index is first written. Further, the index can’t be
            used in a policy. A party relying on a value can be assured that a
            party with write authority initialized the index and that the data
            doesn’t simply have a default or uninitialized value.
       •    As with any other protected entity, TPM 2.0 indexes may have
            either an authorization value or a policy.
       •    Another entity’s policy can include an NV index value. The policy
            specifies an operation to be performed on all or part of the index
            value: a comparison to policy data. The operations include equal,
            not equal, signed, and unsigned comparisons, and a check for bits
            set or clear.

     Another new NV index feature is the data type. It augments the 1.2 unstructured data
type (now called ordinary) with three others, giving four NV index types:
       •    Ordinary
       •    Counter
       •    Bit field
       •    Extend

NV Ordinary Index
An ordinary index is like a TPM 1.2 index. It holds unstructured data of arbitrary length.
In contrast with counter, bit-field, and extend indexes, there is no restriction on the type
of data that can be written.

                          USE CASE: STORING A SECRET

   A platform contains a 20-byte secret that must be available early in a boot cycle. It
   stores the secret in an NV index. The index attribute TPMA_NV_PPREAD specifies
   that reads require platform authorization. The platform software, running early in the
   boot cycle, knows this authorization and so can read the secret. It’s trusted not to
   reveal the secret once it completes its task. Because other software later in the boot
   cycle or beyond doesn’t know the platform authorization, it can’t read the secret.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: Create an ordinary index,
                size = 20 bytes, with platform authorization to read and write
           ••   TPM2_NV_Read: Uses platform authorization

                   USE CASE: STORING A CERTIFICATE

A platform OEM creates a certificate stating that an endorsement key is fixed to the
platform and that the platform was manufactured with certain security guarantees.
The OEM stores the certificate in NV during manufacturing. Read access is
unrestricted. Write access is restricted by policy to the OEM and is used to update
the certificate.
The TPM commands are as follows:
        ••   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: Create an ordinary index, size
             of certificate, platform authorization to write, read with
             authorization value, and a null (zero-length) password
        ••   TPM2_NV_Write: Run with platform authorization
        ••   TPM2_NV_Read: Run with a null password

             USE CASE: STORING A COMMON PASSWORD

A user creates a set of keys with an identical policy, authorizing use if a password in
the NV authorization field is known. The user permits access to all keys by supplying
the correct secret value. The user writes one NV location to change the common
password for all keys.
The TPM commands are as follows:
        1.   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: ordinary index, size = 0 bytes
             (the NV data is not used in this use case), common
             password, policy password to change authorization.
        2.   Create a common policy: TPM2_PolicySecret with the
             name of the NV index.
        3.   TPM2_Create: Creates multiple keys with the common
             policy. userWithAuth is clear so that a policy is
             mandatory.
        4.   TPM2_NV_ChangeAuth: Changes the password for all keys
             in one operation, using the current password.

                   USE CASE: STORING A ROOT PUBLIC KEY

   The IT administrator places the hash of a public key in NVRAM, which is locked
   so the user can’t write to it. It’s used to verify a public key, which is used in turn
   to verify that signatures are from IT. Or it’s the hash of the root public key of the
   certificate chain.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           1.   IT creates the signing key and digests the public key.
           2.   Create a read policy: TPM2_PolicyCommandCode with the
                command TPM2_NV_Read. This policy allows anyone to
                read the index essentially without authorization.
           3.   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace - ordinary index, size = digest
                size, IT administrator password, password to write, policy to
                read with the above read policy.
           4.   TPM2_NV_Write - with the IT admin password, storing the
                public key digest.
   And here’s how to verify a signature:
           1.   TPM2_NV_Read read the public key digest.
           2.   Validate the public key against the digest.
           3.   Validate the signature against the public key.

                          USE CASE: STORING AN HMAC KEY

   In the Linux Integrity Measurement Architecture (IMA) Extended Verification Module
   (EVM), store an HMAC key that is released to the kernel early in the boot and then
   used by the kernel to verify the extended attributes of files to see that they have
   been approved for loading or use by the kernel.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace - ordinary index, size = HMAC key
                size, IT administrator password, password to write, policy to
                read with the above (anyone can read) read policy
           ••   TPM2_NV_Write: With the IT admin password, stores the
                HMAC key
           ••   TPM2_NV_Read: Reads the HMAC key

NV Counter Index
An NV counter is a 64-bit value that can only increment. At the beginning of the first
increment command, it’s initialized to the largest value that any counter has ever had on
the TPM. This includes counter indexes currently defined and counters that were defined
in the past but are no longer on the TPM. Thus a counter can never roll back, even by
deleting and re-creating the index.
     TPM 1.2 users might be familiar with monotonic counters. These NV counters are
the equivalent, but the user is free to define none or as many as are needed up to TPM
resource limits.

                    USE CASE: REVOKING ACCESS TO A KEY

    A key holder wants to revoke access to a key. The key is created with a policy that
    says the key can be used (the policy can be satisfied) as long as the counter value is
    equal to its current value. Incrementing the counter revokes access.
    The TPM commands are as follows:
    TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: counter index, password of key holder, password to write,
    and a policy to read. The policy is TPM2_PolicyCommandCode with the command
    TPM2_PolicyNV. This policy allows anyone to use the index in a policy essentially
    without authorization.
    TPM2_Create: Create a key with userWithAuth clear, requiring a policy to
    authorize the key. The policy is TPM2_PolicyNV with the NV value equal to all zero.
    TPM2_NV_Increment: Revokes authorization to use the key.

NV Bit Field Index
A bit field contains 64 bits, initialized to all bits clear at the beginning of the first write,
which can also optionally set bits. A bit (or bits) can then be set but never cleared.

                 USE CASE: MULTIPLE-USER KEY REVOCATION

    A key holder wants to grant and later revoke access to a key for up to 64 users.
    The key is created with a policy with up to 64 OR terms. Each term combines some
    authorization specific to each user (a biometric or smart card digital signature, for
    example) and an assigned bit being clear. The key is revoked for that user by setting
    the bit in the NV bit field.

    The TPM commands are as follows:
    TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: bit field index, password of key holder, password to write,
    and a policy to read. The policy is TPM2_PolicyCommandCode with the command
    TPM2_PolicyNV. This policy allows anyone to use the index in a policy essentially
    without authorization.
    TPM2_Create: Create a key with userWithAuth clear, requiring a policy to
    authorize the key. The policy is TPM2_PolicyNV with the operand TPM_EO_
    BITCLEAR (the bit assigned to the user is clear).
    TPM2_NV_SetBits: Setting the bit assigned to the user, thus revoking authorization
    to use the key.

NV Extend Index
An extend index is defined with a specified hash algorithm, and it’s fixed for the lifetime
of the index. The data size of the index is based on its hash algorithm. It’s initialized to all
zero before the first write. The write is an extend operation, similar to that performed on
a PCR.
      The most likely use case combines an extend and a hybrid index to create flexible
PCRs, as discussed in the “Hybrid Index” section. Another general use case is a secure audit
log, because any extend operation creates a cryptographic history that can’t be reversed.

                 USE CASE: SECURE AUDIT LOG OF CA KEY USE

    A certificate authority wants to log each time its key is used to sign a certificate.
    It wants to be able to detect whether the log, kept on disk, has been altered. It creates
    an NV extend index for which it has exclusive write authority through a policy.
    Each time the CA signs a new certificate, it logs the certificate and extends a digest
    of the certificate into the NV index. To validate the log, it walks the log, re-creating
    the extend value, and compares it to the NV index value. For additional security, it
    can even get a signature over the NV index value.
    The TPM commands are as follows:
            ••    TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: extend index, policy to write
                  by CA, and a policy to read by anyone. The CA signs a
                  certificate, logs the certificate in an audit log, and digests
                  the certificate.
            ••    TPM2_NV_Extend: Adds the digest to the NV audit log. If
                  the certificate is small enough, it can be extended directly.
                  However, it’s probably faster to digest outside the TPM and
                  extend just a digest.

Hybrid Index
Yet another new TPM 2.0 feature is the hybrid index. As with a nonhybrid, the NV index
metadata (its index handle, size, attributes, policy, and password) are nonvolatile; its
data is created in volatile memory. Except for hybrid counters (described later) the index
data is only written to NV memory on an orderly shutdown. Any of the four index types
(ordinary, counter, bit-field, or extend) can be a hybrid index.
     Hybrid indexes may be appropriate when the application expects frequent writes.
Because NV technology is often subject to wear out, a TPM may protect itself by refusing
to write at a high rate. Volatile memory doesn’t have wear-out issues, so a hybrid index
can be written as often as required.
     Hybrid index data may only be present in volatile memory if the index is deleted
before an orderly shutdown. An application could define the index, write data, use the
values in a policy, and then delete the index.

                          USE CASE: ADDITIONAL PCRS

   The simplest use case is adding PCRs beyond the number the TPM vendor provides,
   typically 24 for a PC Client TPM. As with the permanent PCRs, the index persists
   through power cycles, but the value is reset back to zero. This means PCRs are no
   longer a scarce resource (“beach front property,” in TCG work group slang).
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••    TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: hybrid extend index, well known
                 null password, so that anyone can read and extend
           ••    TPM2_NV_Extend: Now equivalent to TPM2_PCR_Extend

                USE CASE: PCRS WITH DIFFERENT ATTRIBUTES

   An application requires PCRs, but the standard TPM PCRs have fixed attributes
   specified by the platform. For example, the operating system may restrict access,
   the application may want PCR authorization restrictions, the application may need
   a hash algorithm different from those in effect for the TPM PCRs, or the application
   might want extends restricted to an extended locality.
   The application creates a hybrid extend index with the desired attributes,
   uses them as PCRs, and then deletes the index when the application terminates.
   Note that, because the index is a hybrid, the extend doesn’t write NV memory,
   avoiding performance and wear-out issues.

    The TPM commands are as follows:
            ••   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: hybrid extend index, application-
                 specific digest algorithm, application-specific extend policy
                 more restrictive than “anyone can extend.”
            ••   TPM2_NV_Extend: as needed by the application.
            ••   TPM2_NV_UndefineSpace: when the application
                 terminates.
    These PCRs can have read authorizations: policy authorizations for either read
    or write different from those of the platform. They can be used in virtual TPMs
    to record the state of a helper VM inside the vTPM of a VM (see the Virtualization
    Specification).

                            USE CASE: VIRTUALIZATION

    A VMM creates an NV extend hybrid index for each VM. When the VMM creates a
    VM, it creates a corresponding PCR using a hybrid extend index. As the VMM starts
    the VM, it uses introspection to read and measure the VM’s boot code, extending the
    measurements into the VM’s PCR.
    This requires a single command:
    TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: Create a hybrid extend index

     Hybrid ordinary, extend, and bit-field indexes are only written to NV memory on an
orderly shutdown. Hybrid counters are more complicated because of the restriction that
they never roll back or miss an increment operation. This must be ensured even if the
shutdown isn’t orderly, when the volatile value would be written to NV memory.
     To achieve this, the value is written (flushed) to NV memory every so many
increments. Thus a hybrid counter may not be solely in volatile memory, even if it’s
deleted before an orderly shutdown. If an application wants to avoid the flush, or at least
determine when it will occur, a get capability command can report the flush period.
     The second hybrid counter complication occurs on startup. If the most recent value
wasn’t flushed to NV (through an orderly shutdown), the count is set to the highest value
it could have had without causing a flush. That is, it might skip some counts, but it will
never roll back or miss an increment.

NV Access Controls
We previously discussed the major NV attributes: whether it’s an ordinary, counter,
bit-field, or extend index, and whether it’s a hybrid index. An NV index also has unique
controls that are different from objects like keys. Perhaps the most interesting is that it can

have separate controls for read and write. In particular, each index can be defined to use
its policy, its password authorization, or the owner password or authorization, and the
attributes can be set independently for read and write.
     The TPM supports a set of NV index read and write locks. An index may be write-
locked permanently. It can be write- or read-locked until the next TPM reset or restart.
An index may be part of one set of indexes that can be locked in one operation (a global
lock), again until the next reset or restart.
     Finally, many TPM entities are protected by the dictionary-attack protection
mechanism. After some number of failed authorization attempts, the TPM rejects
authorization until a certain amount of time has passed. An NV index may be protected
as well, but an attribute can be set to remove the protection. Removing the protection
might be applicable if the authorization password is known to be a strong secret.

NV Written
Each NV index, when first created, has an implied value: not written. In TPM 1.2, an
index was always created with all-zero data. A read could not distinguish between all-zero
data and a not-yet-written index. In TPM 2.0, not written is a separate state. A policy can
specify that the index must or must not be written.

                         USE CASE: WRITE-ONCE NV INDEX

   The creator wants an index that can be written exactly once, perhaps during
   provisioning. Once written, it can be read by anyone with the correct password.
   To implement this, create an OR policy with two terms. The first term permits the
   NV Write command code only if the index has not been written. The second term
   permits a read if the index has been written and the password is supplied.
   Here are the steps:
           1.   Create a policy with two terms:
                ••   TPM2_PolicyCommandCode (TPM2_NV_Write) AND
                     TPM2_PolicyNvWritten (writtenSet clear)
                ••   TPM2_PolicyCommandCode (TPM2_NV_Read) AND
                     TPM2_PolicyPassword
           2.   T? PM2_NV_DefineSpace - create an ordinary index, policy
                to write and read.

NV Index Handle Values
When the user creates an NV index, the user assigns an index value.1 In TPM 1.2, certain
bits had special properties, such as the D bit used for locking. In the TPM 2.0 library
specification, there is no index assignment other than an overall handle range, and no
bits of the index value have any special meaning. The TPM doesn’t enforce any index
properties based on the index value. However, platform-specific specifications or a global
TCG registry can assign index values.
     For example, the TCG registry assigns handle ranges to the TPM manufacturer
(specifically, 0 to 0x3fffff ), to the platform manufacturer, and for endorsement and
platform certificates. It further reserves ranges for platform-specific specifications, such
as the PC Client, server, mobile, and embedded platforms. All these assignments are by
convention and aren’t enforced in any way by (current) TPMs.

                          USE CASE: STANDARD CERTIFICATES

       We expect that the TCG Infrastructure work group will define standard NV indexes
       for endorsement key certificates. Whereas TPM 1.2 has two such certificates, for the
       TPM vendor and for the platform OEM, TPM 2.0 can have certificates for multiple key
       algorithms and even different creation templates.

     Although the previous assignments are solely by convention, a TCG work group can
also assign NV index values with implicit hardware properties. For example, the TPM may
contain special hardware-package pins for general-purpose IO, called GPIO pins in the
library and platform specifications. The platform specification determines the properties
of the GPIO pins, including the following:
           •     The number of pins
           •     The assignment of a pin to an NV index value
           •     Whether a pin is mandatory or optional
           •     Whether the pin is fixed as an input or output, or is programmable
           •     Whether an output is volatile or persistent
           •     Whether the assignment is fixed by the TPM vendor firmware
                 during manufacturing, or the index must be defined
                 programmatically by the end user using the TPM_NV_DefineSpace
                 command
    The NV data is a hardware pin, but the NV metadata is identical to that of other
indexes. Thus the GPIO comes with the full range of NV index controls, including an
authorization value or policy, read and write controls, and locking features.

1
    This is different from starting a session or loading an object, where the TPM assigns the handle.

NV Names
The Name of a TPM entity uniquely (and cryptographically) defines the entity and is used for
authorization. For an NV index, it’s a hash of the public area, which includes the index (the
handle), the attributes (including whether it has been written), the policy, and the size.
      TPM2_PolicyNV permits an NV index value to be used in a policy. The policy can be
based on a range of logical and arithmetic operations on the index. If the policy were
based merely on the NV index value, it would offer little security: an attacker could delete
the index and replace it with one with different access controls. For that reason, TPM2_
PolicyNV uses the Name.
      An example might help. Suppose you create an NV bit-field index that you intend
to use for key revocation. The policy for the key includes a TPM2_PolicyNV term that can
only be satisfied if the NV bit 0 is clear. The policy for the NV index says only the owner of
a private key can write the index (TPM2_PolicySigned). To revoke the key, the owner signs
a nonce to satisfy the NV policy and then sets bit 0 (TPM2_NV_SetBits).
      Now suppose an attacker tries to remove the key revocation. They can’t clear
bit 0, because a bit-field index bit can only be set, never cleared. So, the attacker tries
something more promising: they delete the index and re-create it with exactly the same
Name. This fails because TPM2_PolicySigned fails on an index that has not yet been
written. The attacker can’t write the index because it can’t satisfy the NV index policy
TPM2_PolicySigned term.
      The attacker makes one final attempt. They delete the index and re-create it with a
policy that they can satisfy. They then write the index so that bit 0 is clear and use that
index to authorize the key’s policy using TPM2_PolicyNV. Because bit 0 is clear, it appears
that the policy should succeed. However, the attacker had to change the policy, which
causes the Name to change. When the new Name is used in TPM2_PolicyNV, the key’s policy
evaluation fails.
      In summary, the “delete and re-create an index” attack fails because of two TPM
features:
       •    An NV index can’t be used in a policy until it has been written.
       •    The NV index in a policy uses the entire Name (public area), not
            just the index handle.

             USE CASE: WRITE ONCE, READ ALWAYS NV INDEX

   The user desires to create an index that they can write exactly once and that can
   then be read by anyone. An example is provisioning the TPM with a certificate.
   The index has two OR terms. The first policy term is satisfied when the index has not
   been written and the owner supplies the correct password; it permits only the NV
   write command. The second term is satisfied once the index has been written; it
   permits only the NV read command.

    Another subtle point is that the Name changes when the index is written, because the
index public area includes the written attribute.

                      USE CASE: SECURING A POLICY SECRET

    A policy secret permits authorization for a set of objects to be linked to a single
    secret. For example, a set of keys can have identical policies that authorize the key
    if an NV index-authorization password is known. The policy would use the NV index
    Name after it has been written.

■■Note TPM2_PolicySecret ties authorization to the NV password. TPM2_PolicyNV ties autho-
rization to the NV data.

     If the Name didn’t change when the index was written, an attacker could delete the
index and create a new one with the same Name but their own secret and thus gain access
to keys tied to the secret. The attack doesn’t work, because the attacker’s index has not
been written and thus has a different Name than the one required in the key’s policy.
     It’s assumed here that the NV index policy (part of the Name) prevents the attacker
from writing the index. For example, the NV write policy might require authentication
with a public key (TPM2_PolicySigned).

■■Note Observe that the data value written to NV doesn’t matter and serves only to prove
that the index creator can write the index. The key policy is tied to the NV password, not the
NV data.

      The previous use case demonstrates an interesting property. You can create an NV
index with a Name that no one else can reproduce. If the Name includes having written
set, and the policy is such that only you can write the index, then only you can create that
Name. This ensures that a policy points to your NV index, not one that an attacker created.
      Further, the same NV index with the same Name can be created on multiple TPMs.

                       USE CASE DUPLICATING A SET OF KEYS

    In the previous use case, the authorization for a set of keys was tied to an NV index
    password. A user can duplicate a set of keys to another TPM. Then the user can
    create an NV index with the same Name on that TPM so that the key’s policy can be
    satisfied on the new TPM.

NV Password
A subtlety of the TPM is that a user can’t really change an object’s password. The
TPM2_ObjectChangeAuth command can create an object with the new password, but the
original object still exists. The user can delete all existing copies of the object, but the
TPM can’t enforce this.
     This quirk isn’t true of an NV index. The index exists only on the TPM. It can never be
context-saved or in any way moved off the TPM. Thus, TPM2_NV_ChangeAuth really does
change the password.

Separate Commands
The TPM API defines a set of commands dedicated to NV. TPM2_NV_DefineSpace creates
an NV index. The caller specifies the NV metadata, including the size for an ordinary
index, the policy, attributes, and the password. As explained earlier, a newly created index
isn’t initialized, or written, yet. It has no data.
      The write commands are as follows:
       •    TPM2_NV_Write writes an ordinary index. Depending on the
            attributes, partial writes may or may not be permitted.
       •    TPM2_NV_Increment increments a counter index. Depending
            on the attributes and the count value, this may cause a write to
            nonvolatile memory.
       •    TPM2_NV_Extend extends arbitrary data (not necessarily a hash
            value) to an extend index.
       •    TPM2_NV_SetBits sets bits in a bit-field index. It ORs the current
            value and the input. An input of all zero is legally and useful. It
            makes the index written and initializes it to all zero.
     TPM2_NV_Read reads any index data. A read can only occur after the index has been
written at least once. TPM2_NV_ReadPublic reads the index public data. In combination
with the session audit feature, a user can get a signature over the public area to prove its
properties.
     Several commands are dedicated to locking an index. The index attributes determine
whether these locks can be set against a particular index:
       •    TPM2_NV_WriteLock can lock an index, forbidding further writes
            until the next boot cycle or forever.
       •    TPM2_NV_GlobalWriteLock can lock a set of indexes, again either
            forever or until the next boot cycle.
       •    TPM2_NV_ReadLock locks an index, preventing further reads until
            the next boot cycle.

     TPM2_NV_ChangeAuth changes the index password. TPM2_NV_Certify can create
a signature over index data. This command is optional in the PC Client specification.
However, a similar result can be obtained by reading the index in an audit session and
then getting a signed audit digest.

Summary
TPM 2.0 has four types of NV indexes: ordinary (unstructured data), bit-field, counter,
and extend data indexes. An index can be read or written using the standard TPM
password and policy controls. Hybrid indexes normally exist in volatile memory, but an
orderly shutdown can save them to NV memory. They can avoid performance and wear-
out issues. When an index is created, its state is “not written”. Its data can’t be read or used
in a policy until it’s written, and the “not written” state itself can be used on a policy.
     Basic applications include provisioning with certificates or public keys. More
advanced applications use an NV authorization in a policy, permitting it to be shared
among entities. A policy referring to a bit-field or counter index value can be used
for key revocation. An extend index offers PCR equivalents with different algorithms,
authorizations, or lifetimes.
     NV indexes have a separate set of commands and unique attributes to control
authorization, read and write locking, and dictionary-attack protection.

