Chapter 16

Auditing TPM Commands

As used in the TPM, audit is the process of logging TPM command and response
parameters that pass between the host and the TPM. The host is responsible for
maintaining the log, which may be in host memory or on disk. An auditor can later use
the TPM to attest to the log’s integrity (that it has not been altered) and authenticity (that
it was logging TPM transactions).
     The underlying audit concept is similar to that of attestation using PCRs. The TPM
extends command and response parameter hashes into an audit digest. The auditor
can later request a signed audit digest and verify the signature and certificate chain. The
auditor can then walk their local copy of the audit log to validate its integrity.
     Audit always records both command and response parameters and only audits a
successful command. The latter requirement vastly simplifies an implementation.1
     This chapter first gives a rationale as to why you may want to audit, then describes
the audit types, and finally goes on to the details of the audit mechanism.

Why Audit
Why would an auditor want a certified list of command and response parameters? This
section provides several use cases, from auditing a single command to auditing an atomic
sequence of commands to auditing a continuous stream of commands.
     In the simplest case, the TPM can audit one command. In a sense, this is a
generalization of a TPM quote, which signs PCRs. In fact, you could do a quote using
audit: start an audit log, read a set of PCRs, end the audit log, and request a signed audit
digest. Although it’s simpler to use TPM2_Quote for a PCR attestation, it can’t be used to
quote NV PCRs.2 Audit is the only way to quote an NV PCR.
     While there is already a TPM point solution for getting a signature over PCRs, audit
provides a slightly more complicated but more flexible facility.

1
  Historically, TPM 1.2 did not at first have this requirement. This led to many corner cases where
the failure was itself due to the audit, where the audit digest was partially updated but then the
command failed, and so on. Late in TPM 1.2, the requirement was changed to “only audit successful
commands,” and this was carried forward to TPM 2.0.
2
  See Chapter 11 for an explanation of how to create an NV extend index PCR.

                 USE CASE: WHAT TPM AM I CONNECTED TO?

   An auditor wants to know the precise TPM properties: manufacturer,
   firmware revision, and so on. The auditor starts an audit log, runs several
   TPM2_GetCapability commands to read the properties of interest, and then
   validates the audit log to ensure that the responses are legitimate.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••    TPM_StartAuthSession: Start a session to be used
                 for audit
           ••    TPM2_GetCapability: Set the audit attribute, read the
                 manufacturer and firmware version, and keep a log of the
                 results
           ••    TPM2_GetSessionAuditDigest: Get a signature over
                 a digest of the log. The auditor uses the signature to
                 verify that the log containing the capabilities has not been
                 tampered with.

                USE CASE: WHAT IS THE STATE OF AN NV INDEX,
                      COUNTER, OR BIT-FIELD INDEX?

   These indexes might be used to revoke the use of another entity through the entity’s
   policy. That policy would use the TPM2_PolicyNV command, where the NV index is
   either a counter or a bit field. Chapter 14 explains the policy use case. Here, the caller
   is concerned that the NV index might not have been updated correctly. For example,
   the caller wants to ensure that a counter has been incremented or a bit set in a bit
   field. The caller can audit a read of this index to get a signed digest of its value. In
   some cases, where the index is authorized using an HMAC, the response HMAC itself
   provides response integrity. However, if the index is password or policy authorized, or
   if the caller doesn’t have the HMAC key, audit provides the required integrity.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••    TPM2_StartAuthSession: Start a session to be used for
                 audit
           ••    TPM2_NV_Read: Set the session attribute and read the
                 index being used in the policy. The caller keeps an audit log.
           ••    TPM2_GetSessionAuditDigest: Get a signature over
                 a digest of the log. The caller uses the signature to verify
                 that the audit log containing the NV read data has not been
                 tampered with.

                     USE CASE: NV INDEX USED AS A PCR

   As described in Chapter 11, a hybrid extend index can be used to implement
   PCRs beyond the platform-specified value. These can’t be attested to using the
   TPM2_Quote command, but a signed audit gives equivalent integrity.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••   TPM2_StartAuthSession: Start a session to be used
                for auditing.
           ••   TPM2_NV_Read: Set the session attribute and read the
                index being used as a PCR. The caller keeps an audit log.
           ••   TPM2_GetSessionAuditDigest: Get a signature over
                a digest of the log. The caller uses the signature to verify
                that the audit log containing the NV PCR value has not been
                tampered with.

Audit Commands
This is a summary of the TPM commands used for audit. See the TPM 2.0 specification
Part 3 for the complete command set and API details:
       •    TPM2_StartAuthSession is used to start a session that can be used
            for audit.
       •    TPM2_GetSessionAuditDigest returns the session audit digest
            and optionally a signature over the digest.
       •    TPM2_GetCommandAuditDigest returns the command audit digest
            and optionally a signature over the digest.
       •    TPM2_SetCommandCodeAuditStatus determines which commands
            are included in a command audit digest.

Audit Types
The TPM library supports two audit types: command audit and session audit.

Command Audit
Command audit has two important traits, which it shares with TPM 1.2 audit.
      First, it’s on a per-command basis. Most commands include an attribute that, when
set, indicates that the TPM should audit all instances of the command. There is a global,
TPM-wide audit digest, and an auditor can request a signature over that digest.

    Second, it’s optional in the PC Client TPM specification. In TPM 1.2, to keep down
development and test costs, vendors routinely ignored optional commands. Hardware 1.2
TPMs didn’t implement command audits. Software can’t rely on command audit being
implemented in all TPM 2.0 devices.3

    USE CASE: AUDITING THE TPM USED AS A CERTIFICATE AUTHORITY

     A TPM can be used as a certificate authority (CA). As a hardware security module, it
     protects its private signing key far better than a software solution. A CA might want
     a verifiable list of all certificates that it signed. By setting a command audit of the
     TPM2_Sign command, the auditor can verify the list of signatures and detect any
     tampering of the list.
     The TPM commands are as follows:
             ••   TPM2_SetCommandCodeAuditStatus: Make TPM2_Sign
                  be audited.
             ••   TPM2_Sign: Uses the TPM as a CA to sign certificates. The
                  caller keeps an audit log.
             ••   TPM2_GetCommandAuditDigest: Gets a signature over a
                  digest of the log containing the certificate hashes that were
                  certified. The caller can use the signature to verify that the
                  audit log has not been tampered with.

Session Audit
Session audit is new for TPM 2.0. It’s mandatory in the PC platform specification, so it’s
likely to be widely available.
     As the name suggests, session audit provides for an audit digest per session. An
authorization session can additionally be used as an audit session by simply setting the
audit attribute in each command to be audited. That is, a session doesn’t become an
audit session at the time it’s started, but rather when it’s used with the audit attribute set.
For commands that don’t require authorization, or to decouple audit from authorization,
the audit session can be a separate session.
     For example, TPM2_Create requires one authorization session to authorize the parent
key. This session can also be marked as an audit session. Alternatively, a second session
can be included with the command, this one marked for audit. TPM2_GetCapability
requires no authorization and is normally used with no sessions. However, a session can
be used for audit.
     A command with multiple sessions can mark only one as an audit session.

3
 TPM2_GetCapability with the parameter TPM_CAP_COMMANDS retrieves a list of implemented
commands.

Audit Log
The beginning of the chapter said that command and response parameter hashes are
logged on the host, and the auditor can validate the signed log. This section outlines the
required steps:
       1.   The auditor retrieves a list of command and response
            parameters from an audit log that the host stored as it
            executed the commands. From these, command parameter
            and response parameter hashes are calculated.
            a.   Fortunately, the command-parameter and response-
                 parameter hash calculations used for audit are exactly
                 the same as those used for authorization. The command
                 and response parameters are serialized (marshaled), and
                 a digest over the resulting byte stream is calculated.
            b.   For a command, the hash calculation, which requires
                 marshaled parameters, should be straightforward. A TSS
                 would naturally expose command-parameter marshaling
                 to assist in the command-parameter authorization
                 operation. Responses are trickier, because a TSS naturally
                 unmarshals responses but doesn’t marshal them. One
                 approach is for the audit log to hold the marshaled
                 response as well as the response parameters. The auditor
                 can use the TSS to unmarshal and then validate those
                 response parameters. If the TSS doesn’t expose the
                 unmarshal function, or if the audit log doesn’t hold the
                 marshaled response, the auditor has no choice but to
                 write or obtain a marshaling function. Because a TPM
                 naturally has this function, it’s possible that it can be
                 copied from a future open source TPM implementation.
            c.   Either way, at the end of this step, the auditor should
                 have command and response parameter hashes that are
                 cryptographically validated against the command and
                 response parameters.
       2.   The auditor performs the equivalent of an extend calculation,
            accumulating each command plus response parameter hash
            from step 1 into an audit digest.
       3.   The digital signature is verified. The calculated audit digest
            from step 2 is validated against the TPM signature and a
            public key.
       4.   The auditor walks a certificate chain back to a trusted root
            certificate, thereby establishing trust in the verification
            public key.
    For continuous auditing, it’s likely that the public key will be cached.

USE CASE: USING THE TPM TO SECURE AN APPLICATION AUDIT LOG

   In addition to auditing TPM functions, the TPM audit facility can secure an
   application audit log. The application creates an NV extend index to record its
   events. Each time it records an event, it first extends that event into the NV index. It
   later gets a signature over the NV index data and uses it to verify that the event log
   has not been tampered with.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••   TPM2_NV_DefineSpace: Define a hybrid extend index
           ••   TPM2_NV_Extend: Extends the application event while also
                recording the event in the application event log.
   When the application wishes to validate the audit log:
           ••   TPM2_StartAuthSession: Starts the audit session
           ••   TPM2_NV_Read: Reads the event digest
           ••   TPM2_GetSessionAuditDigest: Gets a signature over
                the NV read data
   If available, TPM2_NV_Certify can be used to get a signature over the NV read
   data, but that command may not be present on all TPMs.

Audit Data
The session audit digest is read using the TPM2_GetSessionAuditDigest command. In
the typical use case, a signing key is supplied and the response is signed.
     The digital signature isn’t merely over the audit digest. As with other attestation
functions, the TPM wraps the digest in a structure that includes other information. The
TPM specification Part 2 describes this wrapping, where a TPMS_ATTEST wraps a TPMU_
ATTEST union, which is a TPMS_SESSION_AUDIT_INFO structure.
     The TPMS_ATTEST fields were covered in Chapter 12, including TPM_GENERATED, the
qualified name of the signing key, the “extra data,” the clock, and firmware information.
Their security properties are the same here.
     TPMS_SESSION_AUDIT_INFO includes, as expected, the session audit digest. It also
includes a flag indicating the “exclusive” status of the session. See the following section.

Exclusive Audit
Exclusive audit permits an auditor to validate that a sequence of commands in an
audit log was contiguous—that no other commands were interleaved with the exclusive
sequence. A caller can designate only one session as an exclusive session. The caller sets
the audit session auditExclusive attribute as part of a command. Assuming there was no

exclusive session already in progress, this session becomes the exclusive session, and the
attribute is echoed in the response.
     Once a session becomes the exclusive session, it can be used for several commands.
However, any intervening command not using this exclusive audit session causes it to
no longer be the exclusive session. That is, an exclusive session in progress doesn’t block
another command but does record that another command intervened.
     When the audit digest is returned, the structure includes a flag, exclusiveSession,
which is true if there were no intervening commands.

       USE CASE: ENSURE THAT PCRS DO NOT CHANGE DURING
                     A COMMAND SEQUENCE

   A user wants to run a sequence of commands at a specific trust state. PCR values
   indicate the trust state of the platform. The user therefore wants to ensure that PCR
   values don’t change during a sequence of commands. The user runs the sequence
   in an exclusive session. If there was a PCR extend between two commands, it
   changes the current exclusive session. When the caller next tries to use the original
   exclusive session, the TPM returns an error, indicating an intervening command.
   The TPM commands are as follows:
           ••   TPM2_StartAuthSession: Starts a session to be used for
                the exclusive audit.
           ••   TPM command sequence that should be run without
                an intervening PCR extend. Set the audit and
                auditExclusive session attributes.
           ••   If there was an intervening command, the request for an
                exclusive audit session returns TPM_RC_EXCLUSIVE.

Summary
Audit in the TPM is the process of logging command and response parameters. The TPM
logs these parameters with an extend operation, similar to that used for PCRs, while the
host saves the actual parameters. Later, the TPM can return a signed digest of the audit
log. The recipient can validate the signature and thus verify the integrity of the log.
     The TPM offers two audit options. Command audit records all instances of a selected
group of commands, regardless of the session. Session audit records all commands in a
session, regardless of the command. An exclusive session permits the recipient to detect
whether an audit session was interrupted by an intervening, non-audited command. It
can also provide a guarantee that there was no intervening command.

