6
Activation Records

stack: an orderly pile or heap

                                      Webster’s Dictionary

In almost any modern programming language, a function may have local vari-
ables that are created upon entry to the function. Several invocations of the
function may exist at the same time, and each invocation has its own instan-
tiations of local variables.
   In the Tiger function,
  function f(x: int) : int =
    let var y := x+x
     in if y < 10
            then f(y)
            else y-1
    end

a new instantiation of x is created (and initialized by f’s caller) each time
that f is called. Because there are recursive calls, many of these x’s exist
simultaneously. Similarly, a new instantiation of y is created each time the
body of f is entered.
   In many languages (including C, Pascal, and Tiger), local variables are
destroyed when a function returns. Since a function returns only after all the
functions it has called have returned, we say that function calls behave in last-
in-first-out (LIFO) fashion. If local variables are created on function entry and
destroyed on function exit, then we can use a LIFO data structure – a stack –
to hold them.

  fun f(x) =                                    int (*)() f(int x) {
    let fun g(y) = x+y                            int g(int y) {return x+y;}
     in g                                         return g;
    end                                         }

  val h = f(3)                                  int (*h)() = f(3);
  val j = f(4)                                  int (*j)() = f(4);

  val z = h(5)                                  int z = h(5);
  val w = j(7)                                  int w = j(7);

  (a) Written in ML                             (b) Written in pseudo-C

PROGRAM 6.1.          An example of higher-order functions.

                      HIGHER-ORDER FUNCTIONS
                      But in languages supporting both nested functions and function-valued vari-
                      ables, it may be necessary to keep local variables after a function has returned!
                      Consider Program 6.1: This is legal in ML, but of course in C one cannot re-
                      ally nest the function g inside the function f .
                         When f (3) is executed, a new local variable x is created for the activation
                      of function f . Then g is returned as the result of f (x); but g has not yet been
                      called, so y is not yet created.
                         At this point f has returned, but it is too early to destroy x, because when
                      h(5) is eventually executed it will need the value x = 3. Meanwhile, f (4) is
                      entered, creating a different instance of x, and it returns a different instance
                      of g in which x = 4.
                         It is the combination of nested functions (where inner functions may use
                      variables defined in the outer functions) and functions returned as results (or
                      stored into variables) that causes local variables to need lifetimes longer than
                      their enclosing function invocations.
                         Pascal (and Tiger) have nested functions, but they do not have functions as
                      returnable values. C has functions as returnable values, but not nested func-
                      tions. So these languages can use stacks to hold local variables.
                         ML, Scheme, and several other languages have both nested functions and
                      functions as returnable values (this combination is called higher-order func-
                      tions). So they cannot use stacks to hold all local variables. This complicates
                      the implementation of ML and Scheme – but the added expressive power of
                      higher-order functions justifies the extra implementation effort.
                         For the remainder of this chapter we will consider languages with stackable

      local variables and postpone discussion of higher-order functions to Chap-
      ter 15.

6.1   STACK FRAMES

      The simplest notion of a stack is a data structure that supports two opera-
      tions, push and pop. However, it turns out that local variables are pushed in
      large batches (on entry to functions) and popped in large batches (on exit).
      Furthermore, when local variables are created they are not always initialized
      right away. Finally, after many variables have been pushed, we want to con-
      tinue accessing variables deep within the stack. So the abstract push and pop
      model is just not suitable.
         Instead, we treat the stack as a big array, with a special register – the stack
      pointer – that points at some location. All locations beyond the stack pointer
      are considered to be garbage, and all locations before the stack pointer are
      considered to be allocated. The stack usually grows only at the entry to a
      function, by an increment large enough to hold all the local variables for
      that function, and, just before the exit from the function, shrinks by the same
      amount. The area on the stack devoted to the local variables, parameters, re-
      turn address, and other temporaries for a function is called the function’s ac-
      tivation record or stack frame. For historical reasons, run-time stacks usually
      start at a high memory address and grow toward smaller addresses. This can
      be rather confusing: stacks grow downward and shrink upward, like icicles.
         The design of a frame layout takes into account the particular features of
      an instruction set architecture and the programming language being compiled.
      However, the manufacturer of a computer often prescribes a “standard” frame
      layout to be used on that architecture, where possible, by all compilers for all
      programming languages. Sometimes this layout is not the most convenient
      one for a particular programming language or compiler. But by using the
      “standard” layout, we gain the considerable benefit that functions written in
      one language can call functions written in another language.
         Figure 6.2 shows a typical stack frame layout. The frame has a set of in-
      coming arguments (technically these are part of the previous frame but they
      are at a known offset from the frame pointer) passed by the caller. The re-
      turn address is created by the CALL instruction and tells where (within the
      calling function) control should return upon completion of the current func-
      tion. Some local variables are in this frame; other local variables are kept in

                                          ↑ higher addresses

                          argument n
                                .
           incoming             .          previous
          arguments             .          frame
                          argument 2
                          argument 1
      frame pointer →      static link

                             local
                           variables

                         return address

                          temporaries
                                           current
                              saved        frame
                            registers

                          argument m
                                .
           outgoing             .
          arguments             .
                          argument 2
                          argument 1
      stack pointer →      static link

                                           next
                                           frame

                                          ↓ lower addresses

FIGURE 6.2.       A stack frame.

machine registers. Sometimes a local variable kept in a register needs to be
saved into the frame to make room for other uses of the register; there is an
area in the frame for this purpose. Finally, when the current function calls
other functions, it can use the outgoing argument space to pass parameters.

THE FRAME POINTER
Suppose a function g(. . .) calls the function f (a1 , . . . , an ). We say g is the
caller and f is the callee. On entry to f , the stack pointer points to the first
argument that g passes to f . On entry, f allocates a frame by simply sub-
tracting the frame size from the stack pointer SP.
   The old SP becomes the current frame pointer FP. In some frame layouts,
FP is a separate register; the old value of FP is saved in memory (in the frame)
and the new FP becomes the old SP. When f exits, it just copies FP back to
SP and fetches back the saved FP. This arrangement is useful if f ’s frame size
can vary, or if frames are not always contiguous on the stack. But if the frame
size is fixed, then for each function f the FP will always differ from SP by a
known constant, and it is not necessary to use a register for FP at all – FP is a
“fictional” register whose value is always SP+framesize.
   Why talk about a frame pointer at all? Why not just refer to all variables,
parameters, etc. by their offset from SP, if the frame size is constant? The
frame size is not known until quite late in the compilation process, when the
number of memory-resident temporaries and saved registers is determined.
But it is useful to know the offsets of formal parameters and local variables
much earlier. So, for convenience, we still talk about a frame pointer. And
we put the formals and locals right near the frame pointer at offsets that are
known early; the temporaries and saved registers go farther away, at offsets
that are known later.

REGISTERS
A modern machine has a large set of registers (typically 32 of them). To make
compiled programs run fast, it’s useful to keep local variables, intermediate
results of expressions, and other values in registers instead of in the stack
frame. Registers can be directly accessed by arithmetic instructions; on most
machines, accessing memory requires separate load and store instructions.
Even on machines whose arithmetic instructions can access memory, it is
faster to access registers.
   A machine (usually) has only one set of registers, but many different pro-
cedures and functions need to use registers. Suppose a function f is using

      register r to hold a local variable and calls procedure g, which also uses r for
      its own calculations. Then r must be saved (stored into a stack frame) before
      g uses it and restored (fetched back from the frame) after g is finished using
      it. But is it f ’s responsibility to save and restore the register, or g’s? We say
      that r is a caller-save register if the caller (in this case, f ) must save and re-
      store the register, and r is callee-save if it is the responsibility of the callee
      (in this case, g).
          On most machine architectures, the notion of caller-save or callee-save reg-
      ister is not something built into the hardware, but is a convention described
      in the machine’s reference manual. On the MIPS computer, for example, reg-
      isters 16–23 are preserved across procedure calls (callee-save), and all other
      registers are not preserved across procedure calls (caller-save).
          Sometimes the saves and restores are unnecessary. If f knows that the
      value of some variable x will not be needed after the call, it may put x in a
      caller-save register and not save it when calling g. Conversely, if f has a local
      variable i that is needed before and after several function calls, it may put i
      in some callee-save register ri and, save ri just once (upon entry to f ) and
      fetch it back just once (before returning from f ). Thus, the wise selection of
      a caller-save or callee-save register for each local variable and temporary can
      reduce the number of stores and fetches a program executes. We will rely on
      our register allocator to choose the appropriate kind of register for each local
      variable and temporary value.

      PARAMETER PASSING
      On most machines whose calling conventions were designed in the 1970s,
      function arguments were passed on the stack.1 But this causes needless mem-
      ory traffic. Studies of actual programs have shown that very few functions
      have more than four arguments, and almost none have more than six. There-
      fore, parameter-passing conventions for modern machines specify that the
      first k arguments (for k = 4 or k = 6, typically) of a function are passed in
      registers r p , ..., r p+k−1 , and the rest of the arguments are passed in memory.
          Now, suppose f (a1 , . . . , an ) (which received its parameters in r1 , . . . , rn ,
      for example) calls h(z). It must pass the argument z in r1 ; so f saves the
      old contents of r1 (the value a1 ) in its stack frame before calling h. But there
      is the memory traffic that was supposedly avoided by passing arguments in
      registers! How has the use of registers saved any time?
        1 Before about 1960, they were passed not on the stack but in statically allocated blocks of memory,
      which precluded the use of recursive functions.

   There are four answers, any or all of which can be used at the same time:

1. Some procedures don’t call other procedures – these are called leaf proce-
   dures. What proportion of procedures are leaves? Well, if we make the (opti-
   mistic) assumption that the average procedure calls either no other procedures
   or calls at least two others, then we can describe a “tree” of procedure calls in
   which there are more leaves than internal nodes. This means that most proce-
   dures called are leaf procedures.
      Leaf procedures need not write their incoming arguments to memory. In
   fact, often they don’t need to allocate a stack frame at all. This is an important
   savings.
2. Some optimizing compilers use interprocedural register allocation, analyz-
   ing all the functions in an entire program at once. Then they assign different
   procedures different registers in which to receive parameters and hold local
   variables. Thus f (x) might receive x in r1 , but call h(z) with z in r7 .
3. Even if f is not a leaf procedure, it might be finished with all its use of the
   argument x by the time it calls h (technically, x is a dead variable at the point
   where h is called). Then f can overwrite r1 without saving it.
4. Some architectures have register windows, so that each function invocation
   can allocate a fresh set of registers without memory traffic.

   If f needs to write an incoming parameter into the frame, where in the
frame should it go? Ideally, f ’s frame layout should matter only in the imple-
mentation of f . A straightforward approach would be for the caller to pass
arguments a1 , ..., ak in registers and ak+1 , ..., an at the end of its own frame
– the place marked outgoing arguments in Figure 6.2 – which become the
incoming arguments of the callee. If the callee needed to write any of these
arguments to memory, it would write them to the area marked local variables.
   The C programming language actually allows you to take the address of
a formal parameter and guarantees that all the formal parameters of a func-
tion are at consecutive addresses! This is the varargs feature that printf
uses. Allowing programmers to take the address of a parameter can lead to
a dangling reference if the address outlives the frame – as the address of x
will in int *f(int x){return &x;} – and even when it does not lead to
bugs, the consecutive-address rule for parameters constrains the compiler and
makes stack-frame layout more complicated. To resolve the contradiction that
parameters are passed in registers, but have addresses too, the first k param-
eters are passed in registers; but any parameter whose address is taken must
be written to a memory location on entry to the function. To satisfy printf,
the memory locations into which register arguments are written must all be

      consecutive with the memory locations in which arguments k + 1, k + 2, etc.
      are written. Therefore, C programs can’t have some of the arguments saved
      in one place and some saved in another – they must all be saved contiguously.
          So in the standard calling convention of many modern machines the calling
      function reserves space for the register arguments in its own frame, next to
      the place where it writes argument k + 1. But the calling function does not
      actually write anything there; that space is written into by the called function,
      and only if the called function needs to write arguments into memory for any
      reason.
          A more dignified way to take the address of a local variable is to use call-
      by-reference. With call-by-reference, the programmer does not explicitly ma-
      nipulate the address of a variable x. Instead, if x is passed as the argument to
       f (y) where y is a “by-reference” parameter, the compiler generates code to
      pass the address of x instead of the contents of x. At any use of y within the
      function, the compiler generates an extra pointer dereference. With call-by-
      reference, there can be no “dangling reference,” since y must disappear when
       f returns, and f returns before x’s scope ends.

      RETURN ADDRESSES
      When function g calls function f , eventually f must return. It needs to know
      where to go back to. If the call instruction within g is at address a, then
      (usually) the right place to return to is a + 1, the next instruction in g. This is
      called the return address.
         On 1970s machines, the return address was pushed on the stack by the
      call instruction. Modern science has shown that it is faster and more flexi-
      ble to pass the return address in a register, avoiding memory traffic and also
      avoiding the need to build any particular stack discipline into the hardware.
         On modern machines, the call instruction merely puts the return address
      (the address of the instruction after the call) in a designated register. A non-
      leaf procedure will then have to write it to the stack (unless interprocedural
      register allocation is used), but a leaf procedure will not.

      FRAME-RESIDENT VARIABLES
      So a modern procedure-call convention will pass function parameters in reg-
      isters, pass the return address in a register, and return the function result in a
      register. Many of the local variables will be allocated to registers, as will the
      intermediate results of expression evaluation. Values are written to memory
      (in the stack frame) only when necessary for one of these reasons:

• the variable will be passed by reference, so it must have a memory address
  (or, in the C language the & operator is anywhere applied to the variable);
• the variable is accessed by a procedure nested inside the current one;2
• the value is too big to fit into a single register;3
• the variable is an array, for which address arithmetic is necessary to extract
  components;
• the register holding the variable is needed for a specific purpose, such as pa-
  rameter passing (as described above), though a compiler may move such val-
  ues to other registers instead of storing them in memory;
• or there are so many local variables and temporary values that they won’t all
  fit in registers, in which case some of them are “spilled” into the frame.
    We will say that a variable escapes if it is passed by reference, its address
is taken (using C’s & operator), or it is accessed from a nested function.
    When a formal parameter or local variable is declared, it’s convenient to
assign it a location – either in registers or in the stack frame – right at that
point in processing the program. Then, when occurrences of that variable are
found in expressions, they can be translated into machine code that refers
to the right location. Unfortunately, the conditions in our list don’t manifest
themselves early enough. When the compiler first encounters the declaration
of a variable, it doesn’t yet know whether the variable will ever be passed
by reference, accessed in a nested procedure, or have its address taken; and
doesn’t know how many registers the calculation of expressions will require
(it might be desirable to put some local variables in the frame instead of in
registers). An industrial-strength compiler must assign provisional locations
to all formals and locals, and decide later which of them should really go in
registers.

STATIC LINKS
In languages that allow nested function declarations (such as Pascal, ML, and
Tiger), the inner functions may use variables declared in outer functions. This
language feature is called block structure.
   For example, in Program 6.3, write refers to the outer variable output,
and indent refers to outer variables n and output. To make this work, the
function indent must have access not only to its own frame (for variables i
and s) but also to the frames of show (for variable n) and prettyprint (for
variable output).
    2 However, with register allocation across function boundaries, local variables accessed by inner func-
tions can sometimes go in registers, as long as the inner function knows where to look.
    3 However, some compilers spread out a large value into several registers for efficiency.

   1     type tree = {key: string, left: tree, right: tree}
   2
   3     function prettyprint(tree: tree) : string =
   4      let
   5          var output := ""
   6
   7           function write(s: string) =
   8               output := concat(output,s)
   9
  10           function show(n:int, t: tree) =
  11              let function indent(s: string) =
  12                      (for i := 1 to n
  13                        do write(" ");
  14                       output := concat(output,s); write("\n"))
  15               in if t=nil then indent(".")
  16                  else (indent(t.key);
  17                        show(n+1,t.left);
  18                        show(n+1,t.right))
  19              end
  20
  21       in show(0,tree); output
  22      end

PROGRAM 6.3.   Nested functions.

                 There are several methods to accomplish this:
               • Whenever a function f is called, it can be passed a pointer to the frame of the
                 function statically enclosing f ; this pointer is the static link.
               • A global array can be maintained, containing – in position i – a pointer to the
                 frame of the most recently entered procedure whose static nesting depth is i.
                 This array is called a display.
               • When g calls f , each variable of g that is actually accessed by f (or by any
                 function nested inside f ) is passed to f as an extra argument. This is called
                 lambda lifting.

                  I will describe in detail only the method of static links. Which method
               should be used in practice? See Exercise 6.7.
                  Whenever a function f is called, it is passed a pointer to the stack frame
               of the “current” (most recently entered) activation of the function g that im-
               mediately encloses f in the text of the program.
                  For example, in Program 6.3:
               Line #
               21 prettyprint calls show, passing prettyprint’s own frame pointer as
                 show’s static link.

      10 show stores its static link (the address of prettyprint’s frame) into its
        own frame.
      15 show calls indent, passing its own frame pointer as indent’s static link.
      17 show calls show, passing its own static link (not its own frame pointer) as
        the static link.
      12 indent uses the value n from show’s frame. To do so, it fetches at an appro-
        priate offset from indent’s static link (which points at the frame of show).
      13 indent calls write. It must pass the frame pointer of prettyprint as
        the static link. To obtain this, it first fetches at an offset from its own static
        link (from show’s frame), the static link that had been passed to show.
      14 indent uses the variable output from prettyprint’s frame. To do so it
        starts with its own static link, then fetches show’s, then fetches output.4

         So on each procedure call or variable access, a chain of zero or more
      fetches is required; the length of the chain is just the difference in static nest-
      ing depth between the two functions involved.

6.2   FRAMES IN THE Tiger COMPILER

      What sort of stack frames should the Tiger compiler use? Here we face the
      fact that every target machine architecture will have a different standard stack
      frame layout. If we want Tiger functions to be able to call C functions, we
      should use the standard layout. But we don’t want the specifics of any particu-
      lar machine intruding on the implementation of the semantic analysis module
      of the Tiger compiler.
         Thus we must use abstraction. Just as the Symbol module provides a clean
      interface, and hides the internal representation of S_table from its clients,
      we must use an abstract representation for frames.
         The frame interface will look something like this:

         4 This program would be cleaner if show called write here instead of manipulating output
      directly, but it would not be as instructive.

        /* frame.h */

        typedef struct F_frame_ *F_frame;
        typedef struct F_access_ *F_access;

        typedef struct F_accessList_ *F_accessList;
        struct F_accessList_ {F_access head; F_accessList tail;};

        F_frame F_newFrame(Temp_label name, U_boolList formals);
        Temp_label F_name(F_frame f);
        F_accessList F_formals(F_frame f);
        F_access F_allocLocal(F_frame f, bool escape);
          ..
           .

         The abstract interface frame.h is implemented by a module specific to
      the target machine. For example, if compiling to the MIPS architecture, there
      would be a file mipsframe.c containing

        #include "frame.h"
          ..
           .

         In general, we may assume that the machine-independent parts of the com-
      piler have access to this implementation of frame.h; for example,

        /* in translate.c */
        #include "frame.h"
           ..
            .
        F_frame frame = F_newFrame(· · ·);

      In this way the rest of the compiler may access the Frame module without
      knowing the identity of the target machine.
         The type F_frame holds information about formal parameters and local
      variables allocated in this frame. To make a new frame for a function f with
      k formal parameters, call F_newFrame( f , l), where l is a list of k booleans:
      true for each parameter that escapes and false for each parameter that
      does not. The result will be a F_frame object. For example, consider a three-
      argument function named g whose first argument escapes (needs to be kept
      in memory). Then

        F_newFrame(g,U_BoolList(TRUE,
                          U_BoolList(FALSE,
                           U_BoolList(FALSE, NULL))))

returns a new frame object.
   The F_access type describes formals and locals that may be in the frame
or in registers. This is an abstract data type, so the contents of struct
F_access_ are visible only inside the Frame module:

  /* mipsframe.c */
  #include "frame.h"

  struct F_access_
         {enum {inFrame, inReg} kind;
           union {
             int offset;     /* InFrame */
             Temp_temp reg;  /* InReg */
           } u;
        };
  static F_access InFrame(int offset);
  static F_access InReg(Temp_temp reg);

InFrame(X) indicates a memory location at offset X from the frame pointer;
InReg(t84) indicates that it will be held in “register” t84 . F_access is an
abstract data type, so outside of the module the InFrame and InReg con-
structors are not visible. Other modules manipulate accesses using interface
functions to be described in the next chapter.
   The F_formals interface function extracts a list of k “accesses” denoting
the locations where the formal parameters will be kept at run time, as seen
from inside the callee. Parameters may be seen differently by the caller and
the callee. For example, if parameters are passed on the stack, the caller may
put a parameter at offset 4 from the stack pointer, but the callee sees it at offset
4 from the frame pointer. Or the caller may put a parameter into register 6,
but the callee may want to move it out of the way and always access it from
register 13. On the Sparc architecture, with register windows, the caller puts
a parameter into register o1, but the save instruction shifts register windows
so the callee sees this parameter in register i1.
   Because this “shift of view” depends on the calling conventions of the
target machine, it must be handled by the Frame module, starting with new-
Frame. For each formal parameter, newFrame must calculate two things:

• How the parameter will be seen from inside the function (in a register, or in a
  frame location);
• What instructions must be produced to implement the “view shift.”

  For example, a frame-resident parameter will be seen as “memory at offset

               Pentium                 MIPS                           Sparc
           1   InFrame(8)              InFrame(0)                     InFrame(68)
   Formals 2   InFrame(12)             InReg(t157 )                   InReg(t157 )
           3   InFrame(16)             InReg(t158 )                   InReg(t158 )
               M[sp + 0] ← f p         sp ← sp − K                    save %sp,-K,%sp
      View     fp ← sp                 M[sp + K + 0] ← r2             M[fp + 68] ← i0
      Shift    sp ← sp − K             t157 ← r4                      t157 ← i1
                                       t158 ← r5                      t158 ← i2

TABLE 6.4.     Formal parameters for g(x1 , x2 , x3 ) where x1 escapes.

               X from the frame pointer,” and the view shift will be implemented by copying
               the stack pointer to the frame pointer on entry to the procedure.

               REPRESENTATION OF FRAME DESCRIPTIONS
               The implementation module Frame is supposed to keep the representation of
               the F_frame type secret from any clients of the Frame module. But really
               it’s a data structure holding:

               • the locations of all the formals,
               • instructions required to implement the “view shift,”
               • the number of locals allocated so far,
               • and the label at which the function’s machine code is to begin (see page 141).

                  Table 6.4 shows the formals of the three-argument function g (see page 136)
               as newFrame would allocate them on three different architectures: the Pen-
               tium, MIPS, and Sparc. The first parameter escapes, so it needs to be InFrame
               on all three machines. The remaining parameters are InFrame on the Pen-
               tium, but InReg on the other machines.
                  The freshly created temporaries t157 and t158 , and the move instructions that
               copy r4 and r5 into them (or on the Sparc, i1 and i2) may seem superflu-
               ous. Why shouldn’t the body of g just access these formals directly from the
               registers in which they arrive? To see why not, consider

                    function m(x:int, y:int) =             (h(y,y); h(x,x))

               If x stays in “parameter register 1” throughout m, and y is passed to h in
               parameter register 1, then there is a problem.
                  The register allocator will eventually choose which machine register should
               hold t157 . If there is no interference of the type shown in function m, then (on

the MIPS) the allocator will take care to choose register r4 to hold t157 and
r5 to hold t158 . Then the move instructions will be unnecessary and will be
deleted at that time.
   See also pages 172 and 267 for more discussion of the view shift.

LOCAL VARIABLES
Some local variables are kept in the frame; others are kept in registers. To
allocate a new local variable in a frame f , the semantic analysis phase calls

  F_allocLocal( f ,TRUE)

This returns an InFrame access with an offset from the frame pointer. For
example, to allocate two local variables on the Sparc, allocLocal would
be called twice, returning successively InFrame(-4) and InFrame(-8),
which are standard Sparc frame-pointer offsets for local variables.
   The boolean argument to allocLocal specifies whether the new vari-
able escapes and needs to go in the frame; if it is false, then the variable can
be allocated in a register. Thus, F_allocLocal( f ,FALSE) might create
InReg(t481).
   The calls to allocLocal need not come immediately after the frame is
created. In a language such as Tiger or C, there may be variable-declaration
blocks nested inside the body of a function. For example,
     function f() =                            void f()
     let var v := 6                            {int v=6;
      in print(v);                               print(v);
         let var v := 7                          {int v=7;
          in print (v)                             print(v);
         end;                                    }
         print(v);                               print(v);
         let var v := 8                          {int v=8;
          in print (v)                             print(v);
         end;                                    }
         print(v)                                print(v);
     end                                       }

   In each of these cases, there are three different variables v. Either program
will print the sequence 6 7 6 8 6. As each variable declaration is encountered
in processing the Tiger program, allocLocal will be called to allocate a
temporary or new space in the frame, associated with the name v. As each
end (or closing brace) is encountered, the association with v will be forgotten

      – but the space is still reserved in the frame. Thus, there will be a distinct
      temporary or frame slot for every variable declared within the entire function.
         The register allocator will use as few registers as possible to represent the
      temporaries. In this example, the second and third v variables (initialized to
      7 and 8) could be held in the same temporary. A clever compiler might also
      optimize the size of the frame by noticing when two frame-resident variables
      could be allocated to the same slot.

      CALCULATING ESCAPES
      Local variables that do not escape can be allocated in a register; escaping
      variables must be allocated in the frame. A FindEscape function can look
      for escaping variables and record this information in the escape fields of the
      abstract syntax. The simplest way is to traverse the entire abstract syntax tree,
      looking for escaping uses of every variable. This phase must occur before
      semantic analysis begins, since Semant needs to know whether a variable
      escapes immediately upon seeing that variable for the first time.
         The traversal function for FindEscape will be a mutual recursion on ab-
      stract syntax exp’s and var’s, just like the type-checker. And, just like the
      type-checker, it will use environments that map variables to bindings. But in
      this case the binding will be very simple: it will be the boolean flag that is to
      be set if the particular variable escapes:

        /* escape.h */
        void Esc_findEscape(A_exp exp);

        /* escape.c */
        static void traverseExp(S_table env, int depth, A_exp e);
        static void traverseDec(S_table env, int depth, A_dec d);
        static void traverseVar(S_table env, int depth, A_var v);

         Whenever a variable or formal-parameter declaration is found at static
      function-nesting depth d, such as

        A_VarDec{name=symbol(“a”), escape=r ,...}

      then EscapeEntry(d,&(x->escape)) is entered into the environment,
      and x->escape is set to FALSE.
         This new environment is used in processing expressions within the scope
      of the variable; whenever a is used at depth > d, then the escape field of x
      is set to TRUE.

   For a language where addresses of variables can be taken explicitly by
the programmer, or where there are call-by-reference parameters, a similar
FindEscape can find variables that escape in those ways.

TEMPORARIES AND LABELS
The compiler’s semantic analysis phase will want to choose registers for pa-
rameters and local variables, and choose machine-code addresses for proce-
dure bodies. But it is too early to determine exactly which registers are avail-
able, or exactly where a procedure body will be located. We use the word
temporary to mean a value that is temporarily held in a register, and the word
label to mean some machine-language location whose exact address is yet to
be determined – just like a label in assembly language.
   Temps are abstract names for local variables; labels are abstract names
for static memory addresses. The Temp module manages these two distinct
sets of names.

   /* temp.h */

  typedef struct Temp_temp_ *Temp_temp;
  Temp_temp Temp_newtemp(void);

  typedef S_symbol Temp_label;
  Temp_label Temp_newlabel(void);
  Temp_label Temp_namedlabel(string name);
  string Temp_labelstring(Temp_label s);

  typedef struct Temp_tempList_ *Temp_tempList;
  struct Temp_tempList_ {Temp_temp head; Temp_tempList tail;}
  Temp_tempList Temp_TempList(Temp_temp head,
                                         Temp_tempList tail);
  typedef struct Temp_labelList_ *Temp_labelList;
  struct Temp_labelList_{Temp_label head; Temp_labelList tail;}
  Temp_labelList Temp_LabelList(Temp_label head,
                                             Temp_labelList tail);
     ···
    /* Temp˙map type, and operations on it, described on page 207 */

Temp_newtemp() returns a new temporary from an infinite set of temps.
Temp_newlabel() returns a new label from an infinite set of labels. And
Temp_namedlabel(string) returns a new label whose assembly-language
name is string.
   When processing the declaration function f(· · ·), a label for the ad-
dress of f’s machine code can be produced by Temp_newlabel(). It’s tempt-

      ing to call Temp_namedlabel("f") instead – the assembly-language pro-
      gram will be easier to debug if it uses the label f instead of L213 – but unfor-
      tunately there could be two different functions named f in different scopes.

      TWO LAYERS OF ABSTRACTION
      Our Tiger compiler will have two layers of abstraction between semantic
      analysis and frame-layout details:

                   semant.c
                 translate.h
                 translate.c
           frame.h           temp.h
           µframe.c          temp.c

         The frame.h and temp.h interfaces provide machine-independent views
      of memory-resident and register-resident variables. The Translate module
      augments this by handling the notion of nested scopes (via static links), pro-
      viding the interface translate.h to the Semant module.
         It is essential to have an abstraction layer at frame.h, to separate the
      source-language semantics from the machine-dependent frame layout (µ stands
      for a target machine such as mips, sparc, pentium). Separating Semant
      from Translate at the translate.h interface is not absolutely necessary:
      we do it to avoid a huge, unwieldy module that does both type-checking and
      semantic translation.
         In Chapter 7, we will see how Translate provides C functions that are
      useful in producing intermediate representation from abstract syntax. Here,
      we need to know how Translate manages local variables and static function
      nesting for Semant.

         /* translate.h */

        typedef struct Tr_access_ *Tr_access;

        typedef · · · Tr_accessList · · ·
        Tr_accessList Tr_AccessList(Tr_access head,
                                          Tr_accessList tail);

        Tr_level Tr_outermost(void);
        Tr_level Tr_newLevel(Tr_level parent, Temp_label name,
                             U_boolList formals);
        Tr_accessList Tr_formals(Tr_level level);
        Tr_access Tr_allocLocal(Tr_level level, bool escape);

   In the semantic analysis phase of the Tiger compiler, transDec creates a
new “nesting level” for each function by calling Tr_newLevel. That func-
tion in turn calls F_newFrame to make a new frame. Semant keeps this
level in its FunEntry data structure for the function, so that when it comes
across a function call it can pass the called function’s level back to Trans-
late. The FunEntry also needs the label of the function’s machine-code
entry point:

  /* new versions of VarEntry and FunEntry */
  struct E_enventry_ {
          enum {E_varEntry, E_funEntry} kind;
          union {struct {Tr_access access; Ty_ty ty;} var;
                     struct {Tr_level level; Temp_label label;
                            Ty_tyList formals; Ty_ty result;} fun;
                     } u;
          };

  E_enventry E_VarEntry(Tr_access access, Ty_ty ty);
  E_enventry E_FunEntry(Tr_level level, Temp_label label,
                        Ty_tyList formals, Ty_ty result);

   When Semant processes a local variable declaration at level lev, it calls
Tr_allocLocal(lev,esc) to create the variable in this level; the argu-
ment esc specifies whether the variable escapes. The result is a Tr_access,
which is an abstract data type (not the same as F_access, since it must know
about static links). Later, when the variable is used in an expression, Semant
can hand this access back to Translate in order to generate the machine
code to access the variable. Meanwhile, Semant records the access in each
VarEntry in the value-environment.
   The abstract data type Tr_access can be implemented as a pair consisting
of the variable’s level and its F_access:

  /* inside translate.c */
  struct Tr_access_ {Tr_level level; F_access access;};

so that Tr_allocLocal calls F_allocLocal, and also remembers what
level the variable lives in. The level information will be necessary later for
calculating static links, when the variable is accessed from a (possibly) dif-
ferent level.

MANAGING STATIC LINKS
The Frame module should be independent of the specific source language
being compiled. Many source languages do not have nested function declara-

      tions; thus, Frame should not know anything about static links. Instead, this
      is the responsibility of Translate.
          Translate knows that each frame contains a static link. The static link
      is passed to a function in a register and stored into the frame. Since the static
      link behaves so much like a formal parameter, we will treat it as one (as much
      as possible). For a function with k “ordinary” parameters, let l be the list of
      booleans signifying whether the parameters escape. Then

        l ? = U_BoolList(TRUE, l)

      is a new list; the extra TRUE at the front signifies that the static link “extra
      parameter” does escape. Then newFrame(label, l ? ) makes the frame whose
      formal parameter list includes the “extra” parameter.
         Suppose, for example, function f (x, y) is nested inside function g, and the
      level (previously created) for g is called levelg . Then transDec (inside
      semant.c) can call

        Tr_newLevel(levelg , f ,
                    U_BoolList(FALSE, U_BoolList(FALSE, NULL)))

      assuming that neither x nor y escapes. Then Tr_newLevel(label,fmls)
      adds an extra element to the formal-parameter list (for the static link), and
      calls

        F_newFrame(label,U_BoolList(TRUE, fmls))

      What comes back is a F_frame. In this frame are three frame-offset values,
      accessible by calling F_formals(frame). The first of these is the static-
      link offset; the other two are the offsets for x and y. When Semant calls
      Tr_formals(level), it will get these two offsets, suitably converted into
      access values.

      KEEPING TRACK OF LEVELS
      With every call to Tr_newLevel, Semant must pass the enclosing level
      value. When creating the level for the “main” Tiger program (one not within
      any Tiger function), Semant should pass a special level value, obtained by
      calling Tr_outermost(). This is not the level of the Tiger main program,
      it is the level within which that program is nested. All “library” functions are
      declared (as described at the end of Section 5.2) at this outermost level, which
      does not contain a frame or formal parameter list. Tr_outermost() returns

          PROGRAMMING EXERCISE

          the same level every time it is called; it is a function just because initializing
          global variables to heap-allocated values is difficult in C.
             The function transDec will make a new level for each Tiger function
          declaration. But Tr_newLevel must be told the enclosing function’s level.
          This means that transDec must know, while processing each declaration,
          the current static nesting level.
             This is easy: transDec will now get an additional argument (in addition
          to the type and value environments) that is the current level as given by
          the appropriate call to newLevel. And transExp will also require this ar-
          gument, so that transDec can pass a level to transExp, which passes it
          in turn to transDec to process declarations of nested functions. For similar
          reasons, transVar will also need a level argument.

PROGRAM   FRAMES
          Augment semant.c to allocate locations for local variables, and to keep
          track of the nesting level. To keep things simple, assume every variable es-
          capes.
             Implement the Translate module as translate.c.
             If you are compiling for the Sparc, implement the SparcFrame module
          (matching frame.h) as sparcframe.c. If compiling for the MIPS, imple-
          ment MipsFrame, and so on.
             Try to keep all the machine-specific details in your machine-dependent
          Frame module, not in Semant or Translate.
             To keep things simple, handle only escaping parameters. That is, when
          implementing newFrame, handle only the case where all “escape” indicators
          are TRUE.
             If you are working on a RISC machine (such as MIPS or Sparc) that passes
          the first k parameters in registers and the rest in memory, keep things simple
          by handling only the case where there are k or fewer parameters.

          Optional: Implement FindEscape, the module that sets the escape field
          of every variable in the abstract syntax. Modify your transDec function to
          allocate nonescaping variables and formal parameters in registers.

          Optional: Handle functions with more than k formal parameters.
            Supporting files available in $TIGER/chap6 include:

          temp.h, temp.c The module supporting temporaries and labels.

FURTHER
READING

            The use of a single contiguous stack to hold variables and return addresses
            dates from Lisp [McCarthy 1960] and Algol [Naur et al. 1963]. Block struc-
            ture (the nesting of functions) and the use of static links are also from Algol.
               Computers and compilers of the 1960s and ’70s kept most program vari-
            ables in memory, so that there was less need to worry about which variables
            escaped (needed addresses). The VAX, built in 1978, had a procedure-call
            instruction that assumed all arguments were pushed on the stack, and itself
            pushed program counter, frame pointer, argument pointer, argument count,
            and callee-save register mask on the stack [Leonard 1987].
               With the RISC revolution [Patterson 1985] came the idea that procedure
            calling can be done with much less memory traffic. Local variables should be
            kept in registers by default; storing and fetching should be done as needed,
            driven by “spilling” in the register allocator [Chaitin 1982].
               Most procedures don’t have more than five arguments and five local vari-
            ables [Tanenbaum 1978]. To take advantage of this, Chow et al. [1986] and
            Hopkins [1986] designed calling conventions optimized for the common case:
            the first four arguments are passed in registers, with the (rare) extra arguments
            passed in memory; compilers use both caller- and callee-save registers for lo-
            cal variables; leaf procedures don’t even stack frames of their own if they can
            operate within the caller-save registers; and even the return address need not
            always be pushed on the stack.

EXERCISES

       6.1 Using the C compiler of your choice (or a compiler for another language),
            compile some small test functions into assembly language. On Unix this is
            usually done by cc -S. Turn on all possible compiler optimizations. Then
            evaluate the compiled programs by these criteria:
            a. Are local variables kept in registers?
            b. If local variable b is live across more than one procedure call, is it kept
               in a callee-save register? Explain how doing this would speed up the
               following program:
                 int f(int a) {int b; b=a+1; g(); h(b); return b+2;}

     EXERCISES

     c. If local variable x is never live across a procedure call, is it properly
        kept in a caller-save register? Explain how doing this would speed up the
        following program:
           void h(int y) {int x; x=y+1; f(y); f(2);}

6.2 If you have a C compiler that passes parameters in registers, make it generate
     assembly language for this function:

           extern void h(int, int);
           void m(int x, int y) {h(y,y); h(x,x);}

     Clearly, if arguments to m(x, y) arrive in registers rarg1 and rarg2 , and arguments
     to h must be passed in rarg1 and rarg2 , then x cannot stay in rarg1 during the
     marshalling of arguments to h(y, y). Explain when and how your C compiler
     moves x out of the rarg1 register so as to call h(y, y).
6.3 For each of the variables a, b, c, d, e in this C program, say whether the variable
     should be kept in memory or a register, and why.

        int f(int a, int b)
        { int c[3], d, e;
          d=a+1;
          e=g(c, &b);
          return e+c[1]+b;
        }

*6.4 How much memory should this program use?

        int f(int i) {int j,k; j=i*i; k=i?f(i-1):0; return k+j;}
        void main() {f(100000);}

     a. Imagine a compiler that passes parameters in registers, wastes no space
        providing “backup storage” for parameters passed in registers, does not
        use static links, and in general makes stack frames as small as possible.
        How big should each stack frame for f be, in words?
     b. What is the maximum memory use of this program, with such a compiler?
     c. Using your favorite C compiler, compile this program to assembly lan-
        guage and report the size of f ’s stack frame.
     d. Calculate the total memory use of this program with the real C compiler.
     e. Quantitatively and comprehensively explain the discrepancy between (a)
        and (c).
     f. Comment on the likelihood that the designers of this C compiler consid-
        ered deeply recursive functions important in real programs.

      *6.5 Some Tiger functions do not need static links, because they do not make use of
             a particular feature of the Tiger language.
             a. Characterize precisely those functions that do not need a static link
                passed to them.
             b. Give an algorithm (perhaps similar to FindEscape) that marks all such
                functions.
      *6.6 Instead of (or in addition to) using static links, there are other ways of getting
             access to nonlocal variables. One way is just to leave the variable in a register!

                function f() : int =
                  let var a := 5
                      function g() : int =
                         (a+1)
                   in g()+g()
                  end

             If a is left in register r7 (for example) while g is called, then g can just access it
             from there.
                 What properties must a local variable, the function in which it is defined,
             and the functions in which it is used, have for this trick to work?
      *6.7     A display is a data structure that may be used as an alternative to static links
             for maintaining access to nonlocal variables. It is an array of frame pointers,
             indexed by static nesting depth. Element Di of the display always points to the
             most recently called function whose static nesting depth is i .
                  The bookkeeping performed by a function f , whose static nesting depth is
             i , looks like:

                Copy Di to save location in stack frame
                Copy frame pointer to Di
                  · · · body of f · · ·
                Copy save location back to Di

             In Program 6.3, function prettyprint is at depth 1, write and show are at
             depth 2, and so on.
             a. Show the sequence of machine instructions required to fetch the variable
                output into a register at line 14 of Program 6.3, using static links.
             b. Show the machine instructions required if a display were used instead.
             c. When variable x is declared at depth d1 and accessed at depth d2 , how
                many instructions does the static-link method require to fetch x?
             d. How many does the display method require?

EXERCISES

e. How many instructions does static-link maintenance require for a proce-
   dure entry and exit (combined)?
f. How many instructions does display maintenance require for procedure
   entry and exit?
Should we use displays instead of static links? Perhaps; but the issue is more
complicated. For languages such as Pascal and Tiger with block structure but
no function variables, displays work well.
   But the full expressive power of block structure is obtained when functions
can be returned as results of other functions, as in Scheme and ML. For such
languages, there are more issues to consider than just variable-access time and
procedure entry-exit cost: there is closure-building cost, and the problem of
avoiding useless data kept live in closures. Chapter 15 explains some of the
issues.

