       13
       Garbage Collection

       gar-bage: unwanted or useless material
                                           Webster’s Dictionary

       Heap-allocated records that are not reachable by any chain of pointers from
       program variables are garbage. The memory occupied by garbage should be
       reclaimed for use in allocating new records. This process is called garbage
       collection, and is performed not by the compiler but by the runtime system
       (the support programs linked with the compiled code).
          Ideally, we would say that any record that is not dynamically live (will
       not be used in the future of the computation) is garbage. But, as Section 10.1
       explains, it is not always possible to know whether a variable is live. So we
       will use a conservative approximation: we will require the compiler to guar-
       antee that any live record is reachable; we will ask the compiler to minimize
       the number of reachable records that are not live; and we will preserve all
       reachable records, even if some of them might not be live.
          Figure 13.1 shows a Tiger program ready to undergo garbage collection (at
       the point marked garbage-collect here). There are only three program vari-
       ables in scope: p, q, and r.

13.1   MARK-AND-SWEEP COLLECTION

       Program variables and heap-allocated records form a directed graph. The
       variables are roots of this graph. A node n is reachable if there is a path
       of directed edges r → · · · → n starting at some root r. A graph-search algo-
       rithm such as depth-first search (Algorithm 13.2) can mark all the reachable
       nodes.

  let                                                           Program       Heap
    type list = {link: list,                                    Variables
                    key: int}                                                  12
    type tree = {key: int,                                      p   .          ..
                    left: tree,                                 q   37
                    right: tree}                                r   .          15
                                                                                ..
    function maketree() = · · ·
    function showtree(t: tree) = · · ·
   in                                                                            .
    let var x := list{link=nil,key=7}                                          7
                                                                               37
        var y := list{link=x,key=9}
     in x.link := y                                                            ..
    end;
                                                                               59
    let var p := maketree()
        var r := p.right
                                                                                ..
        var q := r.key
     in garbage-collect here                                                     .
                                                                               9
        showtree(r)
                                                                               20
    end
  end
                                                                               ..
FIGURE 13.1.        A heap to be garbage collected.

  function DFS(x)
    if x is a pointer into the heap
       if record x is not marked
          mark x
          for each field f i of record x
              DFS(x. f i )

ALGORITHM 13.2. Depth-first search.

                       Any node not marked must be garbage, and should be reclaimed. This can
                    be done by a sweep of the entire heap, from its first address to its last, looking
                    for nodes that are not marked (Algorithm 13.3). These are garbage and can
                    be linked together in a linked list (the freelist). The sweep phase should also
                    unmark all the marked nodes, in preparation for the next garbage collection.
                       After the garbage collection, the compiled program resumes execution.
                    Whenever it wants to heap-allocate a new record, it gets a record from the
                    freelist. When the freelist becomes empty, that is a good time to do another
                    garbage collection to replenish the freelist.

                     13.1. MARK-AND-SWEEP COLLECTION

  Mark phase:                         Sweep phase:
   for each root v                     p ← first address in heap
       DFS(v)                          while p < last address in heap
                                             if record p is marked
                                                  unmark p
                                             else let f 1 be the first field in p
                                                   p. f1 ← freelist
                                                   freelist ← p
                                             p ← p+(size of record p)

ALGORITHM 13.3. Mark-and-sweep garbage collection.

                     Cost of garbage collection. Depth-first search takes time proportional to the
                     number of nodes it marks, that is, time proportional to the amount of reach-
                     able data. The sweep phase takes time proportional to the size of the heap.
                     Suppose there are R words of reachable data in a heap of size H . Then the
                     cost of one garbage collection is c1 R + c2 H for some constants c1 and c2 ; for
                     example, c1 might be 10 instructions and c2 might be 3 instructions.
                        The “good” that collection does is to replenish the freelist with H − R
                     words of usable memory. Therefore, we can compute the amortized cost of
                     collection by dividing the time spent collecting by the amount of garbage
                     reclaimed. That is, for every word that the compiled program allocates, there
                     is an eventual garbage-collection cost of
                        c1 R + c2 H
                           H−R
                         If R is close to H , this cost becomes very large: each garbage collection
                     reclaims only a few words of garbage. If H is much larger than R, then the
                     cost per allocated word is approximately c2 , or about three instructions of
                     garbage-collection cost per word allocated.
                         The garbage collector can measure H (the heap size) and H − R (the free-
                     list size) directly. After a collection, if R/H is larger than 0.5 (or some other
                     criterion), the collector should increase H by asking the operating system
                     for more memory. Then the cost per allocated word will be approximately
                     c1 + 2c2 , or perhaps 16 instructions per word.

                     Using an explicit stack. The DFS algorithm is recursive, and the maximum
                     depth of its recursion is as long as the longest path in the graph of reachable

                        12                                        12

         .                  .                   .                 .
      p
      q 37
                            .             p
                                          q 37
                                                                  .
      r  .              15
                            .             r     .                 15
                                                                  .
                            .                                     .
                            .                                     .
                            7                                     7

                        37                                        37
                            .                                     .
                            .                                     .
                        59                                        59
                            ..                                    ..
                             .                                     .
                            9                                     9

                        20                      .                 20
                            .                                     .
                            .              freelist
                                                                  .
               (a) Marked                             (b) Swept

FIGURE 13.4.       Mark-and-sweep collection.

                   data. There could be a path of length H in the worst case, meaning that the
                   stack of activation records would be larger than the entire heap!
                      To attack this problem, we use an explicit stack (instead of recursion), as
                   in Algorithm 13.5. Now the stack could still grow to size H , but at least this
                   is H words and not H activation records. Still, it is unacceptable to require
                   auxiliary stack memory as large as the heap being collected.

                   Pointer reversal. After the contents of field x. f i has been pushed on the
                   stack, Algorithm 13.5 will never again look the original location x. fi . This
                   means we can use x. fi to store one element of the stack itself! This all-too-
                   clever idea is called pointer reversal, because x. fi will be made to point back
                   to the record from which x was reached. Then, as the stack is popped, the
                   field x. fi will be restored to its original value.
                      Algorithm 13.6 requires a field in each record called done, which indicates
                   how many fields in that record have been processed. This takes only a few

                    13.1. MARK-AND-SWEEP COLLECTION

  function DFS(x)
   if x is a pointer and record x is not marked
     t ←1
     stack[t] ← x
     while t > 0
            x ← stack[t]; t ← t − 1
            for each field f i of record x
                if x. f i is a pointer and record x. fi is not marked
                   mark x. fi
                   t ← t + 1; stack[t] ← x. f i

ALGORITHM 13.5. Depth-first search using an explicit stack.

                    bits per record (and it can also serve as the mark field).
                       The variable t serves as the top of the stack; every record x on the stack is
                    already marked, and if i = done[x] then x. f i is the “stack link” to the next
                    node down. When popping the stack, x. fi is restored to its original value.

                    An array of freelists. The sweep phase is the same no matter which marking
                    algorithm is used: it just puts the unmarked records on the freelist, and un-
                    marks the marked records. But if records are of many different sizes, a simple
                    linked list will not be very efficient for the allocator. When allocating a record
                    of size n, it may have to search a long way down the list for a free block of
                    that size.
                       A good solution is to have an array of several freelists, so that freelist[i] is
                    a linked list of all records of size i. The program can allocate a node of size i
                    just by taking the head of freelist[i]; the sweep phase of the collector can put
                    each node of size j at the head of freelist[ j ].
                       If the program attempts to allocate from an empty freelist[i], it can try
                    to grab a larger record from freelist[ j ] (for j > i) and split it (putting the
                    unused portion back on freelist[ j − i]). If this fails, it is time to call the
                    garbage collector to replenish the freelists.

                    Fragmentation. It can happen that the program wants to allocate a record of
                    size n, and there are many free records smaller than n but none of the right
                    size. This is called external fragmentation. On the other hand, internal frag-
                    mentation occurs when the program uses a too-large record without splitting
                    it, so that the unused memory is inside the record instead of outside.

  function DFS(x)
   if x is a pointer and record x is not marked
     t ← nil
     mark x; done[x] ← 0
     while true
            i ← done[x]
            if i < # of fields in record x
               y ← x. fi
               if y is a pointer and record y is not marked
                  x. f i ← t; t ← x; x ← y
                  mark x; done[x] ← 0
               else
                  done[x] ← i + 1
            else
               y ← x; x ← t
               if x = nil then return
               i ← done[x]
               t ← x. fi ; x. f i ← y
               done[x] ← i + 1

ALGORITHM 13.6. Depth-first search using pointer reversal.

 13.2              REFERENCE COUNTS

                   One day a student came to Moon and said: “I understand
                   how to make a better garbage collector. We must keep a
                   reference count of the pointers to each cons.”
                   Moon patiently told the student the following story:
                      “One day a student came to Moon and said: ‘I under-
                       stand how to make a better garbage collector ...’ ”

                                               (MIT-AI koan by Danny Hillis)

                   Mark-sweep collection identifies the garbage by first finding out what is reach-
                   able. Instead, it can be done directly by keeping track of how many pointers
                   point to each record: this is the reference count of the record, and it is stored
                   with each record.

13.2. REFERENCE COUNTS

    The compiler emits extra instructions so that whenever p is stored into
x. fi , the reference count of p is incremented, and the reference count of what
x. fi previously pointed to is decremented. If the decremented reference count
of some record r reaches zero, then r is put on the freelist and all the other
records that r points to have their reference counts decremented.
    Instead of decrementing the counts of r. f i when r is put on the freelist,
it is better to do this “recursive” decrementing when r is removed from the
freelist, for two reasons:
1. It breaks up the “recursive decrementing” work into shorter pieces, so that
    the program can run more smoothly (this is important only for interactive or
    real-time programs).
2. The compiler must emit code (at each decrement) to check whether the count
    has reached zero and put the record on the freelist, but the recursive decre-
    menting will be done only in one place, in the allocator.

   Reference counting seems simple and attractive. But there are two major
problems:

1. Cycles of garbage cannot be reclaimed. In Figure 13.1, for example, there is a
   loop of list cells (whose keys are 7 and 9) that are not reachable from program
   variables; but each has a reference count of 1.
2. Incrementing the reference counts is very expensive indeed. In place of the
   single machine instruction x. f i ← p, the program must execute

      z       ← x. f i
      c       ← z.count
      c       ← c−1
      z.count ← c
      if c = 0 call putOnFreelist
      x. f i  ←p
      c       ← p.count
      c       ← c+1
      p.count ← c

   A naive reference counter will increment and decrement the counts on ev-
ery assignment to a program variable. Because this would be extremely ex-
pensive, many of the increments and decrements are eliminated using dataflow
analysis: As a pointer value is fetched and then propagated through local vari-
ables, the compiler can aggregate the many changes in the count to a single
increment, or (if the net change is zero) no extra instructions at all. However,
even with this technique there are many ref-count increments and decrements
that remain, and their cost is very high.

           There are two possible solutions to the “cycles” problem. The first is sim-
        ply to require the programmer to explicitly break all cycles when she is done
        with a data structure. This is less annoying than putting explicit free calls (as
        would be necessary without any garbage collection at all), but it is hardly
        elegant. The other solution is to combine reference counting (for eager and
        nondisruptive reclamation of garbage) with an occasional mark-sweep col-
        lection (to reclaim the cycles).
           On the whole, the problems with reference counting outweigh its advan-
        tages, and it is rarely used for automatic storage management in programming
        language environments.

 13.3   COPYING COLLECTION

        The reachable part of the heap is a directed graph, with records as nodes, and
        pointers as edges, and program variables as roots. Copying garbage collection
        traverses this graph (in a part of the heap called from-space), building an
        isomorphic copy in a fresh area of the heap (called to-space). The to-space
        copy is compact, occupying contiguous memory without fragmentation (that
        is, without free records interspersed with the reachable data). The roots are
        made to point at the to-space copy; then the entire from-space (garbage, plus
        the previously reachable graph) is unreachable.
            Figure 13.7 illustrates the situation before and after a copying collection.
        Before the collection, from-space is full of reachable nodes and garbage;
        there is no place left to allocate, since next has reached limit. After the
        collection, the area of to-space between next and limit is available for the
        compiled program to allocate new records. Because the new-allocation area
        is contiguous, allocating a new record of size n into pointer p is very easy:
        just copy next to p, and increment next by n. Copying collection does not
        have a fragmentation problem.
            Eventually, the program will allocate enough that next reaches limit;
        then another garbage collection is needed. The roles of from-space and to-
        space are swapped, and the reachable data are again copied.

        Initiating a collection. To start a new collection, the pointer next is initial-
        ized to point at the beginning of to-space; as each reachable record in from-
        space is found, it is copied to to-space at position next, and next incre-
        mented by the size of the record.

                   13.3. COPYING COLLECTION

      from-                to-           from-                 to-
      space     roots      space         space      roots      space

                                                                         next

               next
               limit                                                     limit
         (a) Before collection                   (b) After collection

FIGURE 13.7.       Copying collection.

  function Forward( p)
     if p points to from-space
        then if p. f 1 points to to-space
             then return p. f1
             else for each field f i of p
                        next. f i ← p. f i
                   p. f1 ← next
                  next ← next+ size of record p
                  return p. f 1
        else return p

ALGORITHM 13.8. Forwarding a pointer.

                   Forwarding. The basic operation of copying collection is forwarding a
                   pointer; that is, given a pointer p that points to from-space, make p point
                   to to-space (Algorithm 13.8).
                      There are three cases:

                   1. If p points to a from-space record that has already been copied, then p. f 1 is
                      a special forwarding pointer that indicates where the copy is. The forwarding
                      pointer can be identified just by the fact that it points within the to-space, as
                      no ordinary from-space field could point there.
                   2. If p points to a from-space record that has not yet been copied, then it is
                      copied to location next; and the forwarding pointer is installed into p. f 1 . It’s

  scan ← next ← beginning of to-space
  for each root r
      r ← Forward(r)
  while scan < next
      for each field f i of record at scan
          scan. f i ← Forward(scan. f i )
      scan ← scan+ size of record at scan

ALGORITHM 13.9. Breadth-first copying garbage collection.

                     all right to overwrite the f 1 field of the old record, because all the data have
                     already been copied to the to-space at next.
                  3. If p is not a pointer at all, or if it points outside from-space (to a record outside
                     the garbage-collected arena, or to to-space), then forwarding p does nothing.

                  Cheney’s algorithm. The simplest algorithm for copying collection uses
                  breadth-first search to traverse the reachable data (Algorithm 13.9, illustrated
                  in Figure 13.10). First, the roots are forwarded. This copies a few records
                  (those reachable directly from root pointers) to to-space, thereby increment-
                  ing next.
                      The area between scan and next contains records that have been copied
                  to to-space, but whose fields have not yet been forwarded: in general, these
                  fields point to from-space. The area between the beginning of to-space and
                  scan contains records that have been copied and forwarded, so that all the
                  pointers in this area point to to-space. The while loop of (Algorithm 13.9)
                  moves scan toward next, but copying records will cause next to move
                  also. Eventually, scan catches up with next after all the reachable data are
                  copied to to-space.
                      Cheney’s algorithm requires no external stack, and no pointer reversal: it
                  uses the to-space area between scan and next as the queue of its breadth-
                  first search. This makes it considerably simpler to implement than depth-first
                  search with pointer reversal.

                  Locality of reference. However, pointer data structures copied by breadth-
                  first have poor locality of reference: If a record at address a points to another
                  record at address b, it is likely that a and b will be far apart. Conversely, the
                  record at a +8 is likely to be unrelated to the one at a. Records that are copied
                  near each other are those whose distance from the roots are equal.

                       13.3. COPYING COLLECTION

  from-space   roots    to-space       from-space roots   to-space      from-space roots   to-space

      12
                            scan
                                           12     p .      15
                                                                scan

                                                                             ..   p .      15
                                                                                            .
       ..       .p          next
                                            ..    q 37
                                                    .      .                      q 37
                                                                                    .
                . qr
                37                                r        .                      r         .    scan
      15                                                   37                              37
        ..                                   ..            ..               ..              ..
                                                                next
         .                                    .                              .             12
                                                                                            ..
       7                                    7                                7

      37                                                                                         next
       .                                    ..                              ..
       .
      59                                   59                               59
       ..                                    ..                              ..
        .                                     .                               .
       9                                    9                                9

      20                                   20                               20
       ..                                   ..                              ..
     (a) Before collection                (b) Roots forwarded            (c) One record scanned

FIGURE 13.10.          Breadth-first copying collection.

                           In a computer system with virtual memory, or with a memory cache, good
                       locality of reference is important. After the program fetches address a, then
                       the memory subsystem expects addresses near a to be fetched soon. So it
                       ensures that the entire page or cache line containing a and nearby addresses
                       can be quickly accessed.
                           Suppose the program is fetching down a chain of n pointers in a linked
                       list. If the records in the list are scattered around memory, each on a page (or
                       cache line) containing completely unrelated data, then we expect n difference
                       pages or cache lines to be active. But if successive records in the chain are
                       at adjacent addresses, then only n/k pages (cache lines) need to be active,
                       where k records fit on each page (cache line).
                           Depth-first copying gives better locality, since each object a will tend to be
                       adjacent to its first child b; unless b is adjacent to another “parent” a . Other
                       children of a may not be adjacent to a, but if the subtree b is small, then they
                       should be nearby.
                           But depth-first copy requires pointer-reversal, which is inconvenient and

  function Forward( p)
     if p points to from-space
        then if p. f 1 points to to-space
             then return p. f1
             else Chase( p); return p. f1
        else return p

  function Chase( p)
     repeat
       q ← next
       next ← next+ size of record p
       r ← nil
       for each field f i of record p
           q. fi ← p. f i
           if q. f i points to from-space and q. f i . f 1 does not point to to-space
           then r ← q. fi
       p. f1 ← q
       p←r
     until p = nil

ALGORITHM 13.11. Semi-depth-first forwarding.

                    slow. A hybrid, partly depth-first and partly breadth-first algorithm can pro-
                    vide acceptable locality. The basic idea is to use breadth-first copying, but
                    whenever an object is copied, see if some child can be copied near it (Algo-
                    rithm 13.11).

                    Cost of garbage collection. Breadth-first search (or the semi-depth-first vari-
                    ant) takes time proportional to the number of nodes it marks; that is, c3 R for
                    some constant c3 (perhaps equal to 10 instructions). There is no sweep phase,
                    so c3 R is the total cost of collection. The heap is divided into two semi-spaces,
                    so each collection reclaims H/2 − R words that can be allocated before the
                    next collection. The amortized cost of collection is thus
                         c3 R
                       H
                       2
                          −R

                    instructions per word allocated.

                     13.4. GENERATIONAL COLLECTION

        roots       G0                              roots                      G0

                    G1                                          G1

                               remembered                                  remembered
                                   set                                         set
                    G2                                          G2

                (a) Before collection                       (b) After collection

FIGURE 13.12.        Generational collection. The bold arrow is one of the rare
                     pointers from an older generation to a newer one.

                        As H grows much larger than R, this cost approaches zero. That is, there is
                     no inherent lower bound to the cost of garbage collection. In a more realistic
                     setting, where H = 4R, the cost would be about 10 instructions per word al-
                     located. This is rather costly in space and time: it requires four times as much
                     memory as reachable data, and requires 40 instructions of overhead for every
                     4-word object allocated. To reduce both space and time costs significantly,
                     we use generational collection.

 13.4                GENERATIONAL COLLECTION

                     In many programs, newly created objects are likely to die soon; but an object
                     that is still reachable after many collections will probably survive for many
                     collections more. Therefore the collector should concentrate its effort on the
                     “young” data, where there is a higher proportion of garbage.
                        We divide the heap into generations, with the youngest objects in gen-
                     eration G 0 ; every object in generation G 1 is older than any object in G 0 ;
                     everything in G 2 is older than anything in G 1 and so on.
                        To collect (by mark-and-sweep or by copying) just G 0 , just start from
                     the roots and do either depth-first marking or breadth-first copying (or semi-
                     depth-first copying). But now the roots are not just program variables: they

      include any pointer within G 1 , G 2 , . . . that points into G 0 . If there are too
      many of these, then processing the roots will take longer than the traversal of
      reachable objects within G 0 !
         Fortunately, it is rare for an older object to point to a much younger object.
      In many common programming styles, when an object a is created its fields
      are immediately initialized; for example, they might be made to point to b and
      c. But b and c already exist; they are older than a. So we have a newer object
      pointing to an older object. The only way that an older object b could point
      to a newer object a is if some field of b is updated long after b is created; this
      turns out to be rare.
         To avoid searching all of G 1 , G 2 , . . . for roots of G 0 , we make the com-
      piled program remember where there are pointers from old objects to new
      ones. There are several ways of remembering:
      Remembered list: The compiler generates code, after each update store of the
        form b. f i ← a, to put b into a vector of updated objects. Then, at each
        garbage collection, the collector scans the remembered list looking for old
        objects b that point into G 0 .
      Remembered set: Like the remembered list, but uses a bit within object b to
        record that b is already in the vector. Then the code generated by the compiler
        can check this bit to avoid duplicate references to b in the vector.
      Card marking: Divide memory into logical “cards” of size 2k bytes. An object
        can occupy part of a card or can start in the middle of one card and continue
        onto the next. Whenever address b is updated, the card containing that address
        is marked. There is an array of bytes that serve as marks; the byte index can
        be found by shifting address b right by k bits.
      Page marking: This is like card marking, but if 2k is the page size, then the
        computer’s virtual memory system can be used instead of extra instructions
        generated by the compiler. Updating an old generation sets a dirty bit for
        that page. If the operating system does not make dirty bits available to user
        programs, then the user program can implement this by write-protecting the
        page and asking the operating system to refer protection violations to a user-
        mode fault handler that records the dirtiness and unprotects the page.

      When a garbage collection begins, the remembered set tells which objects (or
      cards, or pages) of the old generation can possibly contain pointers into G 0 ;
      these are scanned for roots.
         Algorithm 13.3 or 13.9 can be used to collect G 0 : “heap” or “from-space”
      means G 0 , “to-space” means a new area big enough to hold the reachable
      objects in G 0 , and “roots” include program variables and the remembered
      set. Pointers to older generations are left unchanged: the marking algorithm

       13.5. INCREMENTAL COLLECTION

       does not mark old-generation records, and the copying algorithm copies them
       verbatim without forwarding them.
          After several collections of G 0 , generation G 1 may have accumulated a
       significant amount of garbage that should be collected. Since G 0 may contain
       many pointers into G 1 , it is best to collect G 0 and G 1 together. As before, the
       remembered set must be scanned for roots contained in G 2 , G 3 , . . . . Even
       more rarely, G 2 will be collected, and so on.
          Each older generation should be exponentially bigger than the previous
       one. If G 0 is half a megabyte, then G 1 should be two megabytes, G 2 should
       be eight megabytes, and so on. An object should be promoted from G i to
       G i+1 when it survives two or three collections of G i .
       Cost of generational collection. Without detailed empirical information about
       the distribution of object lifetimes, we cannot analyze the behavior of gener-
       ational collection. In practice, however, it is common for the youngest gener-
       ation to be less than 10% live data. With a copying collector, this means that
       H/R is 10 in this generation, so that the amortized cost per word reclaimed
       is c3 R/(10R − R), or about 1 instruction. If the amount of reachable data in
       G 0 is about 50 to 100 kilobytes, then the amount of space “wasted” by having
       H = 10R in the youngest generation is about a megabyte. In a 50-megabyte
       multigeneration system, this is a small space cost.
          Collecting the older generations can be more expensive. To avoid using
       too much space, a smaller H/R ratio can be used for older generations. This
       increases the time cost of an older-generation collection, but these are suffi-
       ciently rare that the overall amortized time cost is still good.
          Maintaining the remembered set also takes time, approximately 10 instruc-
       tions per pointer update to enter an object into the remembered set and then
       process that entry in the remembered set. If the program does many more
       updates than fresh allocations, then generational collection may be more ex-
       pensive than nongenerational collection.

13.5   INCREMENTAL COLLECTION

       Even if the overall garbage collection time is only a few percent of the com-
       putation time, the collector will occasionally interrupt the program for long
       periods. For interactive or real-time programs this is undesirable. Incremen-
       tal or concurrent algorithms interleave garbage collection work with program
       execution to avoid long interruptions.

  while there are any grey objects
   select a grey record p
   for each field f i of p
       if record p. fi is white
          color record p. fi grey
   color record p black

ALGORITHM 13.13. Basic tricolor marking.

                  Terminology. The collector tries to collect the garbage; meanwhile, the com-
                  piled program keeps changing (mutating) the graph of reachable data, so it is
                  called the mutator. An incremental algorithm is one in which the collector
                  operates only when the mutator requests it; in a concurrent algorithm the col-
                  lector can operate between or during any instructions executed by the mutator.

                  Tricolor marking. In a mark-sweep or copying garbage collection, there are
                  three classes of records:
                  White objects are not yet visited by the depth-first or breadth-first search.
                  Grey objects have been visited (marked or copied), but their children have not
                    yet been examined. In mark-sweep collection, these objects are on the stack;
                    in Cheney’s copying collection, they are between scan and next.
                  Black objects have been marked, and their children also marked. In mark-sweep
                    collection, they have already been popped off the stack; in Cheney’s algo-
                    rithm, have already been scanned.

                     The collection starts with all objects white; the collector executes Algo-
                  rithm 13.13, blackening grey objects and greying their white children. Im-
                  plicit in changing an object from grey to black is removing it from the stack
                  or queue; implicit in greying an object is putting it into the stack or queue.
                  When there are no grey objects, then all white objects must be garbage.
                     Algorithm 13.13 generalizes all of the mark-sweep and copying algorithms
                  shown so far: Algorithms 13.2, 13.3, 13.5, 13.6, and 13.9.
                     All these algorithms preserve two natural invariants:
                  1. No black object points to a white object.
                  2. Every grey object is on the collector’s (stack or queue) data structure (which
                     we will call the grey-set).

                  While the collector operates, the mutator creates new objects (of what color?)
                  and updates pointer fields of existing objects. If the mutator breaks one of the

13.5. INCREMENTAL COLLECTION

invariants, then the collection algorithm will not work.
   Most incremental and concurrent collection algorithms are based on tech-
niques to allow the mutator to get work done while preserving the invariants.
For example:
Dijkstra, Lamport, et al. Whenever the mutator stores a white pointer a into a
   black object b, it colors a grey. (The compiler generates extra instructions at
   each store to check for this.)
Steele. Whenever the mutator stores a white pointer a into a black object b, it
   colors b grey (using extra instructions generated by the compiler).
Boehm, Demers, Shenker. All-black pages are marked read-only in the virtual
   memory system. Whenever the mutator stores any value into an all-black
   page, a page fault marks all objects on that page grey (and makes the page
   writable).
Baker. Whenever the mutator fetches a pointer b to a white object, it colors b
   grey. The mutator never possesses a pointer to a white object, so it cannot
   violate invariant 1. The instructions to check the color of b are generated by
   the compiler after every fetch.
Appel, Ellis, Li. Whenever the mutator fetches a pointer b from any virtual-
   memory page containing any nonblack object, a page-fault handler colors ev-
   ery object on the page black (making children of these objects grey). Thus the
   mutator never possesses a pointer to a white object.

   The first three of these are write-barrier algorithms, meaning that each
write (store) by the mutator must be checked to make sure an invariant is pre-
served. The last two are read-barrier algorithms, meaning that read (fetch)
instructions are the ones that must be checked. We have seen write barriers
before, for generational collection: remembered lists, remembered sets, card
marking, and page marking are all different implementations of the write bar-
rier. Similarly, the read barrier can be implemented in software (as in Baker’s
algorithm) or using the virtual-memory hardware.
   Any implementation of a write or read barrier must synchronize with the
collector. For example, a Dijkstra-style collector might try to change a white
node to grey (and put it into the grey-set) at the same time the mutator is also
greying the node (and putting it into the grey-set). Thus, software implemen-
tations of the read or write barrier will need to use explicit synchronization
instructions, which can be expensive.
   But implementations using virtual-memory hardware can take advantage
of the synchronization implicit in a page fault: if the mutator faults on a page,
the operating system will ensure that no other process has access to that page
before processing the fault.

 13.6   BAKER’S ALGORITHM

        Baker’s algorithm illustrates the details of incremental collection. It is based
        on Cheney’s copying collection algorithm, so it forwards reachable objects
        from from-space to to-space. Baker’s algorithm is compatible with genera-
        tional collection, so that the from-space and to-space might be for generation
        G 0 , or might be G 0 + · · · + G k .
           To initiate a garbage collection (which happens when an allocate request
        fails for lack of unused memory), the roles of the (previous) from-space and
        to-space are swapped, and all the roots are forwarded; this is called the flip.
        Then the mutator is resumed; but each time the mutator calls the allocator to
        get a new record, a few pointers at scan are scanned, so that scan advances
        toward next. Then a new record is allocated at the end of the to-space by
        decrementing limit by the appropriate amount.
           The invariant is that the mutator has pointers only to to-space (never to
        from-space). Thus, when the mutator allocates and initializes a new record,
        that record need not be scanned; when the mutator stores a pointer into an old
        record, it is only storing a to-space pointer.
           If the mutator fetches a field of a record, it might break the invariant. So
        each fetch is followed by two or three instructions that check whether the
        fetched pointer points to from-space. If so, that pointer must be forwarded
        immediately, using the standard forward algorithm.
           For every word allocated, the allocator must advance scan by at least one
        word. When scan=next, the collection terminates until the next time the
        allocator runs out of space. If the heap is divided into two semi-spaces of
        size H/2, and R < H/4, then scan will catch up with next before next
        reaches halfway through the to-space; also by this time, no more than half the
        to-space will be occupied by newly allocated records.
           Baker’s algorithm copies no more data than is live at the flip. Records al-
        located during collection are not scanned, so they do not add to the cost of
        collection. The collection cost is thus c3 R. But there is also a cost to check
        (at every allocation) whether incremental scanning is necessary; this is pro-
        portional to H/2 − R.
           But the largest cost of Baker’s algorithm is the extra instructions after ev-
        ery fetch, required to maintain the invariant. If one in every 10 instructions
        fetches from a heap record, and each of these fetches requires two extra in-
        structions to test whether it is a from-space pointer, then there is at least a

       13.7. INTERFACE TO THE COMPILER

       20% overhead cost just to maintain the invariant. All of the incremental or
       concurrent algorithms that use a software write or read barrier will have a
       significant cost in overhead of ordinary mutator operations.

13.7   INTERFACE TO THE COMPILER

       The compiler for a garbage-collected language interacts with the garbage
       collector by generating code that allocates records, by describing locations
       of roots for each garbage-collection cycle, and by describing the layout of
       data records on the heap. For some versions of incremental collection, the
       compiler must also generate instructions to implement a read barrier or write
       barrier.

       FAST ALLOCATION
       Some programming languages, and some programs, allocate heap data (and
       generate garbage) very rapidly. This is especially true of programs in func-
       tional languages, where updating old data is discouraged.
          The most allocation (and garbage) one could imagine a reasonable pro-
       gram generating is one word of allocation per store instruction; this is be-
       cause each word of a heap-allocated record is usually initialized. Empirical
       measurements show that about one in every seven instructions executed is a
       store, almost regardless of programming language or program. Thus, we have
       (at most) 17 word of allocation per instruction executed.
          Supposing that the cost of garbage collection can be made small by proper
       tuning of a generational collector, there may still be a considerable cost to
       create the heap records. To minimize this cost, copying collection should be
       used so that the allocation space is a contiguous free region; the next free
       location is next and the end of the region is limit. To allocate one record
       of size N , the steps are:

       1. Call the allocate function.
       2. Test next + N < limit ? (If the test fails, call the garbage collector.)
       3. Move next into result
       4. Clear M[next], M[next + 1], . . . , M[next + N − 1]
       5. next ← next + N
       6. Return from the allocate function.
       A. Move result into some computationally useful place.
       B. Store useful values into the record.

      Steps 1 and 6 should be eliminated by inline expanding the allocate function
      at each place where a record is allocated. Step 3 can often be eliminated by
      combining it with step A, and step 4 can be eliminated in favor of step B (steps
      A and B are not numbered because they are part of the useful computation;
      they are not allocation overhead).
         Steps 2 and 5 cannot be eliminated, but if there is more than one allocation
      in the same basic block (or in the same trace, see Section 8.2) the compar-
      ison and increment can be shared among multiple allocations. By keeping
      next and limit in registers, steps 2 and 5 can be done in a total of three
      instructions.
         By this combination of techniques, the cost of allocating a record – and
      then eventually garbage collecting it – can be brought down to about four
      instructions. This means that programming techniques such as the persistent
      binary search tree (page 108) can be efficient enough for everyday use.

      DESCRIBING DATA LAYOUTS
      The collector must be able to operate on records of all types: list, tree, or
      whatever the program has declared. It must be able to determine the number
      of fields in each record, and whether each field is a pointer.
          For statically typed languages such as Tiger or Pascal, or for object-oriented
      languages such as Java or Modula-3, the simplest way to identify heap objects
      is to have the first word of every object point to a special type- or class-
      descriptor record. This record tells the total size of the object and the location
      of each pointer field.
          For statically typed languages this is an overhead of one word per record to
      serve the garbage collector. But object-oriented languages need this descriptor-
      pointer in every object just to implement dynamic method lookup, so that
      there is no additional per-object overhead attributable to garbage collection.
          The type- or class-descriptor must be generated by the compiler from the
      static type information calculated by the semantic analysis phase of the com-
      piler. The descriptor-pointer will be the argument to the runtime system’s
      alloc function.
          In addition to describing every heap record, the compiler must identify to
      the collector every pointer-containing temporary and local variable, whether
      it is in a register or in an activation record. Because the set of live temporaries
      can change at every instruction, the pointer map is different at every point
      in the program. Therefore, it is simpler to describe the pointer map only at
      points where a new garbage collection can begin. These are at calls to the

13.7. INTERFACE TO THE COMPILER

alloc function; and also, since any function-call might be calling a function
which in turn calls alloc, the pointer map must be described at each function
call.
    The pointer map is best keyed by return addresses: a function call at lo-
cation a is best described by its return address immediately after a, because
the return address is what the collector will see in the very next activation
record. The data structure maps return addresses to live-pointer sets; for each
pointer that is live immediately after the call, the pointer map tells its register
or frame location.
    To find all the roots, the collector starts at the top of the stack and scans
downward, frame by frame. Each return address keys the pointer-map entry
that describes the next frame. In each frame, the collector marks (or forwards,
if copying collection) from the pointers in that frame.
    Callee-save registers need special handling. Suppose function f calls g,
which calls h. Function h knows that it saved some of the callee-save registers
in its frame and mentions this fact in its pointer map; but h does not know
which of these registers are pointers. Therefore the pointer map for g must
describe which of its callee-save registers contain pointers at the call to h and
which are “inherited” from f .

DERIVED POINTERS
Sometimes a compiled program has a pointer that points into the middle of
a heap record, or that points before or after the record. For example, the ex-
pression a[i-2000] can be calculated internally as M[a-2000+i]:

   t1 ← a − 2000
   t2 ← t1 + i
   t3 ← M[t2 ]
If the expression a[i-2000] occurs inside a loop, the compiler might choose
to hoist t1 ← a − 2000 outside the loop to avoid recalculating it in each
iteration. If the loop also contains an alloc, and a garbage collection occurs
while t1 is live, will the collector be confused by a pointer t1 that does not
point to the beginning of an object, or (worse yet) points to an unrelated
object?
    We say that the t1 is derived from the base pointer a. The pointer map
must identify each derived pointer and tell the base pointer from which it is
derived. Then, when the collector relocates a to address a , it must adjust t1
to point to address t1 + a − a.

             Of course, this means that a must remain live as long as t1 is live. Consider
          the loop at left, implemented as shown at right:

            let                                                r1 ← 100
              var a := intarray[100] of 0                      r2 ← 0
                                                               call alloc
                                                               a ← r1
              in                                               t1 ← a − 2000
               for i := 1930 to 1990                           i ← 1930
                 do f(a[i-2000])                               L 1 : r1 ← M[t1 + i]
                                                               call f
            end                                                L 2 : if i ≤ 1990 goto L 1

          If there are no other uses of a, then the temporary a appears dead after the
          assignment to t1 . But then the pointer map associated with the return address
          L 2 would not be able to “explain” t1 adequately. Therefore, for purposes of
          the compiler’s liveness analysis, a derived pointer implicitly keeps its base
          pointer live.

PROGRAM   DESCRIPTORS
          Implement record descriptors and pointer maps for the Tiger compiler.
              For each record-type declaration, make a string literal to serve as the record
          descriptor. The length of the string should be equal to the number of fields in
          the record. The ith byte of the string should be p if the ith field of the record
          is a pointer (string, record, or array); or n if the ith field is a nonpointer.
              The allocRecord function should now take the record descriptor string
          (pointer) instead of a length; the allocator can obtain the length from the string
          literal. Then allocRecord should store this descriptor pointer at field zero
          of the record. Modify the runtime system appropriately.
              The user-visible fields of the record will now be at offsets 1, 2, 3, . . . in-
          stead of 0, 1, 2, . . . ; adjust the compiler appropriately.
              Design a descriptor format for arrays, and implement it in the compiler and
          runtime system.
              Implement a temp-map with a boolean for each temporary: is it a pointer or
          not? Also make a similar map for the offsets in each stack frame, for frame-
          resident pointer variables. You will not need to handle derived pointers, as
          your Tiger compiler probably does not keep derived pointers live across func-
          tion calls.
              For each procedure call, put a new return-address label L ret immediately
          after the call instruction. For each one, make a data fragment of the form

          PROGRAMMING EXERCISE

               L ptrmap327 :   .word    L ptrmap326   link to previous ptr-map entry
                               .word    L ret327      key for this entry
                               .word    ...           pointer map for
                                ..                       this return address
                                 .

          and then the runtime system can traverse this linked list of pointer-map en-
          tries, and perhaps build it into a data structure of its own choosing for fast
          lookup of return addresses. The data-layout pseudo-instructions (.word, etc.)
          are, of course, machine dependent.

PROGRAM   GARBAGE COLLECTION
          Implement a mark-sweep or copying garbage collector in the C language, and
          link it into the runtime system. Invoke the collector from allocRecord or
          initArray when the free space is exhausted.

FURTHER
READING

          Reference counting [Collins 1960] and mark-sweep collection [McCarthy
          1960] are almost as old as languages with pointers. The pointer-reversal idea
          is attributed by Knuth [1967] to Peter Deutsch and to Herbert Schorr and W.
          M. Waite.
              Fenichel and Yochelson [1969] designed the first two-space copying col-
          lector, using depth-first search; Cheney [1970] designed the algorithm that
          uses the unscanned nodes in to-space as the queue of a breadth-first search,
          and also the semi-depth-first copying that improves the locality of a linked
          list.
              Steele [1975] designed the first concurrent mark-and-sweep algorithm. Di-
          jkstra et al. [1978] formalized the notion of tricolor marking, and designed a
          concurrent algorithm that they could prove correct, trying to keep the syn-
          chronization requirements as weak as possible. Baker [1978] invented the
          incremental copying algorithm in which the mutator sees only to-space point-
          ers.
              Generational garbage collection, taking advantage of the fact that newer
          objects die quickly and that there are few old-to-new pointers, was invented
          by Lieberman and Hewitt [1983]; Ungar [1986] developed a simpler and more
          efficient remembered set mechanism.

         The Symbolics Lisp Machine [Moon 1984] had special hardware to as-
      sist with incremental and generational garbage collection. The microcoded
      memory-fetch instructions enforced the invariant of Baker’s algorithm; the
      microcoded memory-store instructions maintained the remembered set for
      generational collection. This collector was the first to explicitly improve lo-
      cality of reference by keeping related objects on the same virtual-memory
      page.
         As modern computers rarely use microcode, and a modern general-purpose
      processor embedded in a general-purpose memory hierarchy tends to be an
      order of magnitude faster and cheaper than a computer with special-purpose
      instructions and memory tags, attention turned in the late 1980s to algo-
      rithms that could be implemented with standard RISC instructions and stan-
      dard virtual-memory hardware. Appel et al. [1988] use virtual memory to
      implement a read barrier in a truly concurrent variant of Baker’s algorithm.
      Shaw [1988] uses virtual memory dirty bits to implement a write barrier for
      generational collection, and Boehm et al. [1991] make the same simple write
      barrier serve for concurrent generational mark-and-sweep. Write barriers are
      cheaper to implement than read barriers, because stores to old pages are rarer
      than fetches from to-space, and a write barrier merely needs to set a dirty
      bit and continue with minimal interruption of the mutator. Sobalvarro [1988]
      invented the card marking technique, which uses ordinary RISC instructions
      without requiring interaction with the virtual-memory system.
         Appel and Shao [1996] describe techniques for fast allocation of heap
      records and discuss several other efficiency issues related to garbage-collected
      systems.
         Branquart and Lewi [1971] describe pointer maps communicated from a
      compiler to its garbage collector; Diwan et al. [1992] tie pointer maps to re-
      turn addresses, show how to handle derived pointers, and compress the maps
      to save space.
         Appel [1992, Chapter 12] shows that compilers for functional languages
      must be careful about closure representations; using simple static links (for
      example) can keep enormous amounts of data reachable, preventing the col-
      lector from reclaiming it.
         Boehm and Weiser [1988] describe conservative collection, where the com-
      piler does not inform the collector which variables and record-fields contain
      pointers, so the collector must “guess.” Any bit-pattern pointing into the al-
      located heap is assumed to be a possible pointer and keeps the pointed-to
      record live. However, since the bit-pattern might really be meant as an inte-

             EXERCISES

             ger, the object cannot be moved (which would change the possible integer),
             and some garbage objects may not be reclaimed. Wentworth [1990] points out
             that such an integer may (coincidentally) point to the root of a huge garbage
             data structure, which therefore will not be reclaimed; so conservative col-
             lection will occasionally suffer from a disastrous space leak. Boehm [1993]
             describes several techniques for making these disasters unlikely: for exam-
             ple, if the collector ever finds an integer pointing to address X that is not a
             currently allocated object, it should blacklist that address so that the alloca-
             tor will never allocate an object there. Boehm [1996] points out that even a
             conservative collector needs some amount of compiler assistance: if a derived
             pointer can point outside the bounds of an object, then its base pointer must
             be kept live as long as the derived pointer exists.
                Page 515 discusses some of the literature on improving the cache perfor-
             mance of garbage-collected systems.
                Cohen [1981] comprehensively surveys the first two decades of garbage-
             collection research; Wilson [1997] describes and discusses more recent work.
             Jones and Lins [1996] offer a comprehensive textbook on garbage collection.

EXERCISES

      *13.1 Analyze the cost of mark-sweep versus copying collection. Assume that every
             record is exactly two words long, and every field is a pointer. Some pointers
             may point outside the collectible heap, and these are to be left unchanged.
             a. Analyze Algorithm 13.6 to estimate c1 , the cost (in instructions per reach-
                able word) of depth-first marking.
             b. Analyze Algorithm 13.3 to estimate c2 , the cost (in instructions per word
                in the heap) of sweeping.
             c. Analyze Algorithm 13.9 to estimate c3 , the cost per reachable word of
                copying collection.
             d. There is some ratio γ so that with H = γ R the cost of copying collection
                equals the cost of mark-sweep collection. Find γ .
             e. For H > γ R, which is cheaper, mark-sweep or copying collection?
       13.2 Run Algorithm 13.6 (pointer reversal) on the heap of Figure 13.1. Show the
             state of the heap, the done flags, and variables t, x, and y at the time the node
             containing 59 is first marked.
      *13.3 Assume main calls f with callee-save registers all containing 0. Then f saves
             the callee-save registers it is going to use; puts pointers into some callee-save

              registers, integers into others, and leaves the rest untouched; then calls g. Now
              g saves some of the callee-save registers, puts some pointers and integers into
              them, and calls alloc, which starts a garbage collection.
              a. Write functions f and g matching this description.
              b. Illustrate the pointer maps of functions f and g.
              c. Show the steps that the collector takes to recover the exact locations of
                 all the pointers.
      **13.4 Every object in the Java language supports a hashCode() method that returns
              a “hash code” for that object. Hash codes need not be unique – different objects
              can return the same hash code – but each object must return the same hash
              code every time it is called, and two objects selected at random should have
              only a small chance of having the same hash code.
                 The Java language specification says that “This is typically implemented by
              converting the address of the object to an integer, but this implementation
              technique is not required by the Java language.”
                 Explain the problem in implementing hashCode() this way in a Java system
              with copying garbage collection, and propose a solution.

