       14
       Object-Oriented
       Languages

       ob-ject: to feel distaste for something

                                                 Webster’s Dictionary

       A useful software-engineering principle is information hiding or encapsula-
       tion. A module may provide values of a given type, but the representation of
       that type is known only to the module. Clients of the module may manipulate
       the values only through operations provided by the module. In this way, the
       module can assure that the values always meet consistency requirements of
       its own choosing.
           Object-oriented programming languages are designed to support informa-
       tion hiding. Because the “values” may have internal state that the operations
       will modify, it makes sense to call them objects. Because a typical “module”
       manipulates only one type of object, we can eliminate the notion of module
       and (syntactically) treat the operations as fields of the objects, where they are
       called methods.
           Another important characteristic of object-oriented languages is the no-
       tion of extension or inheritance. If some program context (such as the formal
       parameter of a function or method) expects an object that supports methods
       m 1 , m 2 , m 3 , then it will also accept an object that supports m 1 , m 2 , m 3 , m 4 .

14.1   CLASSES

       To illustrate the techniques of compiling object-oriented languages I will use
       a simple class-based object-oriented language called Object-Tiger.

        We extend the Tiger language with new declaration syntax to create classes:

              dec → classdec
         classdec → class class-id extends class-id { {classfield } }
        classfield → vardec
        classfield → method
          method → method id(tyfields) = exp
          method → method id(tyfields) : type-id = exp

         The declaration class B extends A { · · · } declares a new class B
      that extends the class A. This declaration must be in the scope of the let-
      expression that declares A. All the fields and methods of A implicitly belong
      to B. Some of the A methods may be overridden (have new declarations) in
      B, but the fields may not be overridden. The parameter and result types of an
      overriding method must be identical to those of the overridden method.
         There is a predefined class identifier Object with no fields or methods.
         Methods are much like functions, with formal parameters and bodies. How-
      ever, each method within B has an implicit formal parameter self of type B.
      But self is not a reserved word, it is just an identifier automatically bound
      in each method.
         The responsibility for initializing object data fields rests with the class,
      not with the client. Thus, object-field declarations look more like variable
      declarations than like record-field declarations.
         We make new expression syntax to create objects and invoke methods:

        exp → new class-id
            → lvalue . id()
            → lvalue . id(exp{, exp})

         The expression new B makes a new object of type B; the data fields are
      initialized by evaluating their respective initialization expressions from the
      class declaration of B.
         The l-value b.x, where b is an l-value of type B, denotes the field x of
      object b; this is similar to record-field selection and requires no new syntax.
         The expression b.f(x,y), where b is an l-value of type B, denotes a call
      to the f method of object b with explicit actual parameters x and y, and the
      value b for the implicit self parameter of f.
         Program 14.1 illustrates the use of the Object-Tiger language. Every Ve-
      hicle is an Object; every Car is a Vehicle; thus every Car is also an

                 14.1. CLASSES

  let start := 10

        class Vehicle extends Object {
           var position := start
           method move(int x) = (position := position + x)
        }
        class Car extends Vehicle {
           var passengers := 0
           method await(v: Vehicle) =
               if (v.position < position)
                     then v.move(position - v.position)
               else self.move(10)
        }
        class Truck extends Vehicle {
           method move(int x) =
              if x <= 55 then position := position + x
        }

       var t := new Truck
       var c := new Car
       var v : Vehicle := c
  in
        c.passengers := 2;
        c.move(60);
        v.move(70);
        c.await(t)
  end

PROGRAM 14.1. An object-oriented program.

                 Object. Every Vehicle (and thus every Car and Truck) has an integer
                 position field and a move method.
                   In addition, a Car has an integer passengers field and an await method.
                 The variables in scope on entry to await are
                 start By normal Tiger language scoping rules.
                 passengers Because it is a field of Car.
                 position Because it is (implicitly) a field of Car.
                 v Because it is a formal parameter of await.
                 self Because it is (implicitly) a formal parameter of await.

                    In the main program, the expression new Truck has type Truck, so the
                 type of t is Truck (in the normal manner of variable declarations in Tiger).
                 Variable c has type Car, and variable v is explicitly declared to have type
                 Vehicle. It is legal to use c (of type Car) in a context where type Vehicle is
                 required (the initialization of v), because class Car is a subclass of Vehicle.

  class A extends Object {
                     var a := 0}                   A        B         C          D
  class B extends A {var b := 0                    a        a         a          a
                     var c := 0}                            b         d          b
  class C extends A {var d := 0}                            c                    c
  class D extends B {var e := 0}                                                 e

FIGURE 14.2.   Single inheritance of data fields.

                  Class Truck overrides the move method of Vehicle, so that any attempt
               to move a truck “faster” than 55 has no effect.
                  At the call to c.await(t), the truck t is bound to the formal parame-
               ter v of the await method. Then when v.move is called, this activates the
               Truck_move method body, not Vehicle_move.
                  We use the notation A_m to indicate a method instance m declared within
               a class A. This is not part of the Object-Tiger syntax, it is just for use in dis-
               cussing the semantics of Object-Tiger programs. Each different declaration
               of a method is a different method instance. Two different method instances
               could have the same method name if, for example, one overrides the other.

 14.2          SINGLE INHERITANCE OF DATA FIELDS

               To evaluate the expression v.position, where v belongs to class Vehicle,
               the compiler must generate code to fetch the field position from the object
               (record) that v points to.
                  This seems simple enough: the environment entry for variable v contains
               (among other things) a pointer to the type (class) description of Vehicle;
               this has a list of fields and their offsets. But at run time the variable v could
               also contain a pointer to a Car or Truck; where will the position field be
               in a Car or Truck object?

               Single inheritance. For single-inheritance languages, in which each class ex-
               tends just one parent class, the simple technique of prefixing works well.
               Where B extends A, those fields of B that are inherited from A are laid out in a
               B record at the beginning, in the same order they appear in A records. Fields
               of B not inherited from A are placed afterward, as shown in Figure 14.2.

                 14.2. SINGLE INHERITANCE OF DATA FIELDS

  class A extends Object {
                     var x := 0
                                                  x          x          x          x
                     method f() }                                                            x
  class B extends A {method g() }                                                  y
                                                                                             y
  class C extends B {method g() }
  class D extends C {var y := 0
                                              A A_f     B A_f      C A_f      D D_f
                     method f() }
                                                          B_g        C_g        C_g

PROGRAM 14.3. Class descriptors for dynamic method lookup.

                 METHODS
                 A method instance is compiled much like a function: it turns into machine
                 code that resides at a particular address in the instruction space. Let us say,
                 for example, that the method instance Truck_move has an entry point at
                 machine-code label Truck_move. In the semantic-analysis phase of the com-
                 piler, each variable’s environment entry contains a pointer to its class descrip-
                 tor; each class descriptor contains a pointer to its parent class, and also a list
                 of method instances; each method instance has a machine-code label.

                 Static methods. Some object-oriented languages allow some methods to be
                 declared static. The machine code that executes when c.f() is called de-
                 pends on the type of the variable c, not the type of the object that c holds. To
                 compile a method-call of the form c.f(), the compiler finds the class of c;
                 let us suppose it is class C. Then it searches in class C for a method f; suppose
                 none is found. Then it searches the parent class of C, class B, for a method
                 f; then the parent class of B; and so on. Suppose in some ancestor class A it
                 finds a static method f; then it can compile a function call to label A_f.

                 Dynamic methods. But this technique will not work for dynamic methods.
                 If method f in A is a dynamic method, then it might be overridden in some
                 class D which is a subclass of C (see Figure 14.3). But there is no way to tell
                 at compile time if the variable c is pointing to an object of class D (in which
                 case D_f should be called) or class C (in which case A_f should be called).
                    To solve this problem, the class descriptor must contain a vector with a
                 method instance for each (nonstatic) method name. When class B inherits
                 from A, the method table starts with entries for all method names known to A,
                 and then continues with new methods declared by B. This is very much like
                 the arrangement of fields in objects with inheritance.
                    Figure 14.3 shows what happens when class D overrides method f. Al-

  class A extends Object {var a := 0}                           A             B            C             D
  class B extends Object {var b := 0                            a                          a             a
                          var c := 0}                                         b                          b
  class C extends A {var d := 0}                                              c                          c
  class D extends A,B,C {var e := 0}                                                        d            d
                                                                                                         e

FIGURE 14.4.   Multiple inheritance of data fields.

               though the entry for f is at the beginning of D’s method table, as it is also at
               the beginning of the ancestor class A’s method table, it points to a different
               method-instance label because f has been overridden.
                  To execute c.f(), where f is a dynamic method, the compiled code must
               execute these instructions:
               1. Fetch the class descriptor d at offset 0 from object c.
               2. Fetch the method-instance pointer p from the (constant) f offset of d.
               3. Jump to address p, saving return address (that is, call p).

 14.3          MULTIPLE INHERITANCE

               In languages that permit a class D to extend several parent classes A,B,C
               (that is, where A is not a subclass of B or vice versa), finding field offsets and
               method instances is more difficult. It is impossible to put all the A fields at the
               beginning of D and to put all the B fields at the beginning of D.

               Global graph coloring. One solution to this problem is to statically analyze
               all classes at once, finding some offset for each field name that can be used
               in every record containing that field. We can model this as a graph-coloring
               problem: there is a node for each distinct field name, and an edge for any two
               fields which coexist (perhaps by inheritance) in the same class.1 The offsets
               0, 1, 2, . . . are the colors. Figure 14.4 shows an example.
                  The problem with this approach is that it leaves empty slots in the middle
               of objects, since it cannot always color the N fields of each class with colors
               with the first N colors. To eliminate the empty slots in objects, we pack the
               fields of each object and have the class descriptor tell where each field is.
               Figure 14.5 shows an example. We have done graph coloring on all the field
                 1 Distinct field name does not mean simple equivalence of strings. Each fresh declaration of field or
               method x (where it is not overriding the x of a parent class) is really a distinct name.

                   14.3. MULTIPLE INHERITANCE

        a          b          a          a
                   c          d          b
                                         c
                                         d
                                         e

        A          B          C          D
    a   1                 a   1      a   1
               b   1                 b   2
               c   2                 c   3
                          d   2      d   4
                                     e   5

FIGURE 14.5.       Field offsets in descriptors for multiple inheritance.

                   names, as before, but now the “colors” are not the offsets of those fields within
                   the objects but within the descriptors. To fetch a field a of object x, we fetch
                   the a-word from x’s descriptor; this word contains a small integer telling the
                   position of the actual a data within x.
                      In this scheme, class descriptors have empty slots, but the objects do not;
                   this is acceptable because a system with millions of objects is likely to have
                   only dozens of class descriptors. But each data fetch (or store) requires three
                   instructions instead of one:
                   1. Fetch the descriptor-pointer from the object.
                   2. Fetch the field-offset value from the descriptor.
                   3. Fetch (or store) the data at the appropriate offset in the object.

                   In practice, it is likely that other operations on the object will have fetched
                   the descriptor-pointer already, and multiple operations on the same field (e.g.,
                   fetch then store) won’t need to re-fetch the offset from the descriptor; common-
                   subexpression elimination can remove much of this redundant overhead.

                   Method lookup. Finding method instances in a language with multiple inher-
                   itance is just as complicated as finding field offsets. The global graph-coloring
                   approach works well: the method names can be mixed with the field names to
                   form nodes of a large interference graph. Descriptor entries for fields give lo-
                   cations within the objects; descriptor entries for methods give machine-code
                   addresses of method instances.

        Problems with dynamic linking. Any global approach suffers from the prob-
        lem that the coloring (and layout of class descriptors) can be done only at
        link-time; the job is certainly within the capability of a special-purpose linker.
           However, many object-oriented systems have the capability to load new
        classes into a running system; these classes may be extensions (subclasses)
        of classes already in use. Link-time graph coloring poses many problems for
        a system that allows dynamic incremental linking.

        Hashing. Instead of global graph coloring, we can put a hash table in each
        class descriptor, mapping field names to offsets and method names to method
        instances. This works well with separate compilation and dynamic linking.
           The characters of the field names are not hashed at run time. Instead, each
        field name a is hashed at compile time to an integer hasha in the range [0, N −
        1]. Also, for each field name a unique run-time record (pointer) ptra is made
        for each field.
           Each class descriptor has a field-offset table Ftab of size N containing
        field-offsets and method instances, and (for purposes of collision detection)
        a parallel key table Ktab containing field-name pointers. If the class has a
        field x, then field-offset-table slot number hash x contains the offset for x, and
        key-table slot number hash x contains the pointer ptr x .
           To fetch a field x of object c, the compiler generates code to
        1. Fetch the class descriptor d at offset 0 from object c.
        2. Fetch the field-name f from the address offset d + Ktab + hashx .
        3. Test whether f = ptrx ; if so
        4. Fetch the field offset k from d + Ftab + hashx .
        5. Fetch the contents of the field from c + k.

        This algorithm has four instructions of overhead, which may still be tolerable.
        A similar algorithm works for dynamic method-instance lookup.
          The algorithm as described does not say what to do if the test at line 3 fails.
        Any hash-table collision-resolution technique can be used.

 14.4   TESTING CLASS MEMBERSHIP

        Some object-oriented languages allow the program to test membership of an
        object in a class at run time, as summarized in Table 14.6.
           Since each object points to its class descriptor, the address of the class de-
        scriptor can serve as a “type-tag.” However, if x is an instance of D, and D

                      14.4. TESTING CLASS MEMBERSHIP

                                                               Modula-3             Java
    Test whether object x belongs class C, or to any sub-    ISTYPE(x,C)      x instanceof C
    class of C.
    Given a variable x of class C, where x actually points   NARROW(x,D)           (D)x
    to an object of class D that extends C, yield an ex-
    pression whose compile-time type is class D.

TABLE 14.6.           Facilities for type testing and safe casting.

                      extends C, then x is also an instance of C. Assuming there is no multiple in-
                      heritance, a simple way to implement x instanceof C is to generate code
                      that performs the following loop at run time:
                               t1 ← x.descriptor
                         L 1 : if t1 = C goto true
                               t1 ← t1 .super
                               if t1 = nil goto false
                               goto L 1

                      where t1 .super is the superclass (parent class) of class t1 .
                         However, there is a faster approach using a display of parent classes. As-
                      sume that the class nesting depth is limited to some constant, such as 20.
                      Reserve a 20-word block in each class descriptor. In the descriptor for a class
                      D whose nesting depth is j , put a pointer to descriptor D in the j th slot, a
                      pointer to D.super in the ( j − 1)th slot, a pointer to D.super.super in
                      slot j − 2, and so on up to Object in slot 0. In all slots numbered greater
                      than j , put nil.
                         Now, if x is an instance of D, or of any subclass of D, then the j th slot of
                      x’s class descriptor will point to the class descriptor D. Otherwise it will not.
                      So x instanceof D requires
                      1. Fetch the class descriptor d at offset 0 from object c.
                      2. Fetch the j th class-pointer slot from d.
                      3. Compare with the class descriptor D.

                      This works because the class-nesting depth of D is known at compile time.

                      Type coercions. Given a variable c of type C, it is always legal to treat c as
                      any supertype of C – if C extends B, and variable b has type B, then the
                      assignment b ← c is legal and safe.
                         But the reverse is not true. The assignment c ← b is safe only if b is
                      really (at run time) an instance of C, which is not always the case. If we have

      b ← new B, c ← b, followed by fetching some field of c that is part of class
      C but not class B, then this fetch will lead to unpredictable behavior.
         Thus, safe object-oriented languages (such as Modula-3 and Java) accom-
      pany any coercion from a superclass to a subclass with a run-time type-check
      that raises an exception unless the run-time value is really an instance of the
      subclass (e.g. unless b instanceof C).
         It is a common idiom to write
        Modula-3:                                   Java:
        IF ISTYPE(b,C)                                if (b instanceof C)
          THEN f(NARROW(b,C))                             f((C)b)
          ELSE . . .                                  else . . .

      Now there are two consecutive, identical type tests: one explicit (ISTYPE or
      instanceof) and one implicit (in NARROW or the cast). A good compiler
      will do enough flow analysis to notice that the then-clause is reached only if
      b is in fact an instance of C, so that the type-check in the narrowing operation
      can be eliminated.
         C++ is an unsafe object-oriented language. It has a static cast mechanism
      without run-time checking; careless use of this mechanism can make the pro-
      gram “go wrong” in unpredictable ways. C++ also has dynamic_cast with
      run-time checking, which is like the mechanisms in Modula-3 and Java.

      Typecase. Explicit instanceof testing, followed by a narrowing cast to a
      subclass, is not a wholesome “object-oriented” style. Instead of using this
      idiom, programmers are expected to use dynamic methods that accomplish
      the right thing in each subclass. Nevertheless, the test-then-narrow idiom is
      fairly common.
         Modula-3 has a typecase facility that makes the idiom more beautiful and
      efficient (but not any more “object-oriented”):

        TYPECASE expr
        OF C1 (v1 ) => S1
         | C2 (v2 ) => S2
           ..
            .
         | Cn (vn ) => Sn
        ELSE S0
        END

      If the expr evaluates to an instance of class Ci , then a new variable vi of
      type Ci points to the result of the expr, and statement Si is executed. The

14.4. TESTING CLASS MEMBERSHIP

declaration of vi is implicit in the TYPECASE, and its scope covers only Si .
   If more than one of the Ci match (which can happen if, for example, one is
a superclass of another), then only the first matching clause is taken. If none
of the Ci match, then the ELSE clause is taken (statement S0 is executed).
   Typecase can be converted straightforwardly to a chain of else-ifs, with
each if doing an instance test, a narrowing, and a local variable declaration.
However, if there are very many clauses, then it can take a long time to go
through all the else-ifs. Therefore it is attractive to treat it like a case (switch)
statement on integers, using an indexed jump (computed goto).
   That is, an ordinary case statement on integers:

   ML:                                           C, Java:
   case i                                       switch (i) {
    of 0 => s0                                  case 0: s0 ; break;
     | 1 => s1                                  case 1: s1 ; break;
     | 2 => s2                                  case 2: s2 ; break;
     | 3 => s3                                  case 3: s3 ; break;
     | 4 => s4                                  case 4: s4 ; break;
     | _ => sd                                   default: sd ;
                                                }

is compiled as follows: first a range-check comparison is made to ensure that
i is within the range of case labels (0–4, in this case); then the address of the
ith statement is fetched from the ith slot of a table, and control jumps to si .
   This approach will not work for typecase, because of subclassing. That is,
even if we could make class descriptors be small integers instead of point-
ers, we cannot do an indexed jump based on the class of the object, because
we will miss clauses that match superclasses of that class. Thus, Modula-3
typecase is implemented as a chain of else-ifs.
   Assigning integers to classes is not trivial, because separately compiled
modules can each define their own classes, and we do not want the integers
to clash. But a sophisticated linker might be able to assign the integers at link
time.
   If all the classes in the typecase were final classes (in the sense used
by Java, that they cannot be extended), then this problem would not apply.
Modula-3 does not have final classes; and Java does not have typecase. But
a clever Java system might be able to recognize a chain of else-ifs that do
instanceof tests for a set of final classes, and generate a indexed jump.

 14.5   PRIVATE FIELDS AND METHODS

        True object-oriented languages can protect fields of objects from direct ma-
        nipulation by other objects’ methods. A private field is one that cannot be
        fetched or updated from any function or method declared outside the object;
        a private method is one that cannot be called from outside the object.
           Privacy is enforced by the type-checking phase of the compiler. In the sym-
        bol table of C, along with each field offset and method offset, is a boolean flag
        indicating whether the field is private. When compiling the expression c.f()
        or c.x, it is a simple matter to check that field and reject accesses to private
        fields from any method outside the object declaration.
           There are many varieties of privacy and protection. Different languages
        allow

        • Fields and methods which are accessible only to the class that declares them.
        • Fields and methods accessible to the declaring class, and to any subclasses of
          that class.
        • Fields and methods accessible only within the same module (package, name-
          space) as the declaring class.
        • Fields that are read-only from outside the declaring class, but writable by
          methods of the class.

           In general, these varieties of protection can be statically enforced by compile-
        time type-checking, for class-based languages.

 14.6   CLASSLESS LANGUAGES

        Some object-oriented languages do not use the notion of class at all. In such
        a language, each object implements whatever methods and has whatever data
        fields it wants. Type-checking for such languages is usually dynamic (done at
        run time) instead of static (done at compile time).
           Many objects are created by cloning: copying an existing object (or tem-
        plate object) and then modifying some of the fields. Thus, even in a classless
        language there will be groups (“pseudo-classes”) of similar objects that can
        share descriptors. When b is created by cloning a, it can share a descriptor
        with a. Only if a new field is added or a method field is updated (overridden)
        does b require a new descriptor.
           The techniques used in compiling classless languages are similar to those

       14.7. OPTIMIZING OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMS

       for class-based languages with multiple inheritance and dynamic linking:
       pseudo-class descriptors contain hash tables that yield field offsets and method
       instances.
          The same kinds of global program analysis and optimization that are used
       for class-based languages – finding which method instance will be called
       from a (dynamic) method call site – are just as useful for classless languages.

14.7   OPTIMIZING OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMS

       An optimization of particular importance to object-oriented languages (which
       also benefit from most optimizations that apply to programming languages
       in general) is conversion of dynamic method calls to static method-instance
       calls.
          Compared with an ordinary function call, at each method call site there
       is a dynamic method lookup to determine the method instance. For single-
       inheritance languages, method lookup takes only two instructions. This seems
       like a small cost, but:

       • Modern machines can jump to constant addresses more efficiently than to ad-
         dresses fetched from tables. When the address is manifest in the instruction
         stream, the processor is able to pre-fetch the instruction cache at the destina-
         tion and direct the instruction-issue mechanism to fetch at the target of the
         jump. Unpredictable jumps stall the instruction-issue and -execution pipeline
         for several cycles.
       • An optimizing compiler that does inline expansion or interprocedural analysis
         will have trouble analyzing the consequences of a call if it doesn’t even know
         which method instance is called at a given site.

       For multiple-inheritance and classless languages, the dynamic method-lookup
       cost is even higher.
          Thus, optimizing compilers for object-oriented languages do global pro-
       gram analysis to determine those places where a method call is always calling
       the same method instance; then the dynamic method call can be replaced by
       a static function call.
          For a method call c.f(), where c is of class C, type hierarchy analysis is
       used to determine which subclasses of C contain methods f that may override
       C_f. If there is no such method, then the method instance must be C_f.
          This idea is combined with type propagation, a form of static dataflow
       analysis similar to reaching definitions (see Section 17.2). After an assign-

          ment c ← new C, the exact class of c is known. This information can be
          propagated through the assignment d ← c, and so on. When d.f() is en-
          countered, the type-propagation information limits the range of the type hier-
          archy that might contribute method instances to d.
             Suppose a method f defined in class C calls method g on self. But g is
          a dynamic method and may be overridden, so this call requires a dynamic
          method lookup. An optimizing compiler may make a different copy of a
          method instance C_f for each subclass (e.g. D,E) that extends C. Then when
          the (new copy) D_f calls g, the compiler knows to call the instance D_g with-
          out a dynamic method lookup.

PROGRAM   OBJECT-Tiger
          Implement the Object-Tiger object-oriented extensions to your Tiger com-
          piler.
             This chapter’s description of the Object-Tiger language leaves many things
          unspecified: if method f is declared before method g, can f call g? Can a
          method access all the class variables, or just the ones declared above it? Can
          the initializer of a class variable (field) call a method of the class (and can
          the method therefore see an unitialized field)? You will need to refine and
          document the definition of the Object-Tiger language.

FURTHER
READING

          Dahl and Nygaard’s Simula-67 language [Birtwistle et al. 1973] introduced
          the notion of classes, objects, single inheritance, static methods, instance test-
          ing, typecase, and the prefix technique to implement static single inheritance.
          In addition it had coroutines and garbage collection.
             Cohen [1991] suggested the display for constant-time testing of class mem-
          bership.
             Dynamic methods and multiple inheritance appeared in Smalltalk [Gold-
          berg et al. 1983], but the first implementations used slow searches of par-
          ent classes to find method instances. Rose [1988] and Connor et al. [1989]
          discuss fast hash-based field- and method-access algorithms for multiple in-
          heritance. The use of graph coloring in implementing multiple inheritance is
          due to Dixon et al. [1989]. Lippman [1996] shows how C++-style multiple
          inheritance is implemented.

             EXERCISES

                Chambers et al. [1991] describe several techniques to make classless, dy-
             namically typed languages perform efficiently: pseudo-class descriptors, mul-
             tiple versions of method instances, and other optimizations. Diwan et al.
             [1996] describe optimizations for statically typed languages that can replace
             dynamic method calls by static function calls.
                Conventional object-oriented languages choose a method instance for a
             call a.f(x,y) based only on the class of the method receiver (a) and not
             other arguments (x,y). Languages with multimethods [Bobrow et al. 1989]
             allow dynamic method lookup based on the types of all arguments. Chambers
             and Leavens [1995] show how to do static type-checking for multimethods;
             Amiel et al. [1994] and Chen and Turau [1994] show how to do efficient
             dynamic multimethod lookup.
                Nelson [1991] describes Modula-3, Stroustrup [1997] describes C++, and
             Arnold and Gosling [1996] describe Java.

EXERCISES

      *14.1 A problem with the display technique (as explained on page 307) for testing
             class membership is that the maximum class nesting depth N must be fixed
             in advance, and every class descriptor needs N words of space even if most
             classes are not deeply nested. Design a variant of the display technique that
             does not suffer from these problems; it will be a couple of instructions more
             costly than the one described on page 307.

       14.2 The hash-table technique for finding field offsets and method instances in the
             presence of multiple inheritance is shown incompletely on page 306 – the case
             of f = ptrx is not resolved. Choose a collision-resolution technique, explain
             how it works, and analyze the extra cost (in instructions) in the case that f = ptrx
             (no collision) and f = ptrx (collision).

      *14.3 Consider the following class hierarchy, which contains five method-call sites.
             The task is to show which of the method-call sites call known method instances,
             and (in each case) show which method instance. For example, you might say
             that “method-instance X_g always calls Y_f; method Z_g may call more than
             one instance of f.”

                 class A extends Object { method f() = print("1") }
                 class B extends A      { method g() = (f(); print("2")) }
                 class C extends B      { method f() = (g(); print("3")) }
                 class D extends C      { method g() = (f(); print("4")) }
                 class E extends A      { method g() = (f(); print("5")) }
                 class F extends E      { method g() = (f(); print("6")) }

              Do this analysis for each of the following assumptions:
              a. This is the entire program, and there are no other subclasses of these
                 modules.
              b. This is part of a large program, and any of these classes may be extended
                 elsewhere.
              c. Classes C and E are local to this module, and cannot be extended else-
                 where; the other classes may be extended.
       *14.4 Use method replication to improve your analysis of the program in Exer-
              cise 14.3. That is, make every class override f and g. For example, in class
              B (which does not already override f), put a copy of method A_f, and in D put
              a copy of C_F:

                 class B extends A           { . . . method f() = (print("1")) }
                 class D extends C           { . . . method f() = (g(); print("3")) }

              Similarly, add new instances E_f, F_f, and C_g. Now, for each set of assump-
              tions (a), (b), and (c), show which method calls go to known static instances.
      **14.5 Devise an efficient implementation mechanism for any typecase that only men-
              tions final classes. A final class is one that cannot be extended. (In Java,
              there is a final keyword; but even in other object-oriented languages, a
              class that is not exported from a module is effectively final, and a link-
              time whole-program analysis can discover which classes are never extended,
              whether declared final or not.)
                 You may make any of the following assumptions, but state which assumptions
              you need to use:
              a. The linker has control over the placement of class-descriptor records.
              b. Class descriptors are integers managed by the linker that index into a
                 table of descriptor records.
              c. The compiler explicitly marks final classes (in their descriptors).
              d. Code for typecase can be generated at link time.
              e. After the program is running, no other classes and subclasses are dynam-
                 ically linked into the program.

