      18
      Loop Optimizations

      loop: a series of instructions that is repeated until a ter-
      minating condition is reached

                                           Webster’s Dictionary

      Loops are pervasive in computer programs, and a great proportion of the ex-
      ecution time of a typical program is spent in one loop or another. Hence it is
      worthwhile devising optimizations to make loops go faster. Intuitively, a loop
      is a sequence of instructions that ends by jumping back to the beginning. But
      to be able to optimize loops effectively we will use a more precise definition.
         A loop in a control-flow graph is a set of nodes S including a header node
      h with the following properties:
      • From any node in S there is a path of directed edges leading to h.
      • There is a path of directed edges from h to any node in S.
      • There is no edge from any node outside S to any node in S other than h.

      Thus, the dictionary definition (from Webster’s) is not the same as the techni-
      cal definition.
         Figure 18.1 shows some loops. A loop entry node is one with some prede-
      cessor outside the loop; a loop exit node is one with a successor outside the
      loop. Figures 18.1c, 18.1d, and 18.1e illustrate that a loop may have multiple
      exits, but may have only one entry. Figures 18.1e and 18.1f contain nested
      loops.

      REDUCIBLE FLOW GRAPHS
      A reducible flow graph is one in which the dictionary definition of loop cor-
      responds more closely to the technical definition; but let us develop a more
      precise definition.

            1                               1

                2                           2

                                                                                     1
                         3                  3

                                                              1                      2
                (a)                             (b)

                                                              2                3          4

                1                               1             3                      5

        2       3            4          2             3       4                      6

                (c)                             (d)               (e)               (f)

FIGURE 18.1.          Some loops; in each case, 1 is the header node.

                         Figure 18.2a does not contain a loop; either node in the strongly connected
                      component (2, 3) can be reached without going through the other.
                         Figure 18.2c contains the same pattern of nodes 1, 2, 3; this becomes more
                      clear if we repeatedly delete edges and collapse together pairs of nodes (x, y),
                      where x is the only predecessor of y. That is: delete 6 → 9, 5 → 4, collapse
                      (7, 9), (3, 7), (7, 8), (5, 6), (1, 5), (1, 4); and we obtain Figure 18.2a.
                         An irreducible flow graph is one in which – after collapsing nodes and
                      deleting edges – we can find a subgraph like Figure 18.2a. A reducible flow
                      graph is one that cannot be collapsed to contain such a subgraph. Without
                      such subgraphs, then any cycle of nodes does have a unique header node.
                         Common control-flow constructs such as if-then, if-then-else, while-do,
                      repeat-until, for, and break (even multilevel break) can only generate re-
                      ducible flow graphs. Thus, the control-flow graph for a Tiger or Java function,
                      or a C function without goto, will always be reducible.
                         The following program corresponds to flow graph 18.1e, assuming Tiger
                      were augmented with repeat-until loops:

                                                        1
                                 1
                                                   4            5
                                 2                                        6

           1
                                 3                          3             7     9
                                               2
      2         3                4
                                                                    8

          (a)                   (b)                                 (c)

FIGURE 18.2.        None of these contains a loop. Dotted lines indicate reduction
                    of graph (c) by deleting edges and collapsing nodes.

                      function isPrime(n: int) : int =
                        (i := 2;
                         repeat j := 2;
                                repeat if i*j=n
                                          then return 0
                                          else j := j+1
                                until j=n;
                                i := i+1
                         until i=n;
                         return 1)

                       In a functional language, loops are generally expressed using tail-recursive
                    function calls. The isPrime program might be written as:

                           function isPrime(n: int) : int =
                       0        tryI(n,2)
                           function tryI(n: int, i: int) : int =
                       1        tryJ(n,i,2)
                           function tryJ(n: int, i: int, j: int) : int =
                       2        if i*j=n
                       3           then 0
                       4           else nextJ(n,i,j+1)
                           function nextJ(n: int, i: int, j: int) : int =
                       5        if j=n
                                  then nextI(n,i+1)
                                  else tryJ(n,i,j)
                           function nextI(n: int, i: int) : int =
                       6        if i=n
                                  then 1
                                  else tryI(n,i)

       18.1. DOMINATORS

       where the numbers 1–6 show the correspondence with the flow-graph nodes
       of Figure 18.1f.
          Because the programmer can arrange these functions in arbitrary ways,
       flow graphs produced by the tail-call structure of functional programs are
       sometimes irreducible.

       Advantages of reducible flow graphs. Many dataflow analyses (presented in
       Chapter 17) can be done very efficiently on reducible flow graphs. Instead
       of using fixed-point iteration (“keep executing assignments until there are no
       changes”), we can determine an order for computing the assignments, and
       calculate in advance how many assignments will be necessary – that is, there
       will never be a need to check to see if anything changed.
          However, for the remainder of this chapter we will assume that our control-
       flow graphs may be reducible or irreducible.

18.1   DOMINATORS

       Before we optimize the loops, we must find them in the flow graph. The
       notion of dominators is useful for that purpose.
         Each control-flow graph must have a start node s0 with no predecessors,
       where program (or procedure) execution is assumed to begin.
         A node d dominates a node n if every path of directed edges from s0 to n
       must go through d. Every node dominates itself.

       ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINATORS
       Consider a node n with predecessors p1 , . . . , pk , and a node d (with d ? = n).
       If d dominates each one of the pi , then it must dominate n, because every
       path from s0 to n must go through one of the pi , but every path from s0 to a pi
       must go through d. Conversely, if d dominates n, it must dominate all the pi ;
       otherwise there would be a path from s0 to n going through the predecessor
       not dominated by d.
          Let D[n] be the set of nodes that dominate n. Then
                                                                     
                                                            
          D[s0 ] = {s0 }             D[n] = {n} ∪               D[ p]      for n ? = s0
                                                        p∈pred[n]

       The simultaneous equations can be solved, as usual, by iteration, treating each
       equation as an assignment statement. However, in this case each set D[n] (for

      n ? = s0 ) must be initialized to hold all the nodes in the graph, because each
      assignment D[n] ← {n} ∪ . . . makes D[n] smaller (or unchanged), not larger.
          This algorithm can be made more efficient by ordering the set assignments
      in quasi-topological order, that is, according to a depth-first search of the
      graph (Algorithm 17.5). Section 19.2 describes a faster algorithm for com-
      puting dominators.
          Technically, an unreachable node is dominated by every node in the graph;
      we will avoid the pathologies this can cause by deleting unreachable nodes
      from the graph before calculating dominators and doing loop optimizations.
      See also Exercise 18.4.

      IMMEDIATE DOMINATORS
      Theorem: In a connected graph, suppose d dominates n, and e dominates n.
      Then it must be that either d dominates e, or e dominates d.
         Proof: (By contradiction.) Suppose neither d nor e dominates the other.
      Then there is some path from s0 to e that does not go through d. Therefore
      any path from e to n must go through d; otherwise d would not dominate n.
         Conversely, any path from d to n must go through e. But this means that
      to get from e to n the path must infinitely loop from d to e to d . . . and never
      get to n.
         This theorem tells us that every node n has no more than one immediate
      dominator, idom(n), such that

      1. idom(n) is not the same node as n,
      2. idom(n) dominates n, and
      3. idom(n) does not dominate any other dominator of n.

      Every node except s0 is dominated by at least one node other than itself (since
      s0 dominates every node), so every node except s0 has exactly one immediate
      dominator.

      Dominator tree. Let us draw a graph containing every node of the flow graph,
      and for every node n an edge from idom(n) to n. The resulting graph will be a
      tree, because each node has exactly one immediate dominator. This is called
      the dominator tree.
         Figure 18.3 shows a flow graph and its dominator tree. Some edges in
      the dominator tree correspond single flow-graph edges (such as 4 → 6), but
      others do not (such as 4 → 7). That is, the immediate dominator of a node is
      not necessarily its predecessor in the flow graph.

                   18.1. DOMINATORS

                             1                                 1

                             2                                 2

                   3             4                     3                4

                             5        6                    5       6         7    12

                   8             7                         8                 11

               9                      11                   9

       10                        12                     10

                       (a)                                             (b)

FIGURE 18.3.       (a) A flow graph; (b) its dominator tree.

                      A flow-graph edge from a node n to a node h that dominates n is called a
                   back edge. For every back edge there is a corresponding subgraph of the flow
                   graph that is a loop. The back edges in Figure 18.3a are 3 → 2, 4 → 2, 10 →
                   5, 9 → 8.

                   LOOPS
                   The natural loop of a back edge n → h, where h dominates n, is the set of
                   nodes x such that h dominates x and there is a path from x to n not containing
                   h. The header of this loop will be h.
                      The natural loop of the back edge 10 → 5 from Figure 18.3a includes
                   nodes 5, 8, 9, 10 and has the loop 8, 9 nested within it.
                      A node h can be the header of more than one natural loop, if there is more
                   than one back edge into h. In Figure 18.3a, the natural loop of 3 → 2 consists
                   of the nodes 3, 2 and the natural loop of 4 → 2 consists of 4, 2.
                      The loop optimizations described in this chapter can cope with any loop,
                   whether it is a natural loop or not, and whether or not that loop shares its
                   header with some other loop. However, we usually want to optimize an inner
                   loop first, because most of the program’s execution time is expected to be in

      the inner loop. If two loops share a header, then it is hard to determine which
      should be considered the inner loop. A common way of solving this problem
      is to merge all the natural loops with the same header. The result will not
      necessarily be a natural loop.
         If we merge all the loops with header 2 in Figure 18.3a, we obtain the loop
      2, 3, 4 – which is not a natural loop.

      Nested loops If A and B are loops with headers a and b respectively, such
      that a ? = b and b is in A, then the nodes of B are a proper subset of the nodes
      of A. We say that loop B is nested within A, or that B is the inner loop.
         We can construct a loop-nest tree of loops in a program. The procedure is,
      for a flow graph G:

      1. Compute dominators of G.
      2. Construct the dominator tree.
      3. Find all the natural loops, and thus all the loop-header nodes.
      4. For each loop header h, merge all the natural loops of h into a single loop,
         loop[h].
      5. Construct the tree of loop headers (and implicitly loops), such that h 1 is above
         h 2 in the tree if h 2 is in loop[h 1 ].

         The leaves of the loop-nest tree are the innermost loops.
         Just to have a place to put nodes not in any loop, we could say that the
      entire procedure body is a pseudo-loop that sits at the root of the loop-nest
      tree. The loop-nest tree of Figure 18.3 is shown in Figure 18.4.

      LOOP PREHEADER
      Many loop optimizations will insert statements immediately before the loop
      executes. For example, loop-invariant hoisting moves a statement from inside
      the loop to immediately before the loop. Where should such statements be
      put? Figure 18.5a illustrates a problem: if we want to insert statement s into a
      basic block immediately before the loop, we need to put s at the end of blocks
      2 and 3. In order to have one place to put such statements, we insert a new,
      initially empty, preheader node p outside the loop, with an edge p → h. All
      edges x → h from nodes x inside the loop are left unchanged, but all existing
      edges y → h from nodes y outside the loop are redirected to point to p.

                     18.1. DOMINATORS

                     1
               6, 7, 11, 12

       2                         5
      3, 4                      10

                                 8
                                 9

FIGURE 18.4.         The loop-nest tree for Figure 18.3a. Each loop header is shown
                     in the top half of each oval (nodes 1, 2, 5, 8); a loop comprises
                     a header node (e.g. node 5), all the other nodes shown in the
                     same oval (e.g. node 10), and all the nodes shown in subtrees
                     of the loop-nest-tree node (e.g. 8, 9).

                                                2          3

         2           3                               P

               4                                     4

               5                                     5

         6           7                          6          7

                     8                                     8

               (a)                                  (b)

FIGURE 18.5.         (a) A loop; (b) the same loop with a preheader.

 18.2   LOOP-INVARIANT COMPUTATIONS

        If a loop contains a statement t ← a ⊕ b such that a has the same value each
        time around the loop, and b has the same value each time, then t will also
        have the same value each time. We would like to hoist the computation out of
        the loop, so it is computed just once instead of every time.
           We cannot always tell if a will have the same value every time, so as usual
        we will conservatively approximate. The definition d : t ← a1 ⊕ a2 is loop-
        invariant within loop L if, for each operand ai
        1. ai is a constant,
        2. or all the definitions of ai that reach d are outside the loop,
        3. or only one definition of ai reaches d, and that definition is loop-invariant.
        This leads naturally to an iterative algorithm for finding loop-invariant defini-
        tions: first find all the definitions whose operands are constant or from outside
        the loop, then repeatedly find definitions whose operands are loop-invariant.

        HOISTING
        Suppose t ← a ⊕ b is loop-invariant. Can we hoist it out of the loop? In
        Figure 18.6a, hoisting makes the program compute the same result faster.
        But in Figure 18.6b, hoisting makes the program faster but incorrect – the
        original program does not always execute t ← a ⊕ b, but the transformed
        program does, producing an incorrect value for x if i ≥ N initially. Hoisting
        in Figure 18.6c is also incorrect, because the original loop had more than one
        definition of t, and the transformed program interleaves the assignments to
        t in a different way. And hoisting in Figure 18.6d is wrong because there is
        a use of t before the loop-invariant definition, so after hoisting, this use will
        have the wrong value on the first iteration of the loop.
           With these pitfalls in mind, we can set the criteria for hoisting d : t ←
        a ⊕ b to the end of the loop preheader:
        1. d dominates all loop exits at which t is live-out;
        2. and there is only one definition of t in the loop,
        3. and t is not live-out of the loop preheader.

        Implicit side effects. These rules need modification if t ← a ⊕ b could raise
        some sort of arithmetic exception or have other side effects; see Exercise 18.7.

        Turning while loops into repeat-until loops. Condition (1) tends to prevent
        many computations from being hoisted from while loops; from Figure 18.7a

                        18.3. INDUCTION VARIABLES

                               L0                        L0                        L0
   L0
                                    t     ←0                  t      ←0                 t      ←0
        t     ←0
                               L1                        L1                        L1
   L1
                                     if i ≥ N goto L 2        i      ←i +1              M[ j ] ← t
        i      ←i +1
                                    i      ←i +1              t      ←a⊕b               i      ←i +1
        t      ←a⊕b
                                    t      ←a⊕b               M[i] ← t                  t      ←a⊕b
        M[i] ← t
                                    M[i] ← t                  t      ←0                 M[i] ← t
         if i < N goto L 1
                                     goto L 1                 M[ j ] ← t                 if i < N goto L 1
   L2
                               L2                              if i < N goto L 1   L2
        x     ←t
                                    x     ←t             L2                             x      ←t
            (a) Hoist                   (b) Don’t                 (c) Don’t                 (d) Don’t

FIGURE 18.6.            Some good and bad candidates for hoisting t ← a ⊕ b.

                        it is clear that none of the statements in the loop body dominates the loop
                        exit node (which is the same as the header node). To solve this problem, we
                        can transform the while loop into a repeat loop preceded by an if statement.
                        This requires duplication of the statements in the header node, as shown in
                        Figure 18.7b. Of course, all the statements in the body of a repeat loop dom-
                        inate the loop exit (if there are no break or explicit loop-exit statements), so
                        condition (1) will be satisfied.

 18.3                   INDUCTION VARIABLES

                        Some loops have a variable i that is incremented or decremented, and a vari-
                        able j that is set (in the loop) to i ·c+d where c and d are loop-invariant. Then
                        we can calculate j ’s value without reference to i; whenever i is incremented
                        by a we can increment j by c · a.
                           Consider, for example, Program 18.8a, which sums the elements of an ar-
                        ray. Using induction-variable analysis to find that i and j are related induc-
                        tion variables, strength reduction to replace a multiplication by 4 with an
                        addition, then induction-variable elimination to replace i ≥ n by k ≥ 4n + a,
                        followed by miscellaneous copy propagation, we get Program 18.8b. The
                        transformed loop has fewer quadruples; it might even run faster. Let us now
                        take the series of transformations one step at a time.
                           We say that a variable such as i is a basic induction variable, and j and k

                                                                                    1
                                                      x         i+3
                                                      if x < n goto 2 else goto 3

                                       1
         x         i+3                                                          2
         if x < n goto 2 else goto 3                       y    i+a
                                                           z    M[y]
                                                           w    y+1
                                   2                       M[w]    z
              y      i+a
              z      M[y]
              w      y+1                                                            1a
              M[w]      z                             x         i+3
              goto 1                                  if x < n goto 2 else goto 3

                                   3                                            3

                     (a)                                         (b)

FIGURE 18.7.          A while loop (a), transformed into a repeat loop (b).

       s ←0                                        s ←0
       i ←0                                        k? ← a
 L 1 : if i ≥ n goto L 2                           b ←n·4
        j ←i ·4                                    c ←a+b
       k ← j +a                              L 1 : if k ? ≥ c goto L 2
       x ← M[k]                                    x ← M[k ? ]
       s ←s+x                                      s ←s+x
       i ←i +1                                     k? ← k? + 4
       goto L 1                                    goto L 1
 L2                                          L2
        (a) Before                                   (b) After

PROGRAM 18.8. A loop before and after induction-variable optimizations.

                      18.3. INDUCTION VARIABLES

                                                     s ←0
                                                      j? ← i · 4
                                                     b? ← b · 4
        s ←0                                         n? ← n · 4
  L 1 : if s > 0 goto L 2                      L 1 : if s > 0 goto L 2
        i ←i +b                                       j ? ← j ? + b?
         j ←i ·4                                      j ← j?
        x ← M[ j ]                                   x ← M[ j ]
        s ←s−x                                       s ←s−x
        goto L 1                                     goto L 1
  L2 : i ← i + 1                               L2 : j ? ← j ? + 4
        s ←s+ j                                      s ←s+ j
        if i < n goto L 1                            if j ? < n ? goto L 1

         (a) Before                                      (b) After

FIGURE 18.9.          The basic induction variable i is incremented by different
                      amounts in different iterations; the derived induction variable
                      j is not changed in every iteration.

                      are derived induction variables in the family of i. Right after j is defined (in
                      the original loop), we have j = a j + i · b j , where a j = 0 and b j = 4. We can
                      completely characterize the value of j at its definition by (i, a, b), where i is
                      a basic induction variable and a and b are loop-invariant expressions.
                         If there is another derived induction variable with definition k ← j + ck
                      (where ck is loop-invariant), then k is also in the family of i. We can charac-
                      terize k by the triple (i, ck , b j ), that is, k = ck + i · b j .
                         We can characterize the basic induction variable i by a triple in the same
                      way, that is (i, 0, 1), meaning that i = 0 + i · 1. Thus every induction variable
                      can be characterized by such a triple.
                         If an induction variable changes by the same (constant or loop-invariant)
                      amount in every iteration of the loop, we say it is a linear induction vari-
                      able. In Figure 18.9a, the induction variable i is not linear: incremented by
                      b in some iterations and by 1 in other iterations. Furthermore, in some iter-
                      ations j = i · 4 and in other iterations the derived induction variable j gets
                      (temporarily) left behind as i is incremented.

      DETECTION OF INDUCTION VARIABLES
      Basic induction variables. The variable i is a basic induction variable in a
      loop L with header node h if the only definitions of i within L are of the form
      i ← i + c or i ← i − c where c is loop-invariant.

      Derived induction variables. The variable k is a derived induction variable
      in loop L if:

      1. There is only one definition of k within L, of the form k ← j ·c or k ← j +d,
         where j is an induction variable and c, d are loop-invariant;
      2. and if j is a derived induction variable in the family of i, then:
         (a) the only definition of j that reaches k is the one in the loop,
         (b) and there is no definition of i on any path between the definition of j and
             the definition of k.

      Assuming j is characterized by (i, a, b), then k is described by (i, a · c, b · c)
      or (i, a + d, b), depending on whether k’s definition was j · c or j + d.
         Statements of the form k ← j − c can be treated as k ← j + (−c)
      for purposes of induction-variable analysis (unless −c is not representable,
      which can sometimes happen with two’s complement arithmetic).

      Division. Statements of the form k ← j/c can be rewritten as k ← j · ( 1c ),
      so that k could be considered an induction variable. This fact is useful for
      floating-point calculations – though we must beware of introducing subtle
      numerical errors if 1/c cannot be represented exactly. If this is an integer
      division, we cannot represent 1/c at all.

      STRENGTH REDUCTION
      On many machines, multiplication is more expensive than addition. So we
      would like to take a derived induction variable whose definition is of the form
       j ← i · c and replace it with an addition.
         For each derived induction variable j whose triple is (i, a, b), make a new
      variable j ? (although different derived induction variables with the same triple
      can share the same j ? variable). After each assignment i ← i + c, make an
      assignment j ? ← j ? + c · b where c · b is a loop-invariant expression that
      may be computed in the loop preheader. If c and b are both constant, then the
      multiplication may be done at compile-time. Replace the (unique) assigment
      to j with j ← j ? . Finally, it is necessary to initialize j ? at the end of the loop
      preheader, with j ? ← a + i · b.

18.3. INDUCTION VARIABLES

    We say two induction variables x, y in the family of i are coordinated if
(x − ax )/bx = (y − a y )/b y at every time during the execution of the loop, ex-
cept during a sequence of statements z i ← z i + ci , where ci is loop-invariant.
Clearly, all the new variables in the family of i introduced by strength reduc-
tion are coordinated with each other, and with i.
    When the definition of an induction variable j ← · · · is replaced by j ←
 j , we know that j ? is coordinated but j might not be. However, the standard
   

copy propagation algorithm can help here, replacing uses of j by uses of j ?
where there is no intervening definition of j ? .
    Thus, instead of using some sort of flow analysis to learn whether j is
coordinated, we just use j ? instead, where copy propagation says it is legal to
do so.
    After strength reduction there is still a multiplication, but it is outside the
loop. If the loop executes more than one iteration, then the program should
run faster with additions instead of multiplication, on many machines. The
results of strength reduction may be disappointing on processors that can
schedule multiplications to hide their latency.

Example. Let us perform strength reduction on Program 18.8a. We find that
j is a derived induction variable with triple (i, 0, 4), and k has triple (i, a, 4).
After strength reduction on both j and k, we have

         s ←0
         i ←0
          j? ← 0
         k? ← a
   L 1 : if i ≥ n goto L 2
          j ← j?
         k ← k?
         x ← M[k]
         s ←s+x
         i ←i +1
          j? ← j? + 4
         k? ← k? + 4
         goto L 1
   L2

 We can perform dead-code elimination to remove the statement j ← j ? .
We would also like to remove all the definitions of the useless variable j ? , but

      technically it is not dead, since it is used in every iteration of the loop.

      ELIMINATION
      After strength reduction, some of the induction variables are not used at all
      in the loop, and others are used only in comparisons with loop-invariant vari-
      ables. These induction variables can be deleted.
         A variable is useless in a loop L if it is dead at all exits from L, and its
      only use is in a definition of itself. All definitions of a useless variable may
      be deleted.
         In our example, after the removal of j , the variable j ? is useless. We can
      delete j ? ← j ? + 4. This leaves a definition of j ? in the preheader that can
      now be removed by dead-code elimination.

      REWRITING COMPARISONS
      A variable k is almost useless if it is used only in comparisons against loop-
      invariant values and in definitions of itself, and there is some other induction
      variable in the same family that is not useless. An almost-useless variable may
      be made useless by modifying the comparison to use the related induction
      variable.
         If we have k < n, where j and k are coordinated induction variables in
      the family of i, and n is loop-invariant; then we know that ( j − a j )/b j =
      (k − ak )/bk , so therefore the comparison k < n can be written as
               bk
        ak +      ( j − aj) < n
               bj
      Now, we can subtract ak from both sides and multiply both sides by b j /bk . If
      b j /bk is positive, the resulting comparison is:
                     bj
         j − aj <       (n − ak )
                     bk
      but if b j /bk is negative, then the comparison becomes
                     bj
         j − aj >       (n − ak )
                     bk
      instead. Finally, we add a j to both sides (here we show the positive case):
               bj
         j <      (n − ak ) + a j
               bk
      The entire right-hand side of this comparison is loop-invariant, so it can be
      computed just once in the loop preheader.

       18.4. ARRAY-BOUNDS CHECKS

       Restrictions:

       1. If b j (n − ak ) is not evenly divisible by bk , then this transformation cannot be
          used, because we cannot hold a fractional value in an integer variable.
       2. If b j or bk is not constant, but is a loop-invariant value whose sign is not
          known, then the transformation cannot be used since we won’t know which
          comparison (less-than or greater-than) to use.

       Example. In our example, the comparison i < n can be replaced by k ? <
       a + 4 · n. Of course, a + 4 · n is loop-invariant and should be hoisted. Then i
       will be useless and may be deleted. The transformed program is:

                s ←0
                k? ← a
                b ←n·4
                c ←a+b
          L 1 : if k ? < c goto L 2
                k ← k?
                x ← M[k]
                s ←s+x
                k? ← k? + 4
                goto L 1
          L2

       Finally, copy propagation can eliminate k ← k ? , and we obtain Program 18.8b.

18.4   ARRAY-BOUNDS CHECKS

       Safe programming languages automatically insert array-bounds checks on ev-
       ery subscript operation (see the sermon on page 164). Of course, in well writ-
       ten programs all of these checks are redundant, since well written programs
       don’t access arrays out of bounds. We would like safe languages to achieve
       the fast performance of unsafe languages. Instead of turning off the bounds
       checks (which would not be safe) we ask the compiler to remove any checks
       that it can prove are redundant.
          We cannot hope to remove all the redundant bounds checks, because this
       problem is not computable (it is as hard as the halting problem). But many
       array subscripts are of the form a[i], where i is an induction variable. These
       the compiler can often understand well enough to optimize.

         The bounds for an array are generally of the form 0 ≤ i ∧ i < N. When
      N is nonnegative, as it always is for array sizes, this can be implemented as
      i ≤u N , where ≤u is the unsigned comparison operator.

      Conditions for eliminating array-bounds checking. Although it seems nat-
      ural and intuitive that an induction variable must stay within a certain range,
      and we should be able to tell whether that range does not exceed the bounds
      of the array, the criteria for eliminating a bounds check from a loop L are
      actually quite complicated:

      1. There is an induction variable j and a loop-invariant u used in a statement s1 ,
         taking one of the following forms:

           if j < u goto L 1 else goto L 2
           if j ≥ u goto L 2 else goto L 1
           if u > j goto L 1 else goto L 2
           if u ≤ j goto L 2 else goto L 1

         where L 2 is out of the loop.
      2. There is a statement s2 of the form

           if k <u n goto L 3 else goto L 4

         where k is an induction variable coordinated with j , n is loop-invariant, and
         s1 dominates s2 .
      3. There is no loop nested within L containing a definition of k.
      4. k increases when j does, that is, b j /bk > 0.

         Often, n will be an array length. In a language with static arrays an array
      length n is a constant. In many languages with dynamic arrays, array lengths
      are loop-invariant. In Tiger, Java, and ML the length of an array cannot be
      dynamically modified once the array has been allocated. The array-length n
      will typically be calculated by fetching the length field of some array-pointer
      v. For the sake of illustration, assume the length field is at offset 0 in the array
      object. To avoid the need for complicated alias analysis, the semantic anal-
      ysis phase of the compiler should mark the expression M[v] as immutable,
      meaning that no other store instruction can possibly update the contents of
      the length field of the array v. If v is loop-invariant, then n will also be loop-
      invariant. Even if n is not an array length but is some other loop invariant, we
      can still optimize the comparison k <u n.
         We want to put a test in the loop preheader that expresses the idea that in
      every iteration, k ≥ 0 ∧ k < n. Let k0 be the value of k at the end of the

18.4. ARRAY-BOUNDS CHECKS

preheader, and let k1 , k2 , . . . , km be all the loop-invariant values that
are added to k inside the loop. Then we can ensure k ≥ 0 by testing

  k ≥0∧       k1 ≥ 0 ∧ · · · ∧    km ≥ 0

at the end of the preheader.
   Let k1 , k2 , . . . , k p be the set of loop-invariant values that are added
to k on any path between s1 and s2 that does not go through s1 (again). Then,
to ensure k < n at s2 , it is sufficient to ensure that k < n − ( k1 + · · · + k p )
at s1 . Since we know (k − ak )/bk = ( j − a j )/b j , this test becomes

        bj
   j<      (n − ( k1 + · · · +        k p ) − ak ) + a j
        bk
This will always be true if
        bj
  u<       (n − ( k1 + · · · +        k p ) − ak ) + a j
        bk
since the test j < u dominates the test k < n.
   Since everything in this comparison is loop-invariant, we can move it to
the preheader as follows. First, ensure that definitions of loop-invariants are
hoisted out of the loop. Then, rewrite the loop L as follows: copy all the
statements of L to make a new loop L ? with header L ?h . Inside L ? , replace the
statement

  if k < n goto L ?3 else goto L ?4

by goto L ?3 . At the end of the preheader of L, put statements equivalent to

   if k ≥ 0 ∧ k1 ≥ 0 ∧ · · · ∧ km ≥ 0
               b
       ∧ u < bkj (n − ( k1 + · · · + k p ) − ak ) + a j
         goto L ?h
      else goto L h

The conditional goto tests whether k will always be between 0 and n.
  Sometimes we will have enough information to evaluate this complicated
condition at compile time. This will be true in at least two situations:

1. all the loop-invariants mentioned in it are constants, or
2. n and u are the same temporary variable, ak = a j , bk = b j , and there are no
     k’s added to k between s1 and s2 . In a language like Tiger or Java or ML,
   this could happen if the programmer writes,

           let var u := length(A)
               var i := 0
            in while i<u
                do (sum := sum + A[i];
                    i := i+1)
           end
        The quadruples for length(A) will include u ← M[ A], assuming that the
        length of an array is fetched from offset zero from the array pointer; and the
        quadruples for A[i] will include n ← M[ A], to fetch n for doing the bounds
        check. Now the expressions defining u and n are common subexpressions,
        assuming the expression M[ A] is marked so that we know that no other STORE
        instruction is modifying the contents of memory location M[ A].

      If we can evaluate the big comparison at compile time, then we can uncondi-
      tionally use loop L or loop L ? , and delete the loop that we are not using.

      Cleaning up. After this optimization, the program may have several loose
      ends. Statements after the label L ?4 may be unreachable; there may be several
      useless computations of n and k within L ? . The former can be cleaned up by
      unreachable-code elimination, and the latter by dead-code elimination.

      Generalizations. To be practically useful, the algorithm needs to be general-
      ized in several ways:

      1. The loop-exit comparison might take one of the forms

           if j ≤ u ? goto L 1 else goto L 2
           if j > u ? goto L 2 else goto L 1
           if u ? ≥ j goto L 1 else goto L 2
           if u ? < j goto L 2 else goto L 1

         which compares j ≤ u ? instead of j < u.
      2. The loop-exit test might occur at the bottom of the loop body, instead of before
         the array-bounds test. We can describe this situation as follows: There is a test

           s2 : if j < u goto L 1 else goto L 2

         where L 2 is out of the loop and s2 dominates all the loop back edges. Then
         the ki of interest are the ones between s2 and any back edge, and between
         the loop header and s1 .
      3. We should handle the case where b j /bk < 0.
      4. We should handle the case where j counts downward instead of up, and the
         loop-exit test is something like j ≥ l, for l a loop-invariant lower bound.
      5. The induction-variable increments might be “undisciplined”; for example,

                    18.5. LOOP UNROLLING

                                            L 1 : x ← M[i]
                                                   s ←s+x
                                                   i ←i +4
                                                   if i < n goto L ?1 else L 2
   L 1 : x ← M[i]                           L ?1 : x ← M[i]
         s ←s+x                                    s ←s+x
         i ←i +4                                   i ←i +4
         if i < n goto L 1 else L 2                if i < n goto L 1 else L 2
   L2                                       L2
                (a) Before                                 (b) After

PROGRAM 18.10. Useless loop unrolling.

                             while i<n-1
                              do (if sum<0
                                   then (i:=i+1; sum:= sum+i; i:=i+1)
                                   else i := i+2;
                                  sum := sum + a[i])
                       Here there are three i, (of 1, 1, and 2 respectively). Our analysis will assume
                       that any, all, or none of these increments may be applied; but clearly the effect
                       is i ← i + 2 on either path. In such cases, an analysis that hoists (and merges)
                       the increments above the if will be useful.

 18.5               LOOP UNROLLING

                    Some loops have such a small body that most of the time is spent incre-
                    menting the loop-counter variable and testing the loop-exit condition. We can
                    make these loops more efficient by unrolling them, putting two or more copies
                    of the loop body in a row.
                       Given a loop L with header node h and back edges si → h, we can unroll
                    the loop as follows:
                    1. Copy the nodes to make a loop L ? with header h ? and back edges si? → h ? .
                    2. Change all the back edges in L from si → h to si → h ? .
                    3. Change all the back edges in L ? from si? → h ? to si? → h.

                      For example, Program 18.10a unrolls into Program 18.10b. But nothing
                    useful has been accomplished; each “original” iteration still has an increment
                    and a conditional branch.

                                                if i < n − 8 goto L 1 else L 2
                                          L 1 : x ← M[i]
                                                s ←s+x
                                                x ← M[i + 4]
                                                s ←s+x
   L 1 : x ← M[i]                               i ←i +8
         s ←s+x                                 if i < n − 8 goto L 1 else L 2
         x ← M[i + 4]                     L 2 x ← M[i]
         s ←s+x                                 s ←s+x
         i ←i +8                                i ←i +4
         if i < n goto L 1 else L 2             if i < n goto L 2 else L 3
   L2                                     L3
                (a) Fragile                            (b) Robust

PROGRAM 18.11. Useful loop unrolling; (a) works correctly only for an even
               number of iterations of the original loop; (b) works for any
               number of iterations of the original loop.

                       By using information about induction variables, we can do better. We need
                    an induction variable i such that every increment i ← i +          dominates
                    every back edge of the loop. Then we know that each iteration increments i
                    by exactly the sum of all the , so we can agglomerate the increments and
                    loop-exit tests to get Program 18.11a. But this unrolled loop works correctly
                    only if the original loop iterated an even number of times. We execute “odd”
                    iterations in an epilogue, as shown in Program 18.11b.
                       Here we have shown only the case of unrolling by a factor of two. When a
                    loop is unrolled by a factor of K , then the epilogue is a loop (much like the
                    original one) that iterates up to K − 1 times.

FURTHER
READING

                    Lowry and Medlock [1969] characterized loops using dominators and per-
                    formed induction-variable optimizations. Allen [1970] introduced the notion
                    of reducible flow graphs. Aho et al. [1986] describe many optimizations, anal-
                    yses, and transformations on loops.
                       Splitting control-flow nodes or edges gives a place into which statements

              EXERCISES

              can be moved. The loop preheader transformation described on page 416 is
              an example of such splitting. Other examples are landing pads [Cytron et al.
              1986] – nodes inserted in each loop-exit edge; postbody nodes [Wolfe 1996]
              – nodes inserted at the end of a loop body (see Exercise 18.6); and edge
              splitting to ensure a unique successor or predecessor property [Rosen et al.
              1988] (see Section 19.1).
                 Chapter 19 describes other loop optimizations and a faster algorithm for
              computing dominators.

EXERCISES

       18.1
              a. Calculate the dominators of each node of this flowgraph:

                             A
                         B               C

                     D       E           F

                 G       H           I       J

                K        L       M

              b. Show the immediate dominator tree.
              c. Identify the set of nodes in each natural loop.
       18.2 Calculate the immediate-dominator tree of each of the following graphs:
              a. The graph of Figure 2.8.
              b. The graph of Exercise 2.3a.
              c. The graph of Exercise 2.5a.
              d. The graph of Figure 3.27.
      *18.3 Let G be a control-flow graph, h be a node in G, A be the set of nodes in a
              loop with header h, and B be the set of nodes in a different loop with header
              h. Prove that the subgraph whose nodes are A ∪ B is also a loop.
      *18.4 The immediate dominator theorem (page 414) is false for graphs that contain
              unreachable nodes.

               a. Show a graph with nodes d, e, and n such that d dominates n, e dominates
                  n, but neither d dominates e nor e dominates d.
               b. Identify which step of the proof is invalid for graphs containing unreach-
                  able nodes.
               c. In approximately three words, name an algorithm useful in finding un-
                  reachable nodes.
       *18.5 Show that in a connected flow graph (one without unreachable nodes), a natural
               loop as defined on page 415 satisfies the definition of loop given on page 410.
        18.6    For some purposes it is desirable that each loop header node should have
               exactly two predecessors, one outside the loop and one inside. We can ensure
               that there is only one outside predecessor by inserting a preheader node, as
               described in Section 18.1. Explain how to insert a postbody node to ensure
               that the loop header has only one predecessor inside the loop.
       *18.7 Suppose any arithmetic overflow or divide-by-zero will raise an exception at
               run time. If we hoist t ← a ⊕ b out of a loop, and the loop might not have
               executed the statement at all, then the transformed program may raise the
               exception where the original program did not. Revise the criteria for loop-
               invariant hoisting to take account of this. Instead of writing something informal
               like “might not execute the statement,” use the terminology of dataflow analysis
               and dominators.
        18.8 On pages 418–419 the transformation of a while loop to a repeat loop is
               described. Show how a while loop may be characterized in the control-flow
               graph of basic blocks (using dominators) so that the optimizer can recognize it.
               The body of the loop may have explicit break statements that exit the loop.
       *18.9 For bounds-check elimination, we required (on page 426) that the loop-exit
               test dominate the bounds-check comparison. If it is the other way around, then
               (effectively) we have one extra array subscript at the end of the loop, so the
               criterion

                 ak + i · bk ≥ 0 ∧ (n − ak ) · b j < (u − a j ) · bk

               is “off by one.” Rewrite this criterion for the case where the bounds-check
               comparison occurs before the loop-exit test.
      *18.10 Write down the rules for unrolling a loop, such that the induction-variable
               increments are agglomerated and the unrolled loop has only one loop-exit test
               per iteration, as was shown informally for Program 18.10.

