      20
      Pipelining and
      Scheduling

      sched-ule: a procedural plan that indicates the time and
      sequence of each operation

                                            Webster’s Dictionary

      A simple computer can process one instruction at a time. First it fetches the
      instruction, then decodes it into opcode and operand specifiers, then reads the
      operands from the register bank (or memory), then performs the arithmetic
      denoted by the opcode, then writes the result back to the register back (or
      memory); and then fetches the next instruction.
          Modern computers can execute parts of many different instructions at the
      same time. At the same time the processor is writing results of two instruc-
      tions back to registers, it may be doing arithmetic for three other instruc-
      tions, reading operands for two more instructions, decoding four others, and
      fetching yet another four. Meanwhile, there may be five instructions delayed,
      awaiting the results of memory-fetches.
          Such a processor usually fetches instructions from a single flow of control;
      it’s not that several programs are running in parallel, but the adjacent instruc-
      tions of a single program are decoded and executed simultaneously. This is
      called instruction-level parallelism (ILP), and is the basis for much of the
      astounding advance in processor speed in the last decade of the twentieth
      century.
          A pipelined machine performs the write-back of one instruction in the
      same cycle as the arithmetic “execute” of the next instruction and the operand-
      read of the previous one, and so on. A very-long-instruction-word (VLIW)
      issues several instructions in the same processor cycle; the compiler must en-
      sure that they are not data-dependent on each other. A superscalar machine

issues two or more instructions in parallel if they are not related by data de-
pendence (which it can check quickly in the instruction-decode hardware);
otherwise it issues the instructions sequentially – thus, the program will still
operate correctly if data-dependent instructions are adjacent, but it will run
faster if the compiler has not scheduled non-data-dependent instructions ad-
jacent to each other. A dynamic-scheduling machine reorders the instructions
as they are being executed, so that it can issue several non-data-dependent
instructions simultaneously, and may need less help from the compiler. Any
of these techniques produce instruction-level parallism.
   The more instructions can be executed simultaneously, the faster the pro-
gram will run. But why can’t all the instructions of the program be executed
in parallel? After all, that would be the fastest possible execution.
   There are several kinds of constraints on instruction execution; we can op-
timize the program for instruction-level parallelism by finding the best sched-
ule that obeys these constraints:

Data dependence: If instruction A calculates a result that’s used as an operand
   of instruction B, then B cannot execute before A is finished.
Functional unit: If there are kfu multipliers (adders, etc.) on the chip, then at
   most kfu multiplication (addition, etc.) instructions can execute at once.
Instruction issue: The instruction-issue unit can issue at most kii instructions at
  a time.
Register: At most kr registers can be in use at a time; more specifically, any
   schedule must have some valid register allocation.

The functional-unit, instruction-issue, and register constraints are often lumped
together as resource constraints or resource hazards.
   On a pipelined machine, even if “B cannot execute before A,” there may
be some parts of B’s execution (such as instruction-fetch) that can proceed
concurrently with A; Figures 20.2 and 20.3 give details.
   There are also pseudo-constraints that can often be made to disappear by
renaming variables:

Write-after-write: If instruction A writes to a register or memory location,
 and B writes to the same location, then the order of A and B must not be
 changed. But often it is possible to modify the program so that A and B write
 to different locations.
Write-after-read: If A must read from a location before B writes to it, then
  A and B’s order of execution must not be swapped, unless renaming can be
 done so that they use different locations.

        Cycle 0 Cycle 1 Cycle 2 Cycle 3 Cycle 4 Cycle 5 Cycle 6 Cycle 7 Cycle 8 Cycle 9
                                Shift   Round Round
   ADD  I-Fetch Read    Unpack                          Write
                                Add     Add     Shift
                                                                MultB
   MULT I-Fetch Read    Unpack MultA MultA MultA MultB                  Round Write
                                                                Add
   CONV I-Fetch   Read     Unpack Add        Round    Shift    Shift     Add         Round   Write

FIGURE 20.1.      Functional unit requirements of instructions (on the MIPS
                  R4000 processor). This machine’s floating-point ADD instruc-
                  tion uses the instruction-fetch unit for one cycle; reads regis-
                  ters for one cycle; unpacks exponent and mantissa; then for the
                  next cycle uses a shifter and an adder; then uses both the adder
                  and a rounding unit; then the rounding unit and a shifter; then
                  writes a result back to the register file. The MULT and CONV
                  instructions use functional units in a different order.

                  Resource usage of an instruction. We might describe an instruction in terms
                  of the number of cycles it takes to execute, and the resources it uses at dif-
                  ferent stages of execution. Figure 20.1 shows such a description for three
                  instructions of a hypothetical machine.
                     If the ith cycle of instruction A uses a particular resource, and the j th cycle
                  of instruction B uses the same resource, then B cannot be scheduled exactly
                  i − j cycles after A, as illustrated in Figure 20.2.
                     However, some machines have several functional units of each kind (e.g.,
                  more than one adder); on such a machine it does not suffice to consider in-
                  structions pairwise, but we must consider all the instructions scheduled for a
                  given time.

                  Data-dependence of an instruction. The same considerations apply to data-
                  dependence constraints. The result of some instruction A is written back to
                  the register file during the Write stage of its execution (see Figure 20.1); if
                  instruction B uses this register, then the Read stage of B must be after the
                  Write stage of A. Some machines have bypass circuitry that may allow the
                  arithmetic stage of B to follow immediately after the arithmetic stage of A;
                  for example, the Shift/Add stage of an ADD instruction might be able to
                  immediately follow the Round stage of a MULT. These situations are shown
                  in Figure 20.3.

                                      Shift     Round    Round
   ADD    I-Fetch Read      Unpack                                Write
                                      Add       Add      Shift
                                                                          MultB                   X
   MULT I-Fetch Read        Unpack MultA        MultA    MultA    MultB           Round   Write
                                                                          Add

                                                Shift    Round    Round
   ADD            I-Fetch   Read      Unpack                            Write
                                                Add      Add      Shift
                                                                        MultB                     OK
   MULT I-Fetch   Read      Unpack    MultA     MultA    MultA    MultB           Round   Write
                                                                        Add

                                                         Shift    Round Round
   ADD                      I-Fetch   Read      Unpack                            Write
                                                         Add      Add   Shift
                                                                        MultB                     OK
   MULT I-Fetch   Read      Unpack    MultA     MultA    MultA    MultB           Round   Write
                                                                        Add

                                                                  Shift Round     Round
   ADD                                I-Fetch   Read     Unpack                         Write
                                                                  Add   Add       Shift
                                                                        MultB                     X
   MULT I-Fetch   Read      Unpack    MultA     MultA    MultA    MultB           Round Write
                                                                        Add

                                                                  Shift Round Round
   ADD                                I-Fetch   Read     Unpack                           Write
                                                                  Add   Add   Shift
                                                                  MultB                           X
   MULT Read      Unpack MultA        MultA     MultA    MultB          Round Write
                                                                  Add

                                                                  Shift   Round   Round
   ADD                                I-Fetch   Read     Unpack                           Write
                                                                  Add     Add     Shift
                                                         MultB                                    OK
   MULT Unpack MultA        MultA     MultA     MultB             Round Write
                                                         Add

FIGURE 20.2.      If there is only one functional unit of each kind, then an ADD
                  cannot be started at the same time as a MULT (because of nu-
                  merous resource hazards shown in boldface); nor three cycles
                  after the MULT (because of Add, Round, and Write hazards);
                  nor four cycles later (because of a Round hazard). But if there
                  were two rounding units, then an ADD could be started four
                  cycles after a MULT. Or with dual fetch units, multiple-access
                  register file, and dual unpackers, the MULT and ADD could be
                  started simultaneously.

                             MultB
  MultA MultA MultA MultB          Round     Write↓
                             Add
                                                                      Shift   Round Round
                                             I-Fetch ↑Read Unpack                         Write
                                                                      Add     Add   Shift

                            MultB
  MultA MultA MultA MultB         Round↓ Write
                            Add
                                          Shift       Round Round
                    I-Fetch Read Unpack ↑                             Write
                                          Add         Add   Shift

FIGURE 20.3.    Data dependence. (Above) If the MULT produces a result that
                is an operand to ADD, the MULT must write its result to the reg-
                ister file before the ADD can read it. (Below) Special bypassing
                circuitry can route the result of MULT directly to the Shift and
                Add units, skipping the Write, Read, and Unpack stages.

 20.1           LOOP SCHEDULING WITHOUT RESOURCE BOUNDS

                Choosing an optimal schedule subject to data-dependence constraints and re-
                source hazards is difficult – it is NP-complete, for example. Although NP-
                completeness should never scare the compiler writer (graph coloring is NP
                complete, but the approximation algorithm for graph coloring described in
                Chapter 11 is very successful), it remains the case that resource-bounded loop
                scheduling is hard to do in practice.
                   I will first describe an algorithm that ignores the resource constraints and
                finds an optimal schedule subject only to the data-dependence constraints.
                This algorithm is not useful in practice, but it illustrates the kind of opportu-
                nities there are in instruction-level parallelism.
                   The Aiken-Nicolau loop pipelining algorithm has several steps:

                1. Unroll the loop;
                2. Schedule each instruction from each iteration at the earliest possible time;
                3. Plot the instructions in a tableau of iteration-number versus time;
                4. Find separated groups of instructions at given slopes;
                5. Coalesce the slopes;
                6. Reroll the loop.

                   To explain the notions of tableau, slope, and coalesce, I use Program 20.4a
                as an example; let us assume that every instruction can be completed in one
                cycle, and that arbitrarily many instructions can be issued in the same cycle,
                subject only to data-dependence constraints.

                    20.1. LOOP SCHEDULING WITHOUT RESOURCE BOUNDS

                                               for i ← 1 to N
  for i ← 1 to N
        a ← j ⊕ V [i − 1]
                                                    ai ← ji−1 ⊕ bi−1
        b ←a⊕ f
                                                    bi ← ai ⊕ f i−1
        c ←e⊕ j
                                                    ci ← ei−1 ⊕ ji−1
        d ← f ⊕c
                                                    di ← f i−1 ⊕ ci
        e ←b⊕d
                                                    ei ← bi ⊕ di
        f ← U [i]
                                                    f i ← U [i]
  g : V [i] ← b
                                               g : V [i] ← bi
  h : W [i] ← d
                                               h : W [i] ← di
        j ← X [i]
                                                    ji ← X [i]
              (a)
                                                           (b)

PROGRAM 20.4. (a) A for-loop to be software-pipelined. (b) After a scalar-
              replacement optimization (in the definition of a); and scalar
              variables labeled with their iteration-number.

                    Data dependence through memory. For optimal scheduling of stores and
                    fetches, we need to trace data dependence as a value is stored into mem-
                    ory and then fetched back. As discussed on page 458, dependence analysis
                    of memory references is not trivial! In order to illustrate loop scheduling for
                    Program 20.4a without full-fledged dependence analysis, we can use scalar
                    replacement to replace the reference to V [i − 1] with the (equivalent) b; now
                    we can see that in the resulting Program 20.4b all memory references are in-
                    dependent of each other, assuming that the arrays U, V, W, X do not overlap.
                       Next we mark each variable in the loop body to indicate whether this it-
                    eration’s value is used, or the previous iteration’s value, as shown in Pro-
                    gram 20.4b. We can construct a data-dependence graph as a visual aid in
                    scheduling; solid edges are data dependences within an iteration, and dotted
                    edges are loop-carried dependences, as shown in Graph 20.5a.
                       Now suppose we unroll the loop; the data-dependence graph is a DAG, as
                    shown in Graph 20.5b. Scheduling DAGs is easy if there are no resource con-
                    straints; starting from operations with no predecessors, each operation goes

      as soon as its predecessors have all completed:

         Cycle Instructions
          1 a1 c1 f 1 j1 f 2 j2 f 3 j3 . . .
          2 b1 d1
          3 e1 g1 h 1 a2
          4 b2 c2
          5 d2 g2 a3
           ..  ..
            .   .

         It is convenient to write this schedule in a tableau where the rows are
      successive cycles and the columns are successive iterations of the original
      loop, as shown in Table 20.6a.
         After a few iterations are scheduled, we notice a pattern in the tableau:
      there is a group of instructions cdeh racing down to the lower-right corner
      with a slope of three cycles per iteration, another group abg with a more
      moderate slope of two cycles per iteration, and a third group f j with zero
      slope. The key observation is that there are gaps in the schedule, separating
      identical groups, that grow larger at a constant rate. In this case the groups of
      instructions at iteration i ≥ 4 are identical to the groups at iteration i + 1. In
      general the groups at iteration i will be identical to the groups at i + c, where
      sometimes c > 1; see Exercise 20.1.

      Theorems:

      • If there are K instructions in the loop, the pattern of identical groups separated
        by gaps will always appear within K 2 iterations (and usually much sooner).
      • We can increase the slopes of the less steeply sloped groups, either closing
        the gaps or at least making them small and nonincreasing, without violating
        data-dependence constraints.
      • The resulting tableau has a repeating set of m identical cycles, which can
        constitute the body of a pipelined loop.
      • The resulting loop is optimally scheduled (it runs in the least possible time).

      See the Further Reading section for reference to proofs. But to see why the
      loop is optimal, consider that the data-dependence DAG of the unrolled loop
      has some path of length P to the last instruction to execute, and the scheduled
      loop executes that instruction at time P.
         The result, for our example, is shown in Table 20.6b. Now we can find
      a repeating pattern of three cycles (since three is the slope of the steepest

                    20.1. LOOP SCHEDULING WITHOUT RESOURCE BOUNDS

          a                  c                               a1                c1
                                                             b1                d1
                                                                         j1
                                                                               e1    h1
                                                    g1       a2
                                                                         f1    c2
                    j        d
                                                             b2                d2
          b                                                              j2
                                                                               e2    h2
                                                    g2       a3
                    f                                                    f2    c3
                         h
      g                      e                               b3

                   (a)                                                  (b)

GRAPH 20.5.         Data-dependence graph for Program 20.4b: (a) original graph,
                    in which solid edges are same-iteration dependences and dot-
                    ted edges are loop-carried dependences; (b) acyclic depen-
                    dences of the unrolled loop.

                   Iterations                                  Iterations
       1      2       3 4 5 6                          1       2 3 4 5
    1 ac f j f j     fj fj fj fj                       ac f j
  C 2 bd                                               bd f j
  y 3 egh a                                      Pro- egh a
  c 4        cb                                  logue        bc f j
  l 5        dg     a                                         dg a
  e 6        eh     b                                         eh b f j
  s 7               cg a                                           cg a
    8               d b                                            d b
    9               eh g a                       Loop              eh g     fj
   10                  c b                       body                   c    a
   11                  d g a                                            d b
   12                  eh    b                                          eh g
   13                     c g                    Epilogue                  c
   14                     d                                                d
   15                     eh                                               eh
                                                                  (b)
                   (a)

TABLE 20.6.         (a) Tableau of software-pipelined loop schedule; there is a
                    group of instructions f j with slope 0, another group abg with
                    slope 2, and a third group cdeh with slope 3. (b) The smaller-
                    slope groups are pushed down to slope 3, and a pattern is
                    found (boxed) that constitutes the pipelined loop.

        group). In this case, the pattern does not begin until cycle 8; it is shown in a
        box. This will constitute the body of the scheduled loop. Irregularly scheduled
        instructions before the loop body constitute a prologue, and instructions after
        it constitute the epilogue.
            Now we can generate the multiple-instruction-issue program for this loop,
        as shown in Figure 20.7. However, the variables still have subscripts in this
        “program”: the variable ji+1 is live at the same time as ji . To encode this
        program in instructions, we need to put in MOVE instructions between the
        different variables, as shown in Figure 20.8.
            This loop is optimally scheduled – assuming the machine can execute 8
        instructions at a time, including four simultaneous loads and stores.

        Multicycle instructions. Although I have illustrated an example where each
        instruction takes exactly one cycle, the algorithm is easily extensible to the
        situation where some instructions take multiple cycles.

 20.2   RESOURCE-BOUNDED LOOP PIPELINING

        A real machine can issue only a limited number of instructions at a time,
        and has only a limited number of load/store units, adders, and multipliers. To
        be practically useful, a scheduling algorithm must take account of resource
        constraints.
          The input to the scheduling algorithm must be in three parts:

        1. A program to be scheduled;
        2. A description of what resources each instruction uses in each of its pipeline
           stages (similar to Figure 20.1);
        3. A description of the resources available on the machine (how many of each
           kind of functional unit, how many instructions may be issued at once, restric-
           tions on what kinds of instructions may be issued simultaneously, and so on).

           Resource-bounded scheduling is NP-complete, meaning that there is un-
        likely to be an efficient optimal algorithm. As usual in this situation, we use
        an approximation algorithm that does reasonably well in “typical” cases.

        MODULO SCHEDULING
        Iterative modulo scheduling is a practical, though not optimal, algorithm for
        resource-bounded loop scheduling. The idea is to use iterative backtracking

    a1    ← j0 ⊕ b0       c1 ← e0 ⊕ j0        f1 ← U [1]          j1   ← X[1]
    b1    ← a1 ⊕ f0       d1 ← f 0 ⊕ c1       f2 ← U [2]          j2   ← X[2]
    e1    ← b1 ⊕ d1       V [1] ← b1         W [1] ← d1           a2   ← j1 ⊕ b1
    b2    ← a2 ⊕ f1       c2 ← e1 ⊕ j1        f3 ← U [3]          j3   ← X[3]
    d2    ← f1 ⊕ c2       V [2] ← b2         a3 ← j2 ⊕ b2
    e2    ← b2 ⊕ d2       W [2] ← d2         b3 ← a3 ⊕ f 2        f4   ← U [4]        j4   ← X[4]
    c3    ← e2 ⊕ j2       V [3] ← b3         a4 ← j3 ⊕ b3                            i     ←3
L : di    ← fi−1 ⊕ ci     bi+1 ← ai ⊕ fi
    ei    ← bi ⊕ di       W [i] ← di         V [i + 1] ← bi+1      f i+2 ← U [i + 2] ji+2 ← X[i + 2]
    ci+1 ← ei ⊕ ji        ai+2 ← ji+1 ⊕ bi+1 i ← i + 1            if i < N − 2 goto L
    d N−1 ← f N−2 ⊕ c N−1 b N ← a N ⊕ f N−1
    e N−1 ← b N−1 ⊕ d N−1 W [N − 1] ← d N−1 V [N] ← b N
    cN    ← e N−1 ⊕ j N−1
    dN    ← f N−1 ⊕ c N
    eN    ← bN ⊕ dN       W [N] ← d N

FIGURE 20.7.        Pipelined schedule. Assignments in each row happen simul-
                    taneously; each right-hand side refers to the value before the
                    assignment. The loop exit test i < N + 1 has been “moved
                    past” three increments of i , so appears as i < N − 2.

    a1 ← j0 ⊕ b0     c1 ← e0 ⊕ j0       f1 ← U [1]    j1 ← X[1]
    b1 ← a1 ⊕ f0     d1 ← f0 ⊕ c1       f ← U [2]     j2 ← X[2]
    e1 ← b1 ⊕ d1     V [1] ← b1        W [1] ← d1    a2 ← j1 ⊕ b1
    b2 ← a2 ⊕ f1     c2 ← e1 ⊕ j1       f ← U [3]     j ← X[3]
    d ← f1 ⊕ c2      V [2] ← b2        a ← j2 ⊕ b2
    e2 ← b2 ⊕ d2     W [2] ← d2        b ←a⊕ f        f ← U [4]         j ← X[4]
    c ← e2 ⊕ j2      V [3] ← b         a ← j ⊕b                        i ←3
L : d ← f ⊕c         b ←a ⊕ f          b ← b; a ← a; f ← f ; f ← f ; j ← j ; j ← j
    e ← b ⊕d         W [i] ← d         V [i + 1] ← b  f ← U [i + 2]     j ← X[i + 2]
    c ← e⊕ j         a ← j ⊕b          i ← i +1      if i < N − 2 goto L
    d ← f ⊕c         b ←a⊕ f           b ←b
    e ← b ⊕d         W [N − 1] ← d     V [N] ← b
    c ← e⊕ j
    d ← f ⊕c
    e ← b⊕d          W [N] ← d

FIGURE 20.8.        Pipelined schedule, with move instructions.

      to find a good schedule that obeys the functional-unit and data-dependence
      constraints, and then perform register allocation.
         The algorithm tries to place all the instructions of the loop body in a sched-
      ule of ? cycles, assuming that there will also be a prologue and epilogue of
      the kind used by the Aiken-Nicolau algorithm. The algorithm tries increasing
      values of ? until it reaches a value for which it can make a schedule.
         A key idea of modulo scheduling is that if an instruction violates functional-
      unit constraints at time t, then it will not fit at time t + ?, or at any time t
      where t ≡ t modulo ?.
         Suppose, for example, we are trying to schedule Program 20.4b with ? =
      3 on a machine that can perform only one load instruction at a time. The
      following loop-body schedule is illegal, with two different loads at cycle 1:

         0
         1    fi ← U [i]       ji ← X[i]
         2

        We can move f i from cycle 1 of the loop to cycle 0, or cycle 2:

         0    fi ← U [i]                       0
         1                     ji ← X[i]       1                      ji ← X[i]
         2                                     3     f i ← U [i]

        Either one avoids the resource conflict. We could move f i even earlier, to
      cycle −1, where (in effect) we are computing f i+1 ; or even later, to cycle 3,
      where we are computing f i−1 :

         0                                     0 fi−1 ← U [i − 1]
         1                     ji ← X[i]       1                      ji ← X[i]
         2 f i+1 ← U [i + 1]                   3

         But with ? = 3 we can never solve the resource conflict by moving f i
      from cycle 1 to cycle 4 (or to cycle -2), because 1 ≡ 4 modulo 3; the calcula-
      tion of f would still conflict with the calculation of j :

         0
         1 f i−1 ← U [i − 1]   ji ← X[i]
         2

      Effects on register allocation. Consider the calculation of d ← f ⊕ c, which
      occurs at cycle 0 of the schedule in Figure 20.7. If we place the calculation
      of d in a later cycle, then the data-dependence edges from the definitions of
      f and c to this instruction would lengthen, and the data-dependence edges

from this instruction to the use of d in W [i] ← d would shrink. If a data-
dependence edge shrinks to less than zero cycles, then a data-dependence
constraint has been violated; this can be solved by also moving the calcula-
tions that use d to a later cycle.
   Conversely, if a data-dependence edge grows many cycles long, then we
must carry several “versions” of a value around the loop (as we carry f, f , f
around the loop of Figure 20.8), and this means that we are using more tempo-
raries, so that register allocation may fail. In fact, an optimal loop-scheduling
algorithm should consider register allocation simultaneously with scheduling;
but it is not clear whether optimal algorithms are practical, and the iterated
modulo scheduling algorithm described in this section first schedules, then
does register allocation and hopes for the best.

FINDING THE MINIMUM INITIATION INTERVAL
Modulo scheduling begins by finding a lower bound for the number of cycles
in the pipelined loop body:

Resource estimator: For any kind of functional unit, such as a multiplier or a
  memory-fetch unit, we can see how many cycles such units will be used by
  the corresponding instructions (e.g. multiply or load, respectively) in the loop
  body. This, divided by the number of that kind of functional unit provided by
  the hardware, gives a lower bound for ?. For example, if there are 6 mul-
  tiply instructions that each use a multiplier for 3 cycles, and there are two
  multipliers, then ? ≥ 6 · 3/2.
Data-dependence estimator: For any data-dependence cycle in the data-depen-
  dence graph, where some value x i depends on a chain of other calculations
  that depends on x i−1 , the total latency of the chain gives a lower bound for ?.

Let ?min be the maximum of these estimators.
   Let us calculate ?min for Program 20.4b. For simplicity, we assume that
one ⊕-arithmetic instruction and one load/store can be issued at a time, and
every instruction finishes in one cycle; and we will not consider the schedul-
ing of i ← i + 1 or the conditional branch.
   Then the arithmetic resource estimator is 5 ⊕-instructions in the loop
body divided by 1 issuable arithmetic instructions per cycle, or ? ≥ 5. The
load/store resource estimator is 4 load/store instructions in the loop body
divided by 1 issuable memory operations per cycle, or ? ≥ 4. The data-
dependence estimator comes from the cycle ci → di → ei → ci+1 in
Graph 20.5a, whose length gives ? ≥ 3.

         Next, we prioritize the instructions of the loop body by some heuristic that
      decides which instructions to consider first. For example, instructions that
      are in critical data-dependence cycles, or instructions that use a lot of scarce
      resources, should be placed in the schedule first, and then other instructions
      can be filled in around them. Let H1 , . . . , Hn be the instructions of the loop
      body, in (heuristic) priority order.
         In our example, we could use H = [c, d, e, a, b, f, j, g, h], putting early
      the instructions that are in the critical recurrence cycle or that use the arith-
      metic functional unit (since the resource estimators for this loop tell us that
      arithmetic is in more demand than load/stores).
         The scheduling algorithm maintains a set S of scheduled instructions, each
      scheduled for a particular time t. The value of SchedTime[h] = none if h ? ∈ S,
      otherwise SchedTime[h] is the currently scheduled time for h. The members
      of S obey all resource and data-dependence constraints.
         Each iteration of Algorithm 20.9 places the highest-priority unscheduled
      instruction h into S, as follows:
      1. In the earliest time slot (if there is one) that obeys all dependence constraints
         with respect to already-placed predecessors of h, and respects all resource
         constraints.
      2. But if there is no slot in ? consecutive cycles that obeys resource constraints,
         then there can never be such a slot, because the functional units available at
         time t are the same as those at t + c · ?. In this case, h is placed without
         regard to resource constraints, in the earliest time slot that obeys dependence
         constraints (with respect to already-placed predecessors), and is later than any
         previous attempt to place h.

      Once h is placed, other instructions are removed to make the subset sched-
      ule S legal again: any successors of h that now don’t obey data-dependence
      constraints, or any instructions that have resource conflicts with h.
         This placement-and-removal could iterate forever, but most of the time
      either it finds a solution quickly or there is no solution, for a given ?. To cut
      the algorithm off if it does not find a quick solution, a Budget of c · n schedule
      placements is allowed (for c = 3 or some similar number), after which this
      value of ? is abandoned and the next one is tried.
         When a def-use edge associated with variable j becomes longer than ?
      cycles, it becomes necessary to have more than one copy of j , with MOVE
      instructions copying the different-iteration versions in bucket-brigade style.
      This is illustrated in Figure 20.8 for variables a, b, f, j , but I will not show
      an explicit algorithm for inserting the moves.

  for ? ← ?min to ∞
      Budget ← n · 3
      for i ← 1 to n
           LastTime[i] ← 0
           SchedTime[i] ← none
      while Budget > 0 and there are any unscheduled instructions
              Budget ← Budget − 1
              let h be the highest-priority unscheduled instruction
              tmin ← 0
              for each predecessor p of h
                   if SchedTime[ p] ? = none
                      tmin ← max(tmin , SchedTime[ p] + Delay( p, h))
              for t ← tmin to tmin + ? − 1
                    if SchedTime[h] = none
                       if h can be scheduled without resource conflicts
                          SchedTime[h] ← t
              if SchedTime[h] = none
                       SchedTime[h] ← max(tmin , 1 + LastTime[h])
              LastTime[h] ← SchedTime[h]
              for each successor s of h
                   if SchedTime[s] ? = none
                      if SchedTime[h] + Delay(h, s) > SchedTime[s]
                          SchedTime[s] ← none
              while the current schedule has resource conflicts
                       let s be some instruction (other than h) involved in a resource conflict
                       SchedTime[s] ← none
      if all instructions are scheduled
              RegisterAllocate()
              if register allocation succeeded without spilling
                       return and report a successfully scheduled loop.
  Delay(h, s) =
     Given a dependence edge h i → si+k , so that h uses the value of s from the kth previous iteration
       (where k = 0 means that h uses the current iteration’s value of s);
     Given that the latency of the instruction that computes s is l cycles;
    return l − k?

ALGORITHM 20.9. Iterative modulo scheduling.

SchedTime                    SchedTime                 SchedTime                 SchedTime
            Resource                     Resource                  Resource                   Resource
   a 3       Table              a 3       Table           a 3     Table            a 3    Table
   b          ⊕M                b          ⊕M             b        ⊕M              b       ⊕M
   c 0                          c ?0                      c ?05                    c ?05
   d 1      0 c                 d 1      0                d ?16 0 c                d ?16 0 c f
   e 2      1d                  e 2      1d               e ?2 1d                  e ?27 1 d j
   f        2 e                 f        2 e              f     2                  f 0   2 e g
   g        3a                  g        3a               g     3a                 g 7   3a h
   h                            h                         h                        h 8
   j        4                   j        4 b              j     4 b                j 1   4 b
  Placing c, d, e, a.           Placing b violates       Placing c violates        Placing
                                b → c; remove c.         c → d; remove d;          e, f, j, g, h.
                                                         placing d violates
                                                         d → e; remove e.

FIGURE 20.10.           Iterative modulo scheduling applied to Program 20.4b.
                        Graph 20.5a is the data-dependence graph; ?min = 5 (see
                        page 485); H = [c, d, e, a, b, f, j, g, h].

                            Checking for resource conflicts is done with a resource reservation table,
                        an array of length ?. The resources used by an instruction at time t can be
                        entered in the array at position t mod ?; adding and removing resource-usage
                        from the table, and checking for conflicts, can be done in constant time.
                            This algorithm is not guaranteed to find an optimal schedule in any sense.
                        There may be an optimal, register-allocable schedule with initiation-interval
                         , and the algorithm may fail to find any schedule with time ?, or it may find
                        a schedule for which register-allocation fails. The only consolation is that it
                        is reported to work very well in practice.
                            The operation of the algorithm on our example is shown in Figure 20.10.

                        OTHER CONTROL FLOW
                        I have shown scheduling algorithms for simple straight-line loop bodies. What
                        if the loop contains internal control flow, such as a tree of if-then-else state-
                        ments? One approach is to compute both branches of the loop, and then use a
                        conditional move instruction (provided on many high-performance machines)
                        to produce the right result.
                            For example, the loop at left can be rewritten into the loop at right, using a
                        conditional move:

  for i ← 1 to N                  for i ← 1 to N
      x ← M[i]                        x ← M[i]
      if x > 0                        u ←z∗x
         u ←z∗x                       u ← A[i]
      else u ← A[i]                   if x > 0 move u ← u
      s ←s+u                          s ←s+u

The resulting loop body is now straight-line code that can be scheduled easily.
   But if the two sides of the if differ greatly in size, and the frequently exe-
cuted branch is the small one, then executing both sides in every iteration will
be slower than optimal. Or if one branch of the if has a side effect, it must not
be executed unless the condition is true.
   To solve this problem we use trace scheduling: we pick some frequently
executed straight-line path through the branches of control flow, schedule this
path efficiently, and suffer some amount of ineffiency at those times where
we must jump into or out of the trace. See Section 8.2 and also the Further
Reading section of this chapter.

SHOULD THE COMPILER SCHEDULE INSTRUCTIONS?
Many machines have hardware that does dynamic instruction rescheduling
at run time. These machines do out-of-order execution, meaning that there
may be several decoded instructions in a buffer, and whichever instruction’s
operands are available can execute next, even if other instructions that ap-
peared earlier in the program code are still awaiting operands or resources.
   Such machines first appeared in 1967 (the IBM 360/91), but did not be-
come common until the mid-1990s. Now it appears that most high-perfor-
mance processors are being designed with dynamic (run-time) scheduling.
These machines have several advantages and disadvantages, and it is not yet
clear whether static (compile-time) scheduling or out-of-order execution will
become standard.

Advantages of static scheduling. Out-of-order execution uses expensive hard-
ware resources and tends to increase the chip’s cycle time and wattage. The
static scheduler can schedule earlier the instructions whose future data-depen-
dence path is longest; a real-time scheduler cannot know the length of the
data-dependence path leading from an instruction (see Exercise 20.3). The
scheduling problem is NP-complete, so compilers – which have no real-time
constraint on their scheduling algorithms – should in principle be able to find
better schedules.

   COMPARE I-Fetch Read    Arith ↓ Write
   BRANCH          I-Fetch Read    ↑ Arith ↓
   ADD                     wait    wait      ↑ I-Fetch Read Arith Write

FIGURE 20.11.    Dependence of ADD’s instruction-fetch on result of BRANCH.

                 Advantages of dynamic scheduling. Some aspects of the schedule are unpre-
                 dictable at compile time, such as cache misses, and can be better scheduled
                 when their actual latency is known (see Figure 21.5). Highly pipelined sched-
                 ules tend to use many registers; typical machines have only 32 register names
                 in a five-bit instruction-field, but out-of-order execution with run-time regis-
                 ter renaming can use hundreds of actual registers with a few static names (see
                 the Further Reading section). Optimal static scheduling depends on knowing
                 the precise pipeline state that will be reached by the hardware, which is some-
                 times difficult to determine in practice. Finally, dynamic scheduling does not
                 require that the program be recompiled (i.e. rescheduled) for each different
                 implementation of the same instruction set.

 20.3            BRANCH PREDICTION

                 In many floating-point programs, such as Program 20.4a, the basic blocks
                 are long, the instructions are long-latency floating-point operations, and the
                 branches are very predictable for-loop exit conditions. In such programs the
                 problem, as described in the previous sections, is to schedule the long-latency
                 instructions.
                    But in many programs – such as compilers, operating systems, window
                 systems, word processors – the basic blocks are short, the instructions are
                 quick integer operations, and the branches are harder to predict. Here the
                 main problem is fetching the instructions fast enough to be able to decode
                 and execute them.
                    Figure 20.11 illustrates the pipeline stages of a COMPARE, BRANCH,
                 and ADD instruction. Until the BRANCH has executed, the instruction-fetch
                 of the successor instruction cannot be performed because the address to fetch
                 is unknown.
                    Suppose a superscalar machine can issue four instructions at once. Then,
                 in waiting three cycles after the BRANCH is fetched before the ADD can be
                 fetched, 11 instruction-issue slots are wasted (3 × 4 minus the slot that the
                 BRANCH occupies).

20.3. BRANCH PREDICTION

   Some machines solve this problem by fetching the instructions immedi-
ately following the branch; then if the branch is not taken, these fetched-and-
decoded instructions can be used immediately. Only if the branch is taken
are there stalled instruction slots. Other machines assume the branch will be
taken, and begin fetching the instructions at the target address; then if the
branch falls through, there is a stall. Some machines even fetch from both
addresses simultaneously, though this requires a very complex interface be-
tween processor and instruction-cache.
   Modern machines rely on branch prediction to make the right guess about
which instructions to fetch. The branch prediction can be static – the compiler
predicts which way the branch is likely to go and places its prediction in
the branch instruction itself; or dynamic – the hardware remembers, for each
recently executed branch, which way it went last time, and predicts that it will
go the same way.

STATIC BRANCH PREDICTION
The compiler can communicate predictions to the hardware by a 1-bit field of
the branch instruction that encodes the predicted direction.
   To save this bit, or for compatibility with old instruction sets, some ma-
chines use a rule such as “backward branches are assumed to be taken, for-
ward branches are assumed to be not-taken.” The rationale for the first part
of this rule is that backward branches are (often) loop branches, and a loop
is more likely to continue than to exit. The rationale for the second part of
the rule is that it’s often useful to have predicted-not-taken branches for ex-
ceptional conditions; if all branches are predicted taken, we could reverse the
sense of the condition to make the exceptional case “fall through” and the
normal case take the branch, but this leads to worse instruction-cache per-
formance, as discussed in Section 21.2. When generating code for machines
that use forward/backward branch direction as the prediction mechanism, the
compiler can order the basic blocks of the program in so that the predicted-
taken branches go to lower addresses.
   Several simple heuristics help predict the direction of a branch. Some of
these heuristics make intuitive sense, but all have been validated empirically:

Pointer: If a loop performs an equality comparison on pointers (p=null or
  p=q) then predict the condition as false.
Call: A branch is less likely to the successor that dominates a procedure call
  (many conditional calls are to handle exceptional situations).

      Return: A branch is less likely to a successor that dominates a return-from-
        procedure.
      Loop: A branch is more likely to the successor (if any) that is the header of the
        loop containing the branch.
      Loop: A branch is more likely to the successor (if any) that is a loop preheader,
        if it does not postdominate the branch. This catches the results of the opti-
        mization described in Figure 18.7, where the iteration count is more likely to
        be > 0 than = 0. (B postdominates A if any path from A to program-exit
        must go through B; see Section 19.5.)
      Guard: If some value r is used as an operand of the branch (as part of the
        conditional test), then a branch is more likely to a successor in which r is live
        and which does not postdominate the branch.

         There are some branches to which more than one of the heuristics apply.
      A simple approach in such cases is to give the heuristics a priority order and
      use the first heuristic in order that applies (the order in which they are listed
      above is a reasonable prioritization, based on empirical measurements).
         Another approach is to index a table by every possible subset of conditions
      that might apply, and decide (based on empirical measurements) what to do
      for each subset.

      SHOULD THE COMPILER PREDICT BRANCHES?
      Perfect static prediction results in a dynamic mispredict rate of about 9% (for
      C programs) or 6% (for Fortran programs). The “perfect” mispredict rate is
      not zero because any given branch does not go in the same direction more
      than 91% of the time, on average. If a branch did go the same direction 100%
      of the time, there would be little need for it! Fortran programs tend to have
      more predictable branches because more of the branches are loop branches,
      and the loops have longer iteration counts.
         Profile-based prediction, in which a program is compiled with extra in-
      structions to count the number of times each branch is taken, executed on
      sample data, and recompiled with prediction based on the counts, approaches
      the accuracy of perfect static prediction.
         Prediction based the heuristics described above results in a dynamic mis-
      predict rate of about 20% (for C programs), or about half as good as perfect
      (or profile-based) static prediction.
         A typical hardware-based branch-prediction scheme uses two bits for ev-
      ery branch in the instruction cache, recording how the branch went the last
      two times it executed. This leads to misprediction rates of about 11% (for C

          FURTHER READING

          programs), which is about as good as profile-based prediction.
             A mispredict rate of 10% can result in very many stalled instructions –
          if each mispredict stalls 11 instruction slots, as described in the example on
          page 490, and there is one mispredict every 10 branches, and one-sixth of all
          instructions are branches, then 18% of the processor’s time is spent waiting
          for mispredicted instruction fetches. Therefore it will be necessary to do bet-
          ter, using some combination of hardware and software techniques. Relying on
          heuristics that mispredict 20% of the branches is better than no predictions at
          all, but will not suffice in the long run.

FURTHER
READING

          Hennessy and Patterson [1996] explain the design and implementation of
          high-performance machines, instruction-level parallelism, pipeline structure,
          functional units, caches, out-of-order execution, register renaming, branch
          prediction, and many other computer-architecture issues, with comparisons
          of compiler versus run-time-hardware techniques for optimization. Kane and
          Heinrich [1992] describe the pipeline constraints of the MIPS R4000 com-
          puter, from which Figures 20.1 and 20.2 are adapted.
             CISC computers of the 1970s implemented complex instructions sequen-
          tially using an internal microcode that could do several operations simulta-
          neously; it was not possible for the compiler to interleave parts of several
          macroinstructions for increased parallelism. Fisher [1981] developed an au-
          tomatic scheduling algorithm for microcode, using the idea of trace schedul-
          ing to optimize frequently executed paths, and then proposed a very-long-
          instruction-word (VLIW) architecture [Fisher 1983] that could expose the
          microoperations directly to user programs, using the compiler to schedule.
             Aiken and Nicolau [1988] were among the first to point out that a single
          loop iteration need not be scheduled in isolation, and presented the algorithm
          for optimal (ignoring resource constraints) parallelization of loops.
             Many variations of the multiprocessor scheduling problem are NP-complete
          [Garey and Johnson 1979; Ullman 1975]. The iterative modulo scheduling al-
          gorithm [Rau 1994] gets good results in practice. In the absence of resource
          constraints, it is equivalent to the Bellman-Ford shortest-path algorithm [Ford
          and Fulkerson 1962]. Optimal schedules can be obtained (in principle) by
          expressing the constraints as an integer linear program [Govindarajan et al.

             1996], but integer-linear-program solvers can take exponential time (the prob-
             lem is NP-complete), and the register-allocation constraint is still difficult to
             express in linear inequalities.
                Ball and Larus [1993] describe and measure the static branch-prediction
             heuristics shown in Section 20.3. Young and Smith [1994] show a profile-
             based static branch-prediction algorithm that does better than optimal static
             predition; the apparent contradiction in this statement is explained by the fact
             that their algorithm replicates some basic blocks, so that a branch that’s 80%
             taken (with a 20% misprediction rate) might become two different branches,
             one almost-always taken and one almost-always not taken.

EXERCISES

      20.1   Schedule the following loop using the Aiken-Nicolau algorithm:

                for i ← 1 to N
                      a ← X[i − 2]
                      b ← Y [i − 1]
                       c ← a×b
                      d ← U [i]
                       e ← X[i − 1]
                       f ← d +e
                      g ← d×c
                h : X[i] ← g
                 j : Y [i] ← f

             a. Label all the scalar variables with subscripts i and i − 1. Hint: In this
                loop there are no loop-carried scalar-variable dependences, so none of
                the subscripts will be i − 1.
             b. Perform scalar replacement on uses of X[ ] and Y [ ]. Hint: Now you will
                have subscripts of i − 1 and i − 2.
             c. Perform copy propagation to eliminate variables a, b, e.
             d. Draw a data-dependence graph of statements c, d, f, g, h, j; label intra-
                iteration edges with 0 and loop-carried edges with 1 or 2, depending on
                the number of iterations difference there is in the subscript.
             e. Show the Aiken-Nicolau tableau (as in Table 20.6a).
             f. Find the identical groups separated by increasing gaps. Hint: The iden-
                tical groups will be c cycles apart, where in this case c is greater than
                one!
             g. Show the steepest-slope group. Hint: The slope is not an integer.

      EXERCISES

      h. Unroll the loop k times, where k is the denominator of the slope.

      i. Draw the data-dependence graph of the unrolled loop.

      j. Draw the tableau for the schedule of the unrolled loop.

      k. Find the slope of the steepest-slope group. Hint: Now it should be an
         integer.

      l. Move the shallow-slope group(s) down to close the gap.

      m. Identify the loop body, the prologue, and the epilogue.

      n. Write a schedule showing placement of the prologue, loop body, and
         epilogue in specific cycles, like Figure 20.7.

      o. Eliminate the subscripts on variables in the loop body, inserting move
         instructions where necessary, as in Figure 20.8.

20.2 Do parts a–d of Exercise 20.1. Then use iterated modulo scheduling to schedule
      the loop for a machine that can issue three instructions at a time, of which at
      most one can be a memory instruction and at most one can be a multiply
      instruction. Every instruction completes in one cycle.

      e. Explicitly represent the increment instruction i i+1 ← i i + 1 and the loop
         branch k : if i i+1 ≤ N goto loop in the data-dependence graph, with an
         edge from i to itself (labeled by 1), from i to k (labeled by 0), and from k
         to every node in the loop body (labeled by 1).

      f. Calculate ?min based on data-dependence cycles, the 2-instruction per
         cycle limit, the 1-load/store-per-cycle limit, and the 1-multiply-per-cycle
         limit. Remark: the ? required for a data-dependence cycle is the length
         of the cycle divided by the sum of the edge-labels (where edge labels
         show iteration distance, as described in Exercise 20.1d).

      g. Run Algorithm itermod, showing the SchedTime and Resource tables
         each time a variable has to be removed from the schedule, as in Fig-
         ure 20.10. Use the priority order H = [i, k, c, d, g, f, h, j ].

      h. Eliminate the subscripts on variables in the loop body, inserting move
         instructions where necessary, as in Figure 20.8. If the move instructions
         don’t fit into the 3-instruction-issue limit, then it’s time to increase ? and
         try again.

      20.3   Consider the following program:

                L:                                     L:
                a : a ← U [i ]                         a : a ← U [i ]
                b : b ←a×a                             d : d ←d ×a
                c : V [i ] ← b                         b : b ←a×a
                i : i ←i +1                            c : V [i ] ← b
                d : d ←d ×a                            i : i ←i +1
                e : if d < 1.0 goto L                  e : if d < 1.0 goto L
                            (I) Unscheduled                (II) Scheduled

             Suppose these loops are to be run on an out-of-order execution machine with
             these characteristics: Each instruction takes exactly one cycle, and may be exe-
             cuted as soon as its operands are ready and all preceding conditional branches
             have been executed. Several instructions may be executed at once, except that
             there is only one multiply unit. If two multiply instructions are ready, the in-
             struction from an earlier iteration, or occurring first in the same iteration, is
             executed.
                The program was originally written as shown in loop (I); the compiler has
             rescheduled it as loop (II). For each of the two loops:
             a. Draw the data-dependence graph, showing loop-carried dependences
                with a dashed line.
             b. Add the control dependence as a loop-carried edge from e to each of the
                other nodes.
             c. To simulate how the machine will execute the loop, show the Aiken-
                Nicolau tableau, with the restriction that b and d must never be put in
                the same cycle. In a cycle where b and d’s predecessors are both ready,
                prefer the instruction from the earlier iteration, or from earlier in the same
                iteration.
             d. Compute the steepest slope in the tableau; how many cycles per iteration
                does the loop take?
             e. Can compiler scheduling be useful for dynamically rescheduling (out-of-
                order execution) machines?
      20.4 On many machines, instructions after a conditional branch can be executed
             even before the branch condition is known (the instructions do not commit
             until after the branch condition is verified).
                Suppose we have an out-of-order execution machine with these characteris-
             tics: An add or branch takes one cycle; a multiply takes 4 cycles; each instruction
             may be executed as soon as its operands are ready. Several instructions may be
             executed at once, except that there is only one multiply unit. If two multiply

       EXERCISES

       instructions are ready, the instruction from an earlier iteration, or occurring first
       in the same iteration, is executed.
          For a machine with this behavior, do parts a–e of Exercise 20.3 for the
       following programs:

          L:                                     L:
          a : a ←e×u                             b : b ←e×v
          b : b ← e×v                            a : a ←e×u
          c : c ←a+w                             c : c←a+w
          d : d ←c+x                             d : d ←c+x
          e: e←d+y                               e: e←d+y
          f : if e > 0.0 goto L                   f : if e > 0.0 goto L
             (I) Unscheduled                         (II) Scheduled

20.5 Write a short program that contains an instance of each of the branch-prediction
       heuristics (pointer, call, return, loop header, loop preheader, guard) described
       on pages 491–492. Label each instance.
20.6 Use branch-prediction heuristics to predict the direction of each of the condi-
       tional branches in the programs of Exercise 8.6 (page 190) and Figure 18.7b
       (page 420); explain which heuristic applies to each prediction.

