                                                                                      Preface

     Here’s the plan: when someone uses a feature you don’t understand, simply shoot
     them. This is easier than learning something new, and before too long the only living
     coders will be writing in an easily understood, tiny subset of Python 0.9.6 <wink>.1
         —Tim Peters, legendary core developer and author of The Zen of Python

“Python is an easy to learn, powerful programming language.” Those are the first
words of the official Python 3.10 tutorial. That is true, but there is a catch: because
the language is easy to learn and put to use, many practicing Python programmers
leverage only a fraction of its powerful features.
An experienced programmer may start writing useful Python code in a matter of
hours. As the first productive hours become weeks and months, a lot of developers go
on writing Python code with a very strong accent carried from languages learned
before. Even if Python is your first language, often in academia and in introductory
books it is presented while carefully avoiding language-specific features.
As a teacher introducing Python to programmers experienced in other languages, I
see another problem that this book tries to address: we only miss stuff we know
about. Coming from another language, anyone may guess that Python supports regu‐
lar expressions, and look that up in the docs. But if you’ve never seen tuple unpacking
or descriptors before, you will probably not search for them, and you may end up not
using those features just because they are specific to Python.
This book is not an A-to-Z exhaustive reference of Python. Its emphasis is on the lan‐
guage features that are either unique to Python or not found in many other popular
languages. This is also mostly a book about the core language and some of its libra‐
ries. I will rarely talk about packages that are not in the standard library, even though
the Python package index now lists more than 60,000 libraries, and many of them are
incredibly useful.

1 Message to the comp.lang.python Usenet group, Dec. 23, 2002: “Acrimony in c.l.p”.

                                                                                             xix
Who This Book Is For
This book was written for practicing Python programmers who want to become pro‐
ficient in Python 3. I tested the examples in Python 3.10—most of them also in
Python 3.9 and 3.8. When an example requires Python 3.10, it should be clearly
marked.
If you are not sure whether you know enough Python to follow along, review the top‐
ics of the official Python tutorial. Topics covered in the tutorial will not be explained
here, except for some features that are new.

Who This Book Is Not For
If you are just learning Python, this book is going to be hard to follow. Not only that,
if you read it too early in your Python journey, it may give you the impression that
every Python script should leverage special methods and metaprogramming tricks.
Premature abstraction is as bad as premature optimization.

Five Books in One
I recommend that everyone read Chapter 1, “The Python Data Model”. The core
audience for this book should not have trouble jumping directly to any part in this
book after Chapter 1, but often I assume you’ve read preceding chapters in each spe‐
cific part. Think of Parts I through V as books within the book.
I tried to emphasize using what is available before discussing how to build your own.
For example, in Part I, Chapter 2 covers sequence types that are ready to use, includ‐
ing some that don’t get a lot of attention, like collections.deque. Building user-
defined sequences is only addressed in Part III, where we also see how to leverage the
abstract base classes (ABCs) from collections.abc. Creating your own ABCs is dis‐
cussed even later in Part III, because I believe it’s important to be comfortable using
an ABC before writing your own.
This approach has a few advantages. First, knowing what is ready to use can save you
from reinventing the wheel. We use existing collection classes more often than we
implement our own, and we can give more attention to the advanced usage of avail‐
able tools by deferring the discussion on how to create new ones. We are also more
likely to inherit from existing ABCs than to create a new ABC from scratch. And
finally, I believe it is easier to understand the abstractions after you’ve seen them in
action.
The downside of this strategy is the forward references scattered throughout the
chapters. I hope these will be easier to tolerate now that you know why I chose this
path.

How the Book Is Organized
Here are the main topics in each part of the book:
Part I, “Data Structures”
    Chapter 1 introduces the Python Data Model and explains why the special meth‐
    ods (e.g., __repr__) are the key to the consistent behavior of objects of all types.
    Special methods are covered in more detail throughout the book. The remaining
    chapters in this part cover the use of collection types: sequences, mappings, and
    sets, as well as the str versus bytes split—the cause of much celebration among
    Python 3 users and much pain for Python 2 users migrating their codebases. Also
    covered are the high-level class builders in the standard library: named tuple fac‐
    tories and the @dataclass decorator. Pattern matching—new in Python 3.10—is
    covered in sections in Chapters 2, 3, and 5, which discuss sequence patterns,
    mapping patterns, and class patterns. The last chapter in Part I is about the life
    cycle of objects: references, mutability, and garbage collection.
Part II, “Functions as Objects”
    Here we talk about functions as first-class objects in the language: what that
    means, how it affects some popular design patterns, and how to implement func‐
    tion decorators by leveraging closures. Also covered here is the general concept
    of callables in Python, function attributes, introspection, parameter annotations,
    and the new nonlocal declaration in Python 3. Chapter 8 introduces the major
    new topic of type hints in function signatures.
Part III, “Classes and Protocols”
    Now the focus is on building classes “by hand”—as opposed to using the class
    builders covered in Chapter 5. Like any Object-Oriented (OO) language, Python
    has its particular set of features that may or may not be present in the language in
    which you and I learned class-based programming. The chapters explain how
    to build your own collections, abstract base classes (ABCs), and protocols, as well
    as how to cope with multiple inheritance, and how to implement operator
    overloading—when that makes sense. Chapter 15 continues the coverage of
    type hints.
Part IV, “Control Flow”
    Covered in this part are the language constructs and libraries that go beyond tra‐
    ditional control flow with conditionals, loops, and subroutines. We start with
    generators, then visit context managers and coroutines, including the challenging
    but powerful new yield from syntax. Chapter 18 includes a significant example
    using pattern matching in a simple but functional language interpreter. Chap‐
    ter 19, “Concurrency Models in Python” is a new chapter presenting an overview
    of alternatives for concurrent and parallel processing in Python, their limitations,
    and how software architecture allows Python to operate at web scale. I rewrote

       the chapter about asynchronous programming to emphasize core language fea‐
       tures—e.g., await, async dev, async for, and async with, and show how they
       are used with asyncio and other frameworks.
Part V, “Metaprogramming”
    This part starts with a review of techniques for building classes with attributes
    created dynamically to handle semi-structured data, such as JSON datasets. Next,
    we cover the familiar properties mechanism, before diving into how object
    attribute access works at a lower level in Python using descriptors. The relation‐
    ship among functions, methods, and descriptors is explained. Throughout
    Part V, the step-by-step implementation of a field validation library uncovers
    subtle issues that lead to the advanced tools of the final chapter: class decorators
    and metaclasses.

Hands-On Approach
Often we’ll use the interactive Python console to explore the language and libraries. I
feel it is important to emphasize the power of this learning tool, particularly for those
readers who’ve had more experience with static, compiled languages that don’t pro‐
vide a read-eval-print loop (REPL).
One of the standard Python testing packages, doctest, works by simulating console
sessions and verifying that the expressions evaluate to the responses shown. I used
doctest to check most of the code in this book, including the console listings. You
don’t need to use or even know about doctest to follow along: the key feature of
doctests is that they look like transcripts of interactive Python console sessions, so
you can easily try out the demonstrations yourself.
Sometimes I will explain what we want to accomplish by showing a doctest before the
code that makes it pass. Firmly establishing what is to be done before thinking about
how to do it helps focus our coding effort. Writing tests first is the basis of test-driven
development (TDD), and I’ve also found it helpful when teaching. If you are unfami‐
liar with doctest, take a look at its documentation and this book’s example code
repository.
I also wrote unit tests for some of the larger examples using pytest—which I find eas‐
ier to use and more powerful than the unittest module in the standard library. You’ll
find that you can verify the correctness of most of the code in the book by typing
python3 -m doctest example_script.py or pytest in the command shell of your
OS. The pytest.ini configuration at the root of the example code repository ensures
that doctests are collected and executed by the pytest command.

Soapbox: My Personal Perspective
I have been using, teaching, and debating Python since 1998, and I enjoy studying
and comparing programming languages, their design, and the theory behind them.
At the end of some chapters, I have added “Soapbox” sidebars with my own perspec‐
tive about Python and other languages. Feel free to skip these if you are not into such
discussions. Their content is completely optional.

Companion Website: fluentpython.com
Covering new features—like type hints, data classes, and pattern matching—made
this second edition almost 30% larger than the first. To keep the book luggable,
I moved some content to fluentpython.com. You will find links to articles I published
there in several chapters. Some sample chapters are also in the companion website.
The full text is available online at the O’Reilly Learning subscription service. The
example code repository is on GitHub.

Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
     Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
    Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program ele‐
    ments such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment
    variables, statements, and keywords.
    Note that when a line break falls within a constant_width term, a hyphen is not
    added—it could be misunderstood as part of the term.
Constant width bold
    Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
    Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter‐
    mined by context.

                     This element signifies a tip or suggestion.

                     This element signifies a general note.

                     This element indicates a warning or caution.

Using Code Examples
Every script and most code snippets that appear in the book are available in the Flu‐
ent Python code repository on GitHub at https://fpy.li/code.
If you have a technical question or a problem using the code examples, please send
email to bookquestions@oreilly.com.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code is offered
with this book, you may use it in your programs and documentation. You do not
need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion
of the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code from
this book does not require permission. Selling or distributing examples from O’Reilly
books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting
example code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount of
example code from this book into your product’s documentation does require
permission.
We appreciate, but generally do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN, e.g., “Fluent Python, 2nd ed., by
Luciano Ramalho (O’Reilly). Copyright 2022 Luciano Ramalho, 978-1-492-05635-5.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

O’Reilly Online Learning
                       For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technol‐
                       ogy and business training, knowledge, and insight to help
                       companies succeed.

Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and expertise
through books, articles, and our online learning platform. O’Reilly’s online learning
platform gives you on-demand access to live training courses, in-depth learning
paths, interactive coding environments, and a vast collection of text and video from
O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more information, visit http://oreilly.com.

How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:

    O’Reilly Media, Inc.
    1005 Gravenstein Highway North
    Sebastopol, CA 95472
    800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
    707-829-0515 (international or local)
    707-829-0104 (fax)

We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at https://fpy.li/p-4.
Email bookquestions@oreilly.com to comment or ask technical questions about this
book.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit http://oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly.
Follow us on Twitter: https://twitter.com/oreillymedia.
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia.

Acknowledgments
I did not expect updating a Python book five years later to be such a major undertak‐
ing, but it was. Marta Mello, my beloved wife, was always there when I needed her.
My dear friend Leonardo Rochael helped me from the earliest writing to the final
technical review, including consolidating and double-checking the feedback from the
other tech reviewers, readers, and editors. I honestly don’t know if I’d have made it
without your support, Marta and Leo. Thank you so much!

Jürgen Gmach, Caleb Hattingh, Jess Males, Leonardo Rochael, and Miroslav Šedivý
were the outstanding technical review team for the second edition. They reviewed the
whole book. Bill Behrman, Bruce Eckel, Renato Oliveira, and Rodrigo Bernardo
Pimentel reviewed specific chapters. Their many suggestions from different perspec‐
tives made the book much better.
Many readers sent corrections or made other contributions during the early release
phase, including: Guilherme Alves, Christiano Anderson, Konstantin Baikov, K. Alex
Birch, Michael Boesl, Lucas Brunialti, Sergio Cortez, Gino Crecco, Chukwuerika
Dike, Juan Esteras, Federico Fissore, Will Frey, Tim Gates, Alexander Hagerman,
Chen Hanxiao, Sam Hyeong, Simon Ilincev, Parag Kalra, Tim King, David Kwast,
Tina Lapine, Wanpeng Li, Guto Maia, Scott Martindale, Mark Meyer, Andy McFar‐
land, Chad McIntire, Diego Rabatone Oliveira, Francesco Piccoli, Meredith Rawls,
Michael Robinson, Federico Tula Rovaletti, Tushar Sadhwani, Arthur Constantino
Scardua, Randal L. Schwartz, Avichai Sefati, Guannan Shen, William Simpson, Vivek
Vashist, Jerry Zhang, Paul Zuradzki—and others who did not want to be named, sent
corrections after I delivered the draft, or are omitted because I failed to record their
names—sorry.
During my research, I learned about typing, concurrency, pattern matching, and
metaprogramming while interacting with Michael Albert, Pablo Aguilar, Kaleb Bar‐
rett, David Beazley, J. S. O. Bueno, Bruce Eckel, Martin Fowler, Ivan Levkivskyi, Alex
Martelli, Peter Norvig, Sebastian Rittau, Guido van Rossum, Carol Willing, and Jelle
Zijlstra.
O’Reilly editors Jeff Bleiel, Jill Leonard, and Amelia Blevins made suggestions that
improved the flow of the book in many places. Jeff Bleiel and production editor
Danny Elfanbaum supported me throughout this long marathon.
The insights and suggestions of every one of them made the book better and more
accurate. Inevitably, there will still be bugs of my own creation in the final product. I
apologize in advance.
Finally, I want to extend my heartfelt thanks to my colleagues at Thoughtworks Brazil
—and especially to my sponsor, Alexey Bôas—who supported this project in many
ways, all the way.
Of course, everyone who helped me understand Python and write the first edition
now deserves double thanks. There would be no second edition without a successful
first.

Acknowledgments for the First Edition
The Bauhaus chess set by Josef Hartwig is an example of excellent design: beautiful,
simple, and clear. Guido van Rossum, son of an architect and brother of a master font
designer, created a masterpiece of language design. I love teaching Python because it
is beautiful, simple, and clear.
Alex Martelli and Anna Ravenscroft were the first people to see the outline of this
book and encouraged me to submit it to O’Reilly for publication. Their books taught
me idiomatic Python and are models of clarity, accuracy, and depth in technical writ‐
ing. Alex’s 6,200+ Stack Overflow posts are a fountain of insights about the language
and its proper use.
Martelli and Ravenscroft were also technical reviewers of this book, along with Len‐
nart Regebro and Leonardo Rochael. Everyone in this outstanding technical review
team has at least 15 years of Python experience, with many contributions to high-
impact Python projects in close contact with other developers in the community.
Together they sent me hundreds of corrections, suggestions, questions, and opinions,
adding tremendous value to the book. Victor Stinner kindly reviewed Chapter 21,
bringing his expertise as an asyncio maintainer to the technical review team. It was a
great privilege and a pleasure to collaborate with them over these past several
months.
Editor Meghan Blanchette was an outstanding mentor, helping me improve the orga‐
nization and flow of the book, letting me know when it was boring, and keeping me
from delaying even more. Brian MacDonald edited chapters in Part II while Meghan
was away. I enjoyed working with them, and with everyone I’ve contacted at O’Reilly,
including the Atlas development and support team (Atlas is the O’Reilly book pub‐
lishing platform, which I was fortunate to use to write this book).
Mario Domenech Goulart provided numerous, detailed suggestions starting with the
first early release. I also received valuable feedback from Dave Pawson, Elias Dor‐
neles, Leonardo Alexandre Ferreira Leite, Bruce Eckel, J. S. Bueno, Rafael Gonçalves,
Alex Chiaranda, Guto Maia, Lucas Vido, and Lucas Brunialti.
Over the years, a number of people urged me to become an author, but the most per‐
suasive were Rubens Prates, Aurelio Jargas, Rudá Moura, and Rubens Altimari.
Mauricio Bussab opened many doors for me, including my first real shot at writing a
book. Renzo Nuccitelli supported this writing project all the way, even if that meant a
slow start for our partnership at python.pro.br.
The wonderful Brazilian Python community is knowledgeable, generous, and fun.
The Python Brasil group has thousands of people, and our national conferences bring
together hundreds, but the most influential in my journey as a Pythonista were Leo‐
nardo Rochael, Adriano Petrich, Daniel Vainsencher, Rodrigo RBP Pimentel, Bruno
Gola, Leonardo Santagada, Jean Ferri, Rodrigo Senra, J. S. Bueno, David Kwast, Luiz

Irber, Osvaldo Santana, Fernando Masanori, Henrique Bastos, Gustavo Niemayer,
Pedro Werneck, Gustavo Barbieri, Lalo Martins, Danilo Bellini, and Pedro Kroger.
Dorneles Tremea was a great friend (incredibly generous with his time and knowl‐
edge), an amazing hacker, and the most inspiring leader of the Brazilian Python
Association. He left us too early.
My students over the years taught me a lot through their questions, insights, feed‐
back, and creative solutions to problems. Érico Andrei and Simples Consultoria
made it possible for me to focus on being a Python teacher for the first time.
Martijn Faassen was my Grok mentor and shared invaluable insights with me about
Python and Neanderthals. His work and that of Paul Everitt, Chris McDonough, Tres
Seaver, Jim Fulton, Shane Hathaway, Lennart Regebro, Alan Runyan, Alexander
Limi, Martijn Pieters, Godefroid Chapelle, and others from the Zope, Plone, and Pyr‐
amid planets have been decisive in my career. Thanks to Zope and surfing the first
web wave, I was able to start making a living with Python in 1998. José Octavio Cas‐
tro Neves was my partner in the first Python-centric software house in Brazil.
I have too many gurus in the wider Python community to list them all, but besides
those already mentioned, I am indebted to Steve Holden, Raymond Hettinger, A.M.
Kuchling, David Beazley, Fredrik Lundh, Doug Hellmann, Nick Coghlan, Mark Pil‐
grim, Martijn Pieters, Bruce Eckel, Michele Simionato, Wesley Chun, Brandon Craig
Rhodes, Philip Guo, Daniel Greenfeld, Audrey Roy, and Brett Slatkin for teaching me
new and better ways to teach Python.
Most of these pages were written in my home office and in two labs: CoffeeLab and
Garoa Hacker Clube. CoffeeLab is the caffeine-geek headquarters in Vila Madalena,
São Paulo, Brazil. Garoa Hacker Clube is a hackerspace open to all: a community lab
where anyone can freely try out new ideas.
The Garoa community provided inspiration, infrastructure, and slack. I think Aleph
would enjoy this book.
My mother, Maria Lucia, and my father, Jairo, always supported me in every way. I
wish he was here to see the book; I am glad I can share it with her.
My wife, Marta Mello, endured 15 months of a husband who was always working,
but remained supportive and coached me through some critical moments in the
project when I feared I might drop out of the marathon.
Thank you all, for everything.

