                                                                                           CHAPTER 13
                                Interfaces, Protocols, and ABCs

     Program to an interface, not an implementation.
         —Gamma, Helm, Johnson, Vlissides, First Principle of Object-Oriented Design1

Object-oriented programming is all about interfaces. The best approach to under‐
standing a type in Python is knowing the methods it provides—its interface—as dis‐
cussed in “Types Are Defined by Supported Operations” on page 260 (Chapter 8).
Depending on the programming language, we have one or more ways of defining and
using interfaces. Since Python 3.8, we have four ways. They are depicted in the
Typing Map (Figure 13-1). We can summarize them like this:
Duck typing
   Python’s default approach to typing from the beginning. We’ve been studying
   duck typing since Chapter 1.
Goose typing
   The approach supported by abstract base classes (ABCs) since Python 2.6, which
   relies on runtime checks of objects against ABCs. Goose typing is a major subject
   in this chapter.
Static typing
     The traditional approach of statically-typed languages like C and Java; supported
     since Python 3.5 by the typing module, and enforced by external type checkers
     compliant with PEP 484—Type Hints. This is not the theme of this chapter. Most
     of Chapter 8 and the upcoming Chapter 15 are about static typing.

1 Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software, “Introduction,” p. 18.

Static duck typing
     An approach made popular by the Go language; supported by subclasses of typ
     ing.Protocol—new in Python 3.8—also enforced by external type checkers. We
     first saw this in “Static Protocols” on page 286 (Chapter 8).

The Typing Map
The four typing approaches depicted in Figure 13-1 are complementary: they have
different pros and cons. It doesn’t make sense to dismiss any of them.

Figure 13-1. The top half describes runtime type checking approaches using just the
Python interpreter; the bottom requires an external static type checker such as MyPy or
an IDE like PyCharm. The left quadrants cover typing based on the object’s structure—
i.e., the methods provided by the object, regardless of the name of its class or super‐
classes; the right quadrants depend on objects having explicitly named types: the name
of the object’s class, or the name of its superclasses.

Each of these four approaches rely on interfaces to work, but static typing can be
done—poorly—using only concrete types instead of interface abstractions like proto‐
cols and abstract base classes. This chapter is about duck typing, goose typing, and
static duck typing—typing disciplines that revolve around interfaces.

This chapter is split in four main sections, addressing three of the four quadrants in
the Typing Map (Figure 13-1):

  • “Two Kinds of Protocols” on page 434 compares the two forms of structural
    typing with protocols—i.e., the lefthand side of the Typing Map.
  • “Programming Ducks” on page 435 dives deeper into Python’s usual duck typing,
    including how to make it safer while preserving its major strength: flexibility.
  • “Goose Typing” on page 442 explains the use of ABCs for stricter runtime type
    checking. This is the longest section, not because it’s more important, but
    because there are more sections about duck typing, static duck typing, and static
    typing elsewhere in the book.
  • “Static Protocols” on page 466 covers usage, implementation, and design of typ
    ing.Protocol subclasses—useful for static and runtime type checking.

What’s New in This Chapter
This chapter was heavily edited and is about 24% longer than the corresponding
Chapter 11 in the first edition of Fluent Python. Although some sections and many
paragraphs are the same, there’s a lot of new content. These are the highlights:

  • The chapter introduction and the Typing Map (Figure 13-1) are new. That’s the
    key to most new content in this chapter—and all other chapters related to typing
    in Python ≥ 3.8.
  • “Two Kinds of Protocols” on page 434 explains the similarities and differences
    between dynamic and static protocols.
  • “Defensive Programming and ‘Fail Fast’” on page 440 mostly reproduces content
    from the first edition, but was updated and now has a section title to highlight its
    importance.
  • “Static Protocols” on page 466 is all new. It builds on the initial presentation in
    “Static Protocols” on page 286 (Chapter 8).
  • Updated class diagrams of collections.abc in Figures 13-2, 13-3, and 13-4 to
    include the Collection ABC, from Python 3.6.

The first edition of Fluent Python had a section encouraging use of the numbers ABCs
for goose typing. In “The numbers ABCs and Numeric Protocols” on page 478, I
explain why you should use numeric static protocols from the typing module
instead, if you plan to use static type checkers as well as runtime checks in the style of
goose typing.

Two Kinds of Protocols
The word protocol has different meanings in computer science depending on context.
A network protocol such as HTTP specifies commands that a client can send to a
server, such as GET, PUT, and HEAD. We saw in “Protocols and Duck Typing” on page
402 that an object protocol specifies methods which an object must provide to fulfill a
role. The FrenchDeck example in Chapter 1 demonstrated one object protocol, the
sequence protocol: the methods that allow a Python object to behave as a sequence.
Implementing a full protocol may require several methods, but often it is OK to
implement only part of it. Consider the Vowels class in Example 13-1.

Example 13-1. Partial sequence protocol implementation with __getitem__

>>> class Vowels:
...     def __getitem__(self, i):
...         return 'AEIOU'[i]
...
>>> v = Vowels()
>>> v[0]
'A'
>>> v[-1]
'U'
>>> for c in v: print(c)
...
A
E
I
O
U
>>> 'E' in v
True
>>> 'Z' in v
False

Implementing __getitem__ is enough to allow retrieving items by index, and also to
support iteration and the in operator. The __getitem__ special method is really the
key to the sequence protocol. Take a look at this entry from the Python/C API Refer‐
ence Manual, “Sequence Protocol” section:
int PySequence_Check(PyObject *o)
    Return 1 if the object provides sequence protocol, and 0 otherwise. Note that it
    returns 1 for Python classes with a __getitem__() method unless they are dict
      subclasses […].
We expect a sequence to also support len(), by implementing __len__. Vowels has
no __len__ method, but it still behaves as a sequence in some contexts. And that may

be enough for our purposes. That is why I like to say that a protocol is an “informal
interface.” That is also how protocols are understood in Smalltalk, the first object-
oriented programming environment to use that term.
Except in pages about network programming, most uses of the word “protocol” in
the Python documentation refer to these informal interfaces.
Now, with the adoption of PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck
typing) in Python 3.8, the word “protocol” has another meaning in Python—closely
related, but different. As we saw in “Static Protocols” on page 286 (Chapter 8), PEP
544 allows us to create subclasses of typing.Protocol to define one or more methods
that a class must implement (or inherit) to satisfy a static type checker.
When I need to be specific, I will adopt these terms:
Dynamic protocol
   The informal protocols Python always had. Dynamic protocols are implicit,
   defined by convention, and described in the documentation. Python’s most
   important dynamic protocols are supported by the interpreter itself, and are doc‐
   umented in the “Data Model” chapter of The Python Language Reference.
Static protocol
     A protocol as defined by PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck
     typing), since Python 3.8. A static protocol has an explicit definition: a typ
     ing.Protocol subclass.
There are two key differences between them:

  • An object may implement only part of a dynamic protocol and still be useful; but
    to fulfill a static protocol, the object must provide every method declared in the
    protocol class, even if your program doesn’t need them all.
  • Static protocols can be verified by static type checkers, but dynamic protocols
    can’t.

Both kinds of protocols share the essential characteristic that a class never needs to
declare that it supports a protocol by name, i.e., by inheritance.
In addition to static protocols, Python provides another way of defining an explicit
interface in code: an abstract base class (ABC).
The rest of this chapter covers dynamic and static protocols, as well as ABCs.

Programming Ducks
Let’s start our discussion of dynamic protocols with two of the most important in
Python: the sequence and iterable protocols. The interpreter goes out of its way to

handle objects that provide even a minimal implementation of those protocols, as the
next section explains.

Python Digs Sequences
The philosophy of the Python Data Model is to cooperate with essential dynamic
protocols as much as possible. When it comes to sequences, Python tries hard to
work with even the simplest implementations.
Figure 13-2 shows how the Sequence interface is formalized as an ABC. The Python
interpreter and built-in sequences like list, str, etc., do not rely on that ABC at all. I
am using it only to describe what a full-fledged Sequence is expected to support.

Figure 13-2. UML class diagram for the Sequence ABC and related abstract classes
from collections.abc. Inheritance arrows point from a subclass to its superclasses.
Names in italic are abstract methods. Before Python 3.6, there was no Collection
ABC—Sequence was a direct subclass of Container, Iterable, and Sized.

                     Most ABCs in the collections.abc module exist to formalize
                     interfaces that are implemented by built-in objects and are implic‐
                     itly supported by the interpreter—both of which predate the ABCs
                     themselves. The ABCs are useful as starting points for new classes,
                     and to support explicit type checking at runtime (a.k.a. goose typ‐
                     ing) as well as type hints for static type checkers.

Studying Figure 13-2, we see that a correct subclass of Sequence must implement
__getitem__ and __len__ (from Sized). All the other methods in Sequence are con‐
crete, so subclasses can inherit their implementations—or provide better ones.
Now, recall the Vowels class in Example 13-1. It does not inherit from abc.Sequence
and it only implements __getitem__.
There is no __iter__ method, yet Vowels instances are iterable because—as a fallback
—if Python finds a __getitem__ method, it tries to iterate over the object by calling
that method with integer indexes starting with 0. Because Python is smart enough to

iterate over Vowels instances, it can also make the in operator work even when the
__contains__ method is missing: it does a sequential scan to check if an item is
present.
In summary, given the importance of sequence-like data structures, Python manages
to make iteration and the in operator work by invoking __getitem__ when __iter__
and __contains__ are unavailable.
The original FrenchDeck from Chapter 1 does not subclass abc.Sequence either, but
it does implement both methods of the sequence protocol: __getitem__ and __len__.
See Example 13-2.

Example 13-2. A deck as a sequence of cards (same as Example 1-1)

import collections

Card = collections.namedtuple('Card', ['rank', 'suit'])

class FrenchDeck:
    ranks = [str(n) for n in range(2, 11)] + list('JQKA')
    suits = 'spades diamonds clubs hearts'.split()

    def __init__(self):
        self._cards = [Card(rank, suit) for suit in self.suits
                                        for rank in self.ranks]

    def __len__(self):
        return len(self._cards)

    def __getitem__(self, position):
        return self._cards[position]

Several of the examples in Chapter 1 work because of the special treatment Python
gives to anything vaguely resembling a sequence. The iterable protocol in Python
represents an extreme form of duck typing: the interpreter tries two different meth‐
ods to iterate over objects.
To be clear, the behaviors I described in this section are implemented in the inter‐
preter itself, mostly in C. They do not depend on methods from the Sequence ABC.
For example, the concrete methods __iter__ and __contains__ in the Sequence
class emulate the built-in behaviors of the Python interpreter. If you are curious,
check the source code of these methods in Lib/_collections_abc.py.
Now let’s study another example emphasizing the dynamic nature of protocols—and
why static type checkers have no chance of dealing with them.

Monkey Patching: Implementing a Protocol at Runtime
Monkey patching is dynamically changing a module, class, or function at runtime, to
add features or fix bugs. For example, the gevent networking library monkey patches
parts of Python’s standard library to allow lightweight concurrency without threads
or async/await.2
The FrenchDeck class from Example 13-2 is missing an essential feature: it cannot be
shuffled. Years ago when I first wrote the FrenchDeck example, I did implement a
shuffle method. Later I had a Pythonic insight: if a FrenchDeck acts like a sequence,
then it doesn’t need its own shuffle method because there is already random.shuf
fle, documented as “Shuffle the sequence x in place.”
The standard random.shuffle function is used like this:
      >>> from random import shuffle
      >>> l = list(range(10))
      >>> shuffle(l)
      >>> l
      [5, 2, 9, 7, 8, 3, 1, 4, 0, 6]

                     When you follow established protocols, you improve your chances
                     of leveraging existing standard library and third-party code, thanks
                     to duck typing.

However, if we try to shuffle a FrenchDeck instance, we get an exception, as in
Example 13-3.

Example 13-3. random.shuffle cannot handle FrenchDeck

>>> from random import shuffle
>>> from frenchdeck import FrenchDeck
>>> deck = FrenchDeck()
>>> shuffle(deck)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
  File ".../random.py", line 265, in shuffle
    x[i], x[j] = x[j], x[i]
TypeError: 'FrenchDeck' object does not support item assignment

The error message is clear: 'FrenchDeck' object does not support item assign
ment. The problem is that shuffle operates in place, by swapping items inside the

2 The “Monkey patch” article on Wikipedia has a funny example in Python.

collection, and FrenchDeck only implements the immutable sequence protocol.
Mutable sequences must also provide a __setitem__ method.
Because Python is dynamic, we can fix this at runtime, even at the interactive console.
Example 13-4 shows how to do it.

Example 13-4. Monkey patching FrenchDeck to make it mutable and compatible with
random.shuffle (continuing from Example 13-3)

>>> def set_card(deck, position, card):
...     deck._cards[position] = card
...
>>> FrenchDeck.__setitem__ = set_card
>>> shuffle(deck)
>>> deck[:5]
[Card(rank='3', suit='hearts'), Card(rank='4', suit='diamonds'), Card(rank='4',
suit='clubs'), Card(rank='7', suit='hearts'), Card(rank='9', suit='spades')]

    Create a function that takes deck, position, and card as arguments.

    Assign that function to an attribute named __setitem__ in the FrenchDeck class.

    deck can now be shuffled because I added the necessary method of the mutable
    sequence protocol.
The signature of the __setitem__ special method is defined in The Python Language
Reference in “3.3.6. Emulating container types”. Here I named the arguments deck,
position, card—and not self, key, value as in the language reference—to show
that every Python method starts life as a plain function, and naming the first argu‐
ment self is merely a convention. This is OK in a console session, but in a Python
source file it’s much better to use self, key, and value as documented.
The trick is that set_card knows that the deck object has an attribute named _cards,
and _cards must be a mutable sequence. The set_card function is then attached to
the FrenchDeck class as the __setitem__ special method. This is an example of mon‐
key patching: changing a class or module at runtime, without touching the source
code. Monkey patching is powerful, but the code that does the actual patching is very
tightly coupled with the program to be patched, often handling private and undocu‐
mented attributes.
Besides being an example of monkey patching, Example 13-4 highlights the dynamic
nature of protocols in dynamic duck typing: random.shuffle doesn’t care about the
class of the argument, it only needs the object to implement methods from the muta‐
ble sequence protocol. It doesn’t even matter if the object was “born” with the neces‐
sary methods or if they were somehow acquired later.

Duck typing doesn’t need to be wildly unsafe or hard to debug. The next section
shows some useful code patterns to detect dynamic protocols without resorting to
explicit checks.

Defensive Programming and “Fail Fast”
Defensive programming is like defensive driving: a set of practices to enhance safety
even when faced with careless programmers—or drivers.
Many bugs cannot be caught except at runtime—even in mainstream statically typed
languages.3 In a dynamically typed language, “fail fast” is excellent advice for safer
and easier-to-maintain programs. Failing fast means raising runtime errors as soon
as possible, for example, rejecting invalid arguments right a the beginning of a func‐
tion body.
Here is one example: when you write code that accepts a sequence of items to process
internally as a list, don’t enforce a list argument by type checking. Instead, take
the argument and immediately build a list from it. One example of this code pattern
is the __init__ method in Example 13-10, later in this chapter:
           def __init__(self, iterable):
               self._balls = list(iterable)

That way you make your code more flexible, because the list() constructor handles
any iterable that fits in memory. If the argument is not iterable, the call will fail fast
with a very clear TypeError exception, right when the object is initialized. If you want
to be more explict, you can wrap the list() call with try/except to customize the
error message—but I’d use that extra code only on an external API, because the prob‐
lem would be easy to see for maintainers of the codebase. Either way, the offending
call will appear near the end of the traceback, making it straightforward to fix. If you
don’t catch the invalid argument in the class constructor, the program will blow up
later, when some other method of the class needs to operate on self._balls and it is
not a list. Then the root cause will be harder to find.
Of course, calling list() on the argument would be bad if the data shouldn’t be
copied, either because it’s too large or because the function, by design, needs to
change it in place for the benefit of the caller, like random.shuffle does. In that case,
a runtime check like isinstance(x, abc.MutableSequence) would be the way to go.
If you are afraid to get an infinite generator—not a common issue—you can begin by
calling len() on the argument. This would reject iterators, while safely dealing with
tuples, arrays, and other existing or future classes that fully implement the Sequence

3 That’s why automated testing is necessary.

interface. Calling len() is usually very cheap, and an invalid argument will raise an
error immediately.
On the other hand, if any iterable is acceptable, then call iter(x) as soon as possible
to obtain an iterator, as we’ll see in “Why Sequences Are Iterable: The iter Function”
on page 596. Again, if x is not iterable, this will fail fast with an easy-to-debug
exception.
In the cases I just described, a type hint could catch some problems earlier, but not all
problems. Recall that the type Any is consistent-with every other type. Type inference
may cause a variable to be tagged with the Any type. When that happens, the type
checker is in the dark. In addition, type hints are not enforced at runtime. Fail fast is
the last line of defense.
Defensive code leveraging duck types can also include logic to handle different types
without using isinstance() or hasattr() tests.
One example is how we might emulate the handling of the field_names argument in
collections.namedtuple: field_names accepts a single string with identifiers sepa‐
rated by spaces or commas, or a sequence of identifiers. Example 13-5 shows how I’d
do it using duck typing.

Example 13-5. Duck typing to handle a string or an iterable of strings

    try:
        field_names = field_names.replace(',', ' ').split()
    except AttributeError:
        pass
    field_names = tuple(field_names)
    if not all(s.isidentifier() for s in field_names):
        raise ValueError('field_names must all be valid identifiers')

    Assume it’s a string (EAFP = it’s easier to ask forgiveness than permission).

    Convert commas to spaces and split the result into a list of names.

    Sorry, field_names doesn’t quack like a str: it has no .replace, or it returns
    something we can’t .split.

    If AttributeError was raised, then field_names is not a str and we assume it
    was already an iterable of names.

    To make sure it’s an iterable and to keep our own copy, create a tuple out of what
    we have. A tuple is more compact than list, and it also prevents my code from
    changing the names by mistake.

      Use str.isidentifier to ensure every name is valid.
Example 13-5 shows one situation where duck typing is more expressive than static
type hints. There is no way to spell a type hint that says “field_names must be a
string of identifiers separated by spaces or commas.” This is the relevant part of the
namedtuple signature on typeshed (see the full source at stdlib/3/collections/
__init__.pyi):
           def namedtuple(
               typename: str,
               field_names: Union[str, Iterable[str]],
               *,
               # rest of signature omitted

As you can see, field_names is annotated as Union[str, Iterable[str]], which is
OK as far as it goes, but is not enough to catch all possible problems.
After reviewing dynamic protocols, we move to a more explicit form of runtime type
checking: goose typing.

Goose Typing
      An abstract class represents an interface.
          —Bjarne Stroustrup, creator of C++4

Python doesn’t have an interface keyword. We use abstract base classes (ABCs) to
define interfaces for explicit type checking at runtime—also supported by static type
checkers.
The Python Glossary entry for abstract base class has a good explanation of the value
they bring to duck-typed languages:
      Abstract base classes complement duck typing by providing a way to define interfaces
      when other techniques like hasattr() would be clumsy or subtly wrong (for example,
      with magic methods). ABCs introduce virtual subclasses, which are classes that don’t
      inherit from a class but are still recognized by isinstance() and issubclass(); see
      the abc module documentation.5

Goose typing is a runtime type checking approach that leverages ABCs. I will let Alex
Martelli explain in “Waterfowl and ABCs” on page 443.

4 Bjarne Stroustrup, The Design and Evolution of C++, p. 278 (Addison-Wesley).

5 Retrieved October 18, 2020.

              I am very grateful to my friends Alex Martelli and Anna Raven‐
              scroft. I showed them the first outline of Fluent Python at OSCON
              2013, and they encouraged me to submit it for publication with
              O’Reilly. Both later contributed with thorough tech reviews. Alex
              was already the most cited person in this book, and then he offered
              to write this essay. Take it away, Alex!

                               Waterfowl and ABCs
By Alex Martelli
I’ve been credited on Wikipedia for helping spread the helpful meme and sound-bite
“duck typing” (i.e, ignoring an object’s actual type, focusing instead on ensuring that
the object implements the method names, signatures, and semantics required for its
intended use).
In Python, this mostly boils down to avoiding the use of isinstance to check the
object’s type (not to mention the even worse approach of checking, for example,
whether type(foo) is bar—which is rightly anathema as it inhibits even the sim‐
plest forms of inheritance!).
The overall duck typing approach remains quite useful in many contexts—and yet, in
many others, an often preferable one has evolved over time. And herein lies a tale…
In recent generations, the taxonomy of genus and species (including, but not limited
to, the family of waterfowl known as Anatidae) has mostly been driven by phenetics—
an approach focused on similarities of morphology and behavior…chiefly, observable
traits. The analogy to “duck typing” was strong.
However, parallel evolution can often produce similar traits, both morphological and
behavioral ones, among species that are actually unrelated, but just happened to
evolve in similar, though separate, ecological niches. Similar “accidental similarities”
happen in programming, too—for example, consider the classic object-oriented pro‐
gramming example:
    class Artist:
        def draw(self): ...

    class Gunslinger:
        def draw(self): ...

    class Lottery:
        def draw(self): ...

Clearly, the mere existence of a method named draw, callable without arguments,
is far from sufficient to assure us that two objects x and y, such that x.draw() and
y.draw() can be called, are in any way exchangeable or abstractly equivalent—

  nothing about the similarity of the semantics resulting from such calls can be infer‐
  red. Rather, we need a knowledgeable programmer to somehow positively assert that
  such an equivalence holds at some level!
  In biology (and other disciplines), this issue has led to the emergence (and, on many
  facets, the dominance) of an approach that’s an alternative to phenetics, known as
  cladistics—focusing taxonomical choices on characteristics that are inherited from
  common ancestors, rather than ones that are independently evolved. (Cheap and
  rapid DNA sequencing can make cladistics highly practical in many more cases in
  recent years.)
  For example, sheldgeese (once classified as being closer to other geese) and shelducks
  (once classified as being closer to other ducks) are now grouped together within
  the subfamily Tadornidae (implying they’re closer to each other than to any other
  Anatidae, as they share a closer common ancestor). Furthermore, DNA analysis has
  shown, in particular, that the white-winged wood duck is not as close to the Muscovy
  duck (the latter being a shelduck) as similarity in looks and behavior had long sug‐
  gested—so the wood duck was reclassified into its own genus, and entirely out of the
  subfamily!
  Does this matter? It depends on the context! For such purposes as deciding how best
  to cook a waterfowl once you’ve bagged it, for example, specific observable traits (not
  all of them—plumage, for example, is de minimis in such a context), mostly texture
  and flavor (old-fashioned phenetics!), may be far more relevant than cladistics. But
  for other issues, such as susceptibility to different pathogens (whether you’re trying to
  raise waterfowl in captivity, or preserve them in the wild), DNA closeness can matter
  much more.
  So, by very loose analogy with these taxonomic revolutions in the world of water‐
  fowls, I’m recommending supplementing (not entirely replacing—in certain contexts
  it shall still serve) good old duck typing with…goose typing!
  What goose typing means is: isinstance(obj, cls) is now just fine…as long as cls
  is an abstract base class—in other words, cls’s metaclass is abc.ABCMeta.
  You can find many useful existing abstract classes in collections.abc (and addi‐
  tional ones in the numbers module of The Python Standard Library).6
  Among the many conceptual advantages of ABCs over concrete classes (e.g., Scott
  Meyer’s “all non-leaf classes should be abstract”; see Item 33 in his book, More

6 You can also, of course, define your own ABCs—but I would discourage all but the most advanced Pythonis‐
  tas from going that route, just as I would discourage them from defining their own custom metaclasses…and
  even for said “most advanced Pythonistas,” those of us sporting deep mastery of every fold and crease in the
  language, these are not tools for frequent use. Such “deep metaprogramming,” if ever appropriate, is intended
  for authors of broad frameworks meant to be independently extended by vast numbers of separate develop‐
  ment teams…less than 1% of “most advanced Pythonistas” may ever need that! — A.M.

Effective C++, Addison-Wesley), Python’s ABCs add one major practical advantage:
the register class method, which lets end-user code “declare” that a certain class
becomes a “virtual” subclass of an ABC (for this purpose, the registered class must
meet the ABC’s method name and signature requirements, and more importantly,
the underlying semantic contract—but it need not have been developed with any
awareness of the ABC, and in particular need not inherit from it!). This goes a long
way toward breaking the rigidity and strong coupling that make inheritance some‐
thing to use with much more caution than typically practiced by most object-oriented
programmers.
Sometimes you don’t even need to register a class for an ABC to recognize it as a
subclass!
That’s the case for the ABCs whose essence boils down to a few special methods. For
example:
    >>> class Struggle:
    ...     def __len__(self): return 23
    ...
    >>> from collections import abc
    >>> isinstance(Struggle(), abc.Sized)
    True

As you see, abc.Sized recognizes Struggle as “a subclass,” with no need for registra‐
tion, as implementing the special method named __len__ is all it takes (it’s supposed
to be implemented with the proper syntax—callable without arguments—and seman‐
tics—returning a nonnegative integer denoting an object’s “length”; any code that
implements a specially named method, such as __len__, with arbitrary, non-
compliant syntax and semantics has much worse problems anyway).
So, here’s my valediction: whenever you’re implementing a class embodying any of
the concepts represented in the ABCs in numbers, collections.abc, or other frame‐
work you may be using, be sure (if needed) to subclass it from, or register it into, the
corresponding ABC. At the start of your programs using some library or framework
defining classes which have omitted to do that, perform the registrations yourself;
then, when you must check for (most typically) an argument being, e.g, “a sequence,”
check whether:
    isinstance(the_arg, collections.abc.Sequence)
And, don’t define custom ABCs (or metaclasses) in production code. If you feel the
urge to do so, I’d bet it’s likely to be a case of the “all problems look like a nail”–syn‐
drome for somebody who just got a shiny new hammer—you (and future maintain‐
ers of your code) will be much happier sticking with straightforward and simple code,
eschewing such depths. Valē!

To summarize, goose typing entails:

  • Subclassing from ABCs to make it explict that you are implementing a previously
    defined interface.
  • Runtime type checking using ABCs instead of concrete classes as the second
    argument for isinstance and issubclass.

Alex makes the point that inheriting from an ABC is more than implementing the
required methods: it’s also a clear declaration of intent by the developer. That intent
can also be made explicit through registering a virtual subclass.

                     Details of using register are covered in “A Virtual Subclass of an
                     ABC” on page 460, later in this chapter. For now, here is a brief
                     example: given the FrenchDeck class, if I want it to pass a check like
                     issubclass(FrenchDeck, Sequence), I can make it a virtual sub‐
                     class of the Sequence ABC with these lines:
                           from collections.abc import Sequence
                           Sequence.register(FrenchDeck)

The use of isinstance and issubclass becomes more acceptable if you are checking
against ABCs instead of concrete classes. If used with concrete classes, type checks
limit polymorphism—an essential feature of object-oriented programming. But with
ABCs these tests are more flexible. After all, if a component does not implement an
ABC by subclassing—but does implement the required methods—it can always be
registered after the fact so it passes those explicit type checks.
However, even with ABCs, you should beware that excessive use of isinstance
checks may be a code smell—a symptom of bad OO design.
It’s usually not OK to have a chain of if/elif/elif with isinstance checks per‐
forming different actions depending on the type of object: you should be using poly‐
morphism for that—i.e., design your classes so that the interpreter dispatches calls to
the proper methods, instead of you hardcoding the dispatch logic in if/elif/elif
blocks.
On the other hand, it’s OK to perform an isinstance check against an ABC if you
must enforce an API contract: “Dude, you have to implement this if you want to call
me,” as technical reviewer Lennart Regebro put it. That’s particularly useful in sys‐
tems that have a plug-in architecture. Outside of frameworks, duck typing is often
simpler and more flexible than type checks.
Finally, in his essay, Alex reinforces more than once the need for restraint in the cre‐
ation of ABCs. Excessive use of ABCs would impose ceremony in a language that

became popular because it is practical and pragmatic. During the Fluent Python
review process, Alex wrote in an e-mail:
    ABCs are meant to encapsulate very general concepts, abstractions, introduced by a
    framework—things like “a sequence” and “an exact number.” [Readers] most likely
    don’t need to write any new ABCs, just use existing ones correctly, to get 99.9% of the
    benefits without serious risk of misdesign.

Now let’s see goose typing in practice.

Subclassing an ABC
Following Martelli’s advice, we’ll leverage an existing ABC, collections.MutableSe
quence, before daring to invent our own. In Example 13-6, FrenchDeck2 is explicitly
declared a subclass of collections.MutableSequence.

Example 13-6. frenchdeck2.py: FrenchDeck2, a subclass of collections.MutableSe
quence

from collections import namedtuple, abc

Card = namedtuple('Card', ['rank', 'suit'])

class FrenchDeck2(abc.MutableSequence):
    ranks = [str(n) for n in range(2, 11)] + list('JQKA')
    suits = 'spades diamonds clubs hearts'.split()

    def __init__(self):
        self._cards = [Card(rank, suit) for suit in self.suits
                                        for rank in self.ranks]

    def __len__(self):
        return len(self._cards)

    def __getitem__(self, position):
        return self._cards[position]

    def __setitem__(self, position, value):
        self._cards[position] = value

    def __delitem__(self, position):
        del self._cards[position]

    def insert(self, position, value):
        self._cards.insert(position, value)

      __setitem__ is all we need to enable shuffling…

      …but subclassing MutableSequence forces us to implement __delitem__, an
      abstract method of that ABC.

      We are also required to implement insert, the third abstract method of
      MutableSequence.
Python does not check for the implementation of the abstract methods at import
time (when the frenchdeck2.py module is loaded and compiled), but only at runtime
when we actually try to instantiate FrenchDeck2. Then, if we fail to implement any
of the abstract methods, we get a TypeError exception with a message such as
"Can't instantiate abstract class FrenchDeck2 with abstract methods
__delitem__, insert". That’s why we must implement __delitem__ and insert,
even if our FrenchDeck2 examples do not need those behaviors: the MutableSequence
ABC demands them.
As Figure 13-3 shows, not all methods of the Sequence and MutableSequence ABCs
are abstract.

Figure 13-3. UML class diagram for the MutableSequence ABC and its superclasses
from collections.abc (inheritance arrows point from subclasses to ancestors; names
in italic are abstract classes and abstract methods).

To write FrenchDeck2 as a subclass of MutableSequence, I had to pay the price of
implementing __delitem__ and insert, which my examples did not require. In
return, FrenchDeck2 inherits five concrete methods from Sequence: __contains__,
__iter__, __reversed__, index, and count. From MutableSequence, it gets another
six methods: append, reverse, extend, pop, remove, and __iadd__—which supports
the += operator for in place concatenation.
The concrete methods in each collections.abc ABC are implemented in terms of
the public interface of the class, so they work without any knowledge of the internal
structure of instances.

                   As the coder of a concrete subclass, you may be able to override
                   methods inherited from ABCs with more efficient implementa‐
                   tions. For example, __contains__ works by doing a sequential scan
                   of the sequence, but if your concrete sequence keeps its items sor‐
                   ted, you can write a faster __contains__ that does a binary search
                   using the bisect function from the standard library. See “Manag‐
                   ing Ordered Sequences with Bisect” at fluentpython.com to learn
                   more about it.

To use ABCs well, you need to know what’s available. We’ll review the collections
ABCs next.

ABCs in the Standard Library
Since Python 2.6, the standard library provides several ABCs. Most are defined in the
collections.abc module, but there are others. You can find ABCs in the io and
numbers packages, for example. But the most widely used are in collections.abc.

                   There are two modules named abc in the standard library. Here we
                   are talking about collections.abc. To reduce loading time, since
                   Python 3.4 that module is implemented outside of the collections
                   package—in Lib/_collections_abc.py—so it’s imported separately
                   from collections. The other abc module is just abc (i.e., Lib/
                   abc.py) where the abc.ABC class is defined. Every ABC depends on
                   the abc module, but we don’t need to import it ourselves except to
                   create a brand-new ABC.

Figure 13-4 is a summary UML class diagram (without attribute names) of 17 ABCs
defined in collections.abc. The documentation of collections.abc has a nice
table summarizing the ABCs, their relationships, and their abstract and concrete
methods (called “mixin methods”). There is plenty of multiple inheritance going on
in Figure 13-4. We’ll devote most of Chapter 14 to multiple inheritance, but for now
it’s enough to say that it is usually not a problem when ABCs are concerned.7

7 Multiple inheritance was considered harmful and excluded from Java, except for interfaces: Java interfaces can
  extend multiple interfaces, and Java classes can implement multiple interfaces.

Figure 13-4. UML class diagram for ABCs in collections.abc.

Let’s review the clusters in Figure 13-4:
Iterable, Container, Sized
      Every collection should either inherit from these ABCs or implement compatible
      protocols. Iterable supports iteration with __iter__, Container supports the
      in operator with __contains__, and Sized supports len() with __len__.

Collection
      This ABC has no methods of its own, but was added in Python 3.6 to make it
      easier to subclass from Iterable, Container, and Sized.
Sequence, Mapping, Set
      These are the main immutable collection types, and each has a mutable subclass.
      A detailed diagram for MutableSequence is in Figure 13-3; for MutableMapping
      and MutableSet, see Figures 3-1 and 3-2 in Chapter 3.
MappingView
      In Python 3, the objects returned from the mapping methods .items(), .keys(),
      and .values() implement the interfaces defined in ItemsView, KeysView, and
      ValuesView, respectively. The first two also implement the rich interface of Set,
      with all the operators we saw in “Set Operations” on page 107.
Iterator
      Note that iterator subclasses Iterable. We discuss this further in Chapter 17.

Callable, Hashable
    These are not collections, but collections.abc was the first package to define
    ABCs in the standard library, and these two were deemed important enough
    to be included. They support type checking objects that must be callable or
    hashable.
For callable detection, the callable(obj) built-in function is more convenient than
insinstance(obj, Callable).
If insinstance(obj, Hashable) returns False, you can be certain that obj is not
hashable. But if the return is True, it may be a false positive. The next box explains.

          isinstance with Hashable and Iterable Can Be Misleading
 It’s easy to misinterpret the results of the isinstance and issubclass tests against
 the Hashable and Iterable ABCs.
 If isinstance(obj, Hashable) returns True, that only means that the class of obj
 implements or inherits __hash__. But if obj is a tuple containing unhashable items,
 then obj is not hashable, despite the positive result of the isinstance check. Tech
 reviewer Jürgen Gmach pointed out that duck typing provides the most accurate way
 to determine if an instance is hashable: call hash(obj). That call will raise TypeError
 if obj is not hashable.
 On the other hand, even when isinstance(obj, Iterable) returns False, Python
 may still be able to iterate over obj using __getitem__ with 0-based indices, as we
 saw in Chapter 1 and “Python Digs Sequences” on page 436. The documentation for
 collections.abc.Iterable states:

      The only reliable way to determine whether an object is iterable is to call iter(obj).

After looking at some existing ABCs, let’s practice goose typing by implementing an
ABC from scratch and putting it to use. The goal here is not to encourage everyone to
start creating ABCs left and right, but to learn how to read the source code of the
ABCs you’ll find in the standard library and other packages.

Defining and Using an ABC
This warning appeared in the “Interfaces” chapter of the first edition of Fluent
Python:
    ABCs, like descriptors and metaclasses, are tools for building frameworks. Therefore,
    only a small minority of Python developers can create ABCs without imposing unrea‐
    sonable limitations and needless work on fellow programmers.

Now ABCs have more potential use cases in type hints to support static typing. As
discussed in “Abstract Base Classes” on page 278, using ABCs instead of concrete
types in function argument type hints gives more flexibility to the caller.
To justify creating an ABC, we need to come up with a context for using it as an
extension point in a framework. So here is our context: imagine you need to display
advertisements on a website or a mobile app in random order, but without repeating
an ad before the full inventory of ads is shown. Now let’s assume we are building an
ad management framework called ADAM. One of its requirements is to support user-
provided nonrepeating random-picking classes.8 To make it clear to ADAM users what
is expected of a “nonrepeating random-picking” component, we’ll define an ABC.
In the literature about data structures, “stack” and “queue” describe abstract inter‐
faces in terms of physical arrangements of objects. I will follow suit and use a real-
world metaphor to name our ABC: bingo cages and lottery blowers are machines
designed to pick items at random from a finite set, without repeating, until the set is
exhausted.
The ABC will be named Tombola, after the Italian name of bingo and the tumbling
container that mixes the numbers.
The Tombola ABC has four methods. The two abstract methods are:
.load(…)
      Put items into the container.
.pick()
      Remove one item at random from the container, returning it.
The concrete methods are:
.loaded()
      Return True if there is at least one item in the container.
.inspect()
      Return a tuple built from the items currently in the container, without changing
      its contents (the internal ordering is not preserved).
Figure 13-5 shows the Tombola ABC and three concrete implementations.

8 Perhaps the client needs to audit the randomizer; or the agency wants to provide a rigged one. You never
  know…

Figure 13-5. UML diagram for an ABC and three subclasses. The name of the Tombola
ABC and its abstract methods are written in italics, per UML conventions. The dashed
arrow is used for interface implementation—here I am using it to show that TomboList
not only implements the Tombola interface, but is also registered as virtual subclass of
Tombola—as we will see later in this chapter.9

Example 13-7 shows the definition of the Tombola ABC.

Example 13-7. tombola.py: Tombola is an ABC with two abstract methods and two
concrete methods

import abc

class Tombola(abc.ABC):

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def load(self, iterable):
        """Add items from an iterable."""

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def pick(self):
        """Remove item at random, returning it.

          This method should raise `LookupError` when the instance is empty.
          """

    def loaded(self):
        """Return `True` if there's at least 1 item, `False` otherwise."""

9 «registered» and «virtual subclass» are not standard UML terms. I am using them to represent a class relation‐
  ship that is specific to Python.

           return bool(self.inspect())

      def inspect(self):
          """Return a sorted tuple with the items currently inside."""
          items = []
          while True:
              try:
                   items.append(self.pick())
              except LookupError:
                   break
          self.load(items)
          return tuple(items)

      To define an ABC, subclass abc.ABC.

      An abstract method is marked with the @abstractmethod decorator, and often its
      body is empty except for a docstring.10

      The docstring instructs implementers to raise LookupError if there are no items
      to pick.

      An ABC may include concrete methods.

      Concrete methods in an ABC must rely only on the interface defined by the ABC
      (i.e., other concrete or abstract methods or properties of the ABC).

      We can’t know how concrete subclasses will store the items, but we can build the
      inspect result by emptying the Tombola with successive calls to .pick()…

      …then use .load(…) to put everything back.

10 Before ABCs existed, abstract methods would raise NotImplementedError to signal that subclasses were
   responsible for their implementation. In Smalltalk-80, abstract method bodies would invoke subclassRespon
   sibility, a method inherited from object that would produce an error with the message, “My subclass
   should have overridden one of my messages.”

               An abstract method can actually have an implementation. Even if
               it does, subclasses will still be forced to override it, but they will be
               able to invoke the abstract method with super(), adding function‐
               ality to it instead of implementing from scratch. See the abc mod‐
               ule documentation for details on @abstractmethod usage.

The code for the .inspect() method in Example 13-7 is silly, but it shows that we
can rely on .pick() and .load(…) to inspect what’s inside the Tombola by picking all
items and loading them back—without knowing how the items are actually stored.
The point of this example is to highlight that it’s OK to provide concrete methods in
ABCs, as long as they only depend on other methods in the interface. Being aware of
their internal data structures, concrete subclasses of Tombola may always over‐
ride .inspect() with a smarter implementation, but they don’t have to.
The .loaded() method in Example 13-7 has one line, but it’s expensive: it
calls .inspect() to build the tuple just to apply bool() on it. This works, but a con‐
crete subclass can do much better, as we’ll see.
Note that our roundabout implementation of .inspect() requires that we catch a
LookupError thrown by self.pick(). The fact that self.pick() may raise LookupEr
ror is also part of its interface, but there is no way to make this explicit in Python,
except in the documentation (see the docstring for the abstract pick method in
Example 13-7).
I chose the LookupError exception because of its place in the Python hierarchy of
exceptions in relation to IndexError and KeyError, the most likely exceptions to be
raised by the data structures used to implement a concrete Tombola. Therefore,
implementations can raise LookupError, IndexError, KeyError, or a custom subclass
of LookupError to comply. See Figure 13-6.

Figure 13-6. Part of the Exception class hierarchy.11

      LookupError is the exception we handle in Tombola.inspect.

      IndexError is the LookupError subclass raised when we try to get an item from a
      sequence with an index beyond the last position.

      KeyError is raised when we use a nonexistent key to get an item from a mapping.
We now have our very own Tombola ABC. To witness the interface checking per‐
formed by an ABC, let’s try to fool Tombola with a defective implementation in
Example 13-8.

Example 13-8. A fake Tombola doesn’t go undetected

>>> from tombola import Tombola
>>> class Fake(Tombola):
...     def pick(self):
...         return 13
...
>>> Fake
<class '__main__.Fake'>
>>> f = Fake()
Traceback (most recent call last):

11 The complete tree is in section “5.4. Exception hierarchy” of The Python Standard Library docs.

  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: Can't instantiate abstract class Fake with abstract method load

     Declare Fake as a subclass of Tombola.

     The class was created, no errors so far.

     TypeError is raised when we try to instantiate Fake. The message is very clear:
     Fake is considered abstract because it failed to implement load, one of the
     abstract methods declared in the Tombola ABC.
So we have our first ABC defined, and we put it to work validating a class. We’ll soon
subclass the Tombola ABC, but first we must cover some ABC coding rules.

ABC Syntax Details
The standard way to declare an ABC is to subclass abc.ABC or any other ABC.
Besides the ABC base class, and the @abstractmethod decorator, the abc module
defines the @abstractclassmethod, @abstractstaticmethod, and @abstractprop
erty decorators. However, these last three were deprecated in Python 3.3, when it
became possible to stack decorators on top of @abstractmethod, making the others
redundant. For example, the preferred way to declare an abstract class method is:
     class MyABC(abc.ABC):
         @classmethod
         @abc.abstractmethod
         def an_abstract_classmethod(cls, ...):
             pass

                   The order of stacked function decorators matters, and in the case
                   of @abstractmethod, the documentation is explicit:
                        When abstractmethod() is applied in combination with
                        other method descriptors, it should be applied as the
                        innermost decorator…12

                   In other words, no other decorator may appear between @abstract
                   method and the def statement.

Now that we’ve got these ABC syntax issues covered, let’s put Tombola to use by
implementing two concrete descendants of it.

12 The @abc.abstractmethod entry in the abc module documentation.

Subclassing an ABC
Given the Tombola ABC, we’ll now develop two concrete subclasses that satisfy its
interface. These classes were pictured in Figure 13-5, along with the virtual subclass
to be discussed in the next section.
The BingoCage class in Example 13-9 is a variation of Example 7-8 using a better ran‐
domizer. This BingoCage implements the required abstract methods load and pick.

Example 13-9. bingo.py: BingoCage is a concrete subclass of Tombola

import random

from tombola import Tombola

class BingoCage(Tombola):

      def __init__(self, items):
          self._randomizer = random.SystemRandom()
          self._items = []
          self.load(items)

      def load(self, items):
          self._items.extend(items)
          self._randomizer.shuffle(self._items)

      def pick(self):
          try:
               return self._items.pop()
          except IndexError:
              raise LookupError('pick from empty BingoCage')

      def __call__(self):
          self.pick()

      This BingoCage class explicitly extends Tombola.

      Pretend we’ll use this for online gaming. random.SystemRandom implements the
      random API on top of the os.urandom(…) function, which provides random bytes
      “suitable for cryptographic use,” according to the os module docs.

      Delegate initial loading to the .load(…) method.

      Instead of the plain random.shuffle() function, we use the .shuffle() method
      of our SystemRandom instance.

    pick is implemented as in Example 7-8.

    __call__ is also from Example 7-8. It’s not needed to satisfy the Tombola inter‐
    face, but there’s no harm in adding extra methods.
BingoCage inherits the expensive loaded and the silly inspect methods from Tom
bola. Both could be overridden with much faster one-liners, as in Example 13-10.
The point is: we can be lazy and just inherit the suboptimal concrete methods from
an ABC. The methods inherited from Tombola are not as fast as they could be for
BingoCage, but they do provide correct results for any Tombola subclass that correctly
implements pick and load.
Example 13-10 shows a very different but equally valid implementation of the Tom
bola interface. Instead of shuffling the “balls” and popping the last, LottoBlower
pops from a random position.

Example 13-10. lotto.py: LottoBlower is a concrete subclass that overrides the inspect
and loaded methods from Tombola

import random

from tombola import Tombola

class LottoBlower(Tombola):

    def __init__(self, iterable):
        self._balls = list(iterable)

    def load(self, iterable):
        self._balls.extend(iterable)

    def pick(self):
        try:
             position = random.randrange(len(self._balls))
        except ValueError:
             raise LookupError('pick from empty LottoBlower')
        return self._balls.pop(position)

    def loaded(self):
        return bool(self._balls)

    def inspect(self):
        return tuple(self._balls)

      The initializer accepts any iterable: the argument is used to build a list.

      The random.randrange(…) function raises ValueError if the range is empty, so
      we catch that and throw LookupError instead, to be compatible with Tombola.

      Otherwise the randomly selected item is popped from self._balls.

      Override loaded to avoid calling inspect (as Tombola.loaded does in
      Example 13-7). We can make it faster by working with self._balls directly—no
      need to build a whole new tuple.

      Override inspect with a one-liner.
Example 13-10 illustrates an idiom worth mentioning: in __init__, self._balls
stores list(iterable) and not just a reference to iterable (i.e., we did not merely
assign self._balls = iterable, aliasing the argument). As mentioned in “Defen‐
sive Programming and ‘Fail Fast’” on page 440, this makes our LottoBlower flexible
because the iterable argument may be any iterable type. At the same time, we make
sure to store its items in a list so we can pop items. And even if we always get lists as
the iterable argument, list(iterable) produces a copy of the argument, which is
a good practice considering we will be removing items from it and the client might
not expect that the provided list will be changed.13
We now come to the crucial dynamic feature of goose typing: declaring virtual sub‐
classes with the register method.

A Virtual Subclass of an ABC
An essential characteristic of goose typing—and one reason why it deserves a water‐
fowl name—is the ability to register a class as a virtual subclass of an ABC, even if it
does not inherit from it. When doing so, we promise that the class faithfully imple‐
ments the interface defined in the ABC—and Python will believe us without check‐
ing. If we lie, we’ll be caught by the usual runtime exceptions.
This is done by calling a register class method on the ABC. The registered class
then becomes a virtual subclass of the ABC, and will be recognized as such by issub
class, but it does not inherit any methods or attributes from the ABC.

13 “Defensive Programming with Mutable Parameters” on page 216 in Chapter 6 was devoted to the aliasing
   issue we just avoided here.

               Virtual subclasses do not inherit from their registered ABCs, and
               are not checked for conformance to the ABC interface at any time,
               not even when they are instantiated. Also, static type checkers can’t
               handle virtual subclasses at this time. For details, see Mypy issue
               2922—ABCMeta.register support.

The register method is usually invoked as a plain function (see “Usage of register in
Practice” on page 463), but it can also be used as a decorator. In Example 13-11, we use
the decorator syntax and implement TomboList, a virtual subclass of Tombola, depic‐
ted in Figure 13-7.

Figure 13-7. UML class diagram for the TomboList, a real subclass of list and a vir‐
tual subclass of Tombola.

Example 13-11. tombolist.py: class TomboList is a virtual subclass of Tombola

from random import randrange

from tombola import Tombola

@Tombola.register
class TomboList(list):

    def pick(self):
        if self:
            position = randrange(len(self))
            return self.pop(position)

           else:
               raise LookupError('pop from empty TomboList')

      load = list.extend

      def loaded(self):
          return bool(self)

      def inspect(self):
          return tuple(self)

# Tombola.register(TomboList)

      Tombolist is registered as a virtual subclass of Tombola.

      Tombolist extends list.

      Tombolist inherits its boolean behavior from list, and that returns True if the
      list is not empty.

      Our pick calls self.pop, inherited from list, passing a random item index.

      Tombolist.load is the same as list.extend.

      loaded delegates to bool.14

      It’s always possible to call register in this way, and it’s useful to do so when you
      need to register a class that you do not maintain, but which does fulfill the
      interface.
Note that because of the registration, the functions issubclass and isinstance act
as if TomboList is a subclass of Tombola:
      >>> from tombola import Tombola
      >>> from tombolist import TomboList
      >>> issubclass(TomboList, Tombola)
      True
      >>> t = TomboList(range(100))
      >>> isinstance(t, Tombola)
      True

14 The same trick I used with load() doesn’t work with loaded(), because the list type does not implement
   __bool__, the method I’d have to bind to loaded. The bool() built-in doesn’t need __bool__ to work because
   it can also use __len__. See “4.1. Truth Value Testing” in the “Built-in Types” chapter of the Python
   documentation.

However, inheritance is guided by a special class attribute named __mro__—the
Method Resolution Order. It basically lists the class and its superclasses in the order
Python uses to search for methods.15 If you inspect the __mro__ of TomboList, you’ll
see that it lists only the “real” superclasses—list and object:
     >>> TomboList.__mro__
     (<class 'tombolist.TomboList'>, <class 'list'>, <class 'object'>)

Tombola is not in Tombolist.__mro__, so Tombolist does not inherit any methods
from Tombola.
This concludes our Tombola ABC case study. In the next section, we’ll address how
the register ABC function is used in the wild.

Usage of register in Practice
In Example 13-11, we used Tombola.register as a class decorator. Prior to Python
3.3, register could not be used like that—it had to be called as a plain function after
the class definition, as suggested by the comment at the end of Example 13-11. How‐
ever, even now, it’s more widely deployed as a function to register classes defined
elsewhere. For example, in the source code for the collections.abc module, the
built-in types tuple, str, range, and memoryview are registered as virtual subclasses
of Sequence, like this:
     Sequence.register(tuple)
     Sequence.register(str)
     Sequence.register(range)
     Sequence.register(memoryview)
Several other built-in types are registered to ABCs in _collections_abc.py. Those regis‐
trations happen only when that module is imported, which is OK because you’ll have
to import it anyway to get the ABCs. For example, you need to import MutableMap
ping from collections.abc to perform a check like isinstance(my_dict, Mutable
Mapping).
Subclassing an ABC or registering with an ABC are both explicit ways of making our
classes pass issubclass checks—as well as isinstance checks, which also rely on
issubclass. But some ABCs support structural typing as well. The next section
explains.

15 There is a whole section explaining the __mro__ class attribute in “Multiple Inheritance and Method Resolu‐
   tion Order” on page 494. Right now, this quick explanation will do.

Structural Typing with ABCs
ABCs are mostly used with nominal typing. When a class Sub explicitly inherits from
AnABC, or is registered with AnABC, the name of AnABC is linked to the Sub class—and
that’s how at runtime, issubclass(AnABC, Sub) returns True.
In contrast, structural typing is about looking at the structure of an object’s public
interface to determine its type: an object is consistent-with a type if it implements the
methods defined in the type.16 Dynamic and static duck typing are two approaches to
structural typing.
It turns out that some ABCs also support structural typing. In his essay, “Waterfowl
and ABCs” on page 443, Alex shows that a class can be recognized as a subclass of an
ABC even without registration. Here is his example again, with an added test using
issubclass:
      >>> class Struggle:
      ...     def __len__(self): return 23
      ...
      >>> from collections import abc
      >>> isinstance(Struggle(), abc.Sized)
      True
      >>> issubclass(Struggle, abc.Sized)
      True

Class Struggle is considered a subclass of abc.Sized by the issubclass function
(and, consequently, by isinstance as well) because abc.Sized implements a special
class method named __subclasshook__.
The __subclasshook__ for Sized checks whether the class argument has an attribute
named __len__. If it does, then it is considered a virtual subclass of Sized. See
Example 13-12.

Example 13-12. Definition of Sized from the source code of Lib/_collections_abc.py

class Sized(metaclass=ABCMeta):

      __slots__ = ()

      @abstractmethod
      def __len__(self):
          return 0

      @classmethod
      def __subclasshook__(cls, C):

16 The concept of type consistency was explained in “Subtype-of versus consistent-with” on page 267.

        if cls is Sized:
            if any("__len__" in B.__dict__ for B in C.__mro__):
                return True
        return NotImplemented

    If there is an attribute named __len__ in the __dict__ of any class listed in
    C.__mro__ (i.e., C and its superclasses)…

    …return True, signaling that C is a virtual subclass of Sized.

    Otherwise return NotImplemented to let the subclass check proceed.

               If you are interested in the details of the subclass check, see the
               source code for the ABCMeta.__subclasscheck__ method in
               Python 3.6: Lib/abc.py. Beware: it has lots of ifs and two recursive
               calls. In Python 3.7, Ivan Levkivskyi and Inada Naoki rewrote in C
               most of the logic for the abc module, for better performance. See
               Python issue #31333. The current implementation of ABC
               Meta.__subclasscheck__ simply calls _abc_subclasscheck. The
               relevant C source code is in cpython/Modules/_abc.c#L605.

That’s how __subclasshook__ allows ABCs to support structural typing. You can
formalize an interface with an ABC, you can make isinstance checks against that
ABC, and still have a completely unrelated class pass an issubclass check because it
implements a certain method (or because it does whatever it takes to convince a
__subclasshook__ to vouch for it).
Is it a good idea to implement __subclasshook__ in our own ABCs? Probably not.
All the implementations of __subclasshook__ I’ve seen in the Python source code
are in ABCs like Sized that declare just one special method, and they simply check
for that special method name. Given their “special” status, you can be pretty sure that
any method named __len__ does what you expect. But even in the realm of special
methods and fundamental ABCs, it can be risky to make such assumptions. For
example, mappings implement __len__, __getitem__, and __iter__, but they are
rightly not considered subtypes of Sequence, because you can’t retrieve items using
integer offsets or slices. That’s why the abc.Sequence class does not implement
__subclasshook__.
For ABCs that you and I may write, a __subclasshook__ would be even less depend‐
able. I am not ready to believe that any class named Spam that implements or inherits
load, pick, inspect, and loaded is guaranteed to behave as a Tombola. It’s better to
let the programmer affirm it by subclassing Spam from Tombola, or registering it with

Tombola.register(Spam). Of course, your __subclasshook__ could also check
method signatures and other features, but I just don’t think it’s worthwhile.

Static Protocols
                     Static protocols were introduced in “Static Protocols” on page 286
                     (Chapter 8). I considered delaying all coverage of protocols until
                     this chapter, but decided that the initial presentation of type hints
                     in functions had to include protocols because duck typing is an
                     essential part of Python, and static type checking without protocols
                     doesn’t handle Pythonic APIs very well.

We will wrap up this chapter by illustrating static protocols with two simple exam‐
ples, and a discussion of numeric ABCs and protocols. Let’s start by showing how a
static protocol makes it possible to annotate and type check the double() function we
first saw in “Types Are Defined by Supported Operations” on page 260.

The Typed double Function
When introducing Python to programmers more used to statically typed languages,
one of my favorite examples is this simple double function:
      >>> def double(x):
      ...     return x * 2
      ...
      >>> double(1.5)
      3.0
      >>> double('A')
      'AA'
      >>> double([10, 20, 30])
      [10, 20, 30, 10, 20, 30]
      >>> from fractions import Fraction
      >>> double(Fraction(2, 5))
      Fraction(4, 5)
Before static protocols were introduced, there was no practical way to add type hints
to double without limiting its possible uses.17

17 OK, double() is not very useful, except as an example. But the Python standard library has many functions
   that could not be properly annotated before static protocols were added in Python 3.8. I helped fix a couple of
   bugs in typeshed by adding type hints using protocols. For example, the pull request that fixed “Should Mypy
   warn about potential invalid arguments to max?” leveraged a _SupportsLessThan protocol, which I used to
   enhance the annotations for max, min, sorted, and list.sort.

Thanks to duck typing, double works even with types from the future, such as the
enhanced Vector class that we’ll see in “Overloading * for Scalar Multiplication” on
page 572 (Chapter 16):
    >>> from vector_v7 import Vector
    >>> double(Vector([11.0, 12.0, 13.0]))
    Vector([22.0, 24.0, 26.0])
The initial implementation of type hints in Python was a nominal type system: the
name of a type in an annotation had to match the name of the type of the actual argu‐
ments—or the name of one of its superclasses. Since it’s impossible to name all types
that implement a protocol by supporting the required operations, duck typing could
not be described by type hints before Python 3.8.
Now, with typing.Protocol we can tell Mypy that double takes an argument x that
supports x * 2. Example 13-13 shows how.

Example 13-13. double_protocol.py: definition of double using a Protocol

from typing import TypeVar, Protocol

T = TypeVar('T')

class Repeatable(Protocol):
    def __mul__(self: T, repeat_count: int) -> T: ...

RT = TypeVar('RT', bound=Repeatable)

def double(x: RT) -> RT:
    return x * 2

    We’ll use this T in the __mul__ signature.

    __mul__ is the essence of the Repeatable protocol. The self parameter is usually
    not annotated—its type is assumed to be the class. Here we use T to make sure
    the result type is the same as the type of self. Also, note that repeat_count is
    limited to int in this protocol.

    The RT type variable is bounded by the Repeatable protocol: the type checker
    will require that the actual type implements Repeatable.

    Now the type checker is able to verify that the x parameter is an object that can
    be multiplied by an integer, and the return value has the same type as x.

This example shows why PEP 544 is titled “Protocols: Structural subtyping (static
duck typing).” The nominal type of the actual argument x given to double is irrele‐
vant as long as it quacks—that is, as long as it implements __mul__.

Runtime Checkable Static Protocols
In the Typing Map (Figure 13-1), typing.Protocol appears in the static checking
area—the bottom half of the diagram. However, when defining a typing.Protocol
subclass, you can use the @runtime_checkable decorator to make that protocol sup‐
port isinstance/issubclass checks at runtime. This works because typing.Proto
col is an ABC, therefore it supports the __subclasshook__ we saw in “Structural
Typing with ABCs” on page 464.
As of Python 3.9, the typing module includes seven ready-to-use protocols that are
runtime checkable. Here are two of them, quoted directly from the typing documen‐
tation:
class typing.SupportsComplex
      An ABC with one abstract method, __complex__.
class typing.SupportsFloat
      An ABC with one abstract method, __float__.
These protocols are designed to check numeric types for “convertibility”: if an object
o implements __complex__, then you should be able to get a complex by invoking
complex(o)—because the __complex__ special method exists to support the
complex() built-in function.
Example 13-14 shows the source code for the typing.SupportsComplex protocol.

Example 13-14. typing.SupportsComplex protocol source code

@runtime_checkable
class SupportsComplex(Protocol):
    """An ABC with one abstract method __complex__."""
    __slots__ = ()

      @abstractmethod
      def __complex__(self) -> complex:
          pass

The key is the __complex__ abstract method.18 During static type checking, an object
will be considered consistent-with the SupportsComplex protocol if it implements a
__complex__ method that takes only self and returns a complex.
Thanks to the @runtime_checkable class decorator applied to SupportsComplex, that
protocol can also be used with isinstance checks in Example 13-15.

Example 13-15. Using SupportsComplex at runtime

>>> from typing import SupportsComplex
>>> import numpy as np
>>> c64 = np.complex64(3+4j)
>>> isinstance(c64, complex)
False
>>> isinstance(c64, SupportsComplex)
True
>>> c = complex(c64)
>>> c
(3+4j)
>>> isinstance(c, SupportsComplex)
False
>>> complex(c)
(3+4j)

      complex64 is one of five complex number types provided by NumPy.

      None of the NumPy complex types subclass the built-in complex.

      But NumPy’s complex types implement __complex__, so they comply with the
      SupportsComplex protocol.

      Therefore, you can create built-in complex objects from them.

      Sadly, the complex built-in type does not implement __complex__, although
      complex(c) works fine if c is a complex.
As a result of that last point, if you want to test whether an object c is a complex or
SupportsComplex, you can provide a tuple of types as the second argument to
isinstance, like this:
     isinstance(c, (complex, SupportsComplex))

18 The __slots__ attribute is irrelevant to the current discussion—it’s an optimization we covered in “Saving
   Memory with __slots__” on page 384.

An alternative would be to use the Complex ABC, defined in the numbers module.
The built-in complex type and the NumPy complex64 and complex128 types are all
registered as virtual subclasses of numbers.Complex, therefore this works:
      >>> import numbers
      >>> isinstance(c, numbers.Complex)
      True
      >>> isinstance(c64, numbers.Complex)
      True

I recommended using the numbers ABCs in the first edition of Fluent Python, but
now that’s no longer good advice, because those ABCs are not recognized by the
static type checkers, as we’ll see in “The numbers ABCs and Numeric Protocols” on
page 478.
In this section I wanted to demonstrate that a runtime checkable protocol works with
isinstance, but it turns out this is example not a particularly good use case of isin
stance, as the sidebar “Duck Typing Is Your Friend” on page 470 explains.

                    If you’re using an external type checker, there is one advantage of
                    explict isinstance checks: when you write an if statement where
                    the condition is isinstance(o, MyType), then Mypy can infer that
                    inside the if block, the type of the o object is consistent-with
                    MyType.

                                     Duck Typing Is Your Friend
  Very often at runtime, duck typing is the best approach for type checking: instead of
  calling isinstance or hasattr, just try the operations you need to do on the object,
  and handle exceptions as needed. Here is a concrete example.
  Continuing the previous discussion—given an object o that I need to use as a com‐
  plex number, this would be one approach:
       if isinstance(o, (complex, SupportsComplex)):
           # do something that requires `o` to be convertible to complex
       else:
           raise TypeError('o must be convertible to complex')

  The goose typing approach would be to use the numbers.Complex ABC:
       if isinstance(o, numbers.Complex):
           # do something with `o`, an instance of `Complex`
       else:
           raise TypeError('o must be an instance of Complex')
  However, I prefer to leverage duck typing and do this using the EAFP principle—it’s
  easier to ask for forgiveness than permission:

      try:
          c = complex(o)
      except TypeError as exc:
          raise TypeError('o must be convertible to complex') from exc

  And, if all you’re going to do is raise a TypeError anyway, then I’d omit the try/
  except/raise statements and just write this:
      c = complex(o)

  In this last case, if o is not an acceptable type, Python will raise an exception with a
  very clear message. For example, this is what I get if o is a tuple:
      TypeError: complex() first argument must be a string or a number, not 'tuple'
  I find the duck typing approach much better in this case.

Now that we’ve seen how to use static protocols at runtime with preexisting types like
complex and numpy.complex64, we need to discuss the limitations of runtime checka‐
ble protocols.

Limitations of Runtime Protocol Checks
We’ve seen that type hints are generally ignored at runtime, and this also affects the
use of isinstance or issubclass checks against static protocols.
For example, any class with a __float__ method is considered—at runtime—a vir‐
tual subclass of SupportsFloat, even if the __float__ method does not return a
float.
Check out this console session:
    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.version
    '3.9.5 (v3.9.5:0a7dcbdb13, May 3 2021, 13:17:02) \n[Clang 6.0 (clang-600.0.57)]'
    >>> c = 3+4j
    >>> c.__float__
    <method-wrapper '__float__' of complex object at 0x10a16c590>
    >>> c.__float__()
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: can't convert complex to float

In Python 3.9, the complex type does have a __float__ method, but it exists only to
raise a TypeError with an explicit error message. If that __float__ method had
annotations, the return type would be NoReturn—which we saw in “NoReturn” on
page 294.

But type hinting complex.__float__ on typeshed would not solve this problem
because Python’s runtime generally ignores type hints—and can’t access the typeshed
stub files anyway.
Continuing from the previous Python 3.9 session:
      >>> from typing import SupportsFloat
      >>> c = 3+4j
      >>> isinstance(c, SupportsFloat)
      True
      >>> issubclass(complex, SupportsFloat)
      True

So we have misleading results: the runtime checks against SupportsFloat suggest
that you can convert a complex to float, but in fact that raises a type error.

                     The specific isssue with the complex type is fixed in Python
                     3.10.0b4 with the removal of the complex.__float__ method.
                     But the overall issue remains: isinstance/issubclass checks only
                     look at the presence or absence of methods, without checking their
                     signatures, much less their type annotations. And this is not about
                     to change, because such type checks at runtime would have an
                     unacceptable performance cost.19

Now let’s see how to implement a static protocol in a user-defined class.

Supporting a Static Protocol
Recall the Vector2d class we built in Chapter 11. Given that a complex number and a
Vector2d instance both consist of a pair of floats, it makes sense to support conver‐
sion from Vector2d to complex.
Example 13-16 shows the implementation of the __complex__ method to enhance
the last version of Vector2d we saw in Example 11-11. For completeness, we can sup‐
port the inverse operation with a fromcomplex class method to build a Vector2d from
a complex.

19 Thanks to Ivan Levkivskyi, coauthor of PEP 544 (on Protocols), for pointing out that type checking is not just
   a matter of checking whether the type of x is T: it’s about determining that the type of x is consistent-with T,
   which may be expensive. It’s no wonder that Mypy takes a few seconds to type check even short Python
   scripts.

Example 13-16. vector2d_v4.py: methods for converting to and from complex

   def __complex__(self):
       return complex(self.x, self.y)

   @classmethod
   def fromcomplex(cls, datum):
       return cls(datum.real, datum.imag)

    This assumes that datum has .real and .imag attributes. We’ll see a better imple‐
    mentation in Example 13-17.
Given the preceding code, and the __abs__ method the Vector2d already had in
Example 11-11, we get these features:
   >>> from typing import SupportsComplex, SupportsAbs
   >>> from vector2d_v4 import Vector2d
   >>> v = Vector2d(3, 4)
   >>> isinstance(v, SupportsComplex)
   True
   >>> isinstance(v, SupportsAbs)
   True
   >>> complex(v)
   (3+4j)
   >>> abs(v)
   5.0
   >>> Vector2d.fromcomplex(3+4j)
   Vector2d(3.0, 4.0)
For runtime type checking, Example 13-16 is fine, but for better static coverage and
error reporting with Mypy, the __abs__, __complex__, and fromcomplex methods
should get type hints, as shown in Example 13-17.

Example 13-17. vector2d_v5.py: adding annotations to the methods under study

   def __abs__(self) -> float:
       return math.hypot(self.x, self.y)

   def __complex__(self) -> complex:
       return complex(self.x, self.y)

   @classmethod
   def fromcomplex(cls, datum: SupportsComplex) -> Vector2d:
       c = complex(datum)
       return cls(c.real, c.imag)

      The float return annotation is needed, otherwise Mypy infers Any, and doesn’t
      check the body of the method.

      Even without the annotation, Mypy was able to infer that this returns a complex.
      The annotation prevents a warning, depending on your Mypy configuration.

      Here SupportsComplex ensures the datum is convertible.

      This explicit conversion is necessary, because the SupportsComplex type does not
      declare .real and .imag attributes, used in the next line. For example, Vector2d
      doesn’t have those attributes, but implements __complex__.
The return type of fromcomplex can be Vector2d if from __future__ import anno
tations appears at the top of the module. That import causes type hints to be stored
as strings, without being evaluated at import time, when function definitions are
evaluated. Without the __future__ import of annotations, Vector2d is an invalid
reference at this point (the class is not fully defined yet) and should be written as a
string: 'Vector2d', as if it were a forward reference. This __future__ import was
introduced in PEP 563—Postponed Evaluation of Annotations, implemented in
Python 3.7. That behavior was scheduled to become default in 3.10, but the change
was delayed to a later version.20 When that happens, the import will be redundant,
but harmless.
Next, let’s see how to create—and later, extend—a new static protocol.

Designing a Static Protocol
While studying goose typing, we saw the Tombola ABC in “Defining and Using an
ABC” on page 451. Here we’ll see how to define a similar interface using a static
protocol.
The Tombola ABC specifies two methods: pick and load. We could define a static
protocol with these two methods as well, but I learned from the Go community that
single-method protocols make static duck typing more useful and flexible. The Go
standard library has several interfaces like Reader, an interface for I/O that requires
just a read method. After a while, if you realize a more complete protocol is required,
you can combine two or more protocols to define a new one.
Using a container that picks items at random may or may not require reloading the
container, but it certainly needs a method to do the actual pick, so that’s the method I

20 Read the Python Steering Council decision on python-dev.

will choose for the minimal RandomPicker protocol. The code for that protocol is in
Example 13-18, and its use is demonstrated by tests in Example 13-19.

Example 13-18. randompick.py: definition of RandomPicker

from typing import Protocol, runtime_checkable, Any

@runtime_checkable
class RandomPicker(Protocol):
    def pick(self) -> Any: ...

               The pick method returns Any. In “Implementing a Generic Static
               Protocol” on page 552, we will see how to make RandomPicker a
               generic type with a parameter to let users of the protocol specify
               the return type of the pick method.

Example 13-19. randompick_test.py: RandomPicker in use

import random
from typing import Any, Iterable, TYPE_CHECKING

from randompick import RandomPicker

class SimplePicker:
    def __init__(self, items: Iterable) -> None:
        self._items = list(items)
        random.shuffle(self._items)

    def pick(self) -> Any:
        return self._items.pop()

def test_isinstance() -> None:
    popper: RandomPicker = SimplePicker([1])
    assert isinstance(popper, RandomPicker)

def test_item_type() -> None:
    items = [1, 2]
    popper = SimplePicker(items)
    item = popper.pick()
    assert item in items
    if TYPE_CHECKING:
        reveal_type(item)
    assert isinstance(item, int)

      It’s not necessary to import the static protocol to define a class that implements
      it. Here I imported RandomPicker only to use it on test_isinstance later.

      SimplePicker implements RandomPicker—but it does not subclass it. This is
      static duck typing in action.

      Any is the default return type, so this annotation is not strictly necessary, but it
      does make it more clear that we are implementing the RandomPicker protocol as
      defined in Example 13-18.

      Don’t forget to add -> None hints to your tests if you want Mypy to look at them.

      I added a type hint for the popper variable to show that Mypy understands that
      SimplePicker is consistent-with.

      This test proves that an instance of SimplePicker is also an instance of Random
      Picker. This works because of the @runtime_checkable decorator applied to
      RandomPicker, and because SimplePicker has a pick method as required.

      This test invokes the pick method from a SimplePicker, verifies that it returns
      one of the items given to SimplePicker, and then does static and runtime checks
      on the returned item.

      This line generates a note in the Mypy output.
As we saw in Example 8-22, reveal_type is a “magic” function recognized by Mypy.
That’s why it is not imported and we can only call it inside if blocks protected by
typing.TYPE_CHECKING, which is only True in the eyes of a static type checker, but is
False at runtime.
Both tests in Example 13-19 pass. Mypy does not see any errors in that code either,
and shows the result of the reveal_type on the item returned by pick:
      $ mypy randompick_test.py
      randompick_test.py:24: note: Revealed type is 'Any'
Having created our first protocol, let’s study some advice on the matter.

Best Practices for Protocol Design
After 10 years of experience with static duck typing in Go, it is clear that narrow pro‐
tocols are more useful—often such protocols have a single method, rarely more than
a couple of methods. Martin Fowler wrote a post defining role interface, a useful idea
to keep in mind when designing protocols.

Also, sometimes you see a protocol defined near the function that uses it—that is,
defined in “client code” instead of being defined in a library. This is makes it easy to
create new types to call that function, which is good for extensibility and testing with
mocks.
The practices of narrow protocols and client-code protocols both avoid unnecessary
tight coupling, in line with the Interface Segregation Principle, which we can summa‐
rize as “Clients should not be forced to depend upon interfaces that they do not use.”
The page “Contributing to typeshed” recommends this naming convention for static
protocols (the following three points are quoted verbatim):

   • Use plain names for protocols that represent a clear concept (e.g., Iterator,
     Container).
   • Use SupportsX for protocols that provide callable methods (e.g., SupportsInt,
     SupportsRead, SupportsReadSeek).21
   • Use HasX for protocols that have readable and/or writable attributes or getter/
     setter methods (e.g., HasItems, HasFileno).

The Go standard library has a naming convention that I like: for single method pro‐
tocols, if the method name is a verb, append “-er” or “-or” to make it a noun. For
example, instead of SupportsRead, have Reader. More examples include Formatter,
Animator, and Scanner. For inspiration, see “Go (Golang) Standard Library Inter‐
faces (Selected)” by Asuka Kenji.
One good reason to create minimalistic protocols is the ability to extend them later, if
needed. We’ll now see that it’s not hard to create a derived protocol with an addi‐
tional method.

Extending a Protocol
As I mentioned at the start of the previous section, Go developers advocate to err on
the side of minimalism when defining interfaces—their name for static protocols.
Many of the most widely used Go interfaces have a single method.
When practice reveals that a protocol with more methods is useful, instead of adding
methods to the original protocol, it’s better to derive a new protocol from it. Extend‐
ing a static protocol in Python has a few caveats, as Example 13-20 shows.

21 Every method is callable, so this guideline doesn’t say much. Perhaps “provide one or two methods”? Any‐
   way, it’s a guideline, not a strict rule.

Example 13-20. randompickload.py: extending RandomPicker

from typing import Protocol, runtime_checkable
from randompick import RandomPicker

@runtime_checkable
class LoadableRandomPicker(RandomPicker, Protocol):
    def load(self, Iterable) -> None: ...

      If you want the derived protocol to be runtime checkable, you must apply the
      decorator again—its behavior is not inherited.22

      Every protocol must explicitly name typing.Protocol as one of its base classes
      in addition to the protocol we are extending. This is different from the way
      inheritance works in Python.23

      Back to “regular” object-oriented programming: we only need to declare the
      method that is new in this derived protocol. The pick method declaration is
      inherited from RandomPicker.
This concludes the final example of defining and using a static protocol in this
chapter.
To wrap the chapter, we’ll go over numeric ABCs and their possible replacement with
numeric protocols.

The numbers ABCs and Numeric Protocols
As we saw in “The fall of the numeric tower” on page 279, the ABCs in the numbers
package of the standard library work fine for runtime type checking.
If you need to check for an integer, you can use isinstance(x, numbers.Integral)
to accept int, bool (which subclasses int) or other integer types that are provided by
external libraries that register their types as virtual subclasses of the numbers ABCs.
For example, NumPy has 21 integer types—as well as several variations of floating-
point types registered as numbers.Real, and complex numbers with various bit
widths registered as numbers.Complex.

22 For details and rationale, please see the section about @runtime_checkable in PEP 544—Protocols: Structural
   subtyping (static duck typing).

23 Again, please read “Merging and extending protocols” in PEP 544 for details and rationale.

                  Somewhat surprisingly, decimal.Decimal is not registered as a vir‐
                  tual subclass of numbers.Real. The reason is that, if you need the
                  precision of Decimal in your program, then you want to be pro‐
                  tected from accidental mixing of decimals with floating-point
                  numbers that are less precise.

Sadly, the numeric tower was not designed for static type checking. The root ABC—
numbers.Number—has no methods, so if you declare x: Number, Mypy will not let
you do arithmetic or call any methods on x.
If the numbers ABCs are not supported, what are the options?
A good place to look for typing solutions is the typeshed project. As part of the
Python standard library, the statistics module has a corresponding statistics.pyi
stub file with type hints for on typeshed. There you’ll find the following definitions,
which are used to annotate several functions:
     _Number = Union[float, Decimal, Fraction]
     _NumberT = TypeVar('_NumberT', float, Decimal, Fraction)
That approach is correct, but limited. It does not support numeric types outside of
the standard library, which the numbers ABCs do support at runtime—when the
numeric types are registered as virtual subclasses.
The current trend is to recommend the numeric protocols provided by the typing
module, which we discussed in “Runtime Checkable Static Protocols” on page 468.
Unfortunately, at runtime, the numeric protocols may let you down. As mentioned in
“Limitations of Runtime Protocol Checks” on page 471, the complex type in Python
3.9 implements __float__, but the method exists only to raise TypeError with an
explicit message: “can’t convert complex to float.” It implements __int__ as well, for
the same reason. The presence of those methods makes isinstance return mislead‐
ing results in Python 3.9. In Python 3.10, the methods of complex that uncondition‐
ally raised TypeError were removed.24
On the other hand, NumPy’s complex types implement __float__ and __int__
methods that work, only issuing a warning when each of them is used for the first
time:
     >>> import numpy as np
     >>> cd = np.cdouble(3+4j)
     >>> cd
     (3+4j)
     >>> float(cd)

24 See Issue #41974—Remove complex.__float__, complex.__floordiv__, etc.

      <stdin>:1: ComplexWarning: Casting complex values to real
      discards the imaginary part
      3.0

The opposite problem also happens: built-ins complex, float, and int, and also
numpy.float16 and numpy.uint8, don’t have a __complex__ method, so isin
stance(x, SupportsComplex) returns False for them.25 The NumPy complex types,
such as np.complex64, do implement __complex__ to convert to a built-in complex.
However, in practice, the complex() built-in constructor handles instances of all
these types with no errors or warnings:
      >>> import numpy as np
      >>> from typing import SupportsComplex
      >>> sample = [1+0j, np.complex64(1+0j), 1.0, np.float16(1.0), 1, np.uint8(1)]
      >>> [isinstance(x, SupportsComplex) for x in sample]
      [False, True, False, False, False, False]
      >>> [complex(x) for x in sample]
      [(1+0j), (1+0j), (1+0j), (1+0j), (1+0j), (1+0j)]

This shows that isinstance checks against SupportsComplex suggest that those con‐
versions to complex would fail, but they all succeed. In the typing-sig mailing list,
Guido van Rossum pointed out that the built-in complex accepts a single argument,
and that’s why those conversions work.
On the other hand, Mypy accepts arguments of all those six types in a call to a
to_complex() function defined like this:
      def to_complex(n: SupportsComplex) -> complex:
          return complex(n)

As I write this, NumPy has no type hints, so its number types are all Any.26 On the
other hand, Mypy is somehow “aware” that the built-in int and float can be con‐
verted to complex, even though on typeshed only the built-in complex class has a
__complex__ method.27
In conclusion, although numeric types should not be hard to type check, the current
situation is this: the type hints PEP 484 eschews the numeric tower and implicitly
recommends that type checkers hardcode the subtype relationships among built-in
complex, float, and int. Mypy does that, and it also pragmatically accepts that int
and float are consistent-with SupportsComplex, even though they don’t implement
__complex__.

25 I did not test all the other float and integer variants NumPy offers.

26 The NumPy number types are all registered against the appropriate numbers ABCs, which Mypy ignores.

27 That’s a well-meaning lie on the part of typeshed: as of Python 3.9, the built-in complex type does not actually
   have a __complex__ method.

                I only found unexpected results when using isinstance checks
                with numeric Supports* protocols while experimenting with con‐
                versions to or from complex. If you don’t use complex numbers,
                you can rely on those protocols instead of the numbers ABCs.

The main takeaways for this section are:

  • The numbers ABCs are fine for runtime type checking, but unsuitable for static
    typing.
  • The numeric static protocols SupportsComplex, SupportsFloat, etc. work well
    for static typing, but are unreliable for runtime type checking when complex
    numbers are involved.

We are now ready for a quick review of what we saw in this chapter.

Chapter Summary
The Typing Map (Figure 13-1) is the key to making sense of this chapter. After a brief
introduction to the four approaches to typing, we contrasted dynamic and static pro‐
tocols, which respectively support duck typing and static duck typing. Both kinds of
protocols share the essential characteristic that a class is never required to explicitly
declare support for any specific protocol. A class supports a protocol simply by
implementing the necessary methods.
The next major section was “Programming Ducks” on page 435, where we explored
the lengths to which the Python interpreter goes to make the sequence and iterable
dynamic protocols work, including partial implementations of both. We then saw
how a class can be made to implement a protocol at runtime through the addition of
extra methods via monkey patching. The duck typing section ended with hints for
defensive programming, including detection of structural types without explicit isin
stance or hasattr checks using try/except and failing fast.
After Alex Martelli introduced goose typing in “Waterfowl and ABCs” on page 443,
we saw how to subclass existing ABCs, surveyed important ABCs in the standard
library, and created an ABC from scratch, which we then implemented by traditional
subclassing and by registration. To close this section, we saw how the __subclass
hook__ special method enables ABCs to support structural typing by recognizing
unrelated classes that provide methods fulfilling the interface defined in the ABC.
The last major section was “Static Protocols” on page 466, where we resumed cover‐
age of static duck typing, which started in Chapter 8, in “Static Protocols” on page
286. We saw how the @runtime_checkable decorator also leverages __subclass
hook__ to support structural typing at runtime—even though the best use of static

protocols is with static type checkers, which can take into account type hints to make
structural typing more reliable. Next we talked about the design and coding of a static
protocol and how to extend it. The chapter ended with “The numbers ABCs and
Numeric Protocols” on page 478, which tells the sad story of the derelict state of the
numeric tower and a few existing shortcomings of the proposed alternative: the
numeric static protocols such as SupportsFloat and others added to the typing
module in Python 3.8.
The main message of this chapter is that we have four complementary ways of pro‐
gramming with interfaces in modern Python, each with different advantages and
drawbacks. You are likely to find suitable use cases for each typing scheme in any
modern Python codebase of significant size. Rejecting any one of these approaches
will make your work as a Python programmer harder than it needs to be.
Having said that, Python achieved widespread popularity while supporting only duck
typing. Other popular languages such as JavaScript, PHP, and Ruby, as well as Lisp,
Smalltalk, Erlang, and Clojure—not popular but very influential—are all languages
that had and still have tremendous impact by leveraging the power and simplicity of
duck typing.

Further Reading
For a quick look at typing pros and cons, as well as the importance of typing.Proto
col for the health of statically checked codebases, I highly recommend Glyph Lefko‐
witz’s post “I Want A New Duck: typing.Protocol and the future of duck typing”. I
also learned a lot from his post “Interfaces and Protocols”, comparing typing.Proto
col and zope.interface—an earlier mechanism for defining interfaces in loosely
coupled plug-in systems, used by the Plone CMS, the Pyramid web framework, and
the Twisted asynchronous programming framework, a project founded by Glyph.28
Great books about Python have—almost by definition—great coverage of duck typ‐
ing. Two of my favorite Python books had updates released after the first edition of
Fluent Python: The Quick Python Book, 3rd ed., (Manning), by Naomi Ceder; and
Python in a Nutshell, 3rd ed., by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and Steve Holden
(O’Reilly).
For a discussion of the pros and cons of dynamic typing, see Guido van Rossum’s
interview with Bill Venners in “Contracts in Python: A Conversation with Guido van
Rossum, Part IV”. An insightful and balanced take on this debate is Martin Fowler’s
post “Dynamic Typing”. He also wrote “Role Interface”, which I mentioned in “Best
Practices for Protocol Design” on page 476. Although it is not about duck typing, that

28 Thanks to tech reviewer Jürgen Gmach for recommending the “Interfaces and Protocols” post.

post is highly relevant for Python protocol design, as he contrasts narrow role inter‐
faces with the broader public interfaces of classes in general.
The Mypy documentation is often the best source of information for anything related
to static typing in Python, including static duck typing, addressed in their “Protocols
and structural subtyping” chapter.
The remaining references are all about goose typing. Beazley and Jones’s Python
Cookbook, 3rd ed. (O’Reilly) has a section about defining an ABC (Recipe 8.12). The
book was written before Python 3.4, so they don’t use the now preferred syntax of
declaring ABCs by subclassing from abc.ABC (instead, they use the metaclass key‐
word, which we’ll only really need in Chapter 24). Apart from this small detail, the
recipe covers the major ABC features very well.
The Python Standard Library by Example by Doug Hellmann (Addison-Wesley), has
a chapter about the abc module. It’s also available on the web in Doug’s excellent
PyMOTW—Python Module of the Week. Hellmann also uses the old style of ABC
declaration: PluginBase(metaclass=abc.ABCMeta) instead of the simpler Plugin
Base(abc.ABC) available since Python 3.4.
When using ABCs, multiple inheritance is not only common but practically inevita‐
ble, because each of the fundamental collection ABCs—Sequence, Mapping, and Set
—extends Collection, which in turn extends multiple ABCs (see Figure 13-4).
Therefore, Chapter 14 is an important follow-up to this one.
PEP 3119—Introducing Abstract Base Classes gives the rationale for ABCs. PEP 3141
—A Type Hierarchy for Numbers presents the ABCs of the numbers module, but the
discussion in the Mypy issue #3186 “int is not a Number?” includes some arguments
about why the numeric tower is unsuitable for static type checking. Alex Waygood
wrote a comprehensive answer on StackOverflow, discussing ways to annotate
numeric types. I’ll keep watching Mypy issue #3186 for the next chapters of this saga,
hoping for a happy ending that will make static typing and goose typing compatible
—as they should be.

                                                        Soapbox
  The MVP Journey of Python Static Typing
  I work for Thoughtworks, a worldwide leader in Agile software development. At
  Thoughtworks, we often recommend that our clients should aim to create and deploy
  MVPs: minimal viable products: “a simple version of a product that is given to users
  in order to validate the key business assumptions,” as defined by my colleague Paulo
  Caroli in “Lean Inception”, a post in Martin Fowler’s collective blog.
  Guido van Rossum and the other core developers who designed and implemented
  static typing have followed an MVP strategy since 2006. First, PEP 3107—Function
  Annotations was implemented in Python 3.0 with very limited semantics: just syntax
  to attach annotations to function parameters and returns. This was done explicitly to
  allow for experimentation and collect feedback—key benefits of an MVP.
  Eight years later, PEP 484—Type Hints was proposed and approved. Its implementa‐
  tion in Python 3.5 required no changes in the language or standard library—except
  for adding the typing module, on which no other part of the standard library depen‐
  ded. PEP 484 supported only nominal types with generics—similar to Java—but with
  the actual static checking done by external tools. Important features were missing,
  like variable annotations, generic built-in types, and protocols. Despite those limita‐
  tions, this typing MVP was valuable enough to attract investment and adoption by
  companies with very large Python codebases, like Dropbox, Google, and Facebook; as
  well as support from professional IDEs, like PyCharm, Wing, and VS Code.
  PEP 526—Syntax for Variable Annotations was the first evolutionary step that
  required changes to the interpreter in Python 3.6. More changes to the Python 3.7
  interpreter were made to support PEP 563—Postponed Evaluation of Annotations
  and PEP 560—Core support for typing module and generic types, which allowed
  built-in and standard library collections to accept generic type hints out of the box in
  Python 3.9, thanks to PEP 585—Type Hinting Generics In Standard Collections.
  During those years, some Python users—including me—were underwhelmed by the
  typing support. After I learned Go, the lack of static duck typing in Python was
  incomprehensible, in a language where duck typing had always been a core strength.
  But that is the nature of MVPs: they may not satisfy all potential users, but they can
  be implemented with less effort, and guide further development with feedback from
  actual usage in the field.
  If there is one thing we all learned from Python 3, it’s that incremental progress is
  safer than big-bang releases. I am glad we did not have to wait for Python 4—if it ever
  comes—to make Python more attractive to large enterprises, where the benefits of
  static typing outweigh the added complexity.

Typing Approaches in Popular Languages
Figure 13-8 is a variation of the Typing Map (Figure 13-1) with the names of a few
popular languages that support each of the typing approaches.

Figure 13-8. Four approaches to type checking and some languages that support them.

TypeScript and Python ≥ 3.8 are the only languages in my small and arbitrary sample
that support all four approaches.
Go is clearly a statically typed language in the Pascal tradition, but it pioneered static
duck typing—at least among languages that are widely used today. I also put Go in
the goose typing quadrant because of its type assertions, which allow checking and
adapting to different types at runtime.
If I had to draw a similar diagram in the year 2000, only the duck typing and the static
typing quadrants would have languages in them. I am not aware of languages that
supported static duck typing or goose typing 20 years ago. The fact that each of the
four quadrants has at least three popular languages suggests that a lot of people see
value in each of the four approaches to typing.

  Monkey Patching
  Monkey patching has a bad reputation. If abused, it can lead to systems that are hard
  to understand and maintain. The patch is usually tightly coupled with its target, mak‐
  ing it brittle. Another problem is that two libraries that apply monkey patches may
  step on each other’s toes, with the second library to run destroying patches of the
  first.
  But monkey patching can also be useful, for example, to make a class implement a
  protocol at runtime. The Adapter design pattern solves the same problem by imple‐
  menting a whole new class.
  It’s easy to monkey patch Python code, but there are limitations. Unlike Ruby and
  JavaScript, Python does not let you monkey patch the built-in types. I actually con‐
  sider this an advantage, because you can be certain that a str object will always have
  those same methods. This limitation reduces the chance that external libraries apply
  conflicting patches.

  Metaphors and Idioms in Interfaces
  A metaphor fosters understanding by making constraints and affordances clear.
  That’s the value of the words “stack” and “queue” in describing those fundamental
  data structures: they make clear which operations are allowed, i.e., how items can be
  added or removed. On the other hand, Alan Cooper et al. write in About Face, the
  Essentials of Interaction Design, 4th ed. (Wiley):
          Strict adherence to metaphors ties interfaces unnecessarily tightly to the workings of
          the physical world.

  He’s referring to user interfaces, but the admonition applies to APIs as well. But
  Cooper does grant that when a “truly appropriate” metaphor “falls on our lap,” we
  can use it (he writes “falls on our lap” because it’s so hard to find fitting metaphors
  that you should not spend time actively looking for them). I believe the bingo
  machine imagery I used in this chapter is appropriate and I stand by it.
  About Face is by far the best book about UI design I’ve read—and I’ve read a few.
  Letting go of metaphors as a design paradigm, and replacing it with “idiomatic inter‐
  faces” was the most valuable thing I learned from Cooper’s work.
  In About Face, Cooper does not deal with APIs, but the more I think about his ideas,
  the more I see how they apply to Python. The fundamental protocols of the language
  are what Cooper calls “idioms.” Once we learn what a “sequence” is, we can apply
  that knowledge in different contexts. This is a main theme of Fluent Python: high‐
  lighting the fundamental idioms of the language, so your code is concise, effective,
  and readable—for a fluent Pythonista.

