                                                                                           CHAPTER 19
                                  Concurrency Models in Python

     Concurrency is about dealing with lots of things at once.
     Parallelism is about doing lots of things at once.
     Not the same, but related.
     One is about structure, one is about execution.
     Concurrency provides a way to structure a solution to solve a problem that may (but
     not necessarily) be parallelizable.
         —Rob Pike, co-inventor of the Go language1

This chapter is about how to make Python deal with “lots of things at once.” This
may involve concurrent or parallel programming—even academics who are keen on
jargon disagree on how to use those terms. I will adopt Rob Pike’s informal defini‐
tions in this chapter’s epigraph, but note that I’ve found papers and books that claim
to be about parallel computing but are mostly about concurrency.2
Parallelism is a special case of concurrency, in Pike’s view. All parallel systems are
concurrent, but not all concurrent systems are parallel. In the early 2000s we used
single-core machines that handled 100 processes concurrently on GNU Linux. A
modern laptop with 4 CPU cores is routinely running more than 200 processes at any
given time under normal, casual use. To execute 200 tasks in parallel, you’d need
200 cores. So, in practice, most computing is concurrent and not parallel. The OS

1 Slide 8 of the talk “Concurrency Is Not Parallelism”.

2 I studied and worked with Prof. Imre Simon, who liked to say there are two major sins in science: using dif‐
  ferent words to mean the same thing and using one word to mean different things. Imre Simon (1943–2009)
  was a pioneer of computer science in Brazil who made seminal contributions to Automata Theory and started
  the field of Tropical Mathematics. He was also an advocate of free software and free culture.

manages hundreds of processes, making sure each has an opportunity to make pro‐
gress, even if the CPU itself can’t do more than four things at once.
This chapter assumes no prior knowledge of concurrent or parallel programming.
After a brief conceptual introduction, we will study simple examples to introduce and
compare Python’s core packages for concurrent programming: threading, multi
processing, and asyncio.
The last 30% of the chapter is a high-level overview of third-party tools, libraries,
application servers, and distributed task queues—all of which can enhance the per‐
formance and scalability of Python applications. These are all important topics, but
beyond the scope of a book focused on core Python language features. Nevertheless, I
felt it was important to address these themes in this second edition of Fluent Python,
because Python’s fitness for concurrent and parallel computing is not limited to what
the standard library provides. That’s why YouTube, DropBox, Instagram, Reddit, and
others were able to achieve web scale when they started, using Python as their pri‐
mary language—despite persistent claims that “Python doesn’t scale.”

What’s New in This Chapter
This chapter is new in the second edition of Fluent Python. The spinner examples in
“A Concurrent Hello World” on page 701 previously were in the chapter about asyncio.
Here they are improved, and provide the first illustration of Python’s three
approaches to concurrency: threads, processes, and native coroutines.
The remaining content is new, except for a few paragraphs that originally appeared in
the chapters on concurrent.futures and asyncio.
“Python in the Multicore World” on page 725 is different from the rest of the book:
there are no code examples. The goal is to mention important tools that you may
want to study to achieve high-performance concurrency and parallelism beyond
what’s possible with Python’s standard library.

The Big Picture
There are many factors that make concurrent programming hard, but I want to touch
on the most basic factor: starting threads or processes is easy enough, but how do you
keep track of them?3
When you call a function, the calling code is blocked until the function returns. So
you know when the function is done, and you can easily get the value it returned. If

3 This section was suggested by my friend Bruce Eckel—author of books about Kotlin, Scala, Java, and C++.

the function raises an exception, the calling code can surround the call site with try/
except to catch the error.
Those familiar options are not available when you start a thread or process: you don’t
automatically know when it’s done, and getting back results or errors requires setting
up some communication channel, such as a message queue.
Additionally, starting a thread or a process is not cheap, so you don’t want to start
one of them just to perform a single computation and quit. Often you want to amor‐
tize the startup cost by making each thread or process into a “worker” that enters a
loop and stands by for inputs to work on. This further complicates communications
and introduces more questions. How do you make a worker quit when you don’t
need it anymore? And how do you make it quit without interrupting a job partway,
leaving half-baked data and unreleased resources—like open files? Again the usual
answers involve messages and queues.
A coroutine is cheap to start. If you start a coroutine using the await keyword, it’s
easy to get a value returned by it, it can be safely cancelled, and you have a clear site
to catch exceptions. But coroutines are often started by the asynchronous framework,
and that can make them as hard to monitor as threads or processes.
Finally, Python coroutines and threads are not suitable for CPU-intensive tasks, as
we’ll see.
That’s why concurrent programming requires learning new concepts and coding pat‐
terns. Let’s first make sure we are on the same page regarding some core concepts.

A Bit of Jargon
Here are some terms I will use for the rest of this chapter and the next two:
Concurrency
   The ability to handle multiple pending tasks, making progress one at a time or in
   parallel (if possible) so that each of them eventually succeeds or fails. A single-
   core CPU is capable of concurrency if it runs an OS scheduler that interleaves the
   execution of the pending tasks. Also known as multitasking.
Parallelism
    The ability to execute multiple computations at the same time. This requires a
    multicore CPU, multiple CPUs, a GPU, or multiple computers in a cluster.
Execution unit
    General term for objects that execute code concurrently, each with independent
    state and call stack. Python natively supports three kinds of execution units: pro‐
    cesses, threads, and coroutines.

Process
    An instance of a computer program while it is running, using memory and a slice
    of the CPU time. Modern desktop operating systems routinely manage hundreds
    of processes concurrently, with each process isolated in its own private memory
    space. Processes communicate via pipes, sockets, or memory mapped files—all of
    which can only carry raw bytes. Python objects must be serialized (converted)
    into raw bytes to pass from one process to another. This is costly, and not all
    Python objects are serializable. A process can spawn subprocesses, each called a
    child process. These are also isolated from each other and from the parent. Pro‐
    cesses allow preemptive multitasking: the OS scheduler preempts—i.e., suspends
    —each running process periodically to allow other processes to run. This means
    that a frozen process can’t freeze the whole system—in theory.
Thread
    An execution unit within a single process. When a process starts, it uses a single
    thread: the main thread. A process can create more threads to operate concur‐
    rently by calling operating system APIs. Threads within a process share the same
    memory space, which holds live Python objects. This allows easy data sharing
    between threads, but can also lead to corrupted data when more than one thread
    updates the same object concurrently. Like processes, threads also enable pre‐
    emptive multitasking under the supervision of the OS scheduler. A thread con‐
    sumes less resources than a process doing the same job.
Coroutine
    A function that can suspend itself and resume later. In Python, classic coroutines
    are built from generator functions, and native coroutines are defined with async
    def. “Classic Coroutines” on page 641 introduced the concept, and Chapter 21
    covers the use of native coroutines. Python coroutines usually run within a single
    thread under the supervision of an event loop, also in the same thread. Asynchro‐
    nous programming frameworks such as asyncio, Curio, or Trio provide an event
    loop and supporting libraries for nonblocking, coroutine-based I/O. Coroutines
    support cooperative multitasking: each coroutine must explicitly cede control
    with the yield or await keyword, so that another may proceed concurrently (but
    not in parallel). This means that any blocking code in a coroutine blocks the exe‐
    cution of the event loop and all other coroutines—in contrast with the preemp‐
    tive multitasking supported by processes and threads. On the other hand, each
    coroutine consumes less resources than a thread or process doing the same job.
Queue
   A data structure that lets us put and get items, usually in FIFO order: first in, first
   out. Queues allow separate execution units to exchange application data and con‐
   trol messages, such as error codes and signals to terminate. The implementation
   of a queue varies according to the underlying concurrency model: the queue

    package in Python’s standard library provides queue classes to support threads,
    while the multiprocessing and asyncio packages implement their own queue
    classes. The queue and asyncio packages also include queues that are not FIFO:
    LifoQueue and PriorityQueue.
Lock
    An object that execution units can use to synchronize their actions and avoid
    corrupting data. While updating a shared data structure, the running code
    should hold an associated lock. This signals other parts of the program to wait
    until the lock is released before accessing the same data structure. The simplest
    type of lock is also known as a mutex (for mutual exclusion). The implementa‐
    tion of a lock depends on the underlying concurrency model.
Contention
   Dispute over a limited asset. Resource contention happens when multiple execu‐
   tion units try to access a shared resource—such as a lock or storage. There’s also
   CPU contention, when compute-intensive processes or threads must wait for the
   OS scheduler to give them a share of the CPU time.
Now let’s use some of that jargon to understand concurrency support in Python.

Processes, Threads, and Python’s Infamous GIL
Here is how the concepts we just saw apply to Python programming, in 10 points:

 1. Each instance of the Python interpreter is a process. You can start additional
    Python processes using the multiprocessing or concurrent.futures libraries.
    Python’s subprocess library is designed to launch processes to run external pro‐
    grams, regardless of the languages used to write them.
 2. The Python interpreter uses a single thread to run the user’s program and the
    memory garbage collector. You can start additional Python threads using the
    threading or concurrent.futures libraries.
 3. Access to object reference counts and other internal interpreter state is con‐
    trolled by a lock, the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL). Only one Python thread can
    hold the GIL at any time. This means that only one thread can execute Python
    code at any time, regardless of the number of CPU cores.
 4. To prevent a Python thread from holding the GIL indefinitely, Python’s bytecode
    interpreter pauses the current Python thread every 5ms by default,4 releasing the
    GIL. The thread can then try to reacquire the GIL, but if there are other threads
    waiting for it, the OS scheduler may pick one of them to proceed.

4 Call sys.getswitchinterval() to get the interval; change it with sys.setswitchinterval(s).

 5. When we write Python code, we have no control over the GIL. But a built-in
    function or an extension written in C—or any language that interfaces at the
    Python/C API level—can release the GIL while running time-consuming tasks.
 6. Every Python standard library function that makes a syscall5 releases the GIL.
    This includes all functions that perform disk I/O, network I/O, and
    time.sleep(). Many CPU-intensive functions in the NumPy/SciPy libraries, as
    well as the compressing/decompressing functions from the zlib and bz2 mod‐
    ules, also release the GIL.6
 7. Extensions that integrate at the Python/C API level can also launch other non-
    Python threads that are not affected by the GIL. Such GIL-free threads generally
    cannot change Python objects, but they can read from and write to the memory
    underlying objects that support the buffer protocol, such as bytearray,
    array.array, and NumPy arrays.
 8. The effect of the GIL on network programming with Python threads is relatively
    small, because the I/O functions release the GIL, and reading or writing to the
    network always implies high latency—compared to reading and writing to mem‐
    ory. Consequently, each individual thread spends a lot of time waiting anyway,
    so their execution can be interleaved without major impact on the overall
    throughput. That’s why David Beazley says: “Python threads are great at doing
    nothing.”7
 9. Contention over the GIL slows down compute-intensive Python threads.
    Sequential, single-threaded code is simpler and faster for such tasks.
10. To run CPU-intensive Python code on multiple cores, you must use multiple
    Python processes.

Here is a good summary from the threading module documentation:8
      CPython implementation detail: In CPython, due to the Global Interpreter Lock,
      only one thread can execute Python code at once (even though certain performance-
      oriented libraries might overcome this limitation). If you want your application to
      make better use of the computational resources of multicore machines, you are advised
      to use multiprocessing or concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor. However,

5 A syscall is a call from user code to a function of the operating system kernel. I/O, timers, and locks are some
  of the kernel services available through syscalls. To learn more, read the Wikipedia “System call” article.

6 The zlib and bz2 modules are specifically mentioned in a python-dev message by Antoine Pitrou, who con‐
  tributed the time-slicing GIL logic to Python 3.2.

7 Source: slide 106 of Beazley’s “Generators: The Final Frontier” tutorial.

8 Source: last paragraph of the “Thread objects” section.

     threading is still an appropriate model if you want to run multiple I/O-bound tasks
     simultaneously.

The previous paragraph starts with “CPython implementation detail” because the
GIL is not part of the Python language definition. The Jython and IronPython imple‐
mentations don’t have a GIL. Unfortunately, both are lagging behind—still tracking
Python 2.7. The highly performant PyPy interpreter also has a GIL in its 2.7 and 3.7
versions—the latest as of June 2021.

                    This section did not mention coroutines, because by default they
                    share the same Python thread among themselves and with the
                    supervising event loop provided by an asynchronous framework,
                    therefore the GIL does not affect them. It is possible to use multiple
                    threads in an asynchronous program, but the best practice is that
                    one thread runs the event loop and all coroutines, while additional
                    threads carry out specific tasks. This will be explained in “Delegat‐
                    ing Tasks to Executors” on page 797.

Enough concepts for now. Let’s see some code.

A Concurrent Hello World
During a discussion about threads and how to avoid the GIL, Python contributor
Michele Simionato posted an example that is like a concurrent “Hello World”: the
simplest program to show how Python can “walk and chew gum.”
Simionato’s program uses multiprocessing, but I adapted it to introduce threading
and asyncio as well. Let’s start with the threading version, which may look familiar
if you’ve studied threads in Java or C.

Spinner with Threads
The idea of the next few examples is simple: start a function that blocks for 3 seconds
while animating characters in the terminal to let the user know that the program is
“thinking” and not stalled.
The script makes an animated spinner displaying each character in the string "\|/-"
in the same screen position.9 When the slow computation finishes, the line with the
spinner is cleared and the result is shown: Answer: 42.

9 Unicode has lots of characters useful for simple animations, like the Braille patterns for example. I used the
  ASCII characters "\|/-" to keep the examples simple.

Figure 19-1 shows the output of two versions of the spinning example: first with
threads, then with coroutines. If you’re away from the computer, imagine the \ in the
last line is spinning.

Figure 19-1. The scripts spinner_thread.py and spinner_async.py produce similar out‐
put: the repr of a spinner object and the text “Answer: 42”. In the screenshot, spin‐
ner_async.py is still running, and the animated message “/ thinking!” is shown; that
line will be replaced by “Answer: 42” after 3 seconds.

Let’s review the spinner_thread.py script first. Example 19-1 lists the first two func‐
tions in the script, and Example 19-2 shows the rest.

Example 19-1. spinner_thread.py: the spin and slow functions

import itertools
import time
from threading import Thread, Event

def spin(msg: str, done: Event) -> None:
    for char in itertools.cycle(r'\|/-'):
        status = f'\r{char} {msg}'
        print(status, end='', flush=True)
        if done.wait(.1):
            break
    blanks = ' ' * len(status)
    print(f'\r{blanks}\r', end='')

def slow() -> int:
    time.sleep(3)
    return 42

      This function will run in a separate thread. The done argument is an instance of
      threading.Event, a simple object to synchronize threads.

      This is an infinite loop because itertools.cycle yields one character at a time,
      cycling through the string forever.

      The trick for text-mode animation: move the cursor back to the start of the line
      with the carriage return ASCII control character ('\r').

    The Event.wait(timeout=None) method returns True when the event is set by
    another thread; if the timeout elapses, it returns False. The .1s timeout sets the
    “frame rate” of the animation to 10 FPS. If you want the spinner to go faster, use
    a smaller timeout.

    Exit the infinite loop.

    Clear the status line by overwriting with spaces and moving the cursor back to
    the beginning.

    slow() will be called by the main thread. Imagine this is a slow API call over the
    network. Calling sleep blocks the main thread, but the GIL is released so the
    spinner thread can proceed.

                The first important insight of this example is that time.sleep()
                blocks the calling thread but releases the GIL, allowing other
                Python threads to run.

The spin and slow functions will execute concurrently. The main thread—the only
thread when the program starts—will start a new thread to run spin and then call
slow. By design, there is no API for terminating a thread in Python. You must send it
a message to shut down.
The threading.Event class is Python’s simplest signalling mechanism to coordinate
threads. An Event instance has an internal boolean flag that starts as False. Calling
Event.set() sets the flag to True. While the flag is false, if a thread calls
Event.wait(), it is blocked until another thread calls Event.set(), at which time
Event.wait() returns True. If a timeout in seconds is given to Event.wait(s), this
call returns False when the timeout elapses, or returns True as soon as Event.set()
is called by another thread.
The supervisor function, listed in Example 19-2, uses an Event to signal the spin
function to exit.

Example 19-2. spinner_thread.py: the supervisor and main functions

def supervisor() -> int:
    done = Event()
    spinner = Thread(target=spin, args=('thinking!', done))
    print(f'spinner object: {spinner}')
    spinner.start()
    result = slow()
    done.set()

      spinner.join()
      return result

def main() -> None:
    result = supervisor()
    print(f'Answer: {result}')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()

      supervisor will return the result of slow.

      The threading.Event instance is the key to coordinate the activities of the main
      thread and the spinner thread, as explained further down.

      To create a new Thread, provide a function as the target keyword argument,
      and positional arguments to the target as a tuple passed via args.

      Display the spinner object. The output is <Thread(Thread-1, initial)>, where
      initial is the state of the thread—meaning it has not started.

      Start the spinner thread.

      Call slow, which blocks the main thread. Meanwhile, the secondary thread is run‐
      ning the spinner animation.

      Set the Event flag to True; this will terminate the for loop inside the spin
      function.

      Wait until the spinner thread finishes.

      Run the supervisor function. I wrote separate main and supervisor functions to
      make this example look more like the asyncio version in Example 19-4.
When the main thread sets the done event, the spinner thread will eventually notice
and exit cleanly.
Now let’s take a look at a similar example using the multiprocessing package.

Spinner with Processes
The multiprocessing package supports running concurrent tasks in separate Python
processes instead of threads. When you create a multiprocessing.Process instance,
a whole new Python interpreter is started as a child process in the background. Since
each Python process has its own GIL, this allows your program to use all available

CPU cores—but that ultimately depends on the operating system scheduler. We’ll see
practical effects in “A Homegrown Process Pool” on page 716, but for this simple pro‐
gram it makes no real difference.
The point of this section is to introduce multiprocessing and show that its API
emulates the threading API, making it easy to convert simple programs from
threads to processes, as shown in spinner_proc.py (Example 19-3).

Example 19-3. spinner_proc.py: only the changed parts are shown; everything else is the
same as spinner_thread.py

import itertools
import time
from multiprocessing import Process, Event
from multiprocessing import synchronize

def spin(msg: str, done: synchronize.Event) -> None:

# [snip] the rest of spin and slow functions are unchanged from spinner_thread.py

def supervisor() -> int:
    done = Event()
    spinner = Process(target=spin,
                      args=('thinking!', done))
    print(f'spinner object: {spinner}')
    spinner.start()
    result = slow()
    done.set()
    spinner.join()
    return result

# [snip] main function is unchanged as well

    The basic multiprocessing API imitates the threading API, but type hints and
    Mypy expose this difference: multiprocessing.Event is a function (not a class
    like threading.Event) which returns a synchronize.Event instance…

    …forcing us to import multiprocessing.synchronize…

    …to write this type hint.

    Basic usage of the Process class is similar to Thread.

    The spinner object is displayed as <Process name='Process-1' parent=14868
    initial>, where 14868 is the process ID of the Python instance running
    spinner_proc.py.

The basic API of threading and multiprocessing are similar, but their implementa‐
tion is very different, and multiprocessing has a much larger API to handle the
added complexity of multiprocess programming. For example, one challenge when
converting from threads to processes is how to communicate between processes that
are isolated by the operating system and can’t share Python objects. This means that
objects crossing process boundaries have to be serialized and deserialized, which cre‐
ates overhead. In Example 19-3, the only data that crosses the process boundary is the
Event state, which is implemented with a low-level OS semaphore in the C code
underlying the multiprocessing module.10

                    Since Python 3.8, there’s a multiprocessing.shared_memory pack‐
                    age in the standard library, but it does not support instances of
                    user-defined classes. Besides raw bytes, the package allows pro‐
                    cesses to share a ShareableList, a mutable sequence type that can
                    hold a fixed number of items of types int, float, bool, and None,
                    as well as str and bytes up to 10 MB per item. See the ShareableL
                    ist documentation for more.

Now let’s see how the same behavior can be achieved with coroutines instead of
threads or processes.

Spinner with Coroutines
                    Chapter 21 is entirely devoted to asynchronous programming with
                    coroutines. This is just a high-level introduction to contrast this
                    approach with the threads and processes concurrency models. As
                    such, we will overlook many details.

It is the job of OS schedulers to allocate CPU time to drive threads and processes. In
contrast, coroutines are driven by an application-level event loop that manages a
queue of pending coroutines, drives them one by one, monitors events triggered by
I/O operations initiated by coroutines, and passes control back to the corresponding
coroutine when each event happens. The event loop and the library coroutines and
the user coroutines all execute in a single thread. Therefore, any time spent in a
coroutine slows down the event loop—and all other coroutines.

10 The semaphore is a fundamental building block that can be used to implement other synchronization mecha‐
   nisms. Python provides different semaphore classes for use with threads, processes, and coroutines. We’ll see
   asyncio.Semaphore in “Using asyncio.as_completed and a Thread” on page 788 (Chapter 21).

The coroutine version of the spinner program is easier to understand if we start from
the main function, then study the supervisor. That’s what Example 19-4 shows.

Example 19-4. spinner_async.py: the main function and supervisor coroutine

def main() -> None:
    result = asyncio.run(supervisor())
    print(f'Answer: {result}')

async def supervisor() -> int:
    spinner = asyncio.create_task(spin('thinking!'))
    print(f'spinner object: {spinner}')
    result = await slow()
    spinner.cancel()
    return result

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()

    main is the only regular function defined in this program—the others are
    coroutines.

    The asyncio.run function starts the event loop to drive the coroutine that will
    eventually set the other coroutines in motion. The main function will stay
    blocked until supervisor returns. The return value of supervisor will be the
    return value of asyncio.run.

    Native coroutines are defined with async def.

    asyncio.create_task schedules the eventual execution of spin, immediately
    returning an instance of asyncio.Task.

    The repr of the spinner object looks like <Task pending name='Task-2'
    coro=<spin() running at /path/to/spinner_async.py:11>>.

    The await keyword calls slow, blocking supervisor until slow returns. The
    return value of slow will be assigned to result.

    The Task.cancel method raises a CancelledError exception inside the spin
    coroutine, as we’ll see in Example 19-5.
Example 19-4 demonstrates the three main ways of running a coroutine:

asyncio.run(coro())
      Called from a regular function to drive a coroutine object that usually is the entry
      point for all the asynchronous code in the program, like the supervisor in this
      example. This call blocks until the body of coro returns. The return value of the
      run() call is whatever the body of coro returns.

asyncio.create_task(coro())
      Called from a coroutine to schedule another coroutine to execute eventually.
      This call does not suspend the current coroutine. It returns a Task instance, an
      object that wraps the coroutine object and provides methods to control and
      query its state.
await coro()
      Called from a coroutine to transfer control to the coroutine object returned by
      coro(). This suspends the current coroutine until the body of coro returns. The
      value of the await expression is whatever the body of coro returns.

                   Remember: invoking a coroutine as coro() immediately returns a
                   coroutine object, but does not run the body of the coro function.
                   Driving the body of coroutines is the job of the event loop.

Now let’s study the spin and slow coroutines in Example 19-5.

Example 19-5. spinner_async.py: the spin and slow coroutines

import asyncio
import itertools

async def spin(msg: str) -> None:
    for char in itertools.cycle(r'\|/-'):
        status = f'\r{char} {msg}'
        print(status, flush=True, end='')
        try:
             await asyncio.sleep(.1)
        except asyncio.CancelledError:
             break
    blanks = ' ' * len(status)
    print(f'\r{blanks}\r', end='')

async def slow() -> int:
    await asyncio.sleep(3)
    return 42

    We don’t need the Event argument that was used to signal that slow had comple‐
    ted its job in spinner_thread.py (Example 19-1).

    Use await asyncio.sleep(.1) instead of time.sleep(.1), to pause without
    blocking other coroutines. See the experiment after this example.

    asyncio.CancelledError is raised when the cancel method is called on the
    Task controlling this coroutine. Time to exit the loop.

    The slow coroutine also uses await asyncio.sleep instead of time.sleep.

Experiment: Break the spinner for an insight
Here is an experiment I recommend to understand how spinner_async.py works.
Import the time module, then go to the slow coroutine and replace the line await
asyncio.sleep(3) with a call to time.sleep(3), like in Example 19-6.

Example 19-6. spinner_async.py: replacing await asyncio.sleep(3) with
time.sleep(3)

async def slow() -> int:
    time.sleep(3)
    return 42

Watching the behavior is more memorable than reading about it. Go ahead, I’ll wait.
When you run the experiment, this is what you see:

 1. The spinner object is shown, similar to this: <Task pending name='Task-2'
    coro=<spin() running at /path/to/spinner_async.py:12>>.
 2. The spinner never appears. The program hangs for 3 seconds.
 3. Answer: 42 is displayed and the program ends.

To understand what is happening, recall that Python code using asyncio has only
one flow of execution, unless you’ve explicitly started additional threads or processes.
That means only one coroutine executes at any point in time. Concurrency is
achieved by control passing from one coroutine to another. In Example 19-7, let’s
focus on what happens in the supervisor and slow coroutines during the proposed
experiment.

Example 19-7. spinner_async_experiment.py: the supervisor and slow coroutines

async def slow() -> int:
    time.sleep(3)

      return 42

async def supervisor() -> int:
    spinner = asyncio.create_task(spin('thinking!'))
    print(f'spinner object: {spinner}')
    result = await slow()
    spinner.cancel()
    return result

      The spinner task is created, to eventually drive the execution of spin.

      The display shows the Task is “pending.”

      The await expression transfers control to the slow coroutine.

      time.sleep(3) blocks for 3 seconds; nothing else can happen in the program,
      because the main thread is blocked—and it is the only thread. The operating sys‐
      tem will continue with other activities. After 3 seconds, sleep unblocks, and
      slow returns.

      Right after slow returns, the spinner task is cancelled. The flow of control never
      reached the body of the spin coroutine.
The spinner_async_experiment.py teaches an important lesson, as explained in the
following warning.

                    Never use time.sleep(…) in asyncio coroutines unless you want
                    to pause your whole program. If a coroutine needs to spend some
                    time doing nothing, it should await asyncio.sleep(DELAY). This
                    yields control back to the asyncio event loop, which can drive
                    other pending coroutines.

                                         Greenlet and gevent
   As we discuss concurrency with coroutines, it’s important to mention the greenlet
   package, which has been around for many years and is used at scale.11 The package
   supports cooperative multitasking through lightweight coroutines—named greenlets
   —that don’t require any special syntax such as yield or await, therefore are easier to
   integrate into existing, sequential codebases. SQL Alchemy 1.4 ORM uses greenlets
   internally to implement its new asynchronous API compatible with asyncio.

11 Thanks to tech reviewers Caleb Hattingh and Jürgen Gmach who did not let me overlook greenlet and gevent.

 The gevent networking library monkey patches Python’s standard socket module
 making it nonblocking by replacing some of its code with greenlets. To a large extent,
 gevent is transparent to the surrounding code, making it easier to adapt sequential
 applications and libraries—such as database drivers—to perform concurrent network
 I/O. Numerous open source projects use gevent, including the widely deployed Guni‐
 corn—mentioned in “WSGI Application Servers” on page 730.

Supervisors Side-by-Side
The line count of spinner_thread.py and spinner_async.py is nearly the same. The
supervisor functions are the heart of these examples. Let’s compare them in detail.
Example 19-8 lists only the supervisor from Example 19-2.

Example 19-8. spinner_thread.py: the threaded supervisor function

def supervisor() -> int:
    done = Event()
    spinner = Thread(target=spin,
                     args=('thinking!', done))
    print('spinner object:', spinner)
    spinner.start()
    result = slow()
    done.set()
    spinner.join()
    return result

For comparison, Example 19-9 shows the supervisor coroutine from Example 19-4.

Example 19-9. spinner_async.py: the asynchronous supervisor coroutine

async def supervisor() -> int:
    spinner = asyncio.create_task(spin('thinking!'))
    print('spinner object:', spinner)
    result = await slow()
    spinner.cancel()
    return result

Here is a summary of the differences and similarities to note between the two super
visor implementations:

  • An asyncio.Task is roughly the equivalent of a threading.Thread.
  • A Task drives a coroutine object, and a Thread invokes a callable.
  • A coroutine yields control explicitly with the await keyword.

  • You don’t instantiate Task objects yourself, you get them by passing a coroutine
    to asyncio.create_task(…).
  • When asyncio.create_task(…) returns a Task object, it is already scheduled to
    run, but a Thread instance must be explicitly told to run by calling its start
    method.
  • In the threaded supervisor, slow is a plain function and is directly invoked by
    the main thread. In the asynchronous supervisor, slow is a coroutine driven by
    await.
  • There’s no API to terminate a thread from the outside; instead, you must send a
    signal—like setting the done Event object. For tasks, there is the Task.cancel()
    instance method, which raises CancelledError at the await expression where
    the coroutine body is currently suspended.
  • The supervisor coroutine must be started with asyncio.run in the main
    function.

This comparison should help you understand how concurrent jobs are orchestrated
with asyncio, in contrast to how it’s done with the Threading module, which may be
more familiar to you.
One final point related to threads versus coroutines: if you’ve done any nontrivial
programming with threads, you know how challenging it is to reason about the pro‐
gram because the scheduler can interrupt a thread at any time. You must remember
to hold locks to protect the critical sections of your program, to avoid getting inter‐
rupted in the middle of a multistep operation—which could leave data in an invalid
state.
With coroutines, your code is protected against interruption by default. You must
explicitly await to let the rest of the program run. Instead of holding locks to syn‐
chronize the operations of multiple threads, coroutines are “synchronized” by defini‐
tion: only one of them is running at any time. When you want to give up control, you
use await to yield control back to the scheduler. That’s why it is possible to safely
cancel a coroutine: by definition, a coroutine can only be cancelled when it’s sus‐
pended at an await expression, so you can perform cleanup by handling the Cancel
ledError exception.
The time.sleep() call blocks but does nothing. Now we’ll experiment with a CPU-
intensive call to get a better understanding of the GIL, as well as the effect of CPU-
intensive functions in asynchronous code.

The Real Impact of the GIL
In the threading code (Example 19-1), you can replace the time.sleep(3) call in the
slow function with an HTTP client request from your favorite library, and the spin‐
ner will keep spinning. That’s because a well-designed network library will release the
GIL while waiting for the network.
You can also replace the asyncio.sleep(3) expression in the slow coroutine to
await for a response from a well-designed asynchronous network library, because
such libraries provide coroutines that yield control back to the event loop while wait‐
ing for the network. Meanwhile, the spinner will keep spinning.
With CPU-intensive code, the story is different. Consider the function is_prime in
Example 19-10, which returns True if the argument is a prime number, False if it’s
not.

Example 19-10. primes.py: an easy to read primality check, from Python’s ProcessPool
Executor example

def is_prime(n: int) -> bool:
    if n < 2:
        return False
    if n == 2:
        return True
    if n % 2 == 0:
        return False

     root = math.isqrt(n)
     for i in range(3, root + 1, 2):
         if n % i == 0:
             return False
     return True

The call is_prime(5_000_111_000_222_021) takes about 3.3s on the company laptop
I am using now.12

Quick Quiz
Given what we’ve seen so far, please take the time to consider the following three-
part question. One part of the answer is tricky (at least it was for me).
      What would happen to the spinner animation if you made the following changes,
      assuming that n = 5_000_111_000_222_021—that prime which my machine takes 3.3s
      to verify:

12 It’s a 15” MacBook Pro 2018 with a 6-core, 2.2 GHz Intel Core i7 CPU.

          1. In spinner_proc.py, replace time.sleep(3) with a call to is_prime(n)?
          2. In spinner_thread.py, replace time.sleep(3) with a call to is_prime(n)?
          3. In spinner_async.py, replace await            asyncio.sleep(3) with a call to
             is_prime(n)?

Before you run the code or read on, I recommend figuring out the answers on your
own. Then, you may want to copy and modify the spinner_*.py examples as
suggested.
Now the answers, from easier to hardest.

1. Answer for multiprocessing
The spinner is controlled by a child process, so it continues spinning while the pri‐
mality test is computed by the parent process.13

2. Answer for threading
The spinner is controlled by a secondary thread, so it continues spinning while the
primality test is computed by the main thread.
I did not get this answer right at first: I was expecting the spinner to freeze because I
overestimated the impact of the GIL.
In this particular example, the spinner keeps spinning because Python suspends the
running thread every 5ms (by default), making the GIL available to other pending
threads. Therefore, the main thread running is_prime is interrupted every 5ms,
allowing the secondary thread to wake up and iterate once through the for loop, until
it calls the wait method of the done event, at which time it will release the GIL. The
main thread will then grab the GIL, and the is_prime computation will proceed for
another 5ms.
This does not have a visible impact on the running time of this specific example,
because the spin function quickly iterates once and releases the GIL as it waits for the
done event, so there is not much contention for the GIL. The main thread running
is_prime will have the GIL most of the time.
We got away with a compute-intensive task using threading in this simple experi‐
ment because there are only two threads: one hogging the CPU, and the other waking
up only 10 times per second to update the spinner.

13 This is true today because you are probably using a modern OS with preemptive multitasking. Windows
   before the NT era and macOS before the OSX era were not “preemptive,” therefore any process could take
   over 100% of the CPU and freeze the whole system. We are not completely free of this kind of problem today
   but trust this graybeard: this troubled every user in the 1990s, and a hard reset was the only cure.

But if you have two or more threads vying for a lot of CPU time, your program will
be slower than sequential code.

3. Answer for asyncio
If you call is_prime(5_000_111_000_222_021) in the slow coroutine of the spin‐
ner_async.py example, the spinner will never appear. The effect would be the same
we had in Example 19-6, when we replaced await asyncio.sleep(3) with
time.sleep(3): no spinning at all. The flow of control will pass from supervisor to
slow, and then to is_prime. When is_prime returns, slow returns as well, and super
visor resumes, cancelling the spinner task before it is executed even once. The pro‐
gram appears frozen for about 3s, then shows the answer.

                           Power Napping with sleep(0)
  One way to keep the spinner alive is to rewrite is_prime as a coroutine, and periodi‐
  cally call asyncio.sleep(0) in an await expression to yield control back to the event
  loop, like in Example 19-11.
  Example 19-11. spinner_async_nap.py: is_prime is now a coroutine

  async def is_prime(n):
      if n < 2:
          return False
      if n == 2:
          return True
      if n % 2 == 0:
          return False

      root = math.isqrt(n)
      for i in range(3, root + 1, 2):
          if n % i == 0:
              return False
          if i % 100_000 == 1:
              await asyncio.sleep(0)
      return True

      Sleep once every 50,000 iterations (because the step in the range is 2).
  Issue #284 in the asyncio repository has an informative discussion about the use of
  asyncio.sleep(0).
  However, be aware this will slow down is_prime, and—more importantly—will still
  slow down the event loop and your whole program with it. When I used await asyn
  cio.sleep(0) every 100,000 iterations, the spinner was smooth but the program ran
  in 4.9s on my machine, almost 50% longer than the original primes.is_prime func‐
  tion by itself with the same argument (5_000_111_000_222_021).

  Using await asyncio.sleep(0) should be considered a stopgap measure before you
  refactor your asynchronous code to delegate CPU-intensive computations to another
  process. We’ll see one way of doing that with asyncio.loop.run_in_executor, cov‐
  ered in Chapter 21. Another option would be a task queue, which we’ll briefly discuss
  in “Distributed Task Queues” on page 732.

So far, we’ve only experimented with a single call to a CPU-intensive function. The
next section presents concurrent execution of multiple CPU-intensive calls.

A Homegrown Process Pool
                    I wrote this section to show the use of multiple processes for CPU-
                    intensive tasks, and the common pattern of using queues to distrib‐
                    ute tasks and collect results. Chapter 20 will show a simpler way of
                    distributing tasks to processes: a ProcessPoolExecutor from the
                    concurrent.futures package, which uses queues internally.

In this section we’ll write programs to compute the primality of a sample of 20 inte‐
gers, from 2 to 9,999,999,999,999,999—i.e., 1016 – 1, or more than 253. The sample
includes small and large primes, as well as composite numbers with small and large
prime factors.
The sequential.py program provides the performance baseline. Here is a sample run:
      $ python3 sequential.py
                     2 P 0.000001s
       142702110479723 P 0.568328s
       299593572317531 P 0.796773s
      3333333333333301 P 2.648625s
      3333333333333333     0.000007s
      3333335652092209     2.672323s
      4444444444444423 P 3.052667s
      4444444444444444     0.000001s
      4444444488888889     3.061083s
      5555553133149889     3.451833s
      5555555555555503 P 3.556867s
      5555555555555555     0.000007s
      6666666666666666     0.000001s
      6666666666666719 P 3.781064s
      6666667141414921     3.778166s
      7777777536340681     4.120069s
      7777777777777753 P 4.141530s
      7777777777777777     0.000007s
      9999999999999917 P 4.678164s
      9999999999999999     0.000007s
      Total time: 40.31

The results are shown in three columns:

  • The number to be checked.
  • P if it’s a prime number, blank if not.
  • Elapsed time for checking the primality for that specific number.

In this example, the total time is approximately the sum of the times for each check,
but it is computed separately, as you can see in Example 19-12.

Example 19-12. sequential.py: sequential primality check for a small dataset

#!/usr/bin/env python3

"""
sequential.py: baseline for comparing sequential, multiprocessing,
and threading code for CPU-intensive work.
"""

from time import perf_counter
from typing import NamedTuple

from primes import is_prime, NUMBERS

class Result(NamedTuple):
    prime: bool
    elapsed: float

def check(n: int) -> Result:
    t0 = perf_counter()
    prime = is_prime(n)
    return Result(prime, perf_counter() - t0)

def main() -> None:
    print(f'Checking {len(NUMBERS)} numbers sequentially:')
    t0 = perf_counter()
    for n in NUMBERS:
        prime, elapsed = check(n)
        label = 'P' if prime else ' '
        print(f'{n:16} {label} {elapsed:9.6f}s')

    elapsed = perf_counter() - t0
    print(f'Total time: {elapsed:.2f}s')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()

      The check function (in the next callout) returns a Result tuple with the boolean
      value of the is_prime call and the elapsed time.

      check(n) calls is_prime(n) and computes the elapsed time to return a Result.

      For each number in the sample, we call check and display the result.

      Compute and display the total elapsed time.

Process-Based Solution
The next example, procs.py, shows the use of multiple processes to distribute the pri‐
mality checks across multiple CPU cores. These are the times I get with procs.py:
      $ python3 procs.py
      Checking 20 numbers with 12 processes:
                     2 P 0.000002s
      3333333333333333     0.000021s
      4444444444444444     0.000002s
      5555555555555555     0.000018s
      6666666666666666     0.000002s
       142702110479723 P 1.350982s
      7777777777777777     0.000009s
       299593572317531 P 1.981411s
      9999999999999999     0.000008s
      3333333333333301 P 6.328173s
      3333335652092209     6.419249s
      4444444488888889     7.051267s
      4444444444444423 P 7.122004s
      5555553133149889     7.412735s
      5555555555555503 P 7.603327s
      6666666666666719 P 7.934670s
      6666667141414921     8.017599s
      7777777536340681     8.339623s
      7777777777777753 P 8.388859s
      9999999999999917 P 8.117313s
      20 checks in 9.58s
The last line of the output shows that procs.py was 4.2 times faster than sequential.py.

Understanding the Elapsed Times
Note that the elapsed time in the first column is for checking that specific number.
For example, is_prime(7777777777777753) took almost 8.4s to return True. Mean‐
while, other processes were checking other numbers in parallel.
There were 20 numbers to check. I wrote procs.py to start a number of worker pro‐
cesses equal to the number of CPU cores, as determined by multiprocess
ing.cpu_count().

The total time in this case is much less than the sum of the elapsed time for the indi‐
vidual checks. There is some overhead in spinning up processes and in inter-process
communication, so the end result is that the multiprocess version is only about 4.2
times faster than the sequential. That’s good, but a little disappointing considering
the code launches 12 processes to use all cores on this laptop.

               The multiprocessing.cpu_count() function returns 12 on the
               MacBook Pro I’m using to write this chapter. It’s actually a 6-CPU
               Core-i7, but the OS reports 12 CPUs because of hyperthreading, an
               Intel technology which executes 2 threads per core. However,
               hyperthreading works better when one of the threads is not work‐
               ing as hard as the other thread in the same core—perhaps the first
               is stalled waiting for data after a cache miss, and the other is
               crunching numbers. Anyway, there’s no free lunch: this laptop per‐
               forms like a 6-CPU machine for compute-intensive work that
               doesn’t use a lot of memory—like that simple primality test.

Code for the Multicore Prime Checker
When we delegate computing to threads or processes, our code does not call the
worker function directly, so we can’t simply get a return value. Instead, the worker is
driven by the thread or process library, and it eventually produces a result that needs
to be stored somewhere. Coordinating workers and collecting results are common
uses of queues in concurrent programming—and also in distributed systems.
Much of the new code in procs.py has to do with setting up and using queues. The top
of the file is in Example 19-13.

               SimpleQueue was added to multiprocessing in Python 3.9. If
               you’re using an earlier version of Python, you can replace Simple
               Queue with Queue in Example 19-13.

Example 19-13. procs.py: multiprocess primality check; imports, types, and functions

import sys
from time import perf_counter
from typing import NamedTuple
from multiprocessing import Process, SimpleQueue, cpu_count
from multiprocessing import queues

from primes import is_prime, NUMBERS

class PrimeResult(NamedTuple):
    n: int

      prime: bool
      elapsed: float

JobQueue = queues.SimpleQueue[int]
ResultQueue = queues.SimpleQueue[PrimeResult]

def check(n: int) -> PrimeResult:
    t0 = perf_counter()
    res = is_prime(n)
    return PrimeResult(n, res, perf_counter() - t0)

def worker(jobs: JobQueue, results: ResultQueue) -> None:
    while n := jobs.get():
        results.put(check(n))
    results.put(PrimeResult(0, False, 0.0))

def start_jobs(
    procs: int, jobs: JobQueue, results: ResultQueue
) -> None:
    for n in NUMBERS:
        jobs.put(n)
    for _ in range(procs):
        proc = Process(target=worker, args=(jobs, results))
        proc.start()
        jobs.put(0)

      Trying to emulate threading, multiprocessing provides multiprocessing.Sim
      pleQueue, but this is a method bound to a predefined instance of a lower-level
      BaseContext class. We must call this SimpleQueue to build a queue, we can’t use
      it in type hints.

      multiprocessing.queues has the SimpleQueue class we need for type hints.

      PrimeResult includes the number checked for primality. Keeping n together
      with the other result fields simplifies displaying results later.

      This is a type alias for a SimpleQueue that the main function (Example 19-14) will
      use to send numbers to the processes that will do the work.

      Type alias for a second SimpleQueue that will collect the results in main. The val‐
      ues in the queue will be tuples made of the number to be tested for primality, and
      a Result tuple.

      This is similar to sequential.py.

      worker gets a queue with the numbers to be checked, and another to put results.

      In this code, I use the number 0 as a poison pill: a signal for the worker to finish.
      If n is not 0, proceed with the loop.14

      Invoke the primality check and enqueue PrimeResult.

      Send back a PrimeResult(0, False, 0.0) to let the main loop know that this
      worker is done.

      procs is the number of processes that will compute the prime checks in parallel.

      Enqueue the numbers to be checked in jobs.

      Fork a child process for each worker. Each child will run the loop inside its own
      instance of the worker function, until it fetches a 0 from the jobs queue.

      Start each child process.

      Enqueue one 0 for each process, to terminate them.

                                 Loops, Sentinels, and Poison Pills
   The worker function in Example 19-13 follows a common pattern in concurrent pro‐
   gramming: looping indefinitely while taking items from a queue and processing each
   with a function that does the actual work. The loop ends when the queue produces a
   sentinel value. In this pattern, the sentinel that shuts down the worker is often called a
   “poison pill.”
   None is often used as a sentinel value, but it may be unsuitable if it can occur in the
   data stream. Calling object() is a common way to get a unique value to use as senti‐
   nel. However, that does not work across processes because Python objects must be
   serialized for inter-process communication, and when you pickle.dump and
   pickle.load an instance of object, the unpickled instance is distinct from the origi‐
   nal: it doesn’t compare equal. A good alternative to None is the Ellipsis built-in
   object (a.k.a. ...), which survives serialization without losing its identity.15
   Python’s standard library uses lots of different values as sentinels. PEP 661—Sentinel
   Values proposes a standard sentinel type. As of September 2021, it’s only a draft.

14 In this example, 0 is a convenient sentinel. None is also commonly used for that. Using 0 simplifies the type
   hint for PrimeResult and the code for worker.

15 Surviving serialization without losing our identity is a pretty good life goal.

Now let’s study the main function of procs.py in Example 19-14.

Example 19-14. procs.py: multiprocess primality check; main function

def main() -> None:
    if len(sys.argv) < 2:
        procs = cpu_count()
    else:
        procs = int(sys.argv[1])

      print(f'Checking {len(NUMBERS)} numbers with {procs} processes:')
      t0 = perf_counter()
      jobs: JobQueue = SimpleQueue()
      results: ResultQueue = SimpleQueue()
      start_jobs(procs, jobs, results)
      checked = report(procs, results)
      elapsed = perf_counter() - t0
      print(f'{checked} checks in {elapsed:.2f}s')

def report(procs: int, results: ResultQueue) -> int:
    checked = 0
    procs_done = 0
    while procs_done < procs:
        n, prime, elapsed = results.get()
        if n == 0:
            procs_done += 1
        else:
            checked += 1
            label = 'P' if prime else ' '
            print(f'{n:16} {label} {elapsed:9.6f}s')
    return checked

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()

      If no command-line argument is given, set the number of processes to the num‐
      ber of CPU cores; otherwise, create as many processes as given in the first
      argument.

      jobs and results are the queues described in Example 19-13.

      Start proc processes to consume jobs and post results.

      Retrieve the results and display them; report is defined in .

      Display how many numbers were checked and the total elapsed time.

      The arguments are the number of procs and the queue to post the results.

    Loop until all processes are done.

    Get one PrimeResult. Calling .get() on a queue block until there is an item in
    the queue. It’s also possible to make this nonblocking, or set a timeout. See the
    SimpleQueue.get documentation for details.

    If n is zero, then one process exited; increment the procs_done count.

    Otherwise, increment the checked count (to keep track of the numbers checked)
    and display the results.
The results will not come back in the same order the jobs were submitted. That’s why
I had to put n in each PrimeResult tuple. Otherwise, I’d have no way to know which
result belonged to each number.
If the main process exits before all subprocesses are done, you may see confusing
tracebacks on FileNotFoundError exceptions caused by an internal lock in multi
processing. Debugging concurrent code is always hard, and debugging multiproc
essing is even harder because of all the complexity behind the thread-like façade.
Fortunately, the ProcessPoolExecutor we’ll meet in Chapter 20 is easier to use and
more robust.

               Thanks to reader Michael Albert who noticed the code I published
               during the early release had a race condition in Example 19-14. A
               race condition is a bug that may or may not occur depending on
               the order of actions performed by concurrent execution units. If
               “A” happens before “B,” all is fine; but it “B” happens first, some‐
               thing goes wrong. That’s the race.
               If you are curious, this diff shows the bug and how I fixed it:
               example-code-2e/commit/2c123057—but note that I later refactored
               the example to delegate parts of main to the start_jobs and
               report functions. There’s a README.md file in the same directory
               explaining the problem and the solution.

Experimenting with More or Fewer Processes
You may want try running procs.py, passing arguments to set the number of worker
processes. For example, this command…
   $ python3 procs.py 2
…will launch two worker processes, producing results almost twice as fast as sequen‐
tial.py—if your machine has at least two cores and is not too busy running other
programs.

I ran procs.py 12 times with 1 to 20 processes, totaling 240 runs. Then I computed the
median time for all runs with the same number of processes, and plotted Figure 19-2.

Figure 19-2. Median run times for each number of processes from 1 to 20. Highest
median time was 40.81s, with 1 process. Lowest median time was 10.39s, with 6 pro‐
cesses, indicated by the dotted line.

In this 6-core laptop, the lowest median time was with 6 processes: 10.39s—marked
by the dotted line in Figure 19-2. I expected the run time to increase after 6 processes
due to CPU contention, and it reached a local maximum of 12.51s at 10 processes. I
did not expect and I can’t explain why the performance improved at 11 processes and
remained almost flat from 13 to 20 processes, with median times only slightly higher
than the lowest median time at 6 processes.

Thread-Based Nonsolution
I also wrote threads.py, a version of procs.py using threading instead of multiproc
essing. The code is very similar—as is usually the case when converting simple
examples between these two APIs.16 Due to the GIL and the compute-intensive
nature of is_prime, the threaded version is slower than the sequential code in
Example 19-12, and it gets slower as the number of threads increase, because of CPU
contention and the cost of context switching. To switch to a new thread, the OS
needs to save CPU registers and update the program counter and stack pointer,

16 See 19-concurrency/primes/threads.py in the Fluent Python code repository.

triggering expensive side effects like invalidating CPU caches and possibly even
swapping memory pages.17
The next two chapters will cover more about concurrent programming in Python,
using the high-level concurrent.futures library to manage threads and processes
(Chapter 20) and the asyncio library for asynchronous programming (Chapter 21).
The remaining sections in this chapter aim to answer the question:
      Given the limitations discussed so far, how is Python thriving in a multicore world?

Python in the Multicore World
Consider this citation from the widely quoted article “The Free Lunch Is Over: A
Fundamental Turn Toward Concurrency in Software” by Herb Sutter:
      The major processor manufacturers and architectures, from Intel and AMD to Sparc
      and PowerPC, have run out of room with most of their traditional approaches to
      boosting CPU performance. Instead of driving clock speeds and straight-line instruc‐
      tion throughput ever higher, they are instead turning en masse to hyper-threading and
      multicore architectures. March 2005. [Available online].

What Sutter calls the “free lunch” was the trend of software getting faster with no
additional developer effort because CPUs were executing sequential code faster, year
after year. Since 2004, that is no longer true: clock speeds and execution optimiza‐
tions reached a plateau, and now any significant increase in performance must come
from leveraging multiple cores or hyperthreading, advances that only benefit code
that is written for concurrent execution.
Python’s story started in the early 1990s, when CPUs were still getting exponentially
faster at sequential code execution. There was no talk about multicore CPUs except
in supercomputers back then. At the time, the decision to have a GIL was a no-
brainer. The GIL makes the interpreter faster when running on a single core, and its
implementation simpler.18 The GIL also makes it easier to write simple extensions
through the Python/C API.

17 To learn more, see “Context switch” in the English Wikipedia.

18 These are probably the same reasons that prompted the creator of the Ruby language, Yukihiro Matsumoto,
   to use a GIL in his interpreter as well.

                    I just wrote “simple extensions” because an extension does not
                    need to deal with the GIL at all. A function written in C or Fortran
                    may be hundreds of times faster than the equivalent in Python.19
                    Therefore the added complexity of releasing the GIL to leverage
                    multicore CPUs may not be needed in many cases. So we can
                    thank the GIL for many extensions available for Python—and that
                    is certainly one of the key reasons why the language is so popular
                    today.

Despite the GIL, Python is thriving in applications that require concurrent or parallel
execution, thanks to libraries and software architectures that work around the limita‐
tions of CPython.
Now let’s discuss how Python is used in system administration, data science, and
server-side application development in the multicore, distributed computing world
of 2021.

System Administration
Python is widely used to manage large fleets of servers, routers, load balancers, and
network-attached storage (NAS). It’s also a leading option in software-defined net‐
working (SDN) and ethical hacking. Major cloud service providers support Python
through libraries and tutorials authored by the providers themselves or by their large
communities of Python users.
In this domain, Python scripts automate configuration tasks by issuing commands to
be carried out by the remote machines, so rarely there are CPU-bound operations to
be done. Threads or coroutines are well suited for such jobs. In particular, the concur
rent.futures package we’ll see in Chapter 20 can be used to perform the same oper‐
ations on many remote machines at the same time without a lot of complexity.
Beyond the standard library, there are popular Python-based projects to manage
server clusters: tools like Ansible and Salt, as well as libraries like Fabric.
There is also a growing number of libraries for system administration supporting
coroutines and asyncio. In 2016, Facebook’s Production Engineering team reported:
“We are increasingly relying on AsyncIO, which was introduced in Python 3.4, and
seeing huge performance gains as we move codebases away from Python 2.”

19 As an exercise in college, I had to implement the LZW compression algorithm in C. But first I wrote it in
   Python, to check my understanding of the spec. The C version was about 900× faster.

Data Science
Data science—including artificial intelligence—and scientific computing are very
well served by Python. Applications in these fields are compute-intensive, but Python
users benefit from a vast ecosystem of numeric computing libraries written in C,
C++, Fortran, Cython, etc.—many of which are able to leverage multicore machines,
GPUs, and/or distributed parallel computing in heterogeneous clusters.
As of 2021, Python’s data science ecosystem includes impressive tools such as:
Project Jupyter
    Two browser-based interfaces—Jupyter Notebook and JupyterLab—that allow
    users to run and document analytics code potentially running across the network
    on remote machines. Both are hybrid Python/JavaScript applications, supporting
    computing kernels written in different languages, all integrated via ZeroMQ—an
    asynchronous messaging library for distributed applications. The name Jupyter
    actually comes from Julia, Python, and R, the first three languages supported by
    the Notebook. The rich ecosystem built on top of the Jupyter tools include
    Bokeh, a powerful interactive visualization library that lets users navigate and
    interact with large datasets or continuously updated streaming data, thanks to
    the performance of modern JavaScript engines and browsers.
TensorFlow and PyTorch
    These are the top two deep learning frameworks, according to O’Reilly’s January
    2021 report on usage of their learning resources during 2020. Both projects are
    written in C++, and are able to leverage multiple cores, GPUs, and clusters. They
    support other languages as well, but Python is their main focus and is used by the
    majority of their users. TensorFlow was created and is used internally by Google;
    PyTorch by Facebook.
Dask
   A parallel computing library that can farm out work to local processes or clusters
   of machines, “tested on some of the largest supercomputers in the world”—as
   their home page states. Dask offers APIs that closely emulate NumPy, pandas,
   and scikit-learn—the most popular libraries in data science and machine learn‐
   ing today. Dask can be used from JupyterLab or Jupyter Notebook, and leverages
   Bokeh not only for data visualization but also for an interactive dashboard show‐
   ing the flow of data and computations across the processes/machines in near real
   time. Dask is so impressive that I recommend watching a video such as this 15-
   minute demo in which Matthew Rocklin—a maintainer of the project—shows
   Dask crunching data on 64 cores distributed in 8 EC2 machines on AWS.
These are only some examples to illustrate how the data science community is creat‐
ing solutions that leverage the best of Python and overcome the limitations of the
CPython runtime.

Server-Side Web/Mobile Development
Python is widely used in web applications and for the backend APIs supporting
mobile applications. How is it that Google, YouTube, Dropbox, Instagram, Quora,
and Reddit—among others—managed to build Python server-side applications serv‐
ing hundreds of millions of users 24x7? Again, the answer goes way beyond what
Python provides “out of the box.”
Before we discuss tools to support Python at scale, I must quote an admonition from
the Thoughtworks Technology Radar:
      High performance envy/web scale envy
      We see many teams run into trouble because they have chosen complex tools, frame‐
      works or architectures because they “might need to scale.” Companies such as Twitter
      and Netflix need to support extreme loads and so need these architectures, but they
      also have extremely skilled development teams able to handle the complexity. Most sit‐
      uations do not require these kinds of engineering feats; teams should keep their web
      scale envy in check in favor of simpler solutions that still get the job done.20

At web scale, the key is an architecture that allows horizontal scaling. At that point, all
systems are distributed systems, and no single programming language is likely to be
the right choice for every part of the solution.
Distributed systems is a field of academic research, but fortunately some practitioners
have written accessible books anchored on solid research and practical experience.
One of them is Martin Kleppmann, the author of Designing Data-Intensive Applica‐
tions (O’Reilly).
Consider Figure 19-3, the first of many architecture diagrams in Kleppmann’s book.
Here are some components I’ve seen in Python engagements that I worked on or
have firsthand knowledge of:

   • Application caches:21 memcached, Redis, Varnish
   • Relational databases: PostgreSQL, MySQL
   • Document databases: Apache CouchDB, MongoDB
   • Full-text indexes: Elasticsearch, Apache Solr
   • Message queues: RabbitMQ, Redis

20 Source: Thoughtworks Technology Advisory Board, Technology Radar—November 2015.

21 Contrast application caches—used directly by your application code—with HTTP caches, which would be
  placed on the top edge of Figure 19-3 to serve static assets like images, CSS, and JS files. Content Delivery
  Networks (CDNs) offer another type of HTTP cache, deployed in data centers closer to the end users of your
  application.

Figure 19-3. One possible architecture for a system combining several components.22

There are other industrial-strength open source products in each of those categories.
Major cloud providers also offer their own proprietary alternatives.
Kleppmann’s diagram is general and language independent—as is his book. For
Python server-side applications, two specific components are often deployed:

   • An application server to distribute the load among several instances of the
     Python application. The application server would appear near the top in
     Figure 19-3, handling client requests before they reached the application code.
   • A task queue built around the message queue on the righthand side of
     Figure 19-3, providing a higher-level, easier-to-use API to distribute tasks to pro‐
     cesses running on other machines.

22 Diagram adapted from Figure 1-1, Designing Data-Intensive Applications by Martin Kleppmann (O’Reilly).

The next two sections explore these components that are recommended best practi‐
ces in Python server-side deployments.

WSGI Application Servers
WSGI—the Web Server Gateway Interface—is a standard API for a Python frame‐
work or application to receive requests from an HTTP server and send responses to
it.23 WSGI application servers manage one or more processes running your applica‐
tion, maximizing the use of the available CPUs.
Figure 19-4 illustrates a typical WSGI deployment.

                    If we wanted to merge the previous pair of diagrams, the content of
                    the dashed rectangle in Figure 19-4 would replace the solid “Appli‐
                    cation code” rectangle at the top of Figure 19-3.

The best-known application servers in Python web projects are:

   • mod_wsgi
   • uWSGI24
   • Gunicorn
   • NGINX Unit

For users of the Apache HTTP server, mod_wsgi is the best option. It’s as old as
WSGI itself, but is actively maintained, and now provides a command-line launcher
called mod_wsgi-express that makes it easier to configure and more suitable for use
in Docker containers.

23 Some speakers spell out the WSGI acronym, while others pronounce it as one word rhyming with “whisky.”

24 uWSGI is spelled with a lowercase “u,” but that is pronounced as the Greek letter “µ,” so the whole name
   sounds like “micro-whisky” with a “g” instead of the “k.”

Figure 19-4. Clients connect to an HTTP server that delivers static files and routes
other requests to the application server, which forks child processes to run the applica‐
tion code, leveraging multiple CPU cores. The WSGI API is the glue between the appli‐
cation server and the Python application code.

uWSGI and Gunicorn are the top choices in recent projects I know about. Both are
often used with the NGINX HTTP server. uWSGI offers a lot of extra functionality,
including an application cache, a task queue, cron-like periodic tasks, and many
other features. On the flip side, uWSGI is much harder to configure properly than
Gunicorn.25
Released in 2018, NGINX Unit is a new product from the makers of the well-known
NGINX HTTP server and reverse proxy.

25 Bloomberg engineers Peter Sperl and Ben Green wrote “Configuring uWSGI for Production Deployment”,
  explaining how many of the default settings in uWSGI are not suitable for many common deployment sce‐
  narios. Sperl presented a summary of their recommendations at EuroPython 2019. Highly recommended for
  users of uWSGI.

mod_wsgi and Gunicorn support Python web apps only, while uWSGI and NGINX
Unit work with other languages as well. Please browse their docs to learn more.
The main point: all of these application servers can potentially use all CPU cores on
the server by forking multiple Python processes to run traditional web apps written
in good old sequential code in Django, Flask, Pyramid, etc. This explains why it’s
been possible to earn a living as a Python web developer without ever studying the
threading, multiprocessing, or asyncio modules: the application server handles
concurrency transparently.

                    ASGI—Asynchronous Server Gateway Interface
                    WSGI is a synchronous API. It doesn’t support coroutines with
                    async/await—the most efficient way to implement WebSockets or
                    HTTP long polling in Python. The ASGI specification is a succes‐
                    sor to WSGI, designed for asynchronous Python web frameworks
                    such as aiohttp, Sanic, FastAPI, etc., as well as Django and Flask,
                    which are gradually adding asynchronous functionality.

Now let’s turn to another way of bypassing the GIL to achieve higher performance
with server-side Python applications.

Distributed Task Queues
When the application server delivers a request to one of the Python processes run‐
ning your code, your app needs to respond quickly: you want the process to be avail‐
able to handle the next request as soon as possible. However, some requests demand
actions that may take longer—for example, sending email or generating a PDF. That’s
the problem that distributed task queues are designed to solve.
Celery and RQ are the best known open source task queues with Python APIs. Cloud
providers also offer their own proprietary task queues.
These products wrap a message queue and offer a high-level API for delegating tasks
to workers, possibly running on different machines.

                    In the context of task queues, the words producer and consumer are
                    used instead of traditional client/server terminology. For example,
                    a Django view handler produces job requests, which are put in the
                    queue to be consumed by one or more PDF rendering processes.

Quoting directly from Celery’s FAQ, here are some typical use cases:

          • Running something in the background. For example, to finish the web request as
            soon as possible, then update the users page incrementally. This gives the user the

        impression of good performance and “snappiness,” even though the real work
        might actually take some time.
      • Running something after the web request has finished.
      • Making sure something is done, by executing it asynchronously and using retries.
      • Scheduling periodic work.

Besides solving these immediate problems, task queues support horizontal scalability.
Producers and consumers are decoupled: a producer doesn’t call a consumer, it puts
a request in a queue. Consumers don’t need to know anything about the producers
(but the request may include information about the producer, if an acknowledgment
is required). Crucially, you can easily add more workers to consume tasks as demand
grows. That’s why Celery and RQ are called distributed task queues.
Recall that our simple procs.py (Example 19-13) used two queues: one for job
requests, the other for collecting results. The distributed architecture of Celery and
RQ uses a similar pattern. Both support using the Redis NoSQL database as a message
queue and result storage. Celery also supports other message queues like RabbitMQ
or Amazon SQS, as well other databases for result storage.
This wraps up our introduction to concurrency in Python. The next two chapters will
continue this theme, focusing on the concurrent.futures and asyncio packages of
the standard library.

Chapter Summary
After a bit of theory, this chapter presented the spinner scripts implemented in each
of Python’s three native concurrency programming models:

  • Threads, with the threading package
  • Processes, with multiprocessing
  • Asynchronous coroutines with asyncio

We then explored the real impact of the GIL with an experiment: changing the spin‐
ner examples to compute the primality of a large integer and observe the resulting
behavior. This demonstrated graphically that CPU-intensive functions must be avoi‐
ded in asyncio, as they block the event loop. The threaded version of the experiment
worked—despite the GIL—because Python periodically interrupts threads, and the
example used only two threads: one doing compute-intensive work, and the other
driving the animation only 10 times per second. The multiprocessing variant
worked around the GIL, starting a new process just for the animation, while the main
process did the primality check.

The next example, computing several primes, highlighted the difference between mul
tiprocessing and threading, proving that only processes allow Python to benefit
from multicore CPUs. Python’s GIL makes threads worse than sequential code for
heavy computations.
The GIL dominates discussions about concurrent and parallel computing in Python,
but we should not overestimate its impact. That was the point of “Python in the Mul‐
ticore World” on page 725. For example, the GIL doesn’t affect many use cases of
Python in system administration. On the other hand, the data science and server-side
development communities have worked around the GIL with industrial-strength sol‐
utions tailored to their specific needs. The last two sections mentioned two common
elements to support Python server-side applications at scale: WSGI application
servers and distributed task queues.

Further Reading
This chapter has an extensive reading list, so I split it into subsections.

Concurrency with Threads and Processes
The concurrent.futures library covered in Chapter 20 uses threads, processes, locks,
and queues under the hood, but you won’t see individual instances of them; they’re
bundled and managed by the higher-level abstractions of a ThreadPoolExecutor and
a ProcessPoolExecutor. If you want to learn more about the practice of concurrent
programming with those low-level objects, “An Intro to Threading in Python” by Jim
Anderson is a good first read. Doug Hellmann has a chapter titled “Concurrency with
Processes, Threads, and Coroutines” on his website and book, The Python 3 Standard
Library by Example (Addison-Wesley).
Brett Slatkin’s Effective Python, 2nd ed. (Addison-Wesley), David Beazley’s Python
Essential Reference, 4th ed. (Addison-Wesley), and Martelli et al., Python in a Nut‐
shell, 3rd ed. (O’Reilly) are other general Python references with significant coverage
of threading and multiprocessing. The vast multiprocessing official documenta‐
tion includes useful advice in its “Programming guidelines” section.
Jesse Noller and Richard Oudkerk contributed the multiprocessing package, intro‐
duced in PEP 371—Addition of the multiprocessing package to the standard library.
The official documentation for the package is a 93 KB .rst file—that’s about 63 pages
—making it one of the longest chapters in the Python standard library.
In High Performance Python, 2nd ed., (O’Reilly), authors Micha Gorelick and Ian
Ozsvald include a chapter about multiprocessing with an example about checking
for primes with a different strategy than our procs.py example. For each number, they
split the range of possible factors—from 2 to sqrt(n)—into subranges, and make

each worker iterate over one of the subranges. Their divide-and-conquer approach is
typical of scientific computing applications where the datasets are huge, and worksta‐
tions (or clusters) have more CPU cores than users. On a server-side system handling
requests from many users, it is simpler and more efficient to let each process work on
one computation from start to finish—reducing the overhead of communication and
coordination among processes. Besides multiprocessing, Gorelick and Ozsvald
present many other ways of developing and deploying high-performance data science
applications leveraging multiple cores, GPUs, clusters, profilers, and compilers like
Cython and Numba. Their last chapter, “Lessons from the Field,” is a valuable collec‐
tion of short case studies contributed by other practitioners of high-performance
computing in Python.
Advanced Python Development by Matthew Wilkes (Apress), is a rare book that
includes short examples to explain concepts, while also showing how to build a realis‐
tic application ready for production: a data aggregator, similar to DevOps monitoring
systems or IoT data collectors for distributed sensors. Two chapters in Advanced
Python Development cover concurrent programming with threading and asyncio.
Jan Palach’s Parallel Programming with Python (Packt, 2014) explains the core con‐
cepts behind concurrency and parallelism, covering Python’s standard library as well
as Celery.
“The Truth About Threads” is the title of Chapter 2 in Using Asyncio in Python by
Caleb Hattingh (O’Reilly).26 The chapter covers the benefits and drawbacks of thread‐
ing—with compelling quotes from several authoritative sources—making it clear that
the fundamental challenges of threads have nothing to do with Python or the GIL.
Quoting verbatim from page 14 of Using Asyncio in Python:
      These themes repeat throughout:

         • Threading makes code hard to reason about.
         • Threading is an inefficient model for large-scale concurrency (thousands of con‐
           current tasks).

If you want to learn the hard way how difficult it is to reason about threads and locks
—without risking your job—try the exercises in Allen Downey’s workbook, The Little
Book of Semaphores (Green Tea Press). The exercises in Downey’s book range from
easy to very hard to unsolvable, but even the easy ones are eye-opening.

26 Caleb is one of the tech reviewers for this edition of Fluent Python.

The GIL
If you are intrigued about the GIL, remember we have no control over it from Python
code, so the canonical reference is in the C-API documentation: Thread State and the
Global Interpreter Lock. The Python Library and Extension FAQ answers: “Can’t we
get rid of the Global Interpreter Lock?”. Also worth reading are posts by Guido van
Rossum and Jesse Noller (contributor of the multiprocessing package), respectively:
“It isn’t Easy to Remove the GIL” and “Python Threads and the Global Interpreter
Lock”.
CPython Internals by Anthony Shaw (Real Python) explains the implementation of
the CPython 3 interpreter at the C programming level. Shaw’s longest chapter is
“Parallelism and Concurrency”: a deep dive into Python’s native support for threads
and processes, including managing the GIL from extensions using the C/Python API.
Finally, David Beazley presented a detailed exploration in “Understanding the
Python GIL”.27 In slide #54 of the presentation, Beazley reports an increase in pro‐
cessing time for a particular benchmark with the new GIL algorithm introduced in
Python 3.2. The issue is not significant with real workloads, according to a comment
by Antoine Pitrou—who implemented the new GIL algorithm—in the bug report
submitted by Beazley: Python issue #7946.

Concurrency Beyond the Standard Library
Fluent Python focuses on core language features and core parts of the standard
library. Full Stack Python is a great complement to this book: it’s about Python’s eco‐
system, with sections titled “Development Environments,” “Data,” “Web Develop‐
ment,” and “DevOps,” among others.
I’ve already mentioned two books that cover concurrency using the Python standard
library that also include significant content on third-party libraries and tools:
High Performance Python, 2nd ed. and Parallel Programming with Python. Francesco
Pierfederici’s Distributed Computing with Python (Packt) covers the standard library
and also the use of cloud providers and HPC (High-Performance Computing) clus‐
ters.
“Python, Performance, and GPUs” by Matthew Rocklin is “a status update for using
GPU accelerators from Python,” posted in June 2019.
“Instagram currently features the world’s largest deployment of the Django web
framework, which is written entirely in Python.” That’s the opening sentence of the
blog post, “Web Service Efficiency at Instagram with Python”, written by Min Ni—a
software engineer at Instagram. The post describes metrics and tools Instagram uses

27 Thanks to Lucas Brunialti for sending me a link to this talk.

to optimize the efficiency of its Python codebase, as well as detect and diagnose per‐
formance regressions as it deploys its back end “30-50 times a day.”
Architecture Patterns with Python: Enabling Test-Driven Development, Domain-
Driven Design, and Event-Driven Microservices by Harry Percival and Bob Gregory
(O’Reilly) presents architectural patterns for Python server-side applications. The
authors also made the book freely available online at cosmicpython.com.
Two elegant and easy-to-use libraries for parallelizing tasks over processes are lelo by
João S. O. Bueno and python-parallelize by Nat Pryce. The lelo package defines a @par
allel decorator that you can apply to any function to magically make it unblocking:
when you call the decorated function, its execution is started in another process. Nat
Pryce’s python-parallelize package provides a parallelize generator that distributes
the execution of a for loop over multiple CPUs. Both packages are built on the multi‐
processing library.
Python core developer Eric Snow maintains a Multicore Python wiki, with notes
about his and other people’s efforts to improve Python’s support for parallel execu‐
tion. Snow is the author of PEP 554—Multiple Interpreters in the Stdlib. If approved
and implemented, PEP 554 lays the groundwork for future enhancements that may
eventually allow Python to use multiple cores without the overheads of multiprocess‐
ing. One of the biggest blockers is the complex interaction between multiple active
subinterpreters and extensions that assume a single interpreter.
Mark Shannon—also a Python maintainer—created a useful table comparing concur‐
rent models in Python, referenced in a discussion about subinterpreters between him,
Eric Snow, and other developers on the python-dev mailing list. In Shannon’s table,
the “Ideal CSP” column refers to the theoretical Communicating sequential processes
model proposed by Tony Hoare in 1978. Go also allows shared objects, violating an
essential constraint of CSP: execution units should communicate through message
passing through channels.
Stackless Python (a.k.a. Stackless) is a fork of CPython implementing microthreads,
which are application-level lightweight threads—as opposed to OS threads. The mas‐
sively multiplayer online game EVE Online was built on Stackless, and engineers
employed by the game company CCP were maintainers of Stackless for a while. Some
features of Stackless were reimplemented in the Pypy interpreter and the greenlet
package, the core technology of the gevent networking library, which in turn is the
foundation of the Gunicorn application server.
The actor model of concurrent programming is at the core of the highly scalable
Erlang and Elixir languages, and is also the model of the Akka framework for Scala
and Java. If you want to try out the actor model in Python, check out the Thespian
and Pykka libraries.

My remaining recommendations have few or zero mentions of Python, but are nev‐
ertheless relevant to readers interested in the theme of this chapter.

Concurrency and Scalability Beyond Python
RabbitMQ in Action by Alvaro Videla and Jason J. W. Williams (Manning) is a very
well-written introduction to RabbitMQ and the Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
(AMQP) standard, with examples in Python, PHP, and Ruby. Regardless of the rest
of your tech stack, and even if you plan to use Celery with RabbitMQ under the hood,
I recommend this book for its coverage of concepts, motivation, and patterns for dis‐
tributed message queues, as well as operating and tuning RabbitMQ at scale.
I learned a lot reading Seven Concurrency Models in Seven Weeks, by Paul Butcher
(Pragmatic Bookshelf), with the eloquent subtitle When Threads Unravel. Chapter 1
of the book presents the core concepts and challenges of programming with threads
and locks in Java.28 The remaining six chapters of the book are devoted to what the
author considers better alternatives for concurrent and parallel programming, as sup‐
ported by different languages, tools, and libraries. The examples use Java, Clojure,
Elixir, and C (for the chapter about parallel programming with the OpenCL frame‐
work). The CSP model is exemplified with Clojure code, although the Go language
deserves credit for popularizing that approach. Elixir is the language of the examples
illustrating the actor model. A freely available, alternative bonus chapter about actors
uses Scala and the Akka framework. Unless you already know Scala, Elixir is a more
accessible language to learn and experiment with the actor model and the
Erlang/OTP distributed systems platform.
Unmesh Joshi of Thoughtworks has contributed several pages documenting “Pat‐
terns of Distributed Systems” to Martin Fowler’s blog. The opening page is a great
introduction the topic, with links to individual patterns. Joshi is adding patterns
incrementally, but what’s already there distills years of hard-earned experience in
mission-critical systems.
Martin Kleppmann’s Designing Data-Intensive Applications (O’Reilly) is a rare book
written by a practitioner with deep industry experience and advanced academic back‐
ground. The author worked with large-scale data infrastructure at LinkedIn and two
startups, before becoming a researcher of distributed systems at the University of
Cambridge. Each chapter in Kleppmann’s book ends with an extensive list of refer‐
ences, including recent research results. The book also includes numerous illuminat‐
ing diagrams and beautiful concept maps.
I was fortunate to be in the audience for Francesco Cesarini’s outstanding workshop
on the architecture of reliable distributed systems at OSCON 2016: “Designing and

28 Python’s threading and concurrent.futures APIs are heavily influenced by the Java standard library.

architecting for scalability with Erlang/OTP” (video at the O’Reilly Learning Plat‐
form). Despite the title, 9:35 into the video, Cesarini explains:
    Very little of what I am going to say will be Erlang-specific […]. The fact remains that
    Erlang will remove a lot of accidental difficulties to making systems which are resilient
    and which never fail, and are scalable. So it will be much easier if you do use Erlang, or
    a language running on the Erlang virtual machine.

That workshop was based on the last four chapters of Designing for Scalability with
Erlang/OTP by Francesco Cesarini and Steve Vinoski (O’Reilly).
Programming distributed systems is challenging and exciting, but beware of web-
scale envy. The KISS principle remains solid engineering advice.
Check out the paper “Scalability! But at what COST?” by Frank McSherry, Michael
Isard, and Derek G. Murray. The authors identified parallel graph-processing systems
presented in academic symposia that require hundreds of cores to outperform a
“competent single-threaded implementation.” They also found systems that “under‐
perform one thread for all of their reported configurations.”
Those findings remind me of a classic hacker quip:
    My Perl script is faster than your Hadoop cluster.

                                             Soapbox
 To Manage Complexity, We Need Constraints
 I learned to program on a TI-58 calculator. Its “language” was similar to assembly. At
 that level, all “variables” are globals, and you don’t have the luxury of structured con‐
 trol flow statements. You have conditional jumps: instructions that take the execution
 directly to an arbitrary location—ahead or behind the current spot—depending on
 the value of a CPU register or flag.
 Basically you can do anything in assembly, and that’s the challenge: there are very few
 constraints to keep you from making mistakes, and to help maintainers understand
 the code when changes are needed.
 The second language I learned was the unstructured BASIC that came with 8-bit
 computers—nothing like Visual Basic, which appeared much later. There were FOR,
 GOSUB, and RETURN statements, but still no concept of local variables. GOSUB did not
 support parameter passing: it was just a fancy GOTO that put a return line number in a
 stack so that RETURN had a target to jump to. Subroutines could help themselves to the
 global data, and put results there too. We had to improvise other forms of control
 flow with combinations of IF and GOTO—which, again, allowed you to jump to any
 line of the program.

   After a few years of programming with jumps and global variables, I remember the
   struggle to rewire my brain for “structured programming” when I learned Pascal.
   Now I had to use control flow statements around blocks of code that have a single
   entry point. I couldn’t jump to any instruction I liked. Global variables were unavoid‐
   able in BASIC, but now they were taboo. I needed to rethink the flow of data and
   explicitly pass arguments to functions.
   The next challenge for me was learning object-oriented programming. At its core,
   object-oriented programming is structured programming with more constraints and
   polymorphism. Information hiding forces yet another rethink of where data lives. I
   remember being frustrated more than once because I had to refactor my code so that
   a method I was writing could get information that was encapsulated in an object that
   my method could not reach.
   Functional programming languages add other constraints, but immutability is the
   hardest to swallow after decades of imperative programming and object-oriented
   programming. After we get used to these constraints, we see them as blessings. They
   make reasoning about the code much easier.
   Lack of constraints is the main problem with the threads-and-locks model of concur‐
   rent programming. When summarizing Chapter 1 of Seven Concurrency Models in
   Seven Weeks, Paul Butcher wrote:
          The greatest weakness of the approach, however, is that threads-and-locks program‐
          ming is hard. It may be easy for a language designer to add them to a language, but
          they provide us, the poor programmers, with very little help.

   Some examples of unconstrained behavior in that model:

      • Threads can share access to arbitrary, mutable data structures.
      • The scheduler can interrupt a thread at almost any point, including in the middle
        of a simple operation like a += 1. Very few operations are atomic at the level of
        source code expressions.
      • Locks are usually advisory. That’s a technical term meaning that you must
        remember to explicitly hold a lock before updating a shared data structure. If you
        forget to get the lock, nothing prevents your code from messing up the data
        while another thread dutifully holds the lock and is updating the same data.

   In contrast, consider some constraints enforced by the actor model, in which the exe‐
   cution unit is called an actor:29

29 The Erlang community uses the term “process” for actors. In Erlang, each process is a function in its own
   loop, so they are very lightweight and it’s feasible to have millions of them active at once in a single machine
   —no relation to the heavyweight OS processes we’ve been talking about elsewhere in this chapter. So here we
   have examples of the two sins described by Prof. Simon: using different words to mean the same thing, and
   using one word to mean different things.

  • An actor can have internal state, but cannot share state with other actors.
  • Actors can only communicate by sending and receiving messages.
  • Messages only hold copies of data, not references to mutable data.
  • An actor only handles one message at a time. There is no concurrent execution
    inside a single actor.

Of course, you can adopt an actor style of coding in any language by following these
rules. You can also use object-oriented programming idioms in C, and even struc‐
tured programming patterns in assembly. But doing any of that requires a lot of
agreement and discipline among everyone who touches the code.
Managing locks is unnecessary in the actor model, as implemented by Erlang and
Elixir, where all data types are immutable.
Threads-and-locks are not going away. I just don’t think dealing with such low-level
entities is a good use of my time as I write applications—as opposed to kernel mod‐
ules or databases.
I reserve the right to change my mind, always. But right now, I am convinced that the
actor model is the most sensible, general-purpose concurrent programming model
available. CSP (Communicating Sequential Processes) is also sensible, but its
implementation in Go leaves out some constraints. The idea in CSP is that coroutines
(or goroutines in Go) exchange data and synchronize using queues (called channels in
Go). But Go also supports memory sharing and locks. I’ve seen a book about Go
advocate the use of shared memory and locks instead of channels—in the name of
performance. Old habits die hard.

