                                                              Preface

T     his book applies the deductive method to programming by affiliating
programs with the abstract mathematical theories that enable them to work.
Specification of these theories, algorithms written in terms of these theories,
and theorems and lemmas describing their properties are presented together.
The implementation of the algorithms in a real programming language is
central to the book. While the specifications, which are addressed to human
beings, should, and even must, combine rigor with appropriate informality,
the code, which is addressed to the computer, must be absolutely precise
even while being general.
    As with other areas of science and engineering, the appropriate founda-
tion of programming is the deductive method. It facilitates the decompo-
sition of complex systems into components with mathematically specified
behavior. That, in turn, is a necessary precondition for designing efficient,
reliable, secure, and economical software.
    The book is addressed to those who want a deeper understanding of pro-
gramming, whether they are full-time software developers, or scientists and
engineers for whom programming is an important part of their professional
activity.
    The book is intended to be read from beginning to end. Only by reading
the code, proving the lemmas, and doing the exercises can readers gain
understanding of the material. In addition, we suggest several projects,
some open-ended. While the book is terse, a careful reader will eventually
see the connections between its parts and the reasons for our choice of
material. Discovering the architectural principles of the book should be the
reader’s goal.
    We assume an ability to do elementary algebraic manipulations.1 We
also assume familiarity with the basic vocabulary of logic and set theory
1. For a refresher on elementary algebra, we recommend Chrystal [1904].

                                          xi
xii                                                                             Preface

at the level of undergraduate courses on discrete mathematics; Appendix A
summarizes the notation that we use. We provide definitions of a few con-
cepts of abstract algebra when they are needed to specify algorithms. We
assume programming maturity and understanding of computer architecture2
and fundamental algorithms and data structures.3
    We chose C++ because it combines powerful abstraction facilities with
faithful representation of the underlying machine.4 We use a small subset
of the language and write requirements as structured comments. We hope
that readers not already familiar with C++ are able to follow the book. Ap-
pendix B specifies the subset of the language used in the book.5 Wherever
there is a difference between mathematical notation and C++, the typeset-
ting and the context determine whether the mathematical or C++ meaning
applies. While many concepts and programs in the book have parallels in
STL (the C++ Standard Template Library), the book departs from some of
the STL design decisions. The book also ignores issues that a real library,
such as STL, has to address: namespaces, visibility, inline directives, and so
on.
    Chapter 1 describes values, objects, types, procedures, and concepts.
Chapters 2–5 describe algorithms on algebraic structures, such as semi-
groups and totally ordered sets. Chapters 6–11 describe algorithms on ab-
stractions of memory. Chapter 12 describes objects containing other ob-
jects. The afterword presents our reflections on the approach presented by
the book.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Adobe Systems and its management for supporting the
Foundations of Programming course and this book, which grew out of it. In
particular, Greg Gilley initiated the course and suggested writing the book;
Dave Story and then Bill Hensler provided unwavering support. Finally,
the book would not have been possible without Sean Parent’s enlightened
management and continuous scrutiny of the code and the text. The ideas in
the book stem from our close collaboration, spanning almost three decades,
with Dave Musser. Bjarne Stroustrup deliberately evolved C++ to support
2. We recommend Patterson and Hennessy [2007].
3. For a selective but incisive introduction to algorithms and data structures, we recom-
mend Tarjan [1983].
4. The standard reference is Stroustrup [2000].
5. The code in the book compiles and runs under Microsoft Visual C++ 9 and g++ 4.
This code, together with a few trivial macros that enable it to compile, as well as unit
tests, can be downloaded from www.elementsofprogramming.com.
                                                                          xiii

these ideas. Both Dave and Bjarne were kind enough to come to San Jose
and carefully review the preliminary draft. Sean Parent and Bjarne Strous-
trup wrote the appendix defining the C++ subset used in the book. Jon
Brandt reviewed multiple drafts of the book. John Wilkinson carefully read
the final manuscript, providing innumerable valuable suggestions.
    The book has benefited significantly from the contributions of our editor,
Peter Gordon, our project editor, Elizabeth Ryan, our copy editor, Evelyn
Pyle, and the editorial reviewers: Matt Austern, Andrew Koenig, David
Musser, Arch Robison, Jerry Schwarz, Jeremy Siek, and John Wilkinson.
    We thank all the students who took the course at Adobe and an earlier
course at SGI for their suggestions. We hope we succeeded in weaving the
material from these courses into a coherent whole. We are grateful for com-
ments from Dave Abrahams, Andrei Alexandrescu, Konstantine Arkoudas,
John Banning, Hans Boehm, Angelo Borsotti, Jim Dehnert, John DeTre-
ville, Boris Fomitchev, Kevlin Henney, Jussi Ketonen, Karl Malbrain, Mat
Marcus, Larry Masinter, Dave Parent, Dmitry Polukhin, Jon Reid, Mark
Ruzon, Geoff Scott, David Simons, Anna Stepanov, Tony Van Eerd, Walter
Vannini, Tim Winkler, and Oleg Zabluda.
    We thank John Banning, Bob English, Steven Gratton, Max Hailperin,
Eugene Kirpichov, Alexei Nekrassov, Mark Ruzon, and Hao Song for finding
errors in the first printing. We thank Foster Brereton, Gabriel Dos Reis,
Ryan Ernst, Abraham Sebastian, Mike Spertus, Henning Thielemann, and
Carla Villoria Burgazzi for finding errors in the second printing. We thank
Shinji Dosaka, Ryan Ernst, Steven Gratton, and Abraham Sebastian for
finding errors in the third printing. We thank Matt Austern, Robert Jan
Harteveld, Daniel Krügler, Volker Lukas, Veljko Miljanic, Doug Morgan,
Jeremy Murphy, Qiu Zongyan, Mark Ruzon, Yoshiki Shibata, Sean Silva,
Andrej Sprogar, Mitsutaka Takeda, Stefan Vargyas, and Guilliam Xavier for
finding errors in the (third and) fourth printing. We thank Jeremy Murphy,
Robert Southee, and Yutaka Tsutano for finding errors in the sixth printing,
and Fernando Pelliccioni for proofreading the Authors’ Edition.6
    Finally, we are grateful to all the people who taught us through their
writings or in person and to the institutions that allowed us to deepen our
understanding of programming.

6. See www.elementsofprogramming.com for the up-to-date errata.
