                                                         Chapter 1

                                          Foundations

S    tarting with a brief taxonomy of ideas, we introduce notions of value,
object, type, procedure, and concept that represent different categories of
ideas in the computer. A central notion of the book, regularity, is introduced
and elaborated. When applied to procedures, regularity means that procedures
return equal results for equal arguments. When applied to types, regularity
means that types possess the equality operator and equality-preserving copy
construction and assignment. Regularity enables us to apply equational rea-
soning (substituting equals for equals) to transform and optimize programs.

1.1     Categories of Ideas: Entity, Species,
        Genus
In order to explain what objects, types, and other foundational computer
notions are, it is useful to give an overview of some categories of ideas that
correspond to these notions.
    An abstract entity is an individual thing that is eternal and unchange-
able, while a concrete entity is an individual thing that comes into and out
of existence in space and time. An attribute—a correspondence between a
concrete entity and an abstract entity—describes some property, measure-
ment, or quality of the concrete entity. Identity, a primitive notion of our
perception of reality, determines the sameness of a thing changing over time.
Attributes of a concrete entity can change without affecting its identity. A
snapshot of a concrete entity is a complete collection of its attributes at
a particular point in time. Concrete entities are not only physical entities

but also legal, financial, or political entities. Blue and 13 are examples of
abstract entities. Socrates and the United States of America are examples
of concrete entities. The color of Socrates’ eyes and the number of U.S.
states are examples of attributes.
    An abstract species describes common properties of essentially equivalent
abstract entities. Examples of abstract species are natural number and color.
A concrete species describes the set of attributes of essentially equivalent
concrete entities. Examples of concrete species are man and U.S. state.
    A function is a rule that associates one or more abstract entities, called
arguments, from corresponding species with an abstract entity, called the
result, from another species. Examples of functions are the successor func-
tion, which associates each natural number with the one that immediately
follows it, and the function that associates with two colors the result of
blending them.
    An abstract genus describes different abstract species that are similar in
some respect. Examples of abstract genera are number and binary operator.
A concrete genus describes different concrete species similar in some respect.
Examples of concrete genera are mammal and biped.
    An entity belongs to a single species, which provides the rules for its
construction or existence. An entity can belong to several genera, each of
which describes certain properties.
    We show later in the chapter that objects and values represent entities,
types represent species, and concepts represent genera.

1.2     Values
Unless we know the interpretation, the only things we see in a computer are
0s and 1s. A datum is a finite sequence of 0s and 1s.
    A value type is a correspondence between a species (abstract or concrete)
and a set of datums. A datum corresponding to a particular entity is called
a representation of the entity; the entity is called the interpretation of the
datum. We refer to a datum together with its interpretation as a value.
Examples of values are integers represented in 32-bit two’s complement big-
endian format and rational numbers represented as a concatenation of two
32-bit sequences, interpreted as integer numerator and denominator, repre-
sented as two’s complement big-endian values.
    A datum is well formed with respect to a value type if and only if that
datum represents an abstract entity. For example, every sequence of 32 bits
is well formed when interpreted as a two’s-complement integer; an IEEE 754
1.2   Values                                                                3

floating-point NaN (Not a Number) is not well formed when interpreted as
a real number.
   A value type is properly partial if its values represent a proper subset of
the abstract entities in the corresponding species; otherwise it is total. For
example, the type int is properly partial, while the type bool is total.
   A value type is uniquely represented if and only if at most one value
corresponds to each abstract entity. For example, a type representing a
truth value as a byte that interprets zero as false and nonzero as true is not
uniquely represented. A type representing an integer as a sign bit and an
unsigned magnitude does not provide a unique representation of zero. A
type representing an integer in two’s complement is uniquely represented.
    A value type is ambiguous if and only if a value of the type has more
than one interpretation. The negation of ambiguous is unambiguous. For
example, a type representing a calendar year over a period longer than a
single century as two decimal digits is ambiguous.
   Two values of a value type are equal if and only if they represent the
same abstract entity. They are representationally equal if and only if their
datums are identical sequences of 0s and 1s.

Lemma 1.1 If a value type is uniquely represented, equality implies repre-
sentational equality.

Lemma 1.2 If a value type is not ambiguous, representational equality
implies equality.

    If a value type is uniquely represented, we implement equality by test-
ing that both sequences of 0s and 1s are the same. Otherwise we must
implement equality in such a way that preserves its consistency with the in-
terpretations of its arguments. Nonunique representations are chosen when
testing equality is done less frequently than operations generating new val-
ues and when it is possible to make generating new values faster at the cost
of making equality slower. For example, two rational numbers represented
as pairs of integers are equal if they reduce to the same lowest terms. Two
finite sets represented as unsorted sequences are equal if, after sorting and
eliminating duplicates, their corresponding elements are equal.
    Sometimes, implementing true behavioral equality is too expensive or
even impossible, as in the case for a type of encodings of computable func-
tions. In these cases we must settle for the weaker representational equality:
that two values are the same sequence of 0s and 1s.
   Computers implement functions on abstract entities as functions on val-
ues. While values reside in memory, a properly implemented function on

values does not depend on particular memory addresses: It implements a
mapping from values to values.
   A function defined on a value type is regular if and only if it respects
equality: Substituting an equal value for an argument gives an equal result.
Most numeric functions are regular. An example of a numeric function
that is not regular is the function that returns the numerator of a rational
number represented as a pair of integers, since 12 = 42 , but numerator( 12 ) 6=
numerator( 24 ). Regular functions allow equational reasoning: substituting
equals for equals.
   A nonregular function depends on the representation, not just the inter-
pretation, of its argument. When designing the representation for a value
type, two tasks go hand in hand: implementing equality and deciding which
functions will be regular.

1.3     Objects
A memory is a set of words, each with an address and a content. The
addresses are values of a fixed size, called the address length. The contents
are values of another fixed size, called the word length. The content of an
address is obtained by a load operation. The association of a content with
an address is changed by a store operation. Examples of memories are bytes
in main memory and blocks on a disk drive.
    An object is a representation of a concrete entity as a value in memory.
An object has a state that is a value of some value type. The state of an
object is changeable. Given an object corresponding to a concrete entity,
its state corresponds to a snapshot of that entity. An object owns a set of
resources, such as memory words or records in a file, to hold its state.
    While the value of an object is a contiguous sequence of 0s and 1s, the
resources in which these 0s and 1s are stored are not necessarily contiguous.
It is the interpretation that gives unity to an object. For example, two
doubles may be interpreted as a single complex number even if they are not
adjacent. The resources of an object might even be in different memories.
This book, however, deals only with objects residing in a single memory
with one address space. Every object has a unique starting address, from
which all its resources can be reached.
    An object type is a pattern for storing and modifying values in memory.
Corresponding to every object type is a value type describing states of ob-
jects of that type. Every object belongs to an object type. An example of an
object type is integers represented in 32-bit two’s complement little-endian
1.3   Objects                                                                 5

format aligned to a 4-byte address boundary.
    Values and objects play complementary roles. Values are unchanging and
are independent of any particular implementation in the computer. Objects
are changeable and have computer-specific implementations. The state of
an object at any point in time can be described by a value; this value could
in principle be written down on paper (making a snapshot) or serialized
and sent over a communication link. Describing the states of objects in
terms of values allows us to abstract from the particular implementations of
the objects when discussing equality. Functional programming deals with
values; imperative programming deals with objects.
    We use values to represent entities. Since values are unchanging, they can
represent abstract entities. Sequences of values can also represent sequences
of snapshots of concrete entities. Objects hold values representing entities.
Since objects are changeable, they can represent concrete entities by taking
on a new value to represent a change in the entity. Objects can also represent
abstract entities: staying constant or taking on different approximations to
the abstract.
    We use objects in the computer for the following three reasons.

  1. Objects model changeable concrete entities, such as employee records
     in a payroll application.

  2. Objects provide a powerful way to implement functions on values,
     such as a procedure implementing the square root of a floating-point
     number using an iterative algorithm.

  3. Computers with memory constitute the only available realization of a
     universal computational device.

    Some properties of value types carry through to object types. An object
is well formed if and only if its state is well formed. An object type is
properly partial if and only if its value type is properly partial; otherwise it
is total . An object type is uniquely represented if and only if its value type
is uniquely represented.
    Since concrete entities have identities, objects representing them need
a corresponding notion of identity. An identity token is a unique value
expressing the identity of an object and is computed from the value of the
object and the address of its resources. Examples of identity tokens are the
address of the object, an index into an array where the object is stored,
and an employee number in a personnel record. Testing equality of identity
tokens corresponds to testing identity. During the lifetime of an application,

a particular object could use different identity tokens as it moves either
within a data structure or from one data structure to another.
    Two objects of the same type are equal if and only if their states are
equal. If two objects are equal, we say that one is a copy of the other.
Making a change to an object does not affect any copy of it.
    This book uses a programming language that has no way to describe
values and value types as separate from objects and object types. So from
this point on, when we refer to types without qualification, we mean object
types.

1.4      Procedures
A procedure is a sequence of instructions that modifies the state of some
objects; it may also construct or destroy objects.
   The objects with which a procedure interacts can be divided into four
kinds, corresponding to the intentions of the programmer.

    1. Input/output consists of objects passed to/from a procedure directly
       or indirectly through its arguments or returned result.

    2. Local state consists of objects created, destroyed, and usually modified
       during a single invocation of the procedure.

    3. Global state consists of objects accessible to this and other procedures
       across multiple invocations.

    4. Own state consists of objects accessible only to this procedure (and
       its affiliated procedures) but shared across multiple invocations.

    An object is passed directly if it is passed as an argument or returned as
the result and is passed indirectly if it is passed via a pointer or pointerlike
object. An object is an input to a procedure if it is read, but not modified,
by the procedure. An object is an output from a procedure if it is written,
created, or destroyed by the procedure, but its initial state is not read by
the procedure. An object is an input/output of a procedure if it is modified
as well as read by the procedure.
    A computational basis for a type is a finite set of procedures that enable
the construction of any other procedure on the type. A basis is efficient if
and only if any procedure implemented using it is as efficient as an equivalent
procedure written in terms of an alternative basis. For example, a basis
for unsigned k-bit integers providing only zero, equality, and the successor
1.5   Regular Types                                                                    7

function is not efficient, since the complexity of addition in terms of successor
is exponential in k.
    A basis is expressive if and only if it allows compact and convenient
definitions of procedures on the type. In particular, all the common math-
ematical operations need to be provided when they are appropriate. For
example, subtraction could be implemented using negation and addition
but should be included in an expressive basis. Similarly, negation could
be implemented using subtraction and zero but should be included in an
expressive basis.

1.5       Regular Types
There is a set of procedures whose inclusion in the computational basis of a
type lets us place objects in data structures and use algorithms to copy ob-
jects from one data structure to another. We call types having such a basis
regular, since their use guarantees regularity of behavior and, therefore, in-
teroperability.1 We derive the semantics of regular types from built-in types,
such as bool, int, and, when restricted to well-formed values, double. A
type is regular if and only if its basis includes equality, assignment, destruc-
tor, default constructor, copy constructor, total ordering,2 and underlying
type.3
    Equality is a procedure that takes two objects of the same type and
returns true if and only if the object states are equal. Inequality is always
defined and returns the negation of equality. We use the following notation:

                                      Specifications      C++
                      Equality           a=b             a == b
                      Inequality         a 6= b          a != b

   Assignment is a procedure that takes two objects of the same type and
makes the first object equal to the second without modifying the second.
The meaning of assignment does not depend on the initial value of the first
object. We use the following notation:

                                       Specifications      C++
                      Assignment          a←b              a = b

1. While regular types underlie the design of STL, they were first formally introduced in
Dehnert and Stepanov [2000].
2. Strictly speaking, as becomes clear in Chapter 4, it could be either total ordering or
default total ordering.
3. Underlying type is defined in Chapter 12.

    A destructor is a procedure causing the cessation of an object’s existence.
After a destructor has been called on an object, no procedure can be applied
to it, and its former memory locations and resources may be reused for other
purposes. The destructor is normally invoked implicitly. Global objects
are destroyed when the application terminates, local objects are destroyed
when the block in which they are declared is exited, and elements of a data
structure are destroyed when the data structure is destroyed.
    A constructor is a procedure transforming memory locations into an
object. The possible behaviors range from doing nothing to establishing a
complex object state.
    An object is in a partially formed state if it can be assigned to or de-
stroyed. For an object that is partially formed but not well formed, the
effect of any procedure other than assignment (only on the left side) and
destruction is not defined.

Lemma 1.3 A well-formed object is partially formed.

   A default constructor takes no arguments and leaves the object in a
partially formed state. We use the following notation:

                                                     C++
                    Local object of type T           T a;
                    Anonymous object of type T       T()

   A copy constructor takes an additional argument of the same type and
constructs a new object equal to it. We use the following notation:

                                                 C++
                     Local copy of object b    T a = b;

1.6     Regular Procedures
A procedure is regular if and only if replacing its inputs with equal objects
results in equal output objects. As with value types, when defining an
object type we must make consistent choices in how to implement equality
and which procedures on the type will be regular.

Exercise 1.1 Extend the notion of regularity to input/output objects of a
procedure, that is, to objects that are modified as well as read.

    While regularity is the default, there are reasons for nonregular behavior
of procedures.
1.6    Regular Procedures                                                     9

  1. A procedure returns the address of an object; for example, the built-in
     function addressof.

  2. A procedure returns a value determined by the state of the real world,
     such as the value of a clock or other device.

  3. A procedure returns a value depending on own state; for example, a
     pseudorandom number generator.

  4. A procedure returns a representation-dependent attribute of an object,
     such as the amount of reserved memory for a data structure.

    A functional procedure is a regular procedure defined on regular types,
with one or more direct inputs and a single output that is returned as the
result of the procedure. The regularity of functional procedures allows two
techniques for passing inputs. When the size of the parameter is small or if
the procedure needs a copy it can mutate, we pass it by value, making a local
copy. Otherwise we pass it by constant reference. A functional procedure can
be implemented as a C++ function, function pointer, or function object.4
    This is a functional procedure:
int plus_0(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}
      This is a semantically equivalent functional procedure:
int plus_1(const int& a, const int& b)
{
    return a + b;
}
    This is semantically equivalent but is not a functional procedure, because
its inputs and outputs are passed indirectly:
void plus_2(int* a, int* b, int* c)
{
    *c = *a + *b;
}
    In plus 2, a and b are input objects, while c is an output object. The
notion of a functional procedure is a syntactic rather than semantic property:
In our terminology, plus 2 is regular but not functional.
4. C++ functions are not objects and cannot be passed as arguments; C++ function
pointers and function objects are objects and can be passed as arguments.

    The definition space for a functional procedure is that subset of values
for its inputs to which it is intended to be applied. A functional procedure
always terminates on input in its definition space; while it may terminate
for input outside its definition space, it may not return a meaningful value.
    A homogeneous functional procedure is one whose input objects are all
the same type. The domain of a homogeneous functional procedure is the
type of its inputs. Rather than defining the domain of a nonhomogeneous
functional procedure as the direct product of its input types, we refer indi-
vidually to the input types of a procedure.
    The codomain for a functional procedure is the type of its output. The
result space for a functional procedure is the set of all values from its
codomain returned by the procedure for inputs from its definition space.
    Consider the functional procedure

int square(int n) { return n * n; }

    While its domain and codomain are int, its definition space is the set
of integers whose square is representable in the type, and its result space is
the set of square integers representable in the type.

Exercise 1.2 Assuming that int is a 32-bit two’s complement type, deter-
mine the exact definition and result space.

1.7     Concepts
A procedure using a type depends on syntactic, semantic, and complexity
properties of the computational basis of the type. Syntactically it depends
on the presence of certain literals and procedures with particular names
and signatures. Its semantics depend on properties of these procedures. Its
complexity depends on the time and space complexity of these procedures.
A program remains correct if a type is replaced by a different type with
the same properties. The utility of a software component, such as a library
procedure or data structure, is increased by designing it not in terms of
concrete types but in terms of requirements on types expressed as syntactic
and semantic properties. We call a collection of requirements a concept.
Types represent species; concepts represent genera.
    In order to describe concepts, we need several mechanisms dealing with
types: type attributes, type functions, and type constructors. A type at-
tribute is a mapping from a type to a value describing some characteristic
of the type. Examples of type attributes are the built-in type attribute
sizeof(T) in C++, the alignment of an object of a type, and the number
1.7   Concepts                                                                    11

of members in a struct. If F is a functional procedure type, Arity(F) re-
turns its number of inputs. A type function is a mapping from a type to an
affiliated type. An example of a type function is: given “pointer to T ,” the
type T . In some cases it is useful to define an indexed type function with
an additional constant integer parameter. For example, a type function re-
turning the type of the ith member of a structure type (counting from 0).
If F is a functional procedure type, the type function Codomain(F) returns
the type of the result. If F is a functional procedure type and i < Arity(F),
the indexed type function InputType(F, i) returns the type of the ith param-
eter (counting from 0).5 A type constructor is a mechanism for creating a
new type from one or more existing types. For example, pointer(T) is the
built-in type constructor that takes a type T and returns the type “pointer
to T”; struct is a built-in n-ary type constructor; a structure template is a
user-defined n-ary type constructor.
     If T is an n-ary type constructor, we usually denote its application to
types T0 , . . . , Tn−1 as TT0 ,...,Tn−1 . An important example is pair, which, when
applied to regular types T0 and T1 , returns a struct type pairT0 ,T1 with a
member m0 of type T0 and a member m1 of type T1 . To ensure that the type
pairT0 ,T1 is itself regular, equality, assignment, destructor, and constructors
are defined through memberwise extensions of the corresponding operations
on the types T0 and T1 . The same technique is used for any tuple type,
such as triple. In Chapter 12 we show the implementation of pairT0 ,T1 and
describe how regularity is preserved by more complicated type constructors.
     Somewhat more formally, a concept is a description of requirements on
one or more types stated in terms of the existence and properties of proce-
dures, type attributes, and type functions defined on the types. We say that
a concept is modeled by specific types, or that the types model the concept,
if the requirements are satisfied for these types. To assert that a concept
C is modeled by types T0 , . . . , Tn−1 , we write C(T0 , . . . , Tn−1 ). Concept C 0
refines concept C if whenever C 0 is satisfied for a set of types, C is also
satisfied for those types. We say that C weakens C 0 if C 0 refines C.
     A type concept is a concept defined on one type. For example, C++ de-
fines the type concept integral type, which is refined by unsigned integral type
and by signed integral type, while STL defines the type concept sequence.
We use the primitive type concepts Regular and FunctionalProcedure, cor-
responding to the informal definitions we gave earlier.
     We define concepts formally by using standard mathematical notation.
To define a concept C, we write

5. Appendix B shows how to define type attributes and type functions in C++.

C(T0 , . . . , Tn−1 ) ,
       E0
  ∧ E1
  ∧ ...
  ∧ Ek−1

where , is read as “is equal to by definition,” the Ti are formal type pa-
rameters, and the Ej are concept clauses, which take one of three forms:

     1. Application of a previously defined concept, indicating a subset of the
        type parameters modeling it.

     2. Signature of a type attribute, type function, or procedure that must
        exist for any types modeling the concept. A procedure signature takes
        the form f : T → T 0 , where T is the domain and T 0 is the codomain. A
        type function signature takes the form F : C → C 0 , where the domain
        and codomain are concepts.

     3. Axiom expressed in terms of these type attributes, type functions, and
        procedures.

    We sometimes include the definition of a type attribute, type function,
or procedure following its signature in the second kind of concept clause. It
takes the form x 7→ F(x) for some expression F. In a particular model, such
a definition could be overridden with a different but consistent implemen-
tation.
    For example, this concept describes a unary functional procedure:

UnaryFunction(F) ,
     FunctionalProcedure(F)
  ∧ Arity(F) = 1
  ∧ Domain : UnaryFunction → Regular
       F 7→ InputType(F, 0)

     This concept describes a homogeneous functional procedure:

HomogeneousFunction(F) ,
    FunctionalProcedure(F)
  ∧ Arity(F) > 0
  ∧ (∀i, j ∈ N)(i, j < Arity(F)) ⇒ (InputType(F, i) = InputType(F, j))
  ∧ Domain : HomogeneousFunction → Regular
       F 7→ InputType(F, 0)
1.7    Concepts                                                                        13

      Observe that

(∀F ∈ FunctionalProcedure) UnaryFunction(F) ⇒ HomogeneousFunction(F)

    An abstract procedure is parameterized by types and constant values,
with requirements on these parameters.6 We use function templates and
function object templates. The parameters follow the template keyword
and are introduced by typename for types and int or another integral type
for constant values. Requirements are specified via the requires clause,
whose argument is an expression built up from constant values, concrete
types, formal parameters, applications of type attributes and type functions,
equality on values and types, concepts, and logical connectives.7
    Here is an example of an abstract procedure:

template<typename Op>
    requires(BinaryOperation(Op))
Domain(Op) square(const Domain(Op)& x, Op op)
{
    return op(x, x);
}

    The domain values could be large, so we pass them by constant refer-
ence. Operations tend to be small (e.g., a function pointer or small function
object), so we pass them by value.
    Concepts describe properties satisfied by all objects of a type, whereas
preconditions describe properties of particular objects. For example, a pro-
cedure might require a parameter to be a prime number. The requirement
for an integer type is specified by a concept, while primality is specified by
a precondition. The type of a function pointer expresses only its signature,
not its semantic properties. For example, a procedure might require a pa-
rameter to be a pointer to a function implementing an associative binary
operation on integers. The requirement for a binary operation on integers
is specified by a concept; associativity of a particular function is specified
by a precondition.
    To define a precondition for a family of types, we need to use mathe-
matical notation, such as universal and existential quantifiers, implication,
and so on. For example, to specify the primality of an integer, we define
6. Abstract procedures appeared, in substantially the form we use them, in 1930 in van der
Waerden [1930], which was based on the lectures of Emmy Noether and Emil Artin.
George Collins and David Musser used them in the context of computer algebra in the
late 1960s and early 1970s. See, for example, Musser [1975].
7. See Appendix B for the full syntax of the requires clause.

     property(N : Integer )
     prime : N
        n 7→ (|n| 6= 1) ∧ (∀u, v ∈ N) uv = n ⇒ (|u| = 1 ∨ |v| = 1)

where the first line introduces formal type parameters and the concepts they
model, the second line names the property and gives its signature, and the
third line gives the predicate establishing whether the property holds for a
given argument.
    To define regularity of a unary functional procedure, we write

     property(F : UnaryFunction)
     regular unary function : F
        f 7→ (∀f 0 ∈ F)(∀x, x 0 ∈ Domain(F))
               (f = f 0 ∧ x = x 0 ) ⇒ (f(x) = f 0 (x 0 ))

   The definition easily extends to n-ary functions: Application of equal
functions to equal arguments gives equal results. By extension, we call an
abstract function regular if all its instantiations are regular. In this book
every procedural argument is a regular function unless otherwise stated; we
omit the precondition stating this explicitly.
Project 1.1 Extend the notions of equality, assignment, and copy construc-
tion to objects of distinct types. Think about the interpretations of the two
types and axioms that connect cross-type procedures.

1.8         Conclusions
The commonsense view of reality humans share has a representation in
the computer. By grounding the meanings of values and objects in their
interpretations, we obtain a simple, coherent view. Design decisions, such
as how to define equality, become straightforward when the correspondence
to entities is taken into account.
