                                                Afterword

W       e recap the main themes of the book: regularity, concepts, algorithms
and their interfaces, programming techniques, and meanings of pointers. For
each theme, we also discuss its particular limitations.

Regularity
Regular types define copy construction and assignment in terms of equality.
Regular functions return equal results when applied to equal arguments. For
example, regularity of transformations allowed us to define and reason about
algorithms for analyzing orbits. Regularity was in fact relied on throughout
the book by ordering relations, the successor function for forward iterators,
and many others.
    When we work with built-in types, we usually treat the complexity of
equality, copying, and assignment as constant. When we deal with compos-
ite objects, the complexity of these operations is expected to be linear in
the area of objects: the total amount of memory, including remote as well
as local parts. Our expectation, however, that equality is at worst linear in
the area of its arguments cannot always be met in practice.
    For example, consider representing a multiset, or unordered collection
of potentially repeated elements, as an unsorted dynamic sequence. Al-
though inserting a new element takes constant time, testing two multisets
for equality takes O(n log n) time to sort them and then compare them
lexicographically. If equality testing is infrequent, this is a good tradeoff;
however, putting such multisets into a sequence to be searched with find
could lead to unacceptable performance. For an extreme example, consider
a situation in which the equality for a type must be implemented with graph
isomorphism, a problem for which no polynomial-time algorithm is known.
    We noted in Section 1.2 that when implementing behavioral equality
on values is not feasible, we can often implement representational equal-

226                                                           AFTERWORD

ity. For composite objects, we often implement representational equality
with the techniques of Section 7.4. Such structural equality is often use-
ful in giving the semantics of copy construction and assignment and may
be useful for other purposes. Recall that representational equality implies
behavioral equality. Similarly, while a natural total ordering is not always
realizable, a default total ordering based on structure (e.g., lexicographical
ordering for sequences) allows us to efficiently sort and search. There are,
of course, objects for which neither copy construction nor assignment—nor
even equality—makes sense, because they own a unique resource.

Concepts
We use concepts from abstract algebra—semigroups, monoids, and modules—
to describe such algorithms as power, remainder, and gcd. In many cases we
need to adapt standard mathematical concepts to fit algorithms. Sometimes,
we introduce new concepts, such as HalvableMonoid , to strengthen require-
ments. Sometimes, we relax requirements, as with the partially associative
property. Often we deal with partial domains, as with the definition-space
predicate passed to collision point. Mathematical concepts are tools to be
used and freely modified. It is the same with concepts originating in com-
puter science. The iterator concepts describe fundamental properties of
certain algorithms and data structures; however, there are other coordinate
structures described by concepts yet to be discovered. It is a task of the
programmer to determine whether a given concept is useful.

Algorithms and Their Interfaces
Bounded half-open ranges correspond naturally to the implementation of
many data structures and provide a convenient way to represent inputs and
outputs for such algorithms as find, rotate, partition, merge, and so on.
However, with some algorithms, such as partition point n, a counted range
is the natural interface. Even for algorithms for which bounded ranges
are natural, there usually exist natural variations taking counted ranges.
Limiting ourselves to a single variety of interface would be a false economy.
    Three rotation algorithms, described in Chapter 10, correspond to three
iterator concepts. For every algorithm, we need to discover its conceptual
requirements, the preconditions on its input, and any other characteristics
that make its use appropriate. It is rarely the case that a single algorithm
is appropriate in all circumstances.
AFTERWORD                                                                    227

Programming Techniques
Using successor, a transformation that is strictly functional, allowed us to
write a variety of clear and efficient programs. In Chapter 9, however, we
chose to encapsulate calls of successor and predecessor into small mutative
machines, such as copy step, since it led to clearer code for a family of related
algorithms. Similarly, it is appropriate to use goto in the state machines in
Chapter 8 and to use reinterpret cast for the underlying type mechanism
in Chapter 12. Instead of restricting the expressive power of the underlying
machine and the language, it is necessary to determine the appropriate
use for each available construct. Good software results from the proper
organization of components, not from syntactic or semantic restrictions.

Meanings of Pointers
The book demonstrates two ways of using pointers: (1) as iterators and other
coordinates representing intermediate positions within an algorithm, and (2)
as connectors, representing ownership of the remote parts of a composite
object. For example, in Section 12.2, we discussed the use of pointers to
connect nodes within a list and extents within an array.
    These two roles for pointers determine different behavior when an object
is copied, destroyed, or compared for equality. Copying an object follows its
connectors to copy the remote parts, so the new object contains new con-
nectors pointing to the copied parts. On the other hand, copying an object
containing iterators (e.g., a bounded range) simply copies the iterators with-
out following them. Similarly, destroying an object follows its connectors
to destroy the remote parts, while destroying an object containing iterators
has no effect on the object to which the iterators point. Finally, equality
on a container follows connectors to compare corresponding parts, while
equality on a noncontainer (e.g., a bounded range) simply tests for equality
of corresponding iterators.
    There is, however, a third way to use pointers, to represent a relation-
ship between entities. A relationship between two or more objects is not
a part owned by these objects; it has an existence of its own while main-
taining mutual dependencies between the objects it relates. In general, a
pointer representing a relationship does not participate in the regular opera-
tions. For example, copying an object does not follow or copy a relationship
pointer, since the relationship exists for the object being copied but not for
its copy. If a one-to-one relationship is represented as a pair of embedded
pointers linking two objects, destroying either of the objects must clear the
228                                                           AFTERWORD

corresponding pointer in the other object.
    Designing data structures as composite objects with ownership and re-
mote parts leads to a programming style in which the primary objects—
those that are not subparts of other objects—reside in static variables, with
a lifetime of the entire program execution or, in local variables, with a life-
time of a block. Dynamically allocated memory is used only for remote
parts. This extends the stack-based block structure of Algol 60 to handle
arbitrary data structures. Such structure naturally fits many applications.
However, there are circumstances in which reference counting, garbage col-
lection, or other memory-management techniques are appropriate.

Conclusions
Programming is an iterative process: studying useful problems, finding effi-
cient algorithms for them, distilling the concepts underlying the algorithms,
and organizing the concepts and algorithms into a coherent mathematical
theory. Each new discovery adds to the permanent body of knowledge, but
each has its limitations.
