TEXTS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
Texts in Computer Science

Series Editors
David Gries, Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Orit Hazzan , Faculty of Education in Technology and Science, Technion—Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel
Titles in this series now included in the Thomson Reuters Book Citation Index!
   ‘Texts in Computer Science’ (TCS) delivers high-quality instructional content for
undergraduates and graduates in all areas of computing and information science, with a
strong emphasis on core foundational and theoretical material but inclusive of some
prominent applications-related content. TCS books should be reasonably self-contained
and aim to provide students with modern and clear accounts of topics ranging across the
computing curriculum. As a result, the books are ideal for semester courses or for
individual self-study in cases where people need to expand their knowledge. All texts are
authored by established experts in their fields, reviewed internally and by the series editors,
and provide numerous examples, problems, and other pedagogical tools; many contain
fully worked solutions.
   The TCS series is comprised of high-quality, self-contained books that have broad and
comprehensive coverage and are generally in hardback format and sometimes contain
color. For undergraduate textbooks that are likely to be more brief and modular in their
approach, require only black and white, and are under 275 pages, Springer offers the
flexibly designed Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science series, to which we refer
potential authors.

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/3191
Steven S. Skiena

The Algorithm Design Manual
Third Edition

123
Steven S. Skiena
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY, USA

ISSN 1868-0941                      ISSN 1868-095X (electronic)
Texts in Computer Science
ISBN 978-3-030-54255-9              ISBN 978-3-030-54256-6 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6

1st edition: © Springer-Verlag New York 1998
2nd edition: © Springer-Verlag London Limited 2008, Corrected printing 2012
3rd edition: © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2020
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the
whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does
not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective
laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give
a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that
may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
