Chapter 1

Introduction to Algorithm
Design

What is an algorithm? An algorithm is a procedure to accomplish a speciﬁc
task. An algorithm is the idea behind any reasonable computer program.
    To be interesting, an algorithm must solve a general, well-speciﬁed problem.
An algorithmic problem is speciﬁed by describing the complete set of instances
it must work on and of its output after running on one of these instances. This
distinction, between a problem and an instance of a problem, is fundamental.
For example, the algorithmic problem known as sorting is deﬁned as follows:

Problem: Sorting
Input: A sequence of n keys a1 , . . . , an .
Output: The permutation (reordering) of the input sequence such that a1 ≤
a2 ≤ · · · ≤ an−1 ≤ an .

    An instance of sorting might be an array of names, like {Mike, Bob, Sally,
Jill, Jan}, or a list of numbers like {154, 245, 568, 324, 654, 324}. Determining
that you are dealing with a general problem instead of an instance is your ﬁrst
step towards solving it.
    An algorithm is a procedure that takes any of the possible input instances
and transforms it to the desired output. There are many diﬀerent algorithms
that can solve the problem of sorting. For example, insertion sort is a method
that starts with a single element (thus trivially forming a sorted list) and then
incrementally inserts the remaining elements so that the list remains sorted.
An animation of the logical ﬂow of this algorithm on a particular instance (the
letters in the word “INSERTIONSORT”) is given in Figure 1.1.
    This algorithm, implemented in C, is described below:

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   3
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_1
4               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

                              I N S E R T I O N S O R T
                              I N S E R T I O N S O R T
                              I NS ER T I O N S O R T
                              E I N S R T I O N S O R T
                              E I N R S T I O N S O R T
                              E I N R S T IO N S O R T
                              E I I N R STO N S O R T
                              E I I NORST N S O R T
                              E I I NN OR S T S O R T
                              E I I N NOR S S T OR T
                              E I I NN OOR S S T RT
                              E I I NNOOR R S S T T
                              E I I N N OO R R S S T T

    Figure 1.1: Animation of insertion sort in action (time ﬂows downward).

void insertion_sort(item_type s[], int n) {
    int i, j;    /* counters */

      for (i = 1; i < n; i++) {
          j = i;
          while ((j > 0) && (s[j] < s[j - 1])) {
              swap(&s[j], &s[j - 1]);
              j = j-1;
          }
      }
}

   Note the generality of this algorithm. It works just as well on names as it
does on numbers. Or anything else, given the appropriate comparison operation
(<) to test which of two keys should appear ﬁrst in sorted order. It can be
readily veriﬁed that this algorithm correctly orders every possible input instance
according to our deﬁnition of the sorting problem.
    There are three desirable properties for a good algorithm. We seek algo-
rithms that are correct and eﬃcient, while being easy to implement. These
goals may not be simultaneously achievable. In industrial settings, any pro-
gram that seems to give good enough answers without slowing the application
down is often acceptable, regardless of whether a better algorithm exists. The
issue of ﬁnding the best possible answer or achieving maximum eﬃciency usually
arises in industry only after serious performance or legal troubles.
    This chapter will focus on algorithm correctness, with our discussion of ef-
ﬁciency concerns deferred to Chapter 2. It is seldom obvious whether a given
algorithm correctly solves a given problem. Correct algorithms usually come
with a proof of correctness, which is an explanation of why we know that the
algorithm must take every instance of the problem to the desired result. But be-
fore we go further, it is important to demonstrate why it’s obvious never suﬃces
as a proof of correctness, and is usually ﬂat-out wrong.
1.1. ROBOT TOUR OPTIMIZATION                                                      5

                      0                                       0

                                                     8                    1

                                                         5        4

Figure 1.2: A good instance for the nearest-neighbor heuristic. The rainbow
coloring (red to violet) reﬂects the order of incorporation.

1.1     Robot Tour Optimization
Let’s consider a problem that arises often in manufacturing, transportation,
and testing applications. Suppose we are given a robot arm equipped with a
tool, say a soldering iron. When manufacturing circuit boards, all the chips and
other components must be fastened onto the substrate. More speciﬁcally, each
chip has a set of contact points (or wires) that need be soldered to the board.
To program the robot arm for this job, we must ﬁrst construct an ordering of
the contact points so that the robot visits (and solders) the ﬁrst contact point,
then the second point, third, and so forth until the job is done. The robot arm
then proceeds back to the ﬁrst contact point to prepare for the next board, thus
turning the tool-path into a closed tour, or cycle.
    Robots are expensive devices, so we want the tour that minimizes the time
it takes to assemble the circuit board. A reasonable assumption is that the
robot arm moves with ﬁxed speed, so the time to travel between two points is
proportional to their distance. In short, we must solve the following algorithm
problem:

Problem: Robot Tour Optimization
Input: A set S of n points in the plane.
Output: What is the shortest cycle tour that visits each point in the set S?

    You are given the job of programming the robot arm. Stop right now and
think up an algorithm to solve this problem. I’ll be happy to wait for you. . .

     Several algorithms might come to mind to solve this problem. Perhaps the
most popular idea is the nearest-neighbor heuristic. Starting from some point
p0 , we walk ﬁrst to its nearest neighbor p1 . From p1 , we walk to its nearest
unvisited neighbor, thus excluding only p0 as a candidate. We now repeat this
process until we run out of unvisited points, after which we return to p0 to close
oﬀ the tour. Written in pseudo-code, the nearest-neighbor heuristic looks like
6               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

        −21                             −5      −1 0 1     3              11

        −21                             −5      −1 0   1   3                11

Figure 1.3: A bad instance for the nearest-neighbor heuristic, with the optimal
solution. Colors are sequenced as ordered in the rainbow.

this:
         NearestNeighbor(P )
            Pick and visit an initial point p0 from P
            p = p0
            i=0
            While there are still unvisited points
                i=i+1
                Select pi to be the closest unvisited point to pi−1
                Visit pi
            Return to p0 from pn−1
    This algorithm has a lot to recommend it. It is simple to understand and
implement. It makes sense to visit nearby points before we visit faraway points
to reduce the total travel time. The algorithm works perfectly on the example
in Figure 1.2. The nearest-neighbor rule is reasonably eﬃcient, for it looks at
each pair of points (pi , pj ) at most twice: once when adding pi to the tour, the
other when adding pj . Against all these positives there is only one problem.
This algorithm is completely wrong.
    Wrong? How can it be wrong? The algorithm always ﬁnds a tour, but it
doesn’t necessarily ﬁnd the shortest possible tour. It doesn’t necessarily even
come close. Consider the set of points in Figure 1.3, all of which lie along a line.
The numbers describe the distance that each point lies to the left or right of
the point labeled “0”. When we start from the point “0” and repeatedly walk
to the nearest unvisited neighbor, we might keep jumping left–right–left–right
over “0” as the algorithm oﬀers no advice on how to break ties. A much better
(indeed optimal) tour for these points starts from the left-most point and visits
each point as we walk right before returning at the left-most point.
    Try now to imagine your boss’s delight as she watches a demo of your robot
arm hopscotching left–right–left–right during the assembly of such a simple
board.
1.1. ROBOT TOUR OPTIMIZATION                                                     7

    “But wait,” you might be saying. “The problem was in starting at point
“0.” Instead, why don’t we start the nearest-neighbor rule using the left-most
point as the initial point p0 ? By doing this, we will ﬁnd the optimal solution
on this instance.”
    That is 100% true, at least until we rotate our example by 90 degrees. Now
all points are equally left-most. If the point “0” were moved just slightly to the
left, it would be picked as the starting point. Now the robot arm will hopscotch
up–down–up–down instead of left–right–left–right, but the travel time will be
just as bad as before. No matter what you do to pick the ﬁrst point, the
nearest-neighbor rule is doomed to work incorrectly on certain point sets.
    Maybe what we need is a diﬀerent approach. Always walking to the closest
point is too restrictive, since that seems to trap us into making moves we didn’t
want. A diﬀerent idea might repeatedly connect the closest pair of endpoints
whose connection will not create a problem, such as premature termination of
the cycle. Each vertex begins as its own single vertex chain. After merging
everything together, we will end up with a single chain containing all the points
in it. Connecting the ﬁnal two endpoints gives us a cycle. At any step during
the execution of this closest-pair heuristic, we will have a set of single vertices
and the end of vertex-disjoint chains available to merge. In pseudocode:

        ClosestPair(P )
            Let n be the number of points in set P .
            For i = 1 to n − 1 do
                d=∞
                For each pair of endpoints (s, t) from distinct vertex chains
                    if dist(s, t) ≤ d then sm = s, tm = t, and d = dist(s, t)
                Connect (sm , tm ) by an edge
            Connect the two endpoints by an edge

    This closest-pair rule does the right thing in the example in Figure 1.3.
It starts by connecting “0” to its two immediate neighbors, the points 1 and
−1. Subsequently, the next closest pair will alternate left–right, growing the
central path by one link at a time. The closest-pair heuristic is somewhat more
complicated and less eﬃcient than the previous one, but at least it gives the
right answer in this example.
    But not on all examples. Consider what this algorithm does on the point set
in Figure 1.4(l). It consists of two rows of equally spaced points, with the rows
slightly closer together (distance 1 − ) than the neighboring points are spaced
within each row (distance 1 + ). Thus, the closest pairs of points stretch across
the gap, not around the boundary. After we pair oﬀ these points, the closest re-
maining pairs will connect these pairs alternately around the boundary. The to-
tal path length of the closest-pair tour is 3(1−)+2(1+)+ (1 − )2 + (2 + 2)2 .
Compared to the tour shown in Figure 1.4(r), we travel over 20% farther than
necessary when  → 0. Examples exist where the penalty is considerably worse
than this.
    Thus, this second algorithm is also wrong. Which one of these algorithms
  8               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

                         1+ε                                              1+ε

1−ε                                1−ε         1−ε                                     1−ε

          1+ε                                             1+ε
                   (l)                                             (r)

  Figure 1.4: A bad instance for the closest-pair heuristic, with the optimal solu-
  tion.

  performs better? You can’t tell just by looking at them. Clearly, both heuristics
  can end up with very bad tours on innocent-looking input.
     At this point, you might wonder what a correct algorithm for our problem
  looks like. Well, we could try enumerating all possible orderings of the set of
  points, and then select the one that minimizes the total length:

            OptimalTSP(P )
               d=∞
               For each of the n! permutations Pi of point set P
                   If (cost(Pi ) ≤ d) then d = cost(Pi ) and Pmin = Pi
               Return Pmin

      Since all possible orderings are considered, we are guaranteed to end up
  with the shortest possible tour. This algorithm is correct, since we pick the
  best of all the possibilities. But it is also extremely slow. Even a powerful
  computer couldn’t hope to enumerate all the 20! = 2,432,902,008,176,640,000
  orderings of 20 points within a day. For real circuit boards, where n ≈ 1,000,
  forget about it. All of the world’s computers working full time wouldn’t come
  close to ﬁnishing the problem before the end of the universe, at which point it
  presumably becomes moot.
      The quest for an eﬃcient algorithm to solve this problem, called the traveling
  salesman problem (TSP), will take us through much of this book. If you need
  to know how the story ends, check out the catalog entry for TSP in Section 19.4
  (page 594).

      Take-Home Lesson: There is a fundamental diﬀerence between algorithms,
      procedures that always produce a correct result, and heuristics, which may
      usually do a good job but provide no guarantee of correctness.

  1.2       Selecting the Right Jobs
  Now consider the following scheduling problem. Imagine you are a highly in
  demand actor, who has been presented with oﬀers to star in n diﬀerent movie
  projects under development. Each oﬀer comes speciﬁed with the ﬁrst and last
1.2. SELECTING THE RIGHT JOBS                                                               9

             Tarjan of the Jungle                  The Four Volume Problem
  The President’s Algorist        Steiner’s Tree                       Process Terminated
                             Halting State           Programming Challenges
"Discrete" Mathematics                                                        Calculated Bets

Figure 1.5: An instance of the non-overlapping movie scheduling problem. The
four red titles deﬁne an optimal solution.

day of ﬁlming. Whenever you accept a job, you must commit to being available
throughout this entire period. Thus, you cannot accept two jobs whose intervals
overlap.
    For an artist such as yourself, the criterion for job acceptance is clear: you
want to make as much money as possible. Because each ﬁlm pays the same fee,
this implies you seek the largest possible set of jobs (intervals) such that no two
of them conﬂict with each other.
    For example, consider the available projects in Figure 1.5. You can star in
at most four ﬁlms, namely “Discrete” Mathematics, Programming Challenges,
Calculated Bets, and one of either Halting State or Steiner’s Tree.
    You (or your agent) must solve the following algorithmic scheduling problem:
Problem: Movie Scheduling Problem
Input: A set I of n intervals on the line.
Output: What is the largest subset of mutually non-overlapping intervals that
can be selected from I?
    Now you (the algorist) are given the job of developing a scheduling algorithm
for this task. Stop right now and try to ﬁnd one. Again, I’ll be happy to wait. . .

    There are several ideas that may come to mind. One is based on the notion
that it is best to work whenever work is available. This implies that you should
start with the job with the earliest start date – after all, there is no other job
you can work on then, at least during the beginning of this period:

         EarliestJobFirst(I)
             Accept the earliest starting job j from I that does not overlap any
             previously accepted job, and repeat until no more such jobs remain.

   This idea makes sense, at least until we realize that accepting the earliest
job might block us from taking many other jobs if that ﬁrst job is long. Check
out Figure 1.6(l), where the epic War and Peace is both the ﬁrst job available
and long enough to kill oﬀ all other prospects.
   This bad example naturally suggests another idea. The problem with War
and Peace is that it is too long. Perhaps we should instead start by taking
the shortest job, and keep seeking the shortest available job at every turn.
Maximizing the number of jobs we do in a given period is clearly connected to
the notion of banging them out as quickly as possible. This yields the heuristic:
10              CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

                War and Peace

                      (l)                                   (r)

Figure 1.6: Bad instances for the (l) earliest job ﬁrst and (r) shortest job ﬁrst
heuristics. The optimal solutions are in red.

        ShortestJobFirst(I)
            While (I = ∅) do
                Accept the shortest possible job j from I.
                Delete j, and any interval that intersects j, from I.

    Again this idea makes sense, at least until we realize that accepting the
shortest job might block us from taking two other jobs, as shown in Figure
1.6(r). While the maximum potential loss here seems smaller than with the
previous heuristic, it can still limit us to half the optimal payoﬀ.
    At this point, an algorithm where we try all possibilities may start to look
good. As with the TSP problem, we can be certain exhaustive search is correct.
If we ignore the details of testing whether a set of intervals are in fact disjoint,
it looks something like this:

        ExhaustiveScheduling(I)
           j=0
           Smax = ∅
           For each of the 2n subsets Si of intervals I
               If (Si is mutually non-overlapping) and (size(Si ) > j)
                    then j = size(Si ) and Smax = Si .
           Return Smax

    But how slow is it? The key limitation is enumerating the 2n subsets of
n things. The good news is that this is much better than enumerating all n!
orders of n things, as proposed for the robot tour optimization problem. There
are only about one million subsets when n = 20, which can be enumerated
within seconds on a decent computer. However, when fed n = 100 movies, we
get 2100 subsets, which is much much greater than the 20! that made our robot
cry “uncle” in the previous problem.
    The diﬀerence between our scheduling and robotics problems is that there is
an algorithm that solves movie scheduling both correctly and eﬃciently. Think
about the ﬁrst job to terminate—that is, the interval x whose right endpoint
is left-most among all intervals. This role is played by “Discrete” Mathematics
in Figure 1.5. Other jobs may well have started before x, but all of these must
at least partially overlap each other. Thus, we can select at most one from the
group. The ﬁrst of these jobs to terminate is x, so any of the overlapping jobs
potentially block out other opportunities to the right of it. Clearly we can never
lose by picking x. This suggests the following correct, eﬃcient algorithm:
1.3. REASONING ABOUT CORRECTNESS                                               11

        OptimalScheduling(I)
           While (I = ∅) do
               Accept the job j from I with the earliest completion date.
               Delete j, and any interval which intersects j, from I.

    Ensuring the optimal answer over all possible inputs is a diﬃcult but often
achievable goal. Seeking counterexamples that break pretender algorithms is an
important part of the algorithm design process. Eﬃcient algorithms are often
lurking out there; this book will develop your skills to help you ﬁnd them.

 Take-Home Lesson: Reasonable-looking algorithms can easily be incorrect. Al-
 gorithm correctness is a property that must be carefully demonstrated.

1.3     Reasoning about Correctness
Hopefully, the previous examples have opened your eyes to the subtleties of
algorithm correctness. We need tools to distinguish correct algorithms from
incorrect ones, the primary one of which is called a proof.
    A proper mathematical proof consists of several parts. First, there is a
clear, precise statement of what you are trying to prove. Second, there is a set
of assumptions of things that are taken to be true, and hence can be used as
part of the proof. Third, there is a chain of reasoning that takes you from these
assumptions to the statement you are trying to prove. Finally, there is a little
square ( ) or QED at the bottom to denote that you have ﬁnished, representing
the Latin phrase for “thus it is demonstrated.”
    This book is not going to emphasize formal proofs of correctness, because
they are very diﬃcult to do right and quite misleading when you do them wrong.
A proof is indeed a demonstration. Proofs are useful only when they are honest,
crisp arguments that explain why an algorithm satisﬁes a non-trivial correctness
property. Correct algorithms require careful exposition, and eﬀorts to show both
correctness and not incorrectness.

1.3.1    Problems and Properties
Before we start thinking about algorithms, we need a careful description of the
problem that needs to be solved. Problem speciﬁcations have two parts: (1) the
set of allowed input instances, and (2) the required properties of the algorithm’s
output. It is impossible to prove the correctness of an algorithm for a fuzzily-
stated problem. Put another way, ask the wrong question and you will get the
wrong answer.
    Some problem speciﬁcations allow too broad a class of input instances. Sup-
pose we had allowed ﬁlm projects in our movie scheduling problem to have gaps
in production (e.g. ﬁlming in September and November but a hiatus in Octo-
ber). Then the schedule associated with any particular ﬁlm would consist of a
given set of intervals. Our star would be free to take on two interleaving but not
overlapping projects (such as the above-mentioned ﬁlm nested with one ﬁlming
12             CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

in August and October). The earliest completion algorithm would not work for
such a generalized scheduling problem. Indeed, no eﬃcient algorithm exists for
this generalized problem, as we will see in Section 11.3.2.

 Take-Home Lesson: An important and honorable technique in algorithm de-
 sign is to narrow the set of allowable instances until there is a correct and
 eﬃcient algorithm. For example, we can restrict a graph problem from general
 graphs down to trees, or a geometric problem from two dimensions down to
 one.
    There are two common traps when specifying the output requirements of a
problem. The ﬁrst is asking an ill-deﬁned question. Asking for the best route
between two places on a map is a silly question, unless you deﬁne what best
means. Do you mean the shortest route in total distance, or the fastest route,
or the one minimizing the number of turns? All of these are liable to be diﬀerent
things.
    The second trap involves creating compound goals. The three route-planning
criteria mentioned above are all well-deﬁned goals that lead to correct, eﬃcient
optimization algorithms. But you must pick a single criterion. A goal like Find
the shortest route from a to b that doesn’t use more than twice as many turns as
necessary is perfectly well deﬁned, but complicated to reason about and solve.
    I encourage you to check out the problem statements for each of the seventy-
ﬁve catalog problems in Part II of this book. Finding the right formulation for
your problem is an important part of solving it. And studying the deﬁnition of
all these classic algorithm problems will help you recognize when someone else
has thought about similar problems before you.

1.3.2    Expressing Algorithms
Reasoning about an algorithm is impossible without a careful description of the
sequence of steps that are to be performed. The three most common forms of
algorithmic notation are (1) English, (2) pseudocode, or (3) a real programming
language. Pseudocode is perhaps the most mysterious of the bunch, but it is
best deﬁned as a programming language that never complains about syntax
errors.
     All three methods are useful because there is a natural tradeoﬀ between
greater ease of expression and precision. English is the most natural but least
precise programming language, while Java and C/C++ are precise but diﬃcult
to write and understand. Pseudocode is generally useful because it represents
a happy medium.
     The choice of which notation is best depends upon which method you are
most comfortable with. I usually prefer to describe the ideas of an algorithm in
English (with pictures!), moving to a more formal, programming-language-like
pseudocode or even real code to clarify suﬃciently tricky details.
     A common mistake my students make is to use pseudocode to dress up an
ill-deﬁned idea so that it looks more formal. Clarity should be the goal. For
1.3. REASONING ABOUT CORRECTNESS                                                13

example, the ExhaustiveScheduling algorithm on page 10 would have better
been written in English as:

    ExhaustiveScheduling(I)
       Test all 2n subsets of intervals from I, and return the largest subset
           consisting of mutually non-overlapping intervals.

 Take-Home Lesson: The heart of any algorithm is an idea. If your idea is
 not clearly revealed when you express an algorithm, then you are using too
 low-level a notation to describe it.

1.3.3    Demonstrating Incorrectness
The best way to prove that an algorithm is incorrect is to produce an instance on
which it yields an incorrect answer. Such instances are called counterexamples.
No rational person will ever defend the correctness of an algorithm after a
counter-example has been identiﬁed. Very simple instances can instantly defeat
reasonable-looking heuristics with a quick touché. Good counterexamples have
two important properties:

   • Veriﬁability – To demonstrate that a particular instance is a counterex-
     ample to a particular algorithm, you must be able to (1) calculate what
     answer your algorithm will give in this instance, and (2) display a better
     answer so as to prove that the algorithm didn’t ﬁnd it.

   • Simplicity – Good counter-examples have all unnecessary details stripped
     away. They make clear exactly why the proposed algorithm fails. Simplic-
     ity is important because you must be able to hold the given instance in
     your head in order to reason about it. Once a counterexample has been
     found, it is worth simplifying it down to its essence. For example, the
     counterexample of Figure 1.6(l) could have been made simpler and better
     by reducing the number of overlapped segments from ﬁve to two.

   Hunting for counterexamples is a skill worth developing. It bears some
similarity to the task of developing test sets for computer programs, but relies
more on inspiration than exhaustion. Here are some techniques to aid your
quest:

   • Think small – Note that the robot tour counter-examples I presented
     boiled down to six points or less, and the scheduling counter-examples
     to only three intervals. This is indicative of the fact that when algorithms
     fail, there is usually a very simple example on which they fail. Amateur
     algorists tend to draw a big messy instance and then stare at it helplessly.
     The pros look carefully at several small examples, because they are easier
     to verify and reason about.
14               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

     • Think exhaustively – There are usually only a small number of possible
       instances for the ﬁrst non-trivial value of n. For example, there are only
       three distinct ways two intervals on the line can occur: as disjoint intervals,
       as overlapping intervals, and as properly nesting intervals, one within the
       other. All cases of three intervals (including counter-examples to both of
       the movie heuristics) can be systematically constructed by adding a third
       segment in each possible way to these three instances.

     • Hunt for the weakness – If a proposed algorithm is of the form “always
       take the biggest” (better known as the greedy algorithm), think about why
       that might prove to be the wrong thing to do. In particular, . . .

     • Go for a tie – A devious way to break a greedy heuristic is to provide
       instances where everything is the same size. Suddenly the heuristic has
       nothing to base its decision on, and perhaps has the freedom to return
       something suboptimal as the answer.

     • Seek extremes – Many counter-examples are mixtures of huge and tiny,
       left and right, few and many, near and far. It is usually easier to verify or
       reason about extreme examples than more muddled ones. Consider two
       tightly bunched clouds of points separated by a much larger distance d.
       The optimal TSP tour will be essentially 2d regardless of the number of
       points, because what happens within each cloud doesn’t really matter.

 Take-Home Lesson: Searching for counterexamples is the best way to disprove
 the correctness of a heuristic.

Stop and Think: Greedy Movie Stars?

Problem: Recall the movie star scheduling problem, where we seek to ﬁnd the
largest possible set of non-overlapping intervals in a given set S. A natural
greedy heuristic selects the interval i, which overlaps the smallest number of
other intervals in S, removes them, and repeats until no intervals remain.
    Give a counter-example to this proposed algorithm.

Solution: Consider the counter-example in Figure 1.7. The largest possible
independent set consists of the four intervals in red, but the interval of lowest
degree (shown in pink) overlaps two of these, After we grab it, we are doomed
to ﬁnding a solution of only three intervals.
    But how would you go about constructing such an example? My thought
process started with an odd-length chain of intervals, each of which overlaps
one interval to the left and one to the right. Picking an even-length chain would
mess up the optimal solution (hunt for the weakness). All intervals overlap two
others, except for the left and right-most intervals (go for the tie). To make
these terminal intervals unattractive, we can pile other intervals on top of them
1.4. INDUCTION AND RECURSION                                                      15

Figure 1.7: Counter-example to the greedy heuristic for movie star scheduling.
Picking the pink interval, which intersects the fewest others, blocks us from the
optimal solution (the four red intervals).

(seek extremes). The length of our chain (7) is the shortest that permits this
construction to work.

1.4      Induction and Recursion
Failure to ﬁnd a counterexample to a given algorithm does not mean “it is
obvious” that the algorithm is correct. A proof or demonstration of correctness
is needed. Often mathematical induction is the method of choice.
    When I ﬁrst learned about mathematical
                                      n          induction it seemed like complete
magic. You proved a formula like i=1 i = n(n + 1)/2 for some basis case like
n = 1 or 2, then assumed it was true all the way to n − 1 before proving it was
in fact true for general n using the assumption. That was a proof? Ridiculous!
    When I ﬁrst learned the programming technique of recursion it also seemed
like complete magic. The program tested whether the input argument was some
basis case like 1 or 2. If not, you solved the bigger case by breaking it into pieces
and calling the subprogram itself to solve these pieces. That was a program?
Ridiculous!
    The reason both seemed like magic is because recursion is mathematical
induction in action. In both, we have general and boundary conditions, with
the general condition breaking the problem into smaller and smaller pieces. The
initial or boundary condition terminates the recursion. Once you understand
either recursion or induction, you should be able to see why the other one also
works.
    I’ve heard it said that a computer scientist is a mathematician who only
knows how to prove things by induction. This is partially true because computer
scientists are lousy at proving things, but primarily because so many of the
algorithms we study are either recursive or incremental.
    Consider the correctness of insertion sort, which we introduced at the be-
ginning of this chapter. The reason it is correct can be shown inductively:
16              CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

Figure 1.8: Large-scale changes in the optimal solution (red boxes) after insert-
ing a single interval (dashed) into the instance.

     • The basis case consists of a single element, and by deﬁnition a one-element
       array is completely sorted.

     • We assume that the ﬁrst n − 1 elements of array A are completely sorted
       after n − 1 iterations of insertion sort.

     • To insert one last element x to A, we ﬁnd where it goes, namely the unique
       spot between the biggest element less than or equal to x and the smallest
       element greater than x. This is done by moving all the greater elements
       back by one position, creating room for x in the desired location.

    One must be suspicious of inductive proofs, however, because very subtle
reasoning errors can creep in. The ﬁrst are boundary errors. For example,
our insertion sort correctness proof above boldly stated that there was a unique
place to insert x between two elements, when our basis case was a single-element
array. Greater care is needed to properly deal with the special cases of inserting
the minimum or maximum elements.
    The second and more common class of inductive proof errors concerns cava-
lier extension claims. Adding one extra item to a given problem instance might
cause the entire optimal solution to change. This was the case in our scheduling
problem (see Figure 1.8). The optimal schedule after inserting a new segment
may contain none of the segments of any particular optimal solution prior to
insertion. Boldly ignoring such diﬃculties can lead to very convincing inductive
proofs of incorrect algorithms.

 Take-Home Lesson: Mathematical induction is usually the right way to verify
 the correctness of a recursive or incremental insertion algorithm.

Stop and Think: Incremental Correctness

Problem: Prove the correctness of the following recursive algorithm for incre-
menting natural numbers, that is, y → y + 1:

          Increment(y)
              if (y = 0) then return(1) else
                   if (y mod 2) = 1 then
                        return(2 · Increment(y/2 ))
                   else return(y + 1)
1.5. MODELING THE PROBLEM                                                      17

Solution: The correctness of this algorithm is certainly not obvious to me. But
as it is recursive and I am a computer scientist, my natural instinct is to try to
prove it by induction. The basis case of y = 0 is obviously correctly handled.
Clearly the value 1 is returned, and 0 + 1 = 1.
    Now assume the function works correctly for the general case of y = n − 1.
Given this, we must demonstrate the truth for the case of y = n. The cases
corresponding to even numbers are obvious, because y + 1 is explicitly returned
when (y mod 2) = 0.
    For odd numbers, the answer depends on what Increment(y/2 ) returns.
Here we want to use our inductive assumption, but it isn’t quite right. We have
assumed that Increment worked correctly for y = n − 1, but not for a value that
is about half of it. We can ﬁx this problem by strengthening our assumption to
declare that the general case holds for all y ≤ n − 1. This costs us nothing in
principle, but is necessary to establish the correctness of the algorithm.
    Now, the case of odd y (i.e. y = 2m + 1 for some integer m) can be dealt
with as:

          2 · Increment((2m + 1)/2 )    = 2 · Increment(m + 1/2 )
                                         = 2 · Increment(m)
                                         = 2(m + 1)
                                         = 2m + 2 = y + 1

and the general case is resolved.

1.5     Modeling the Problem
Modeling is the art of formulating your application in terms of precisely de-
scribed, well-understood problems. Proper modeling is the key to applying
algorithmic design techniques to real-world problems. Indeed, proper model-
ing can eliminate the need to design or even implement algorithms, by relating
your application to what has been done before. Proper modeling is the key to
eﬀectively using the “Hitchhiker’s Guide” in Part II of this book.
    Real-world applications involve real-world objects. You might be working on
a system to route traﬃc in a network, to ﬁnd the best way to schedule classrooms
in a university, or to search for patterns in a corporate database. Most algo-
rithms, however, are designed to work on rigorously deﬁned abstract structures
such as permutations, graphs, and sets. To exploit the algorithms literature,
you must learn to describe your problem abstractly, in terms of procedures on
such fundamental structures.

1.5.1    Combinatorial Objects
Odds are very good that others have probably stumbled upon any algorithmic
problem you care about, perhaps in substantially diﬀerent contexts. But to ﬁnd
        18               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

                                  Sol
                                                           Stony Brook                 Greenport
                                                                                                              Orient Point

                                                                         Riverhead
               Morris      Eve                Sid
                                                                                             Shelter Island

                                                                                                              Montauk
Steve    Len    Rob Richard Laurie Jim Lisa         Jeff   Islip                     Sag Harbor

               Figure 1.9: Modeling real-world structures with trees and graphs.

        out what is known about your particular “widget optimization problem,” you
        can’t hope to ﬁnd it in a book under widget. You must ﬁrst formulate widget
        optimization in terms of computing properties of common structures such as
        those described below:

             • Permutations are arrangements, or orderings, of items. For example,
               {1, 4, 3, 2} and {4, 3, 2, 1} are two distinct permutations of the same set
               of four integers. We have already seen permutations in the robot opti-
               mization problem, and in sorting. Permutations are likely the object in
               question whenever your problem seeks an “arrangement,” “tour,” “order-
               ing,” or “sequence.”

             • Subsets represent selections from a set of items. For example, {1, 3, 4}
               and {2} are two distinct subsets of the ﬁrst four integers. Order does
               not matter in subsets the way it does with permutations, so the subsets
               {1, 3, 4} and {4, 3, 1} would be considered identical. Subsets arose as can-
               didate solutions in the movie scheduling problem. They are likely the
               object in question whenever your problem seeks a “cluster,” “collection,”
               “committee,” “group,” “packaging,” or “selection.”

             • Trees represent hierarchical relationships between items. Figure 1.9(a)
               shows part of the family tree of the Skiena clan. Trees are likely the
               object in question whenever your problem seeks a “hierarchy,” “dominance
               relationship,” “ancestor/descendant relationship,” or “taxonomy.”

             • Graphs represent relationships between arbitrary pairs of objects. Figure
               1.9(b) models a network of roads as a graph, where the vertices are cities
               and the edges are roads connecting pairs of cities. Graphs are likely the
               object in question whenever you seek a “network,” “circuit,” “web,” or
               “relationship.”

             • Points deﬁne locations in some geometric space. For example, the loca-
               tions of McDonald’s restaurants can be described by points on a map/plane.
               Points are likely the object in question whenever your problems work on
               “sites,” “positions,” “data records,” or “locations.”
1.5. MODELING THE PROBLEM                                                     19

   • Polygons deﬁne regions in some geometric spaces. For example, the bor-
     ders of a country can be described by a polygon on a map/plane. Polygons
     and polyhedra are likely the object in question whenever you are working
     on “shapes,” “regions,” “conﬁgurations,” or “boundaries.”

   • Strings represent sequences of characters, or patterns. For example, the
     names of students in a class can be represented by strings. Strings are
     likely the object in question whenever you are dealing with “text,” “char-
     acters,” “patterns,” or “labels.”

    These fundamental structures all have associated algorithm problems, which
are presented in the catalog of Part II. Familiarity with these problems is im-
portant, because they provide the language we use to model applications. To
become ﬂuent in this vocabulary, browse through the catalog and study the in-
put and output pictures for each problem. Understanding these problems, even
at a cartoon/deﬁnition level, will enable you to know where to look later when
the problem arises in your application.
    Examples of successful application modeling will be presented in the war
stories spaced throughout this book. However, some words of caution are in
order. The act of modeling reduces your application to one of a small number
of existing problems and structures. Such a process is inherently constraining,
and certain details might not ﬁt easily into the given target problem. Also,
certain problems can be modeled in several diﬀerent ways, some much better
than others.
    Modeling is only the ﬁrst step in designing an algorithm for a problem. Be
alert for how the details of your applications diﬀer from a candidate model, but
don’t be too quick to say that your problem is unique and special. Temporarily
ignoring details that don’t ﬁt can free the mind to ask whether they really were
fundamental in the ﬁrst place.

 Take-Home Lesson: Modeling your application in terms of well-deﬁned struc-
 tures and algorithms is the most important single step towards a solution.

1.5.2    Recursive Objects
Learning to think recursively is learning to look for big things that are made
from smaller things of exactly the same type as the big thing. If you think of
houses as sets of rooms, then adding or deleting a room still leaves a house
behind.
    Recursive structures occur everywhere in the algorithmic world. Indeed, each
of the abstract structures described above can be thought about recursively. You
just have to see how you can break them down, as shown in Figure 1.10:

   • Permutations – Delete the ﬁrst element of a permutation of n things
     {1, . . . , n} and you get a permutation of the remaining n − 1 things. This
     may require renumbering to keep the object a permutation of consecu-
     tive integers. For example, removing the ﬁrst element of {4, 1, 5, 2, 3} and
20                CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

                 4−
  {4,1,5,2,3}          4 {1,4,2,3}

                 9−
     {1,2,7,9}          9 {1,2,7}

                                                  ALGORITHM                 A LGORITHM

Figure 1.10: Recursive decompositions of combinatorial objects. Permutations,
subsets, trees, and graphs (left column). Point sets, polygons, and strings (right
column). Note that the elements of a permutation of {1, . . . , n} get renumbered
after element deletion in order to remain a permutation of {1, . . . , n − 1}.

        renumbering gives {1, 4, 2, 3}, a permutation of {1, 2, 3, 4}. Permutations
        are recursive objects.

     • Subsets – Every subset of {1, . . . , n} contains a subset of {1, . . . , n − 1}
       obtained by deleting element n, if it is present. Subsets are recursive
       objects.

     • Trees – Delete the root of a tree and what do you get? A collection of
       smaller trees. Delete any leaf of a tree and what do you get? A slightly
       smaller tree. Trees are recursive objects.

     • Graphs – Delete any vertex from a graph, and you get a smaller graph.
       Now divide the vertices of a graph into two groups, left and right. Cut
       through all edges that span from left to right, and what do you get? Two
       smaller graphs, and a bunch of broken edges. Graphs are recursive objects.

     • Points – Take a cloud of points, and separate them into two groups by
       drawing a line. Now you have two smaller clouds of points. Point sets are
       recursive objects.

     • Polygons – Inserting any internal chord between two non-adjacent ver-
       tices of a simple polygon cuts it into two smaller polygons. Polygons are
       recursive objects.

     • Strings – Delete the ﬁrst character from a string, and what do you get?
       A shorter string. Strings are recursive objects.1
   1 An alert reader of the previous edition observed that salads are recursive objects, in ways

that hamburgers are not. Take a bite (or an ingredient) out of a salad, and what is left is a
smaller salad. Take a bite out of a hamburger, and what is left is something disgusting.
1.6. PROOF BY CONTRADICTION                                                       21

    Recursive descriptions of objects require both decomposition rules and basis
cases, namely the speciﬁcation of the smallest and simplest objects where the
decomposition stops. These basis cases are usually easily deﬁned. Permutations
and subsets of zero things presumably look like {}. The smallest interesting tree
or graph consists of a single vertex, while the smallest interesting point cloud
consists of a single point. Polygons are a little trickier; the smallest genuine
simple polygon is a triangle. Finally, the empty string has zero characters in it.
The decision of whether the basis case contains zero or one element is more a
question of taste and convenience than any fundamental principle.
    Recursive decompositions will deﬁne many of the algorithms we will see in
this book. Keep your eyes open for them.

1.6      Proof by Contradiction
Although some computer scientists only know how to prove things by induction,
this isn’t true of everyone. The best sometimes use contradiction.
    The basic scheme of a contradiction argument is as follows:
   • Assume that the hypothesis (the statement you want to prove) is false.
   • Develop some logical consequences of this assumption.
   • Show that one consequence is demonstrably false, thereby showing that
     the assumption is incorrect and the hypothesis is true.
    The classic contradiction argument is Euclid’s proof that there are an inﬁnite
number of prime numbers: integers n like 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, . . . that have no non-
trivial factors, only 1 and n itself. The negation of the claim would be that there
are only a ﬁnite number of primes, say m, which can be listed as p1 , . . . , pm . So
let’s assume this is the case and work with it.
    Prime numbers have particular properties with respect to division. Suppose
we construct the integer formed as the product of “all” of the listed primes:
                                          m
                                          
                                    N=          pi
                                          i=1

This integer N has the property that it is divisible by each and every one of the
known primes, because of how it was built.
    But consider the integer N + 1. It can’t be divisible by p1 = 2, because N is.
The same is true for p2 = 3 and every other listed prime. Since N + 1 doesn’t
have any non-trivial factor, this means it must be prime. But you asserted that
there are exactly m prime numbers, none of which are N + 1. This assertion is
false, so there cannot be a bounded number of primes. Touché!
    For a contradiction argument to be convincing, the ﬁnal consequence must
be clearly, ridiculously false. Muddy outcomes are not convincing. It is also
important that this contradiction be a logical consequence of the assumption.
We will see contradiction arguments for minimum spanning tree algorithms in
Section 8.1.
22                   CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

1.7         About the War Stories
The best way to learn how careful algorithm design can have a huge impact on
performance is to look at real-world case studies. By carefully studying other
people’s experiences, we learn how they might apply to our work.
    Scattered throughout this text are several of my own algorithmic war sto-
ries, presenting our successful (and occasionally unsuccessful) algorithm design
eﬀorts on real applications. I hope that you will be able to internalize these
experiences so that they will serve as models for your own attacks on problems.
    Every one of the war stories is true. Of course, the stories improve somewhat
in the retelling, and the dialogue has been punched up to make them more
interesting to read. However, I have tried to honestly trace the process of going
from a raw problem to a solution, so you can watch how this process unfolded.
    The Oxford English Dictionary deﬁnes an algorist as “one skillful in reckon-
ings or ﬁguring.” In these stories, I have tried to capture some of the mindset
of the algorist in action as they attack a problem.
    The war stories often involve at least one problem from the problem catalog
in Part II. I reference the appropriate section of the catalog when such a problem
occurs. This emphasizes the beneﬁts of modeling your application in terms of
standard algorithm problems. By using the catalog, you will be able to pull out
what is known about any given problem whenever it is needed.

1.8         War Story: Psychic Modeling
The call came for me out of the blue as I sat in my oﬃce.
    “Professor Skiena, I hope you can help me. I’m the President of Lotto
Systems Group Inc., and we need an algorithm for a problem arising in our
latest product.”
    “Sure,” I replied. After all, the dean of my engineering school is always
encouraging our faculty to interact more with industry.
    “At Lotto Systems Group, we market a program designed to improve our
customers’ psychic ability to predict winning lottery numbers. 2 In a standard
lottery, each ticket consists of six numbers selected from, say, 1 to 44. However,
after proper training, our clients can visualize (say) ﬁfteen numbers out of the
44 and be certain that at least four of them will be on the winning ticket. Are
you with me so far?”
    “Probably not,” I replied. But then I recalled how my dean encourages us
to interact with industry.
    “Our problem is this. After the psychic has narrowed the choices down to
ﬁfteen numbers and is certain that at least four of them will be on the winning
ticket, we must ﬁnd the most eﬃcient way to exploit this information. Suppose
a cash prize is awarded whenever you pick at least three of the correct numbers
on your ticket. We need an algorithm to construct the smallest set of tickets
that we must buy in order to guarantee that we win at least one prize.”
     2 Yes, this is a true story.
1.8. WAR STORY: PSYCHIC MODELING                                                  23

                  Tickets                     Winning Pairs
                   1 2 3                      1 2       2 3        3 4
                   1 4 5                      1 3       2 4        3 5
                   2 4 5                      1 4       2 5        4 5
                   3 4 5                      1 5

Figure 1.11: Covering all pairs of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} with tickets {1, 2, 3}, {1, 4, 5},
{2, 4, 5}, {3, 4, 5}. Pair color reﬂects the covering ticket.

    “Assuming the psychic is correct?”
    “Yes, assuming the psychic is correct. We need a program that prints out
a list of all the tickets that the psychic should buy in order to minimize their
investment. Can you help us?”
    Maybe they did have psychic ability, for they had come to the right place.
Identifying the best subset of tickets to buy was very much a combinatorial
algorithm problem. It was going to be some type of covering problem, where
each ticket bought would “cover” some of the possible 4-element subsets of the
psychic’s set. Finding the absolute smallest set of tickets to cover everything was
a special instance of the NP-complete problem set cover (discussed in Section
21.1 (page 678)), and presumably computationally intractable.
    It was indeed a special instance of set cover, completely speciﬁed by only
four numbers: the size n of the candidate set S (typically n ≈ 15), the number of
slots k for numbers on each ticket (typically k ≈ 6), the number of psychically-
promised correct numbers j from S (say j = 4), and ﬁnally, the number of
matching numbers l necessary to win a prize (say l = 3). Figure 1.11 illustrates
a covering of a smaller instance, where n = 5, k = 3, and l = 2, and no psychic
contribution (meaning j = 5).
    “Although it will be hard to ﬁnd the exact minimum set of tickets to buy,
with heuristics I should be able to get you pretty close to the cheapest covering
ticket set,” I told him. “Will that be good enough?”
    “So long as it generates better ticket sets than my competitor’s program,
that will be ﬁne. His system doesn’t always guarantee a win. I really appreciate
your help on this, Professor Skiena.”
    “One last thing. If your program can train people to pick lottery winners,
why don’t you use it to win the lottery yourself?”
    “I look forward to talking to you again real soon, Professor Skiena. Thanks
for the help.”
    I hung up the phone and got back to thinking. It seemed like the perfect
project to give to a bright undergraduate. After modeling it in terms of sets
and subsets, the basic components of a solution seemed fairly straightforward:

   • We needed the ability to generate all subsets of k numbers from the can-
     didate set S. Algorithms for generating and ranking/unranking subsets of
     sets are presented in Section 17.5 (page 521).
24               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

     • We needed the right formulation of what it meant to have a covering set
       of purchased tickets. The obvious criteria would be to pick a small set of
       tickets
            such that we have purchased at least one ticket containing each of
       the nl l-subsets of S that might pay oﬀ with the prize.

     • We needed to keep track of which prize combinations we have thus far
       covered. We seek tickets to cover as many thus-far-uncovered prize com-
       binations as possible. The currently covered combinations are a subset of
       all possible combinations. Data structures for subsets are discussed in Sec-
       tion 15.5 (page 456). The best candidate seemed to be a bit vector, which
       would answer in constant time “is this combination already covered?”

     • We needed a search mechanism to decide which ticket to buy next. For
       small enough set sizes, we could do an exhaustive search over all possible
       subsets of tickets and pick the smallest one. For larger problems, a ran-
       domized search process like simulated annealing (see Section 12.6.3 (page
       406)) would select tickets-to-buy to cover as many uncovered combina-
       tions as possible. By repeating this randomized procedure several times
       and picking the best solution, we would be likely to come up with a good
       set of tickets.

    The bright undergraduate, Fayyaz Younas, rose to the challenge. Based
on this framework, he implemented a brute-force search algorithm and found
optimal solutions for problems with n ≤ 5 in a reasonable time. He implemented
a random search procedure to solve larger problems, tweaking it for a while
before settling on the best variant. Finally, the day arrived when we could call
Lotto Systems Group and announce that we had solved the problem.
    “Our program found an optimal solution for n = 15, k = 6, j = 4, l = 3
meant buying 28 tickets.”
    “Twenty-eight tickets!” complained the president. “You must have a bug.
Look, these ﬁve tickets will suﬃce to cover everything twice over: {2, 4, 8, 10, 13, 14},
{4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 15}, {1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 13}, {3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 15}, {1, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14}.” We
ﬁddled with this example for a while before admitting that he was right.
    We hadn’t modeled the problem correctly! In fact, we didn’t need to explicitly
cover all possible winning combinations. Figure 1.12 illustrates the principle by
giving a two-ticket solution to our previous four-ticket example. Although the
pairs {2, 4}, {2, 5}, {3, 4}, or {3, 5} do not explicitly appear in one of our two
tickets, these pairs plus any possible third ticket number must create a pair in
either {1, 2, 3} or {1, 4, 5}. We were trying to cover too many combinations, and
the penny-pinching psychics were unwilling to pay for such extravagance.
    Fortunately, this story has a happy ending. The general outline of our search-
based solution still holds for the real problem. All we must ﬁx is which subsets
we get credit for covering with a given set of tickets. After this modiﬁcation,
we obtained the kind of results they were hoping for. Lotto Systems Group
gratefully accepted our program to incorporate into their product, and we hope
they hit the jackpot with it.
1.9. ESTIMATION                                                                        25

                Tickets             Winning Pairs
                1 2 3               1 2         2 3       3 4
                1 4 5               1 3         2 4       3 5
                                    1 4         2 5       4 5
                                    1 5

            1                   1                     1                  1
                 {1 2 3}              {1 2 3}             {1 2 3}            {1 2 3}
      24    3              25   3               34    2             35   2
                 {1 4 5}              {1 4 5}             {1 4 5}            {1 4 5}
            5                   4                     5                  4

Figure 1.12: Guaranteeing a winning pair from {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} using only tickets
{1, 2, 3} and {1, 4, 5}. The bottom ﬁgure shows how all missing pairs imply a
covered pair on expansion.

    The moral of this story is to make sure that you model your problem cor-
rectly before trying to solve it. In our case, we came up with a reasonable model,
but didn’t work hard enough to validate it before we started to program. Our
misinterpretation would have become obvious had we worked out a small ex-
ample by hand and bounced it oﬀ our sponsor before beginning work. Our
success in recovering from this error is a tribute to the basic correctness of our
initial formulation, and our use of well-deﬁned abstractions for such tasks as (1)
ranking/unranking k-subsets, (2) the set data structure, and (3) combinatorial
search.

1.9     Estimation
When you don’t know the right answer, the best thing to do is guess. Principled
guessing is called estimation. The ability to make back-of-the-envelope estimates
of diverse quantities such as the running time of a program is a valuable skill in
algorithm design, as it is in any technical enterprise.
    Estimation problems are best solved through some kind of logical reasoning
process, typically a mix of principled calculations and analogies. Principled
calculations give the answer as a function of quantities that either you already
know, can look up on Google, or feel conﬁdent enough to guess. Analogies
reference your past experiences, recalling those that seem similar to some aspect
of the problem at hand.
    I once asked my class to estimate the number of pennies in a hefty glass jar,
and got answers ranging from 250 to 15,000. Both answers will seem pretty silly
if you make the right analogies:

   • A penny roll holds 50 coins in a tube roughly the length and width of your
     biggest ﬁnger. So ﬁve such rolls can easily be held in your hand, with no
     need for a hefty jar.
26               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

     • 15,000 pennies means $150 in value. I have never managed to accumulate
       that much value in coins even in a hefty pile of change—and here I am
       only using pennies!
    But the class average estimate proved very close to the right answer, which
turned out to be 1879. There are at least three principled ways I can think of
to estimate the number of coins in the jar:

     • Volume – The jar was a cylinder with about 5 inches diameter, and the
       coins probably reached a level equal to about ten pennies tall stacked end
       to end. Figure a penny is ten times longer than it is thick. The bottom
       layer of the jar was a circle of radius about ﬁve pennies. So

                             (10 × 10) × (π × 2.52 ) ≈ 1962.5

     • Weight – Lugging the jar felt like carrying around a bowling ball. Mul-
       tiplying the number of US pennies in a pound (181 when I looked it up)
       times a 10 lb. ball gave a frighteningly accurate estimate of 1810.
     • Analogy – The coins had a height of about 8 inches in the jar, or twice
       that of a penny roll. Figure I could stack about two layers of ten rolls per
       layer in the jar, or a total estimate of 1,000 coins.

    A best practice in estimation is to try to solve the problem in diﬀerent ways
and see if the answers generally agree in magnitude. All of these are within a
factor of two of each other, giving me conﬁdence that my answer is about right.
    Try some of the estimation exercises at the end of this chapter, and see how
many diﬀerent ways you can approach them. If you do things right, the ratio
between your high and low estimates should be somewhere within a factor of two
to ten, depending upon the nature of the problem. A sound reasoning process
matters a lot more here than the actual numbers you get.

Chapter Notes
Every algorithm book reﬂects the design philosophy of its author. For stu-
dents seeking alternative presentations and viewpoints, I particularly recom-
mend the books of Cormen, et al. [CLRS09], Kleinberg and Tardos [KT06],
Manber [Man89], and Roughgarden [Rou17].
     Formal proofs of algorithm correctness are important, and deserve a fuller
discussion than this chapter is able to provide. See Gries [Gri89] for a thorough
introduction to the techniques of program veriﬁcation.
     The movie scheduling problem represents a very special case of the general
independent set problem, which will be discussed in Section 19.2 (page 589).
The restriction limits the allowable input instances to interval graphs, where
the vertices of the graph G can be represented by intervals on the line and
(i, j) is an edge of G iﬀ the intervals overlap. Golumbic [Gol04] provides a full
treatment of this interesting and important class of graphs.
1.10. EXERCISES                                                                               27

    Jon Bentley’s Programming Pearls columns are probably the best known
collection of algorithmic “war stories,” collected in two books [Ben90, Ben99].
Brooks’s The Mythical Man Month [Bro95] is another wonderful collection of
war stories that, although focused more on software engineering than algorithm
design, remain a source of considerable wisdom. Every programmer should read
these books for pleasure as well as insight.
    Our solution to the lotto ticket set covering problem is presented in more
detail in Younas and Skiena [YS96].

1.10        Exercises
Finding Counterexamples
 1-1. [3] Show that a + b can be less than min(a, b).
 1-2. [3] Show that a × b can be less than min(a, b).
 1-3. [5] Design/draw a road network with two points a and b such that the fastest
      route between a and b is not the shortest route.
 1-4. [5] Design/draw a road network with two points a and b such that the shortest
      route between a and b is not the route with the fewest turns.
 1-5. [4] The knapsack problem is as follows: given a set of integers S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sn },
      and a target number T , ﬁnd a subset of S that adds up exactly to T . For ex-
      ample, there exists a subset within S = {1, 2, 5, 9, 10} that adds up to T = 22
      but not T = 23.
      Find counterexamples to each of the following algorithms for the knapsack prob-
      lem. That is, give an S and T where the algorithm does not ﬁnd a solution that
      leaves the knapsack completely full, even though a full-knapsack solution exists.

        (a) Put the elements of S in the knapsack in left to right order if they ﬁt, that
            is, the ﬁrst-ﬁt algorithm.
       (b) Put the elements of S in the knapsack from smallest to largest, that is, the
           best-ﬁt algorithm.
        (c) Put the elements of S in the knapsack from largest to smallest.

 1-6. [5] The set cover problem is as follows: given a set S of subsets S1 , . . . , Sm of
      the universal set U = {1, ..., n}, ﬁnd the smallest subset of subsets T ⊆ S such
      that ∪ti ∈T ti = U . For example, consider the subsets S1 = {1, 3, 5}, S2 = {2, 4},
      S3 = {1, 4}, and S4 = {2, 5}. The set cover of {1, . . . , 5} would then be S1 and
      S2 .
      Find a counterexample for the following algorithm: Select the largest subset for
      the cover, and then delete all its elements from the universal set. Repeat by
      adding the subset containing the largest number of uncovered elements until all
      are covered.
 1-7. [5] The maximum clique problem in a graph G = (V, E) asks for the largest
      subset C of vertices V such that there is an edge in E between every pair of
      vertices in C. Find a counterexample for the following algorithm: Sort the
      vertices of G from highest to lowest degree. Considering the vertices in order
28               CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

      of degree, for each vertex add it to the clique if it is a neighbor of all vertices
      currently in the clique. Repeat until all vertices have been considered.

Proofs of Correctness
 1-8. [3] Prove the correctness of the following recursive algorithm to multiply two
      natural numbers, for all integer constants c ≥ 2.
               Multiply(y, z)
                    if z = 0 then return(0) else
                    return(Multiply(cy, z/c) + y · (z mod c))
 1-9. [3] Prove the correctness of the following algorithm for evaluating a polynomial
      an xn + an−1 xn−1 + · · · + a1 x + a0 .
                Horner(a, x)
                     p = an
                     for i from n − 1 to 0
                           p = p · x + ai
                     return p
1-10. [3] Prove the correctness of the following sorting algorithm.
               Bubblesort (A)
                     for i from n to 1
                           for j from 1 to i − 1
                                 if (A[j] > A[j + 1])
                                     swap the values of A[j] and A[j + 1]
1-11. [5] The greatest common divisor of positive integers x and y is the largest integer
      d such that d divides x and d divides y. Euclid’s algorithm to compute gcd(x, y)
      where x > y reduces the task to a smaller problem:

                                   gcd(x, y) = gcd(y, x mod y)

      Prove that Euclid’s algorithm is correct.

Induction
                       n
1-12. [3] Prove that     i=1 i = n(n + 1)/2 for n ≥ 0, by induction.
                       n
                        i=1 i = n(n + 1)(2n + 1)/6 for n ≥ 0, by induction.
1-13. [3] Prove that
                      
            Prove that ni=1 i = n (n + 1) /4 for n ≥ 0, by induction.
                             3   2       2
1-14. [3]
1-15. [3] Prove that

                        
                        n
                              i(i + 1)(i + 2) = n(n + 1)(n + 2)(n + 3)/4
                        i=1

1-16. [5] Prove by induction on n ≥ 1 that for every a = 1,

                                        
                                        n
                                                     an+1 − 1
                                              ai =
                                        i=0
                                                      a−1
1.10. EXERCISES                                                                      29

1-17. [3] Prove by induction that for n ≥ 1,

                                    
                                    n
                                            1        n
                                                 =
                                    i=1
                                        i(i + 1)   n + 1

1-18. [3] Prove by induction that n3 + 2n is divisible by 3 for all n ≥ 0.
1-19. [3] Prove by induction that a tree with n vertices has exactly n − 1 edges.
1-20. [3] Prove by induction that the sum of the cubes of the ﬁrst n positive integers
      is equal to the square of the sum of these integers, that is,
                                      
                                      n        
                                               n
                                        i3 = (   i)2
                                      i=1       i=1

Estimation
1-21. [3] Do all the books you own total at least one million pages? How many total
      pages are stored in your school library?
1-22. [3] How many words are there in this textbook?
1-23. [3] How many hours are one million seconds? How many days? Answer these
      questions by doing all arithmetic in your head.
1-24. [3] Estimate how many cities and towns there are in the United States.
1-25. [3] Estimate how many cubic miles of water ﬂow out of the mouth of the
      Mississippi River each day. Do not look up any supplemental facts. Describe all
      assumptions you made in arriving at your answer.
1-26. [3] How many Starbucks or McDonald’s locations are there in your country?
1-27. [3] How long would it take to empty a bathtub with a drinking straw?
1-28. [3] Is disk drive access time normally measured in milliseconds (thousandths of
      a second) or microseconds (millionths of a second)? Does your RAM memory
      access a word in more or less than a microsecond? How many instructions can
      your CPU execute in one year if the machine is left running all the time?
1-29. [4] A sorting algorithm takes 1 second to sort 1,000 items on your machine.
      How long will it take to sort 10,000 items. . .
       (a) if you believe that the algorithm takes time proportional to n2 , and
       (b) if you believe that the algorithm takes time roughly proportional to n log n?

Implementation Projects
1-30. [5] Implement the two TSP heuristics of Section 1.1 (page 5). Which of them
      gives better solutions in practice? Can you devise a heuristic that works better
      than both of them?
1-31. [5] Describe how to test whether a given set of tickets establishes suﬃcient
      coverage in the Lotto problem of Section 1.8 (page 22). Write a program to ﬁnd
      good ticket sets.
30              CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

Interview Problems
1-32. [5] Write a function to perform integer division without using either the / or *
      operators. Find a fast way to do it.
1-33. [5] There are twenty-ﬁve horses. At most, ﬁve horses can race together at a
      time. You must determine the fastest, second fastest, and third fastest horses.
      Find the minimum number of races in which this can be done.
1-34. [3] How many piano tuners are there in the entire world?
1-35. [3] How many gas stations are there in the United States?
1-36. [3] How much does the ice in a hockey rink weigh?
1-37. [3] How many miles of road are there in the United States?
1-38. [3] On average, how many times would you have to ﬂip open the Manhattan
      phone book at random in order to ﬁnd a speciﬁc name?

LeetCode
 1-1. https://leetcode.com/problems/daily-temperatures/
 1-2. https://leetcode.com/problems/rotate-list/
 1-3. https://leetcode.com/problems/wiggle-sort-ii/

HackerRank
 1-1. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/array-left-rotation/
 1-2. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/kangaroo/
 1-3. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/hackerland-radio-transmitters/

Programming Challenges
These programming challenge problems with robot judging are available at
https://onlinejudge.org:
 1-1. “The 3n + 1 Problem”—Chapter 1, problem 100.
 1-2. “The Trip”—Chapter 1, problem 10137.
 1-3. “Australian Voting”—Chapter 1, problem 10142.
