Chapter 3

Data Structures

Putting the right data structure into a slow program can work the same wonders
as transplanting fresh parts into a sick patient. Important classes of abstract
data types such as containers, dictionaries, and priority queues have many func-
tionally equivalent data structures that implement them. Changing the data
structure does not affect the correctness of the program, since we presumably
replace a correct implementation with a different correct implementation. How-
ever, the new implementation may realize different trade-offs in the time to
execute various operations, so the total performance can improve dramatically.
Like a patient in need of a transplant, only one part might need to be replaced
in order to fix the problem.
    But it is better to be born with a good heart than have to wait for a replace-
ment. The maximum benefit from proper data structures results from designing
your program around them in the first place. We assume that the reader has
had some previous exposure to elementary data structures and pointer manip-
ulation. Still, data structure courses (CS II) focus more on data abstraction
and object orientation than the nitty-gritty of how structures should be repre-
sented in memory. This material will be reviewed here to make sure you have
it down.
    As with most subjects, in data structures it is more important to really un-
derstand the basic material than to have exposure to more advanced concepts.
This chapter will focus on each of the three fundamental abstract data types
(containers, dictionaries, and priority queues) and show how they can be im-
plemented with arrays and lists. Detailed discussion of the trade-offs between
more sophisticated implementations is deferred to the relevant catalog entry for
each of these data types.

3.1       Contiguous vs. Linked Data Structures
Data structures can be neatly classified as either contiguous or linked, depend-
ing upon whether they are based on arrays or pointers. Contiguously allocated

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   69
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_3
70                                             CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

structures are composed of single slabs of memory, and include arrays, matrices,
heaps, and hash tables. Linked data structures are composed of distinct chunks
of memory bound together by pointers, and include lists, trees, and graph ad-
jacency lists.
    In this section, I review the relative advantages of contiguous and linked data
structures. These trade-offs are more subtle than they appear at first glance,
so I encourage readers to stick with me here even if you may be familiar with
both types of structures.

3.1.1      Arrays
The array is the fundamental contiguously allocated data structure. Arrays are
structures of fixed-size data records such that each element can be efficiently
located by its index or (equivalently) address.
    A good analogy likens an array to a street full of houses, where each array
element is equivalent to a house, and the index is equivalent to the house number.
Assuming all the houses are of equal size and numbered sequentially from 1 to n,
we can compute the exact position of each house immediately from its address. 1
    Advantages of contiguously allocated arrays include:

     • Constant-time access given the index – Because the index of each element
       maps directly to a particular memory address, we can access arbitrary
       data items instantly provided we know the index.

     • Space efficiency – Arrays consist purely of data, so no space is wasted with
       links or other formatting information. Further, end-of-record information
       is not needed because arrays are built from fixed-size records.

     • Memory locality – Many programming tasks require iterating through all
       the elements of a data structure. Arrays are good for this because they
       exhibit excellent memory locality. Physical continuity between succes-
       sive data accesses helps exploit the high-speed cache memory on modern
       computer architectures.

    The downside of arrays is that we cannot adjust their size in the middle
of a program’s execution. Our program will fail as soon as we try to add the
(n + 1)st customer, if we only allocated room for n records. We can compensate
by allocating extremely large arrays, but this can waste space, again restricting
what our programs can do.
    Actually, we can efficiently enlarge arrays as we need them, through the
miracle of dynamic arrays. Suppose we start with an array of size 1, and double
its size from m to 2m whenever we run out of space. This doubling process
allocates a new contiguous array of size 2m, copies the contents of the old array
   1 Houses in Japanese cities are traditionally numbered in the order they were built, not by

their physical location. This makes it extremely difficult to locate a Japanese address without
a detailed map.
3.1. CONTIGUOUS VS. LINKED DATA STRUCTURES                                            71

to the lower half of the new one, and then returns the space used by the old
array to the storage allocation system.
    The apparent waste in this procedure involves recopying the old contents on
each expansion. How much work do we really do? It will take log 2 n (also known
as lg n) doublings until the array gets to have n positions, plus one final doubling
on the last insertion when n = 2j for some j. There are recopying operations
after the first, second, fourth, eighth, . . . , nth insertions. The number of copy
operations at the ith doubling will be 2i−1 , so the total number of movements
M will be:
                lg n
                ?                                         lg n
                                                          ?           ?∞
                                                    n          n          1
     M =n+             2i−1 = 1 + 2 + 4 + . . . +     +n=       i
                                                                  ≤ n       i
                                                                              = 2n
                i=1
                                                    2     i=i
                                                               2      i=0
                                                                          2

Thus, each of the n elements move only two times on average, and the total
work of managing the dynamic array is the same O(n) as it would have been if
a single array of sufficient size had been allocated in advance!
    The primary thing lost in using dynamic arrays is the guarantee that each
insertion takes constant time in the worst case. Note that all accesses and most
insertions will be fast, except for those relatively few insertions that trigger
array doubling. What we get instead is a promise that the nth element insertion
will be completed quickly enough that the total effort expended so far will still
be O(n). Such amortized guarantees arise frequently in the analysis of data
structures.

3.1.2     Pointers and Linked Structures
Pointers are the connections that hold the pieces of linked structures together.
Pointers represent the address of a location in memory. A variable storing a
pointer to a given data item can provide more freedom than storing a copy of
the item itself. A cell-phone number can be thought of as a pointer to its owner
as they move about the planet.
    Pointer syntax and power differ significantly across programming languages,
so we begin with a quick review of pointers in C language. A pointer p is
assumed to give the address in memory where a particular chunk of data is
located.2 Pointers in C have types declared at compile time, denoting the data
type of the items they can point to. We use *p to denote the item that is pointed
to by pointer p, and &x to denote the address of (i.e.pointer to) a particular
variable x. A special NULL pointer value is used to denote structure-terminating
or unassigned pointers.
    All linked data structures share certain properties, as revealed by the fol-
lowing type declaration for linked lists:

   2 C permits direct manipulation of memory addresses in ways that may horrify Java pro-

grammers, but I will avoid doing any such tricks.
72                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

                      Turing             Knuth                  Karp     NIL

        Figure 3.1: Linked list example showing data and pointer fields.

typedef struct list {
    item_type item;                /* data item */
    struct list *next;             /* point to successor */
} list;

     In particular:

     • Each node in our data structure (here list) contains one or more data
       fields (here item) that retain the data that we need to store.

     • Each node contains a pointer field to at least one other node (here next).
       This means that much of the space used in linked data structures is de-
       voted to pointers, not data.

     • Finally, we need a pointer to the head of the structure, so we know where
       to access it.

    The list here is the simplest linked structure. The three basic operations sup-
ported by lists are searching, insertion, and deletion. In doubly linked lists, each
node points both to its predecessor and its successor element. This simplifies
certain operations at a cost of an extra pointer field per node.

Searching a List
Searching for item x in a linked list can be done iteratively or recursively. I
opt for recursively in the implementation below. If x is in the list, it is either
the first element or located in the rest of the list. Eventually, the problem is
reduced to searching in an empty list, which clearly cannot contain x.

list *search_list(list *l, item_type x) {
    if (l == NULL) {
        return(NULL);
    }

      if (l->item == x) {
          return(l);
      } else {
          return(search_list(l->next, x));
      }
}
3.1. CONTIGUOUS VS. LINKED DATA STRUCTURES                                      73

Insertion into a List
Insertion into a singly linked list is a nice exercise in pointer manipulation, as
shown below. Since we have no need to maintain the list in any particular order,
we might as well insert each new item in the most convenient place. Insertion
at the beginning of the list avoids any need to traverse the list, but does require
us to update the pointer (denoted l) to the head of the data structure.

void insert_list(list **l, item_type x) {
    list *p;    /* temporary pointer */

     p = malloc(sizeof(list));
     p->item = x;
     p->next = *l;
     *l = p;
}

    Two C-isms to note. First, the malloc function allocates a chunk of memory
of sufficient size for a new node to contain x. Second, the funny double star
in **l denotes that l is a pointer to a pointer to a list node. Thus, the last
line, *l=p; copies p to the place pointed to by l, which is the external variable
maintaining access to the head of the list.

Deletion From a List
Deletion from a linked list is somewhat more complicated. First, we must find
a pointer to the predecessor of the item to be deleted. We do this recursively:

list *item_ahead(list *l, list *x) {
    if ((l == NULL) || (l->next == NULL)) {
        return(NULL);
    }

     if ((l->next) == x) {
         return(l);
     } else {
         return(item_ahead(l->next, x));
     }
}

    The predecessor is needed because it points to the doomed node, so its next
pointer must be changed. The actual deletion operation is simple, once ruling
out the case that the to-be-deleted element does not exist. Special care must
be taken to reset the pointer to the head of the list (l) when the first element
is deleted:
74                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

void delete_list(list **l, list **x) {
    list *p;            /* item pointer */
    list *pred;         /* predecessor pointer */

      p = *l;
      pred = item_ahead(*l, *x);

      if (pred == NULL) { /* splice out of list */
          *l = p->next;
      } else {
          pred->next = (*x)->next;
      }
      free(*x);           /* free memory used by node */
}

    C language requires explicit deallocation of memory, so we must free the
deleted node after we are finished with it in order to return the memory to the
system. This leaves the incoming pointer as a dangling reference to a location
that no longer exists, so care must be taken not to use this pointer again.
Such problems can generally be avoided in Java because of its stronger memory
management model.

3.1.3      Comparison
The advantages of linked structures over static arrays include:
     • Overflow on linked structures never occurs unless the memory is actually
       full.
     • Insertion and deletion are simpler than for static arrays.
     • With large records, moving pointers is easier and faster than moving the
       items themselves.
Conversely, the relative advantages of arrays include:
     • Space efficiency: linked structures require extra memory for storing pointer
       fields.
     • Efficient random access to items in arrays.
     • Better memory locality and cache performance than random pointer jump-
       ing.

    Take-Home Lesson: Dynamic memory allocation provides us with flexibility
    on how and where we use our limited storage resources.

   One final thought about these fundamental data structures is that both
arrays and linked lists can be thought of as recursive objects:
3.2. CONTAINERS: STACKS AND QUEUES                                            75

   • Lists – Chopping the first element off a linked list leaves a smaller linked
     list. This same argument works for strings, since removing characters from
     a string leaves a string. Lists are recursive objects.

   • Arrays – Splitting the first k elements off of an n element array gives
     two smaller arrays, of size k and n − k, respectively. Arrays are recursive
     objects.

   This insight leads to simpler list processing, and efficient divide-and-conquer
algorithms such as quicksort and binary search.

3.2     Containers: Stacks and Queues
I use the term container to denote an abstract data type that permits storage
and retrieval of data items independent of content. By contrast, dictionaries are
abstract data types that retrieve based on key values or content, and will be
discussed in Section 3.3 (page 76).
    Containers are distinguished by the particular retrieval order they support.
In the two most important types of containers, this retrieval order depends on
the insertion order:

   • Stacks support retrieval by last-in, first-out (LIFO) order. Stacks are
     simple to implement and very efficient. For this reason, stacks are probably
     the right container to use when retrieval order doesn’t matter at all, such
     as when processing batch jobs. The put and get operations for stacks are
     usually called push and pop:

        – Push(x,s): Insert item x at the top of stack s.
        – Pop(s): Return (and remove) the top item of stack s.

      LIFO order arises in many real-world contexts. People crammed into a
      subway car exit in LIFO order. Food inserted into my refrigerator usu-
      ally exits the same way, despite the incentive of expiration dates. Algo-
      rithmically, LIFO tends to happen in the course of executing recursive
      algorithms.

   • Queues support retrieval in first-in, first-out (FIFO) order. This is surely
     the fairest way to control waiting times for services. Jobs processed in
     FIFO order minimize the maximum time spent waiting. Note that the
     average waiting time will be the same regardless of whether FIFO or LIFO
     is used. Many computing applications involve data items with infinite
     patience, which renders the question of maximum waiting time moot.
      Queues are somewhat trickier to implement than stacks and thus are most
      appropriate for applications (like certain simulations) where the order is
      important. The put and get operations for queues are usually called en-
      queue and dequeue.
76                                         CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

         – Enqueue(x,q): Insert item x at the back of queue q.
         – Dequeue(q): Return (and remove) the front item from queue q.

       We will see queues later as the fundamental data structure controlling
       breadth-first search (BFS) in graphs.

    Stacks and queues can be effectively implemented using either arrays or
linked lists. The key issue is whether an upper bound on the size of the container
is known in advance, thus permitting the use of a statically allocated array.

3.3      Dictionaries
The dictionary data type permits access to data items by content. You stick
an item into a dictionary so you can find it when you need it. The primary
operations dictionaries support are:

     • Search(D,k) – Given a search key k, return a pointer to the element in
       dictionary D whose key value is k, if one exists.

     • Insert(D,x) – Given a data item x, add it to the dictionary D.

     • Delete(D,x) – Given a pointer x to a given data item in the dictionary D,
       remove it from D.

    Certain dictionary data structures also efficiently support other useful oper-
ations:

     • Max(D) or Min(D) – Retrieve the item with the largest (or smallest) key
       from D. This enables the dictionary to serve as a priority queue, as will
       be discussed in Section 3.5 (page 87).

     • Predecessor(D,x) or Successor(D,x) – Retrieve the item from D whose key
       is immediately before (or after) item x in sorted order. These enable us
       to iterate through the elements of the data structure in sorted order.

    Many common data processing tasks can be handled using these dictionary
operations. For example, suppose we want to remove all duplicate names from a
mailing list, and print the results in sorted order. Initialize an empty dictionary
D, whose search key will be the record name. Now read through the mailing list,
and for each record search to see if the name is already in D. If not, insert it into
D. After reading through the mailing list, we print the names in the dictionary.
By starting from the first item Min(D) and repeatedly calling Successor until
we obtain Max(D), we traverse all elements in sorted order.
    By defining such problems in terms of abstract dictionary operations, we can
ignore the details of the data structure’s representation and focus on the task
at hand.
3.3. DICTIONARIES                                                             77

   In the rest of this section, we will carefully investigate simple dictionary
implementations based on arrays and linked lists. More powerful dictionary
implementations such as binary search trees (see Section 3.4 (page 81)) and
hash tables (see Section 3.7 (page 93)) are also attractive options in practice.
A complete discussion of different dictionary data structures is presented in the
catalog in Section 15.1 (page 440). I encourage the reader to browse through
the data structures section of the catalog to better learn what your options are.

Stop and Think: Comparing Dictionary Implementations (I)

Problem: What are the asymptotic worst-case running times for all seven fun-
damental dictionary operations (search, insert, delete, successor, predecessor,
minimum, and maximum) when the data structure is implemented as:
   • An unsorted array.
   • A sorted array.

Solution: This problem (and the one following it) reveals some of the inherent
trade-offs of data structure design. A given data representation may permit
efficient implementation of certain operations at the cost that other operations
are expensive.
   In addition to the array in question, we will assume access to a few extra
variables such as n, the number of elements currently in the array. Note that
we must maintain the value of these variables in the operations where they
change (e.g., insert and delete), and charge these operations the cost of this
maintenance.
   The basic dictionary operations can be implemented with the following costs
on unsorted and sorted arrays. The starred element indicates cleverness.

                                          Unsorted    Sorted
                  Dictionary operation    array       array
                  Search(A, k)            O(n)        O(log n)
                  Insert(A, x)            O(1)        O(n)
                  Delete(A, x)            O(1)∗       O(n)
                  Successor(A, x)         O(n)        O(1)
                  Predecessor(A, x)       O(n)        O(1)
                  Minimum(A)              O(n)        O(1)
                  Maximum(A)              O(n)        O(1)

    We must understand the implementation of each operation to see why. First,
let’s discuss the operations when maintaining an unsorted array A.

   • Search is implemented by testing the search key k against (potentially)
     each element of an unsorted array. Thus, search takes linear time in the
     worst case, which is when key k is not found in A.
78                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

     • Insertion is implemented by incrementing n and then copying item x to
       the nth cell in the array, A[n]. The bulk of the array is untouched, so this
       operation takes constant time.

     • Deletion is somewhat trickier, hence the asterisk in the table above. The
       definition states that we are given a pointer x to the element to delete,
       so we need not spend any time searching for the element. But removing
       the xth element from the array A leaves a hole that must be filled. We
       could fill the hole by moving each of the elements from A[x + 1] to A[n]
       down one position, but this requires Θ(n) time when the first element is
       deleted. The following idea is better: just overwrite A[x] with A[n], and
       decrement n. This only takes constant time.

     • The definitions of the traversal operations, Predecessor and Successor,
       refer to the item appearing before/after x in sorted order. Thus, the
       answer is not simply A[x − 1] (or A[x + 1]), because in an unsorted array
       an element’s physical predecessor (successor) is not necessarily its logical
       predecessor (successor). Instead, the predecessor of A[x] is the biggest
       element smaller than A[x]. Similarly, the successor of A[x] is the smallest
       element larger than A[x]. Both require a sweep through all n elements of
       A to determine the winner.

     • Minimum and Maximum are similarly defined with respect to sorted order,
       and so require linear-cost sweeps to identify in an unsorted array. It is
       tempting to set aside extra variables containing the current minimum
       and maximum values, so we can report them in O(1) time. But this is
       incompatible with constant-time deletion, as deleting the minimum valued
       item mandates a linear-time search to find the new minimum.

    Implementing a dictionary using a sorted array completely reverses our no-
tions of what is easy and what is hard. Searches can now be done in O(log n)
time, using binary search, because we know the median element sits in A[n/2].
Since the upper and lower portions of the array are also sorted, the search can
continue recursively on the appropriate portion. The number of halvings of n
until we get to a single element is lg n?.
    The sorted order also benefits us with respect to the other dictionary retrieval
operations. The minimum and maximum elements sit in A[1] and A[n], while
the predecessor and successor to A[x] are A[x − 1] and A[x + 1], respectively.
    Insertion and deletion become more expensive, however, because making
room for a new item or filling a hole may require moving many items arbitrarily.
Thus, both become linear-time operations.

 Take-Home Lesson: Data structure design must balance all the different op-
 erations it supports. The fastest data structure to support both operations A
 and B may well not be the fastest structure to support just operation A or B.
3.3. DICTIONARIES                                                                             79

Stop and Think: Comparing Dictionary Implementations (II)

Problem:    What are the asymptotic worst-case running times for each of
the seven fundamental dictionary operations when the data structure is im-
plemented as

    • A singly linked unsorted list.

    • A doubly linked unsorted list.

    • A singly linked sorted list.

    • A doubly linked sorted list.

Solution: Two different issues must be considered in evaluating these implemen-
tations: singly vs. doubly linked lists and sorted vs. unsorted order. Operations
with subtle implementations are denoted with an asterisk:

                                         Singly linked           Doubly linked
          Dictionary operation         unsorted sorted          unsorted sorted
          Search(L, k)                 O(n)        O(n)         O(n)      O(n)
          Insert(L, x)                 O(1)        O(n)         O(1)      O(n)
          Delete(L, x)                 O(n)∗       O(n)∗        O(1)      O(1)
          Successor(L, x)              O(n)        O(1)         O(n)      O(1)
          Predecessor(L, x)            O(n)        O(n)∗        O(n)      O(1)
                                            ∗
          Minimum(L)                   O(1)        O(1)         O(n)      O(1)
          Maximum(L)                   O(1)∗       O(1)∗        O(n)      O(1)

   As with unsorted arrays, search operations are destined to be slow while
maintenance operations are fast.

    • Insertion/Deletion – The complication here is deletion from a singly linked
      list. The definition of the Delete operation states we are given a pointer
      x to the item to be deleted. But what we really need is a pointer to the
      element pointing to x in the list, because that is the node that needs to
      be changed. We can do nothing without this list predecessor, and so must
      spend linear time searching for it on a singly linked list. Doubly linked lists
      avoid this problem, since we can immediately retrieve the list predecessor
      of x.3
   3 Actually, there is a way to delete an element from a singly linked list in constant time, as

shown in Figure 3.2. Overwrite the node that x points to with the contents of what x.next
points to, then deallocate the node that x.next originally pointed to. Special care must be
taken if x is the first node in the list, or the last node (by employing a permanent sentinel
element that is always the last node in the list). But this would prevent us from having
constant-time minimum/maximum operations, because we no longer have time to find new
extreme elements after deletion.
80                                         CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

                             x

                             x                y                 z

                             xy               y                 z

                             x

Figure 3.2: By overwriting the contents of a node-to-delete, and deleting its
original successor, we can delete a node without access to its list predecessor.

       Deletion is faster for sorted doubly linked lists than sorted arrays, because
       splicing out the deleted element from the list is more efficient than filling
       the hole by moving array elements. The predecessor pointer problem again
       complicates deletion from singly linked sorted lists.

     • Search – Sorting provides less benefit for linked lists than it did for arrays.
       Binary search is no longer possible, because we can’t access the median
       element without traversing all the elements before it. What sorted lists
       do provide is quick termination of unsuccessful searches, for if we have not
       found Abbott by the time we hit Costello we can deduce that he doesn’t
       exist in the list. Still, searching takes linear time in the worst case.

     • Traversal operations – The predecessor pointer problem again complicates
       implementing Predecessor with singly linked lists. The logical successor is
       equivalent to the node successor for both types of sorted lists, and hence
       can be implemented in constant time.

     • Minimum/Maximum – The minimum element sits at the head of a sorted
       list, and so is easily retrieved. The maximum element is at the tail of the
       list, which normally requires Θ(n) time to reach in either singly or doubly
       linked lists.
       However, we can maintain a separate pointer to the list tail, provided we
       pay the maintenance costs for this pointer on every insertion and deletion.
       The tail pointer can be updated in constant time on doubly linked lists: on
       insertion check whether last->next still equals NULL, and on deletion set
       last to point to the list predecessor of last if the last element is deleted.
       We have no efficient way to find this predecessor for singly linked lists. So
       why can we implement Maximum in O(1)? The trick is to charge the cost
       to each deletion, which already took linear time. Adding an extra linear
       sweep to update the pointer does not harm the asymptotic complexity of
       Delete, while gaining us Maximum (and similarly Minimum) in constant
       time as a reward for clear thinking.
3.4. BINARY SEARCH TREES                                                                    81

                         3       3            2         1            1

                   2         1                              3            2
                                       1            3

                     1           2                      2                3

Figure 3.3: The five distinct binary search trees on three nodes. All nodes in
the left (resp. right) subtree of node x have keys < x (resp. > x).

3.4       Binary Search Trees
We have seen data structures that allow fast search or flexible update, but not
fast search and flexible update. Unsorted, doubly linked lists supported insertion
and deletion in O(1) time but search took linear time in the worst case. Sorted
arrays support binary search and logarithmic query times, but at the cost of
linear-time update.
    Binary search requires that we have fast access to two elements—specifically
the median elements above and below the given node. To combine these ideas,
we need a “linked list” with two pointers per node. This is the basic idea behind
binary search trees.
    A rooted binary tree is recursively defined as either being (1) empty, or
(2) consisting of a node called the root, together with two rooted binary trees
called the left and right subtrees, respectively. The order among “sibling” nodes
matters in rooted trees, that is, left is different from right. Figure 3.3 gives the
shapes of the five distinct binary trees that can be formed on three nodes.
    A binary search tree labels each node in a binary tree with a single key
such that for any node labeled x, all nodes in the left subtree of x have keys
< x while all nodes in the right subtree of x have keys > x.4 This search tree
labeling scheme is very special. For any binary tree on n nodes, and any set of n
keys, there is exactly one labeling that makes it a binary search tree. Allowable
labelings for three-node binary search trees are given in Figure 3.3.

3.4.1      Implementing Binary Search Trees
Binary tree nodes have left and right pointer fields, an (optional) parent pointer,
and a data field. These relationships are shown in Figure 3.4; a type declaration
for the tree structure is given below:

   4 Allowing duplicate keys in a binary search tree (or any other dictionary structure) is bad

karma, often leading to very subtle errors. To better support repeated items, we can add a
third pointer to each node, explicitly maintaining a list of all items with the given key.
82                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

            parent

     left            right

                              min                   max

                                                                 x

Figure 3.4: Relationships in a binary search tree. Parent and sibling pointers
(left). Finding the minimum and maximum elements in a binary search tree
(center). Inserting a new node in the correct position (right).

typedef struct tree {
    item_type item;                 /* data item */
    struct tree *parent;            /* pointer to parent */
    struct tree *left;              /* pointer to left child */
    struct tree *right;             /* pointer to right child */
} tree;

    The basic operations supported by binary trees are searching, traversal, in-
sertion, and deletion.

Searching in a Tree
The binary search tree labeling uniquely identifies where each key is located.
Start at the root. Unless it contains the query key x, proceed either left or right
depending upon whether x occurs before or after the root key. This algorithm
works because both the left and right subtrees of a binary search tree are them-
selves binary search trees. This recursive structure yields the recursive search
algorithm below:

tree *search_tree(tree *l, item_type x) {
    if (l == NULL) {
        return(NULL);
    }

            if (l->item == x) {
                return(l);
            }

            if (x < l->item) {
                return(search_tree(l->left, x));
            } else {
                return(search_tree(l->right, x));
            }
}
3.4. BINARY SEARCH TREES                                                       83

    This search algorithm runs in O(h) time, where h denotes the height of the
tree.

Finding Minimum and Maximum Elements in a Tree

By definition, the smallest key must reside in the left subtree of the root, since
all keys in the left subtree have values less than that of the root. Therefore,
as shown in Figure 3.4 (center), the minimum element must be the left-most
descendant of the root. Similarly, the maximum element must be the right-most
descendant of the root.

tree *find_minimum(tree *t) {
    tree *min;    /* pointer to minimum */

    if (t == NULL) {
        return(NULL);
    }

    min = t;
    while (min->left != NULL) {
        min = min->left;
    }
    return(min);
}

Traversal in a Tree

Visiting all the nodes in a rooted binary tree proves to be an important com-
ponent of many algorithms. It is a special case of traversing all the nodes and
edges in a graph, which will be the foundation of Chapter 7.
    A prime application of tree traversal is listing the labels of the tree nodes.
Binary search trees make it easy to report the labels in sorted order. By defini-
tion, all the keys smaller than the root must lie in the left subtree of the root,
and all keys bigger than the root in the right subtree. Thus, visiting the nodes
recursively, in accord with such a policy, produces an in-order traversal of the
search tree:

void traverse_tree(tree *l) {
    if (l != NULL) {
        traverse_tree(l->left);
        process_item(l->item);
        traverse_tree(l->right);
    }
}
84                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

    Each item is processed only once during the course of traversal, so it runs in
O(n) time, where n denotes the number of nodes in the tree.
    Different traversal orders come from changing the position of process item
relative to the traversals of the left and right subtrees. Processing the item first
yields a pre-order traversal, while processing it last gives a post-order traversal.
These make relatively little sense with search trees, but prove useful when the
rooted tree represents arithmetic or logical expressions.

Insertion in a Tree
There is exactly one place to insert an item x into a binary search tree T so we
can be certain where to find it again. We must replace the NULL pointer found
in T after an unsuccessful query for the key of x.
    This implementation uses recursion to combine the search and node insertion
stages of key insertion. The three arguments to insert tree are (1) a pointer
l to the pointer linking the search subtree to the rest of the tree, (2) the key x
to be inserted, and (3) a parent pointer to the parent node containing l. The
node is allocated and linked in after hitting the NULL pointer. Note that we pass
the pointer to the appropriate left/right pointer in the node during the search,
so the assignment *l = p; links the new node into the tree:

void insert_tree(tree **l, item_type x, tree *parent) {
    tree *p;    /* temporary pointer */

     if (*l == NULL) {
         p = malloc(sizeof(tree));
         p->item = x;
         p->left = p->right = NULL;
         p->parent = parent;
         *l = p;
         return;
     }

     if (x < (*l)->item) {
         insert_tree(&((*l)->left), x, *l);
     } else {
         insert_tree(&((*l)->right), x, *l);
     }
}

    Allocating the node and linking it into the tree is a constant-time operation,
after the search has been performed in O(h) time. Here h denotes the height of
the search tree.
    3.4. BINARY SEARCH TREES                                                                                         85

      2                           2                            2                               2

1                  7         1               7           1                7              1               7

      4                 8         4                  8         4               8               5               8

3                  6                         6           3                 5             3               6

       5                           5

    initial tree              delete leaf node (3)       delete node with 1 child (6)   delete node with 2 children (4)

    Figure 3.5: Deleting tree nodes with 0, 1, and 2 children. Colors show the nodes
    affected as a result of the deletion.

    Deletion from a Tree
    Deletion is somewhat trickier than insertion, because removing a node means
    appropriately linking its two descendant subtrees back into the tree somewhere
    else. There are three cases, illustrated in Figure 3.5. Study this figure. Leaf
    nodes have no children, and so may be deleted simply by clearing the pointer
    to the given node.
        The case of a doomed node having one child is also straightforward. We
    can link this child to the deleted node’s parent without violating the in-order
    labeling property of the tree.
        But what of a node with two children? Our solution is to relabel this node
    with the key of its immediate successor in sorted order. This successor must
    be the smallest value in the right subtree, specifically the left-most descendant
    in the right subtree p. Moving this descendant to the point of deletion results
    in a properly labeled binary search tree, and reduces our deletion problem to
    physically removing a node with at most one child—a case that has been resolved
    above. The full implementation has been omitted here because it looks a little
    ghastly, but the code follows logically from the description above.
        The worst-case complexity analysis is as follows. Every deletion requires the
    cost of at most two search operations, each taking O(h) time where h is the
    height of the tree, plus a constant amount of pointer manipulation.

    3.4.2              How Good are Binary Search Trees?
    When implemented using binary search trees, all three dictionary operations
    take O(h) time, where h is the height of the tree. The smallest height we can
    hope for occurs when the tree is perfectly balanced, meaning that h = log n?.
    This is very good, but the tree must be perfectly balanced.
        Our insertion algorithm puts each new item at a leaf node where it should
    have been found. This makes the shape (and more importantly height) of the
    tree determined by the order in which we insert the keys.
86                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

    Unfortunately, bad things can happen when building trees through insertion.
The data structure has no control over the order of insertion. Consider what
happens if the user inserts the keys in sorted order. The operations insert(a),
followed by insert(b), insert(c), insert(d), . . . will produce a skinny, linear-
height tree where only right pointers are used.
    Thus, binary trees can have heights ranging from lg n to n. But how tall are
they on average? The average case analysis of algorithms can be tricky because
we must carefully specify what we mean by average. The question is well defined
if we assume each of the n! possible insertion orderings to be equally likely, and
average over those. If this assumption is valid then we are in luck, because with
high probability the resulting tree will have Θ(log n) height. This will be shown
in Section 4.6 (page 130).
    This argument is an important example of the power of randomization. We
can often develop simple algorithms that offer good performance with high prob-
ability. We will see that a similar idea underlies the fastest known sorting algo-
rithm, quicksort.

3.4.3    Balanced Search Trees
Random search trees are usually good. But if we get unlucky with our order of
insertion, we can end up with a linear-height tree in the worst case. This worst
case is outside of our direct control, since we must build the tree in response to
the requests given by our potentially nasty user.
    What would be better is an insertion/deletion procedure that adjusts the
tree a little after each insertion, keeping it close enough to be balanced that the
maximum height is logarithmic. Sophisticated balanced binary search tree data
structures have been developed that guarantee the height of the tree always to
be O(log n). Therefore, all dictionary operations (insert, delete, query) take
O(log n) time each. Implementations of balanced tree data structures such as
red–black trees and splay trees are discussed in Section 15.1 (page 440).
    From an algorithm design viewpoint, it is important to know that these trees
exist and that they can be used as black boxes to provide an efficient dictionary
implementation. When figuring the costs of dictionary operations for algorithm
analysis, we can assume the worst-case complexities of balanced binary trees to
be a fair measure.
 Take-Home Lesson: Picking the wrong data structure for the job can be
 disastrous in terms of performance. Identifying the very best data structure is
 usually not as critical, because there can be several choices that perform in a
 similar manner.

Stop and Think: Exploiting Balanced Search Trees

Problem: You are given the task of reading n numbers and then printing
them out in sorted order. Suppose you have access to a balanced dictionary
data structure, which supports the operations search, insert, delete, minimum,
3.5. PRIORITY QUEUES                                                               87

maximum, successor, and predecessor each in O(log n) time. How can you sort
in O(n log n) time using only:

  1. insert and in-order traversal?

  2. minimum, successor, and insert?

  3. minimum, insert, and delete?

Solution: Every algorithm for sorting items using a binary search tree has to
start by building the actual tree. This involves initializing the tree (basically
setting the pointer t to NULL), and then reading/inserting each of the n items
into t. This costs O(n log n), since each insertion takes at most O(log n) time.
Curiously, just building the data structure is a rate-limiting step for each of our
sorting algorithms!
    The first problem allows us to do insertion and in-order traversal. We can
build a search tree by inserting all n elements, then do a traversal to access the
items in sorted order.
    The second problem allows us to use the minimum and successor operations
after constructing the tree. We can start from the minimum element, and then
repeatedly find the successor to traverse the elements in sorted order.
    The third problem does not give us successor, but does allow us delete. We
can repeatedly find and delete the minimum element to once again traverse all
the elements in sorted order.
    In summary, the solutions to the three problems are:

      Sort1()                  Sort2()                   Sort3()
          initialize-tree(t)       initialize-tree(t)        initialize-tree(t)
          While (not EOF)          While (not EOF)           While (not EOF)
               read(x);                 read(x);                  read(x);
               insert(x,t)              insert(x,t);              insert(x,t);
          Traverse(t)              y = Minimum(t)            y = Minimum(t)
                                   While (y ?= NULL) do While (y ?= NULL) do
                                        print(y→item)             print(y→item)
                                        y = Successor(y,t)        Delete(y,t)
                                                                  y = Minimum(t)

    Each of these algorithms does a linear number of logarithmic-time opera-
tions, and hence runs in O(n log n) time. The key to exploiting balanced binary
search trees is using them as black boxes.

3.5     Priority Queues
Many algorithms need to process items in a specific order. For example, suppose
you must schedule jobs according to their importance relative to other jobs. Such
88                                       CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

scheduling requires sorting the jobs by importance, and then processing them
in this sorted order.
    The priority queue is an abstract data type that provides more flexibility
than simple sorting, because it allows new elements to enter a system at arbi-
trary intervals. It can be much more cost-effective to insert a new job into a
priority queue than to re-sort everything on each such arrival.
    The basic priority queue supports three primary operations:

     • Insert(Q,x)– Given item x, insert it into the priority queue Q.

     • Find-Minimum(Q) or Find-Maximum(Q)– Return a pointer to the item
       whose key value is smallest (or largest) among all keys in priority queue
       Q.

     • Delete-Minimum(Q) or Delete-Maximum(Q)– Remove the item whose key
       value is minimum (or maximum) from priority queue Q.

    Naturally occurring processes are often informally modeled by priority queues.
Single people maintain a priority queue of potential dating candidates, mentally
if not explicitly. One’s impression on meeting a new person maps directly to
an attractiveness or desirability score, which serves as the key field for insert-
ing this new entry into the “little black book” priority queue data structure.
Dating is the process of extracting the most desirable person from the data
structure (Find-Maximum), spending an evening to evaluate them better, and
then reinserting them into the priority queue with a possibly revised score.

 Take-Home Lesson: Building algorithms around data structures such as dictio-
 naries and priority queues leads to both clean structure and good performance.

Stop and Think: Basic Priority Queue Implementations

Problem: What is the worst-case time complexity of the three basic priority
queue operations (insert, find-minimum, and delete-minimum) when the basic
data structure is as follows:

     • An unsorted array.

     • A sorted array.

     • A balanced binary search tree.

Solution: There is surprising subtlety when implementing these operations,
even using a data structure as simple as an unsorted array. The unsorted array
dictionary (discussed on page 77) implements insertion and deletion in constant
time, and search and minimum in linear time. A linear-time implementation of
delete-minimum can be composed from find-minimum, followed by delete.
3.6. WAR STORY: STRIPPING TRIANGULATIONS                                       89

Figure 3.6: A triangulated model of a dinosaur (l), with several triangle strips
peeled off the model (r).

    For sorted arrays, we can implement insert and delete in linear time, and
minimum in constant time. However, priority queue deletions involve only the
minimum element. By storing the sorted array in reverse order (largest value on
top), the minimum element will always be the last one in the array. Deleting the
tail element requires no movement of any items, just decrementing the number
of remaining items n, and so delete-minimum can be implemented in constant
time.
    All this is fine, yet the table below claims we can implement find-minimum
in constant time for each data structure:
                                     Unsorted    Sorted    Balanced
                                     array       array     tree
             Insert(Q, x)            O(1)        O(n)      O(log n)
             Find-Minimum(Q)         O(1)        O(1)      O(1)
             Delete-Minimum(Q)       O(n)        O(1)      O(log n)
    The trick is using an extra variable to store a pointer/index to the minimum
entry in each of these structures, so we can simply return this value whenever we
are asked to find-minimum. Updating this pointer on each insertion is easy—we
update it iff the newly inserted value is less than the current minimum. But what
happens on a delete-minimum? We can delete that minimum element we point
to, and then do a search to restore this canned value. The operation to identify
the new minimum takes linear time on an unsorted array and logarithmic time
on a tree, and hence can be folded into the cost of each deletion.
    Priority queues are very useful data structures. Indeed, they will be the hero
of two of our war stories. A particularly nice priority queue implementation
(the heap) will be discussed in the context of sorting in Section 4.3 (page 115).
Further, a complete set of priority queue implementations is presented in Section
15.2 (page 445) of the catalog.

3.6     War Story: Stripping Triangulations
Geometric models used in computer graphics are commonly represented by a
triangulated surface, as shown in Figure 3.6(l). High-performance rendering
90                                              CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

                        2                                         2

                    L                                         L
                                R                                         R
      1                                     4     1                                   4
                        3                                         3
                                    L                                         L
                            5                                         5
                R                   R                     R                   R
                        R                                         R

           6                            7             6                           7

Figure 3.7: Extracting a triangle strip from a triangular mesh: A strip with
partial coverage using alternating left and right turns (left), and a strip with
complete coverage by exploiting the flexibility of arbitrary turns (right).

engines have special hardware for rendering and shading triangles. This render-
ing hardware is so fast that the computational bottleneck becomes the cost of
feeding the triangulation structure into the hardware engine.
    Although each triangle can be described by specifying its three endpoints,
an alternative representation proves more efficient. Instead of specifying each
triangle in isolation, suppose that we partition the triangles into strips of adja-
cent triangles and walk along the strip. Since each triangle shares two vertices
in common with its neighbors, we save the cost of retransmitting the two ex-
tra vertices and any associated information. To make the description of the
triangles unambiguous, the OpenGL triangular-mesh renderer assumes that all
turns alternate left and right. The strip in Figure 3.7 (left) completely describes
five triangles of the mesh with the vertex sequence [1,2,3,4,5,7,6] and the im-
plied left/right order. The strip on the right describes all seven triangles with
specified turns: [1,2,3,l-4,r-5,l-7,r-6,r-1,r-3].
    The task was to find a small number of strips that together cover all the
triangle in a mesh, without overlap. This can be thought of as a graph problem.
The graph of interest has a vertex for every triangle of the mesh, and an edge
between every pair of vertices representing adjacent triangles. This dual graph
representation captures all the information about the triangulation (see Section
18.12 (page 581)) needed to partition it into strips.
    Once we had the dual graph, the project could begin in earnest. We sought
to partition the dual graph’s vertices into as few paths or strips as possible.
Partitioning it into one path implied that we had discovered a Hamiltonian path,
which by definition visits each vertex exactly once. Since finding a Hamiltonian
path is NP-complete (see Section 19.5 (page 598)), we knew not to look for an
optimal algorithm, but concentrate instead on heuristics.
    The simplest approach for strip cover would start from an arbitrary triangle
and then do a left–right walk until the walk ends, either by hitting the boundary
of the object or a previously visited triangle. This heuristic had the advantage
3.6. WAR STORY: STRIPPING TRIANGULATIONS                                       91

                                                     top

                        1   2   3   4      253 254 255 256

       Figure 3.8: A bounded-height priority queue for triangle strips.

that it would be fast and simple, although there is no reason to expect that it
must find the smallest possible set of left–right strips for a given triangulation.
    The greedy heuristic should result in a relatively small number of strips,
however. Greedy heuristics always try to grab the best possible thing first. In
the case of the triangulation, the natural greedy heuristic would be to identify
the starting triangle that yields the longest left–right strip, and peel that one
off first.
    Being greedy does not guarantee you the best possible solution overall, since
the first strip you peel off might break apart a lot of potential strips we would
have wanted to use later. Still, being greedy is a good rule of thumb if you want
to get rich. Removing the longest strip leaves the fewest number of triangles
remaining for later strips, so greedy should outperform the naive heuristic of
pick anything.
    But how much time does it take to find the largest strip to peel off next?
Let k be the length of the walk possible from an average vertex. Using the
simplest possible implementation, we could walk from each of the n vertices to
find the largest remaining strip to report in O(kn) time. Repeating this for
each of the roughly n/k strips we extract yields an O(n2 )-time implementation,
which would be hopelessly slow on even a small model of 20,000 triangles.
    How could we speed this up? It seems wasteful to re-walk from each triangle
after deleting a single strip. We could maintain the lengths of all the possible
future strips in a data structure. However, whenever we peel off a strip, we
must update the lengths of all affected strips. These strips will be shortened
because they walked through a triangle that now no longer exists. There are
two aspects of such a data structure:

   • Priority queue – Since we were repeatedly identifying the longest remain-
     ing strip, we needed a priority queue to store the strips ordered according
     to length. The next strip to peel always sits at the top of the queue. Our
     priority queue had to permit reducing the priority of arbitrary elements of
     the queue whenever we updated the strip lengths to reflect what triangles
     were peeled away. Because all of the strip lengths were bounded by a fairly
92                                       CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

                             Triangle     Naive   Greedy      Greedy
            Model name          count      cost      cost        time
            Diver               3,798     8,460    4,650       6.4 sec
            Heads               4,157    10,588    4,749       9.9 sec
            Framework           5,602     9,274    7,210       9.7 sec
            Bart Simpson        9,654    24,934   11,676      20.5 sec
            Enterprise        12,710     29,016   13,738      26.2 sec
            Torus             20,000     40,000   20,200     272.7 sec
            Jaw               75,842    104,203   95,020     136.2 sec

Figure 3.9: A comparison of the naive and greedy heuristics for several triangular
meshes. Cost is the number of strips. Running time generally scales with
triangle count, except for the highly symmetric torus with very long strips.

       small integer (hardware constraints prevent any strip from having more
       than 256 vertices), we used a bounded-height priority queue (an array of
       buckets, shown in Figure 3.8 and described in Section 15.2 (page 445)).
       An ordinary heap would also have worked just fine.
       To update the queue entry associated with each triangle, we needed to
       quickly find where it was. This meant that we also needed a . . .
     • Dictionary – For each triangle in the mesh, we had to find where it was in
       the queue. This meant storing a pointer to each triangle in a dictionary.
       By integrating this dictionary with the priority queue, we built a data
       structure capable of a wide range of operations.

    Although there were various other complications, such as quickly recalcu-
lating the length of the strips affected by the peeling, the key idea needed to
obtain better performance was to use the priority queue. Run time improved
by several orders of magnitude after employing this data structure.
    How much better did the greedy heuristic do than the naive heuristic? Study
the table in Figure 3.9. In all cases, the greedy heuristic led to a set of strips
that cost less, as measured by the total number of vertex occurrences in the
strips. The savings ranged from about 10% to 50%, which is quite remarkable
since the greatest possible improvement (going from three vertices per triangle
down to one) yields a savings of only 66.6%.
    After implementing the greedy heuristic with our priority queue data struc-
ture, the program ran in O(n · k) time, where n is the number of triangles and
k is the length of the average strip. Thus, the torus, which consisted of a small
number of very long strips, took longer than the jaw, even though the latter
contained over three times as many triangles.
    There are several lessons to be gleaned from this story. First, when working
with a large enough data set, only linear or near-linear algorithms are likely
to be fast enough. Second, choosing the right data structure is often the key
to getting the time complexity down. Finally, using the greedy heuristic can
3.7. HASHING                                                                    93

significantly improve performance over the naive approach. How much this
improvement will be can only be determined by experimentation.

3.7     Hashing
Hash tables are a very practical way to maintain a dictionary. They exploit the
fact that looking an item up in an array takes constant time once you have its
index. A hash function is a mathematical function that maps keys to integers.
We will use the value of our hash function as an index into an array, and store
our item at that position.
    The first step of the hash function is usually to map each key (here the string
S) to a big integer. Let α be the size of the alphabet on which S is written.
Let char(c) be a function that maps each symbol of the alphabet to a unique
integer from 0 to α − 1. The function
                                    |S|−1
                                    ?
                    H(S) = α|S| +           α|S|−(i+1) × char(si )
                                    i=0

maps each string to a unique (but large) integer by treating the characters of
the string as “digits” in a base-α number system.
     This creates unique identifier numbers, but they are so large they will quickly
exceed the number of desired slots in our hash table (denoted by m). We must
reduce this number to an integer between 0 and m − 1, by taking the remainder
H ? (S) = H(S) mod m. This works on the same principle as a roulette wheel.
The ball travels a long distance, around and around the circumference-m wheel
?H(S)/m times before settling down to a random bin. If the table size is
selected with enough finesse (ideally m is a large prime not too close to 2i − 1),
the resulting hash values should be fairly uniformly distributed.

3.7.1    Collision Resolution
No matter how good our hash function is, we had better be prepared for col-
lisions, because two distinct keys will at least occasionally hash to the same
value. There are two different approaches for maintaining a hash table:

   • Chaining represents a hash table as an array of m linked lists (“buckets”),
     as shown in Figure 3.10. The ith list will contain all the items that hash
     to the value of i. Search, insertion, and deletion thus reduce to the corre-
     sponding problem in linked lists. If the n keys are distributed uniformly
     in a table, each list will contain roughly n/m elements, making them a
     constant size when m ≈ n.
      Chaining is very natural, but devotes a considerable amount of memory to
      pointers. This is space that could be used to make the table larger, which
      reduces the likelihood of collisions. In fact, the highest-performing hash
      tables generally rely on an alternative method called open addressing.
94                                            CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

                        0   1    2   3    4   5   6       7    8   9

                            55       21       2           13       34

                            5                             8

Figure 3.10: Collision resolution by chaining, after hashing the first eight Fi-
bonacci numbers in increasing order, with hash function H(x) = (2x + 1)
mod 10. Insertions occur at the head of each list in this figure.

                 0 1         2 3          4   5       6        7   8     9
                 34 5       55 21             2                3   8    13

Figure 3.11: Collision resolution by open addressing and sequential probing,
after inserting the first eight Fibonacci numbers in increasing order with H(x) =
(2x + 1) mod 10. The red elements have been bumped to the first open slot
after the desired location.

     • Open addressing maintains the hash table as a simple array of elements
       (not buckets). Each cell is initialized to null, as shown in Figure 3.11.
       On each insertion, we check to see whether the desired cell is empty; if
       so, we insert the item there. But if the cell is already occupied, we must
       find some other place to put the item. The simplest possibility (called
       sequential probing) inserts the item into the next open cell in the table.
       Provided the table is not too full, the contiguous runs of non-empty cells
       should be fairly short, hence this location should be only a few cells away
       from its intended position.
       Searching for a given key now involves going to the appropriate hash value
       and checking to see if the item there is the one we want. If so, return it.
       Otherwise we must keep checking through the length of the run. Deletion
       in an open addressing scheme can get ugly, since removing one element
       might break a chain of insertions, making some elements inaccessible. We
       have no alternative but to reinsert all the items in the run that follows the
       new hole.

   Chaining and open addressing both cost O(m) to initialize an m-element
hash table to null elements prior to the first insertion.
3.7. HASHING                                                                  95

    When using chaining with doubly linked lists to resolve collisions in an m-
element hash table, the dictionary operations for n items can be implemented
in the following expected and worst case times:

                                     Hash table    Hash table
                                     (expected)    (worst case)
                Search(L, k)         O(n/m)        O(n)
                Insert(L, x)         O(1)          O(1)
                Delete(L, x)         O(1)          O(1)
                Successor(L, x)      O(n + m)      O(n + m)
                Predecessor(L, x)    O(n + m)      O(n + m)
                Minimum(L)           O(n + m)      O(n + m)
                Maximum(L)           O(n + m)      O(n + m)

    Traversing all the elements in the table takes O(n + m) time for chaining,
since we have to scan all m buckets looking for elements, even if the actual num-
ber of inserted items is small. This reduces to O(m) time for open addressing,
since n must be at most m.
    Pragmatically, a hash table often is the best data structure to maintain a
dictionary. The applications of hashing go far beyond dictionaries, however, as
we will see below.

3.7.2    Duplicate Detection via Hashing
The key idea of hashing is to represent a large object (be it a key, a string, or
a substring) by a single number. We get a representation of the large object
by a value that can be manipulated in constant time, such that it is relatively
unlikely that two different large objects map to the same value.
   Hashing has a variety of clever applications beyond just speeding up search.
I once heard Udi Manber—at one point responsible for all search products at
Google—talk about the algorithms employed in industry. The three most im-
portant algorithms, he explained, were “hashing, hashing, and hashing.”
   Consider the following problems with nice hashing solutions:

   • Is a given document unique within a large corpus? – Google crawls yet
     another webpage. How can it tell whether this is new content never seen
     before, or just a duplicate page that exists elsewhere on the web?
     Explicitly comparing the new document D against all n previous docu-
     ments is hopelessly inefficient for a large corpus. However, we can hash
     D to an integer, and compare H(D) to the hash codes of the rest of the
     corpus. Only if there is a collision might D be a possible duplicate. Since
     we expect few spurious collisions, we can explicitly compare the few doc-
     uments sharing a particular hash code with little total effort.
   • Is part of this document plagiarized? – A lazy student copies a portion
     of a web document into their term paper. “The web is a big place,” he
     smirks. “How will anyone ever find the page I stole this from?”
96                                        CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

       This is a more difficult problem than the previous application. Adding,
       deleting, or changing even one character from a document will completely
       change its hash code. The hash codes produced in the previous application
       thus cannot help for this more general problem.
       However, we could build a hash table of all overlapping windows (sub-
       strings) of length w in all the documents in the corpus. Whenever there
       is a match of hash codes, there is likely a common substring of length w
       between the two documents, which can then be further investigated. We
       should choose w to be long enough so such a co-occurrence is very unlikely
       to happen by chance.
       The biggest downside of this scheme is that the size of the hash table
       becomes as large as the document corpus itself. Retaining a small but
       well-chosen subset of these hash codes is exactly the goal of min-wise
       hashing, discussed in Section 6.6.

     • How can I convince you that a file isn’t changed? – In a closed-bid auction,
       each party submits their bid in secret before the announced deadline. If
       you knew what the other parties were bidding, you could arrange to bid
       $1 more than the highest opponent and walk off with the prize as cheaply
       as possible. The “right” auction strategy would thus be to hack into the
       computer containing the bids just prior to the deadline, read the bids, and
       then magically emerge as the winner.
       How can this be prevented? What if everyone submits a hash code of their
       actual bid prior to the deadline, and then submits the full bid only after
       the deadline? The auctioneer will pick the largest full bid, but checks
       to make sure the hash code matches what was submitted prior to the
       deadline. Such cryptographic hashing methods provide a way to ensure
       that the file you give me today is the same as the original, because any
       change to the file will change the hash code.

    Although the worst-case bounds on anything involving hashing are dismal,
with a proper hash function we can confidently expect good behavior. Hashing
is a fundamental idea in randomized algorithms, yielding linear expected-time
algorithms for problems that are Θ(n log n) or Θ(n2 ) in the worst case.

3.7.3      Other Hashing Tricks
Hash functions provide useful tools for many things beyond powering hash ta-
bles. The fundamental idea is of many-to-one mappings, where many is con-
trolled so it is very unlikely to be too many.

3.7.4      Canonicalization
Consider a word game that gives you a set of letters S, and asks you to find
all dictionary words that can be made by reordering them. For example, I can
3.7. HASHING                                                                    97

make three words from the four letters in S = (a, e, k, l), namely kale, lake, and
leak.
    Think how you might write a program to find the matching words for S,
given a dictionary D of n words. Perhaps the most straightforward approach is
to test each word d ∈ D against the characters of S. This takes time linear in
n for each S, and the test is somewhat tricky to program.
    What if we instead hash every word in D to a string, by sorting the word’s
letters. Now kale goes to aekl, as do lake and leak. By building a hash table
with the sorted strings as keys, all words with the same letter distribution get
hashed to the same bucket. Once you have built this hash table, you can use it
for different query sets S. The time for each query will be proportional to the
number of matching words in D, which is a lot smaller than n.
    Which set of k letters can be used to make the most dictionary words? This
seems like a much harder problem, because there are αk possible letter sets,
where α is the size of the alphabet. But observe that the answer is simply the
hash code with the largest number of collisions. Sweeping over a sorted array
of hash codes (or walking through each bucket in a chained hash table) makes
this fast and easy.
    This is a good example of the power of canonicalization, reducing compli-
cated objects to a standard (i.e. “canonical”) form. String transformations like
reducing letters to lower case or stemming (removing word suffixes like -ed, -s,
or -ing) result in increased matches, because multiple strings collide on the same
code. Soundex is a canonicalization scheme for names, so spelling variants of
“Skiena” like “Skina,”, “Skinnia,” and “Schiena” all get hashed to the same
Soundex code, S25. Soundex is described in more detail in Section 21.4.
    For hash tables, collisions are very bad. But for pattern matching problems
like these, collisions are exactly what we want.

3.7.5    Compaction
Suppose that you wanted to sort all n books in the library, not by their titles but
by the contents of the actual text. Bulwer-Lytton’s [BL30] “It was a dark and
stormy night. . . ” would appear before this book’s “What is an algorithm?. . . ”
Assuming the average book is m ≈ 100,000 words long, doing this sort seems
an expensive and clumsy job since each comparison involves two books.
     But suppose we instead represent each book by the first (say) 100 characters,
and sort these strings. There will be collisions involving duplicates of the same
prefix, involving multiple editions or perhaps plagiarism, but these will be quite
rare. After sorting the prefixes, we can then resolve the collisions by comparing
the full texts. The world’s fastest sorting programs use this idea, as discussed
in Section 17.1.
     This is an example of hashing for compaction, also called fingerprinting,
where we representing large objects by small hash codes. It is easier to work
with small objects than large ones, and the hash code generally preserves the
identity of each item. The hash function here is trivial (just take the prefix) but
it is designed to accomplish a specific goal—not to maintain a hash table. More
98                                            CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

sophisticated hash functions can make the probability of collisions between even
slightly different objects vanishingly low.

3.8       Specialized Data Structures
The basic data structures described thus far all represent an unstructured set
of items so as to facilitate retrieval operations. These data structures are well
known to most programmers. Not as well known are data structures for repre-
senting more specialized kinds of objects, such as points in space, strings, and
graphs.
    The design principles of these data structures are the same as for basic
objects. There exists a set of basic operations we need to perform repeatedly.
We seek a data structure that allows these operations to be performed very
efficiently. These specialized data structures are important for efficient graph
and geometric algorithms, so one should be aware of their existence:

     • String data structures – Character strings are typically represented by
       arrays of characters, perhaps with a special character to mark the end of
       the string. Suffix trees/arrays are special data structures that preprocess
       strings to make pattern matching operations faster. See Section 15.3 (page
       448) for details.

     • Geometric data structures – Geometric data typically consists of collec-
       tions of data points and regions. Regions in the plane can be described by
       polygons, where the boundary of the polygon is a closed chain of line
       segments. A polygon P can be represented using an array of points
       (v1 , . . . , vn , v1 ), such that (vi , vi+1 ) is a segment of the boundary of P .
       Spatial data structures such as kd-trees organize points and regions by ge-
       ometric location to support fast search operations. See Section 15.6 (page
       460).

     • Graph data structures – Graphs are typically represented using either ad-
       jacency matrices or adjacency lists. The choice of representation can have
       a substantial impact on the design of the resulting graph algorithms, and
       will be discussed in Chapter 7 and in the catalog in Section 15.4.

     • Set data structures – Subsets of items are typically represented using a
       dictionary to support fast membership queries. Alternatively, bit vectors
       are Boolean arrays such that the ith bit is 1 if i is in the subset. Data
       structures for manipulating sets is presented in the catalog in Section 15.5.

3.9       War Story: String ’em Up
The human genome encodes all the information necessary to build a person.
Sequencing the genome has had an enormous impact on medicine and molecular
3.9. WAR STORY: STRING ’EM UP                                                   99

                                     T    A    T C C
                        T            T    A    T C
                      G T            T    A    T
                    C G T            T    A
                  A C G T            T    A    T C C A

Figure 3.12: The concatenation of two fragments can be in S only if all sub-
fragments are.

biology. Algorists like me have become interested in bioinformatics, for several
reasons:

   • DNA sequences can be accurately represented as strings of characters on
     the four-letter alphabet (A,C,T,G). The needs of biologist have sparked
     new interest in old algorithmic problems such as string matching (see
     Section 21.3 (page 685)) as well as creating new problems such as shortest
     common superstring (see Section 21.9 (page 709)).

   • DNA sequences are very long strings. The human genome is approximately
     three billion base pairs (or characters) long. Such large problem size means
     that asymptotic (Big Oh) complexity analysis is fully justified on biological
     problems.

   • Enough money is being invested in genomics for computer scientists to
     want to claim their piece of the action.

    One of my interests in computational biology revolved around a proposed
technique for DNA sequencing called sequencing by hybridization (SBH). This
procedure attaches a set of probes to an array, forming a sequencing chip. Each
of these probes determines whether or not the probe string occurs as a sub-
string of the DNA target. The target DNA can now be sequenced based on the
constraints of which strings are (and are not) substrings of the target.
    We sought to identify all the strings of length 2k that are possible substrings
of an unknown string S, given the set of all length-k substrings of S. For exam-
ple, suppose we know that AC, CA, and CC are the only length-2 substrings
of S. It is possible that ACCA is a substring of S, since the center substring is
one of our possibilities. However, CAAC cannot be a substring of S, since AA
is not a substring of S. We needed to find a fast algorithm to construct all the
consistent length-2k strings, since S could be very long.
    The simplest algorithm to build the 2k strings would be to concatenate all
O(n2 ) pairs of k-strings together, and then test to make sure that all (k − 1)
length-k substrings spanning the boundary of the concatenation were in fact
substrings, as shown in Figure 3.12. For example, the nine possible concatena-
tions of AC, CA, and CC are ACAC, ACCA, ACCC, CAAC, CACA, CACC,
100                                      CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

CCAC, CCCA, and CCCC. Only CAAC can be eliminated, because of the
absence of AA as a substring of S.
    We needed a fast way of testing whether the k − 1 substrings straddling
the concatenation were members of our dictionary of permissible k-strings. The
time it takes to do this depends upon which dictionary data structure we use.
A binary search tree could find the correct string within O(log n) comparisons,
where each comparison involved testing which of two length-k strings appeared
first in alphabetical order. The total time using such a binary search tree would
be O(k log n).
    That seemed pretty good. So my graduate student, Dimitris Margaritis,
used a binary search tree data structure for our implementation. It worked
great up until the moment we ran it.
    “I’ve tried the fastest computer we have, but our program is too slow,”
Dimitris complained. “It takes forever on string lengths of only 2,000 characters.
We will never get up to n = 50,000.”
    We profiled our program and discovered that almost all the time was spent
searching in this data structure. This was no surprise, since we did this k −
1 times for each of the O(n2 ) possible concatenations. We needed a faster
dictionary data structure, since search was the innermost operation in such a
deep loop.
    “How about using a hash table?” I suggested. “It should take O(k) time to
hash a k-character string and look it up in our table. That should knock off a
factor of O(log n).”
    Dimitris went back and implemented a hash table implementation for our
dictionary. Again, it worked great, up until the moment we ran it.
    “Our program is still too slow,” Dimitris complained. “Sure, it is now about
ten times faster on strings of length 2,000. So now we can get up to about 4,000
characters. Big deal. We will never get up to 50,000.”
    “We should have expected this,” I mused. “After all, lg 2 (2,000) ≈ 11. We
need a faster data structure to search in our dictionary of strings.”
    “But what can be faster than a hash table?” Dimitris countered. “To look
up a k-character string, you must read all k characters. Our hash table already
does O(k) searching.”
    “Sure, it takes k comparisons to test the first substring. But maybe we
can do better on the second test. Remember where our dictionary queries are
coming from. When we concatenate ABCD with EF GH, we are first testing
whether BCDE is in the dictionary, then CDEF . These strings differ from
each other by only one character. We should be able to exploit this so each
subsequent test takes constant time to perform. . . ”
    “We can’t do that with a hash table,” Dimitris observed. “The second key
is not going to be anywhere near the first in the table. A binary search tree
won’t help, either. Since the keys ABCD and BCDE differ according to the
first character, the two strings will be in different parts of the tree.”
    “But we can use a suffix tree to do this,” I countered. “A suffix tree is a
trie containing all the suffixes of a given set of strings. For example, the suffixes
of ACAC are {ACAC, CAC, AC, C}. Coupled with suffixes of string CACT ,
3.9. WAR STORY: STRING ’EM UP                                                 101

                                   A              T
                                         C

                               C         A       T

                           A        T   C

                          C                  T

Figure 3.13: Suffix tree on ACAC and CACT , with the pointer to the suffix
of ACAC. Green nodes correspond to suffixes of ACAC, with blue nodes to
suffixes of CACT .

we get the suffix tree of Figure 3.13. By following a pointer from ACAC to its
longest proper suffix CAC, we get to the right place to test whether CACT is
in our set of strings. One character comparison is all we need to do from there.”
    Suffix trees are amazing data structures, discussed in considerably more
detail in Section 15.3 (page 448). Dimitris did some reading about them, then
built a nice suffix tree implementation for our dictionary. Once again, it worked
great up until the moment we ran it.
    “Now our program is faster, but it runs out of memory,” Dimitris com-
plained. “The suffix tree builds a path of length k for each suffix of length k,
so all told there can be Θ(n2 ) nodes in the tree. It crashes when we go beyond
2,000 characters. We will never get up to strings with 50,000 characters.”
    I wasn’t ready to give up yet. “There is a way around the space problem, by
using compressed suffix trees,” I recalled. “Instead of explicitly representing long
paths of character nodes, we can refer back to the original string.” Compressed
suffix trees always take linear space, as described in Section 15.3 (page 448).
    Dimitris went back one last time and implemented the compressed suffix
tree data structure. Now it worked great! As shown in Figure 3.14, we ran
our simulation for strings of length n = 65,536 without incident. Our results
showed that interactive SBH could be a very efficient sequencing technique.
Based on these simulations, we were able to arouse interest in our technique
from biologists. Making the actual wet laboratory experiments feasible provided
another computational challenge, which is reported in Section 12.8 (page 414).
    The take-home lessons for programmers should be apparent. We isolated a
single operation (dictionary string search) that was being performed repeatedly
and optimized the data structure to support it. When an improved dictionary
structure still did not suffice, we looked deeper into the kind of queries we were
performing, so that we could identify an even better data structure. Finally,
we didn’t give up until we had achieved the level of performance we needed. In
algorithms, as in life, persistence usually pays off.
102                                     CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

           String     Binary        Hash      Suffix     Compressed
           length         tree      table      tree           tree
                8          0.0        0.0       0.0            0.0
               16          0.0        0.0       0.0            0.0
               32          0.1        0.0       0.0            0.0
               64          0.3        0.4       0.3            0.0
              128          2.4        1.1       0.5            0.0
              256        17.1         9.4       3.8            0.2
              512        31.6        67.0       6.9            1.3
            1,024     1,828.9        96.6      31.5            2.7
            2,048    11,441.7       941.7     553.6           39.0
            4,096    > 2 days     5,246.7    out of           45.4
            8,192                > 2 days   memory           642.0
           16,384                                          1,614.0
           32,768                                         13,657.8
           65,536                                         39,776.9

Figure 3.14: Run times (in seconds) for the SBH simulation using various data
structures, as a function of the string length n.

Chapter Notes
Optimizing hash table performance is surprisingly complicated for such a con-
ceptually simple data structure. The importance of short runs in open address-
ing has led to more sophisticated schemes than sequential probing for optimal
hash table performance. For more details, see Knuth [Knu98].
    My thinking on hashing was profoundly influenced by a talk by Mihai Pătraşcu,
a brilliant theoretician who sadly died before he turned 30. More detailed treat-
ments on hashing and randomized algorithms include Motwani and Raghavan
[MR95] and Mitzenmacher and Upfal [MU17].
    Our triangle strip optimizing program, stripe, is described in Evans et al.
[ESV96]. Hashing techniques for plagiarism detection are discussed in Schlieimer
et al. [SWA03].
    Surveys of algorithmic issues in DNA sequencing by hybridization include
Chetverin and Kramer [CK94] and Pevzner and Lipshutz [PL94]. Our work on
interactive SBH reported in the war story is reported in Margaritis and Skiena
[MS95a].
3.10. EXERCISES                                                                       103

3.10       Exercises
Stacks, Queues, and Lists
 3-1. [3] A common problem for compilers and text editors is determining whether
      the parentheses in a string are balanced and properly nested. For example, the
      string ((())())() contains properly nested pairs of parentheses, while the strings
      )()( and ()) do not. Give an algorithm that returns true if a string contains
      properly nested and balanced parentheses, and false if otherwise. For full credit,
      identify the position of the first offending parenthesis if the string is not properly
      nested and balanced.
 3-2. [5] Give an algorithm that takes a string S consisting of opening and closing
      parentheses, say )()(())()()))())))(, and finds the length of the longest balanced
      parentheses in S, which is 12 in the example above. (Hint: The solution is not
      necessarily a contiguous run of parenthesis from S.)
 3-3. [3] Give an algorithm to reverse the direction of a given singly linked list. In
      other words, after the reversal all pointers should now point backwards. Your
      algorithm should take linear time.
 3-4. [5] Design a stack S that supports S.push(x), S.pop(), and S.findmin(), which
      returns the minimum element of S. All operations should run in constant time.
 3-5. [5] We have seen how dynamic arrays enable arrays to grow while still achiev-
      ing constant-time amortized performance. This problem concerns extending
      dynamic arrays to let them both grow and shrink on demand.

       (a) Consider an underflow strategy that cuts the array size in half whenever
           the array falls below half full. Give an example sequence of insertions and
           deletions where this strategy gives a bad amortized cost.
       (b) Then, give a better underflow strategy than that suggested above, one that
           achieves constant amortized cost per deletion.

 3-6. [3] Suppose you seek to maintain the contents of a refrigerator so as to minimize
      food spoilage. What data structure should you use, and how should you use
      it?
 3-7. [5] Work out the details of supporting constant-time deletion from a singly
      linked list as per the footnote from page 79, ideally to an actual implementation.
      Support the other operations as efficiently as possible.

Elementary Data Structures
 3-8. [5] Tic-tac-toe is a game played on an n × n board (typically n = 3) where two
      players take consecutive turns placing “O” and “X” marks onto the board cells.
      The game is won if n consecutive “O” or ‘X” marks are placed in a row, column,
      or diagonal. Create a data structure with O(n) space that accepts a sequence
      of moves, and reports in constant time whether the last move won the game.
 3-9. [3] Write a function which, given a sequence of digits 2–9 and a dictionary of n
      words, reports all words described by this sequence when typed in on a standard
      telephone keypad. For the sequence 269 you should return any, box, boy, and
      cow, among other words.
104                                           CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

3-10. [3] Two strings X and Y are anagrams if the letters of X can be rearranged
      to form Y . For example, silent/listen, and incest/insect are anagrams. Give an
      efficient algorithm to determine whether strings X and Y are anagrams.

Trees and Other Dictionary Structures
3-11. [3] Design a dictionary data structure in which search, insertion, and deletion
      can all be processed in O(1) time in the worst case. You may assume the set
      elements are integers drawn from a finite set 1, 2, .., n, and initialization can take
      O(n) time.
3-12. [3] The maximum depth of a binary tree is the number of nodes on the path
      from the root down to the most distant leaf node. Give an O(n) algorithm to
      find the maximum depth of a binary tree with n nodes.
3-13. [5] Two elements of a binary search tree have been swapped by mistake. Give
      an O(n) algorithm to identify these two elements so they can be swapped back.
3-14. [5] Given two binary search trees, merge them into a doubly linked list in sorted
      order.
3-15. [5] Describe an O(n)-time algorithm that takes an n-node binary search tree
      and constructs an equivalent height-balanced binary search tree. In a height-
      balanced binary search tree, the difference between the height of the left and
      right subtrees of every node is never more than 1.
3-16. [3] Find the storage efficiency ratio (the ratio of data space over total space)
      for each of the following binary tree implementations on n nodes:
       (a) All nodes store data, two child pointers, and a parent pointer. The data
           field requires 4 bytes and each pointer requires 4 bytes.
       (b) Only leaf nodes store data; internal nodes store two child pointers. The
           data field requires four bytes and each pointer requires two bytes.
3-17. [5] Give an O(n) algorithm that determines whether a given n-node binary tree
      is height-balanced (see Problem 3-15).
3-18. [5] Describe how to modify any balanced tree data structure such that search,
      insert, delete, minimum, and maximum still take O(log n) time each, but suc-
      cessor and predecessor now take O(1) time each. Which operations have to be
      modified to support this?
3-19. [5] Suppose you have access to a balanced dictionary data structure that sup-
      ports each of the operations search, insert, delete, minimum, maximum, suc-
      cessor, and predecessor in O(log n) time. Explain how to modify the insert
      and delete operations so they still take O(log n) but now minimum and max-
      imum take O(1) time. (Hint: think in terms of using the abstract dictionary
      operations, instead of mucking about with pointers and the like.)
3-20. [5] Design a data structure to support the following operations:

         • insert(x,T) – Insert item x into the set T .
         • delete(k,T) – Delete the kth smallest element from T .
         • member(x,T) – Return true iff x ∈ T .

      All operations must take O(log n) time on an n-element set.
3.10. EXERCISES                                                                     105

3-21. [8] A concatenate operation takes two sets S1 and S2 , where every key in S1 is
      smaller than any key in S2 , and merges them. Give an algorithm to concatenate
      two binary search trees into one binary search tree. The worst-case running
      time should be O(h), where h is the maximal height of the two trees.

Applications of Tree Structures
3-22. [5] Design a data structure that supports the following two operations:
         • insert(x) – Insert item x from the data stream to the data structure.
         • median() – Return the median of all elements so far.
      All operations must take O(log n) time on an n-element set.
3-23. [5] Assume we are given a standard dictionary (balanced binary search tree)
      defined on a set of n strings, each of length at most l. We seek to print out all
      strings beginning with a particular prefix p. Show how to do this in O(ml log n)
      time, where m is the number of strings.
3-24. [5] An array A is called k-unique if it does not contain a pair of duplicate
      elements within k positions of each other, that is, there is no i and j such that
      A[i] = A[j] and |j − i| ≤ k. Design a worst-case O(n log k) algorithm to test if
      A is k-unique.
3-25. [5] In the bin-packing problem, we are given n objects, each weighing at most
      1 kilogram. Our goal is to find the smallest number of bins that will hold the n
      objects, with each bin holding 1 kilogram at most.

         • The best-fit heuristic for bin packing is as follows. Consider the objects
           in the order in which they are given. For each object, place it into the
           partially filled bin with the smallest amount of extra room after the ob-
           ject is inserted. If no such bin exists, start a new bin. Design an algo-
           rithm that implements the best-fit heuristic (taking as input the n weights
           w1 , w2 , ..., wn and outputting the number of bins used) in O(n log n) time.
         • Repeat the above using the worst-fit heuristic, where we put the next
           object into the partially filled bin with the largest amount of extra room
           after the object is inserted.

3-26. [5] Suppose that we are given a sequence of n values x1 , x2 , ..., xn and seek to
      quickly answer repeated queries of the form: given i and j, find the smallest
      value in xi , . . . , xj .

       (a) Design a data structure that uses O(n2 ) space and answers queries in O(1)
           time.
       (b) Design a data structure that uses O(n) space and answers queries in
           O(log n) time. For partial credit, your data structure can use O(n log n)
           space and have O(log n) query time.

3-27. [5] Suppose you are given an input set S of n integers, and a black box that if
      given any sequence of integers and an integer k instantly and correctly answers
      whether there is a subset of the input sequence whose sum is exactly k. Show
      how to use the black box O(n) times to find a subset of S that adds up to k.
3-28. [5] Let A[1..n] be an array of real numbers. Design an algorithm to perform
      any sequence of the following operations:
106                                         CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

         • Add(i,y) – Add the value y to the ith number.
                                                                             ?i
         • Partial-sum(i) – Return the sum of the first i numbers, that is,     j=1 A[j].

      There are no insertions or deletions; the only change is to the values of the num-
      bers. Each operation should take O(log n) steps. You may use one additional
      array of size n as a work space.
3-29. [8] Extend the data structure of the previous problem to support insertions and
      deletions. Each element now has both a key and a value. An element is accessed
      by its key, but the addition operation is applied to the values. The Partial sum
      operation is different.

         • Add(k,y) – Add the value y to the item with key k.
         • Insert(k,y) – Insert a new item with key k and value y.
         • Delete(k) – Delete the item with key k.
         • Partial-sum(k) – Return the sum?   of all the elements currently in the set
           whose key is less than k, that is, i<k xi .

      The worst-case running time should still be O(n log n) for any sequence of O(n)
      operations.
3-30. [8] You are consulting for a hotel that has n one-bed rooms. When a guest
      checks in, they ask for a room whose number is in the range [l, h]. Propose a
      data structure that supports the following data operations in the allotted time:
       (a) Initialize(n): Initialize the data structure for empty rooms numbered
           1, 2, . . . , n, in polynomial time.
       (b) Count(l, h):   Return the number of available rooms in [l, h], in O(log n)
           time.
       (c) Checkin(l, h): In O(log n) time, return the first empty room in [l, h] and
           mark it occupied, or return NIL if all the rooms in [l, h] are occupied.
       (d) Checkout(x): Mark room x as unoccupied, in O(log n) time.
3-31. [8] Design a data structure that allows one to search, insert, and delete an
      integer X in O(1) time (i.e., constant time, independent of the total number of
      integers stored). Assume that 1 ≤ X ≤ n and that there are m + n units of
      space available, where m is the maximum number of integers that can be in the
      table at any one time. (Hint: use two arrays A[1..n] and B[1..m].) You are not
      allowed to initialize either A or B, as that would take O(m) or O(n) operations.
      This means the arrays are full of random garbage to begin with, so you must be
      very careful.

Implementation Projects
3-32. [5] Implement versions of several different dictionary data structures, such as
      linked lists, binary trees, balanced binary search trees, and hash tables. Con-
      duct experiments to assess the relative performance of these data structures in
      a simple application that reads a large text file and reports exactly one instance
      of each word that appears within it. This application can be efficiently imple-
      mented by maintaining a dictionary of all distinct words that have appeared
      thus far in the text and inserting/reporting each new word that appears in the
      stream. Write a brief report with your conclusions.
3.10. EXERCISES                                                                         107

3-33. [5] A Caesar shift (see Section 21.6 (page 697)) is a very simple class of ciphers for
      secret messages. Unfortunately, they can be broken using statistical properties
      of English. Develop a program capable of decrypting Caesar shifts of sufficiently
      long texts.

Interview Problems
3-34. [3] What method would you use to look up a word in a dictionary?
3-35. [3] Imagine you have a closet full of shirts. What can you do to organize your
      shirts for easy retrieval?
3-36. [4] Write a function to find the middle node of a singly linked list.
3-37. [4] Write a function to determine whether two binary trees are identical. Iden-
      tical trees have the same key value at each position and the same structure.
3-38. [4] Write a program to convert a binary search tree into a linked list.
3-39. [4] Implement an algorithm to reverse a linked list. Now do it without recur-
      sion.
3-40. [5] What is the best data structure for maintaining URLs that have been visited
      by a web crawler? Give an algorithm to test whether a given URL has already
      been visited, optimizing both space and time.
3-41. [4] You are given a search string and a magazine. You seek to generate all the
      characters in the search string by cutting them out from the magazine. Give an
      algorithm to efficiently determine whether the magazine contains all the letters
      in the search string.
3-42. [4] Reverse the words in a sentence—that is, “My name is Chris” becomes “Chris
      is name My.” Optimize for time and space.
3-43. [5] Determine whether a linked list contains a loop as quickly as possible without
      using any extra storage. Also, identify the location of the loop.
3-44. [5] You have an unordered array X of n integers. Find the array M containing
      n elements where Mi is the product of all integers in X except for Xi . You may
      not use division. You can use extra memory. (Hint: there are solutions faster
      than O(n2 ).)
3-45. [6] Give an algorithm for finding an ordered word pair (e.g. “New York”) oc-
      curring with the greatest frequency in a given webpage. Which data structures
      would you use? Optimize both time and space.

LeetCode
 3-1. https://leetcode.com/problems/validate-binary-search-tree/
 3-2. https://leetcode.com/problems/count-of-smaller-numbers-after-self/
 3-3. https://leetcode.com/problems/construct-binary-tree-from-preorder-and-
      inorder-traversal/

HackerRank
 3-1. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/is-binary-search-tree/
 3-2. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/queue-using-two-stacks/
 3-3. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/detect-whether-a-linked-list-contains-
      a-cycle/problem
108                                     CHAPTER 3. DATA STRUCTURES

Programming Challenges
These programming challenge problems with robot judging are available at
https://onlinejudge.org:
 3-1. “Jolly Jumpers”—Chapter 2, problem 10038.
 3-2. “Crypt Kicker”—Chapter 2, problem 843.
 3-3. “Where’s Waldorf?”—Chapter 3, problem 10010.
 3-4. “Crypt Kicker II”—Chapter 3, problem 850.
