Chapter 6

Hashing and Randomized
Algorithms

Most of the algorithms discussed in previous chapters were designed to optimize
worst-case performance: they are guaranteed to return optimal solutions for
every problem instance within a specified running time.
   This is great, when we can do it. But relaxing the demand for either always
correct or always efficient can lead to useful algorithms that still have perfor-
mance guarantees. Randomized algorithms are not merely heuristics: any bad
performance is due to getting unlucky on coin flips, rather than adversarial
input data.
   We classify randomized algorithms into two types, depending upon whether
they guarantee correctness or efficiency:
    • Las Vegas algorithms: These randomized algorithms guarantee correct-
      ness, and are usually (but not always) efficient. Quicksort is an excellent
      example of a Las Vegas algorithm.
    • Monte Carlo algorithms: These randomized algorithms are provably ef-
      ficient, and usually (but not always) produce the correct answer or some-
      thing close to it. Representative of this class are random sampling methods
      discussed in Section 12.6.1, where we return the best solution found in the
      course of (say) 1,000,000 random samples.
We will see several examples of both types of algorithm in this chapter.
    One blessing of randomized algorithms is that they tend to be very simple to
describe and implement. Eliminating the need to worry about rare or unlikely
situations makes it possible to avoid complicated data structures and other
contortions. These clean randomized algorithms are often intuitively appealing,
and relatively easy to design.
    However, randomized algorithms are frequently quite difficult to analyze
rigorously. Probability theory is the mathematics we need for the analysis of
randomized algorithms, and is of necessity both formal and subtle. Probabilistic

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   171
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_6
172            CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

analysis often involves algebraic manipulation of long chains of inequalities that
looks frightening, and relies on tricks and experience.
    This makes it difficult to provide satisfying analysis on the level of this book,
which maintains a strict no-theorem/proof policy. But I will try to provide
intuition where I can, so you can appreciate why these algorithms are usually
correct or efficient.
    We have had initial peeks at randomized algorithms through our discussions
of hash tables (Section 3.7) and quicksort (Section 4.6). Review these now to
give yourself the best chance of understanding what is to come.

Stop and Think: Quicksort City

Problem: Why is randomized quicksort a Las Vegas algorithm, as opposed to a
Monte Carlo algorithm?

Solution: Recall that Monte Carlo algorithms are always fast and usually cor-
rect, while Las Vegas algorithms are always correct and usually fast.
    Randomized quicksort always produces a sorted permutation, so we know it
is always correct. Picking a very bad series of pivots might cause the running
to exceed O(n log n), but we are always going to end up sorted. Thus, quicksort
is a nice example of a Las Vegas-style algorithm.

6.1       Probability Review
I will resist the temptation to give a thorough review of probability theory here,
as part of my objective to keep this book to a manageable size. My presumptions
are: (1) you have had some previous exposure to probability theory, and (2) you
know where to look if you feel you need more. I will therefore limit myself to a
few basic definitions and properties we will use.

6.1.1      Probability
Probability theory provides a formal framework for reasoning about the likeli-
hood of events. Because it is a formal discipline, there is a thicket of associated
definitions to instantiate exactly what we are reasoning about:

      • An experiment is a procedure that yields one of a set of possible out-
        comes. As our ongoing example, consider the experiment of tossing two
        six-sided dice, one red and one blue, with each face bearing a distinct
        integer {1, . . . , 6}.

      • A sample space S is the set of possible outcomes of an experiment. In our
6.1. PROBABILITY REVIEW                                                              173

    dice example, there are thirty-six possible outcomes, namely
                      S = {(1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (1, 5), (1, 6),
                             (2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 4), (2, 5), (2, 6),
                             (3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 4), (3, 5), (3, 6),
                             (4, 1), (4, 2), (4, 3), (4, 4), (4, 5), (4, 6),
                             (5, 1), (5, 2), (5, 3), (5, 4), (5, 5), (5, 6),
                             (6, 1), (6, 2), (6, 3), (6, 4), (6, 5), (6, 6)}.

  • An event E is a specified subset of the outcomes of an experiment. The
    event that the sum of the dice equals 7 or 11 (the conditions to win at
    craps on the first roll) is the subset
             E = {(1, 6), (2, 5), (3, 4), (4, 3), (5, 2), (6, 1), (5, 6), (6, 5)}.

  • The probability of an outcome s, denoted p(s), is a number with the two
    properties:
       – For each outcome s in sample space S, 0 ≤ p(s) ≤ 1.
                                                              ?
       – The sum of probabilities of all outcomes adds to one: s∈S p(s) = 1.
    If we assume two distinct fair dice, the probability p(s) = (1/6) × (1/6) =
    1/36 for all outcomes s ∈ S.
  • The probability of an event E is the sum of the probabilities of the out-
    comes of the event. Thus,
                                         ?
                                P (E) =     p(s)
                                                 s∈E

    An alternative formulation is in terms of the complement of the event Ē,
    the case when E does not occur. Then
                                     P (E) = 1 − P (Ē)
    This is useful, because often it is easier to analyze P (Ē) than P (E) di-
    rectly.
  • A random variable V is a numerical function on the outcomes of a proba-
    bility space. The function “sum the values of two dice” (V ((a, b)) = a + b)
    produces an integer result between 2 and 12. This implies a probability
    distribution of the possible values of the random variable. The probability
    P (V (s) = 7) = 1/6, while P (V (s) = 12) = 1/36.
  • The expected value of a random variable V defined on a sample space S,
    E(V ), is defined                 ?
                             E(V ) =    p(s) · V (s)
                                             s∈S
174              CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

  S                               S                                  S

             A                                                              A        B

            A                            A\B                                A[B
Figure 6.1: Venn diagrams illustrating set difference (left), intersection (middle),
and union (right).

6.1.2       Compound Events and Independence
We will be interested in complex events computed from simpler events A and B
on the same set of outcomes. Perhaps event A is that at least one of two dice
be an even number, while event B denotes rolling a total of either 7 or 11. Note
that there exist outcomes of A that are not outcomes of B, specifically

      A − B = {(1, 2), (1, 4), (2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 4), (2, 6), (3, 2), (3, 6), (4, 1),
               (4, 2), (4, 4), (4, 5), (4, 6), (5, 4), (6, 2), (6, 3), (6, 4), (6, 6)}

This is the set difference operation. Observe that here B − A = {}, because
every pair adding to 7 or 11 must contain one odd and one even number.
    The outcomes in common between both events A and B are called the in-
tersection, denoted A ∩ B. This can be written as

                                      A ∩ B = A − (S − B)

Outcomes that appear in either A or B are called the union, denoted A ∪ B.
The probability of the union and intersection are related by the formula

                          P (A ∪ B) = P (A) + P (B) − P (A ∩ B)

With the complement operation Ā = S −A, we get a rich language for combining
events, shown in Figure 6.1. We can readily compute the probability of any of
these sets by summing the probabilities of the outcomes in the defined sets.
   The events A and B are said to be independent if

                                 P (A ∩ B) = P (A) × P (B)

This means that there is no special structure of outcomes shared between events
A and B. Assuming that half of the students in my class are female, and half
the students in my class are above average, we would expect that a quarter of
my students are both female and above average if the events are independent.
   Probability theorists love independent events, because it simplifies their cal-
culations. For example, if Ai denotes the event of getting an even number on
6.1. PROBABILITY REVIEW                                                        175

the ith dice throw, then the probability of obtaining all evens in a throw of two
dice is P (A1 ∩ A2 ) = P (A1 )P (A2 ) = (1/2)(1/2) = 1/4. Then, the probability
of A, that at least one of two dice is even, is

P (A) = P (A1 ∪ A2 ) = P (A1 ) + P (A2 ) − P (A1 ∩ A2 ) = 1/2 + 1/2 − 1/4 = 3/4

    That independence often doesn’t hold explains much of the subtlety and
difficulty of probabilistic analysis. The probability of getting n heads when
tossing n independent coins is 1/2n . But it would be 1/2 if the coins were
perfectly correlated, since the only possibilities would be all heads or all tails.
This computation would become very hard if there were complex dependencies
between the outcomes of the ith and jth coins.
    Randomized algorithms are typically designed around samples drawn inde-
pendently at random, so that we can safely multiply probabilities to understand
compound events.

6.1.3    Conditional Probability
Presuming that P (B) > 0, the conditional probability of A given B, P (A|B) is
defined as follows
                                      P (A ∩ B)
                           P (A|B) =
                                        P (B)
   In particular, if events A and B are independent, then

                              P (A ∩ B)   P (A)P (B)
                  P (A|B) =             =            = P (A)
                                P (B)        P (B)

and B has absolutely no impact on the likelihood of A. Conditional probability
becomes interesting only when the two events have dependence on each other.
   Recall the dice-rolling events from Section 6.1.2, namely:

   • Event A: at least one of two dice is an even number.

   • Event B: the sum of the two dice is either 7 or 11.

   Observe that P (A|B) = 1, because any roll summing to an odd value must
consist of one even and one odd number. Thus, A ∩ B = B. For P (B|A), note
that P (A ∩ B) = P (B) = 8/36 and P (A) = 27/36, so P (B|A) = 8/27.
   Our primary tool to compute conditional probabilities will be Bayes’ theo-
rem, which reverses the direction of the dependencies:

                                        P (A|B)P (B)
                            P (B|A) =
                                            P (A)

Often it proves easier to compute probabilities in one direction than another,
as in this problem. By Bayes’ theorem P (B|A) = (1 · 8/36)/(27/36) = 8/27,
exactly what we got before.
176            CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

Figure 6.2: The probability density function (pdf) of the sum of two dice con-
tains exactly the same information as the cumulative density function (cdf), but
looks very different.

6.1.4       Probability Distributions
Random variables are numerical functions where the values are associated with
probabilities of occurrence. In our example where V (s) is the sum of two tossed
dice, the function produces an integer between 2 and 12. The probability of a
particular value V (s) = X is the sum of the probabilities of all the outcomes
whose components add up to X.
    Such random variables can be represented by their probability density func-
tion, or pdf. This is a graph where the x-axis represents the values the random
variable can take on, and the y-axis denotes the probability of each given value.
Figure 6.2 (left) presents the pdf of the sum of two fair dice. Observe that the
peak at X = 7 corresponds to the most probable dice total, with a probability
of 1/6.

6.1.5       Mean and Variance
There are two main types of summary statistics, which together tell us an enor-
mous amount about a probability distribution or a data set:
      • Central tendency measures, which capture the center around which the
        random samples or data points are distributed.
      • Variation or variability measures, which describe the spread, that is, how
        far the random samples or data points can lie from the center.
    The primary centrality measure is the mean. The mean of a random variable
V , denoted E(V ) and also known as the expected value, is given by
                                      ?
                             E(V ) =      V (s)p(s)
                                        s∈S

   When the elementary events are all of equal probability, the mean or average,
computed as
                                          n
                                      1?
                               X̄ =         xi
                                      n i=1
6.1. PROBABILITY REVIEW                                                      177

Figure 6.3: The probability distribution of getting h heads in n =10,000 tosses
of a fair coin is tightly centered around the mean, n/2 =5,000.

   The most common measure of variability is the standard?deviation σ. The
standard deviation of a random variable V is given by σ = E((V − E(V ))2 .
For a data set, the standard deviation is computed from the sum of squared
differences between the individual elements and the mean:
                                    ?n
                                      i=1 (xi − X̄)
                                                      2
                            σ=
                                         n−1

   A related statistic, the variance V = σ 2 , is the square of the standard
deviation. Sometimes it is more convenient to talk about variance than standard
deviation, because the term is ten characters shorter. But they measure exactly
the same thing.

6.1.6    Tossing Coins
You probably have a fair degree of intuition about the distribution of the number
of heads and tails when you toss a fair coin 10,000 times. You know that the
expected number of heads in n tosses, each with probability p = 1/2 of heads, is
pn, or 5,000 for this example. You likely know that the distribution for h heads
out of n is a binomial distribution, where
                                           ?n?       ?n ?
                         P (X − h) = ?n h ?n? = hn
                                          x=0 x
                                                     2

and that it is a bell-shaped symmetrical distribution about the mean.
   But you may not appreciate just how narrow this distribution is, as shown in
Figure 6.3. Sure, anywhere from 0 to n heads can result from n fair coin tosses.
But they won’t: the number of heads we get will almost always be within a
few standard deviations of the mean,?where the standard √ deviation σ for the
binomial distribution is given by σ = np(1 − p) = Θ( n).
178         CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

                                            1                  3

                  1 2 3 4 5 6
                                            6                  4

Figure 6.4: How long does a random walk take to visit all n nodes of a path
(left) or a complete graph (right)?

   Indeed, for any probability distribution, at least 1 − (1/k 2 ) of the mass of
the distribution lies within ±kσ of the mean μ. Typically σ is small relative
to μ for the distributions arising in the analysis of randomized algorithms and
processes.

 Take-Home Lesson: Students often ask me “what happens” when randomized
 quicksort runs in Θ(n2 ). The answer is that nothing happens, in exactly the
 same way nothing happens when you buy a lottery ticket: you almost certainly
 just lose. With a randomized quicksort you almost certainly just win: the
 probability distribution is so tight that you nearly always run in time very
 close to expectation.

Stop and Think: Random Walks on a Path

Problem: Random walks on graphs are important processes to understand. The
expected covering time (the number of moves until we have visited all vertices)
differs depending upon the topology of the graph (see Figure 6.4). What is it
for a path?
    Suppose we start at the left end of an m-vertex path. We repeatedly flip
a fair coin, moving one step right on heads and one step left on tails (staying
where we are if we were to fall off the path). How many coin flips do we expect
it will take, as a function of m, until we get to the right end of the path?

Solution: To get to the right end of the path, we need m − 1 more heads than
tails after n coin flips, assuming we don’t bother to flip when on the left-most
vertex where we can only move right. We √   expect about half of the flips to be
heads, with a standard deviation of σ = Θ( n). This σ describes the spread of
the difference in the number of the heads and tails we are likely to have. We
must flip enough times for σ to be on the order of m, so
                                   √
                            m = Θ( n) → n = Θ(m2 )
6.2. UNDERSTANDING BALLS AND BINS                                             179

6.2     Understanding Balls and Bins
Ball and bin problems are classics of probability theory. We are given x identical
balls to toss at random into y labeled bins. We are interested in the resulting
distribution of balls. How many bins are expected to contain a given number of
balls?
    Hashing can be thought of as a ball and bin process. Suppose we hash n
balls/keys into n bins/buckets. We expect an average of one ball per bin, but
note that this will be true regardless of how good or bad the hash function is.
    A good hash function should behave like a random number generator, se-
lecting integers/bin IDs with equal probability from 1 to n. But what happens
when we draw n such integers from a uniform distribution? The ideal would
be for each of the n items (balls) to be assigned to a different bin, so that each
bucket contains exactly one item to search. But is this really what happens?
    To help develop your own intuition, I encourage you to code a little simula-
tion and run your own experiment. I did, and got the following results, for hash
table sizes from one million to one hundred million items:

                              Number of Buckets with k Items
                        k    n = 106    n = 107      n = 108
                         0   367,899   3,678,774   36,789,634
                         1   367,928   3,677,993   36,785,705
                         2   183,926   1,840,437   18,392,948
                         3    61,112     613,564    6,133,955
                        4     15,438     152,713    1,531,360
                        5       3130      30,517      306,819
                        6        499       5,133       51,238
                         7        56         754        7,269
                         8        12         107          972
                         9                     8           89
                        10                                 10
                        11                                  1

    We see that 36.78% of the buckets are empty in all three cases. That can’t
be a coincidence. The first bucket will be empty iff each of the n balls gets
assigned to one of the other n − 1 buckets. The probability p of missing for each
particular ball is p = (n − 1)/n, which approaches 1 as n gets large. But we
must miss for all n balls, the probability of which is pn . What happens when
we multiply a large number of large probabilities? You actually saw the answer
back when you studied limits:
                                             n
                                     n−1             1
                   P (|B1 | = 0) =               →     = 0.367879
                                      n              e

Thus, 36.78% of the buckets in a large hash table will be empty. And, as it turns
out, exactly the same fraction of buckets is expected to contain one element.
   If so many buckets are empty, others must be unusually full. The fullest
bucket gets fuller in the table above as n increases, from 8 to 9 to 11. In fact,
the expected value of the longest list is O(log n/ log log n), which grows slowly
but is not a constant. Thus, I was a little too glib when I said in Section 3.7.1
180            CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

Figure 6.5: Illustrating the coupon collectors problem through an experiment
tossing balls at random into ten bins. It is not until the 33rd toss that all bins
are non-empty.

that the worst-case access time for hashing is O(1).1

 Take-Home Lesson: Precise analysis of random process requires formal proba-
 bility theory, algebraic skills, and careful asymptotics. We will gloss over such
 issues in this chapter, but you should appreciate that they are out there.

6.2.1      The Coupon Collector’s Problem
As a final hashing warmup, let’s keep tossing balls into these n bins until none
of them are empty, that is, until we have at least one ball in each bin. How
many tosses do we expect this should take? As shown in Figure 6.5, it may
require considerably more than n tosses until every bin is occupied.
    We can split such a sequence of balls into n runs, where run ri consists of the
balls we toss after we have filled i buckets until the next time we hit an empty
bucket. The expected number of balls to fill all n slots E(n) will be the sum of
the expected lengths of all runs. If you are flipping a coin with probability p
of coming up heads, the expected number of flips until you get your first head
is 1/p; this is a property of the geometric distribution. After filling i buckets,
the probability that our next toss will hit an empty bucket is p = (n − i)/n.
Putting this together, we get the following
                      n−1
                      ?               n−1
                                      ?          n−1
                                                 ? 1
                                           n
            E(n) =          |ri | =           =n         = nHn ≈ n ln n
                      i=0             i=0
                                          n−i    i=0
                                                     n−i
                                                                                  ?n
   The trick here is to remember that the harmonic number Hn =                       i=1 1/i,
and that Hn ≈ ln n.

Stop and Think: Covering Time for Kn

Problem: Suppose we start on vertex 1 of a complete n-vertex graph (see Figure
6.4). We take a random walk on this graph, at each step going to a randomly
   1 To be precise, the expected search time for hashing is O(1) averaged over all n keys, but

we also expect there will a few keys unlucky enough to require Θ(log n/ log log n) time.
6.3. WHY IS HASHING A RANDOMIZED ALGORITHM?                                  181

selected neighbor of our current position. What is the expected number of steps
until we have visited all vertices of the graph?

Solution: This is exactly the same question as the previous stop and think,
but with a different graph and thus with a possibly different answer.
    Indeed, the random process here of independently generating random inte-
gers from 1 to n looks essentially the same as the coupon collector’s problem.
This suggests that the expected length of the covering walk is Θ(n log n).
    The only hitch in this argument is that the random walk model does not
permit us to stay at the same vertex for two successive steps, unless the graph
has edges from a vertex to itself (self-loops). A graph without such self-loops
should have a slightly faster covering time, since a repeat visit does not make
progress in any way, but not enough to change the asymptotics. The probability
of discovering one of n − i untouched vertices in the next step changes from
(n − i)/n to (n − i)/(n − 1), reducing the total covering time analysis from nHn
to (n − 1)Hn . But these are asymptotically the same. Covering the complete
graph takes Θ(n log n) steps, much faster than the covering time of the path.

6.3     Why is Hashing a Randomized Algorithm?
Recall that a hash function h(s) maps keys s to integers in a range from 0 to
m − 1, ideally uniformly over this interval. Because good hash functions scatter
keys around this integer range in a manner similar to that of a uniform random
number generator, we can analyze hashing by treating the values as drawn from
tosses of an m-sided die.
    But just because we can analyze hashing in terms of probabilities doesn’t
make it a randomized algorithm. As discussed so far, hashing is completely
deterministic, involving no random numbers. Indeed, hashing must be deter-
ministic, because we need h(x) to produce exactly the same result whenever
called with a given x, or else we can never hope to find x in a hash table.
    One reason we like randomized algorithms is that they make the worst case
input instance go away: bad performance should be a result of extremely bad
luck, rather than some joker giving us data that makes us do bad things. But it
is easy (in principle) to construct a worst case example for any hash function h.
Suppose we take an arbitrary set S of nm distinct keys, and hash each s ∈ S.
Because the range of this function has only m elements, there must be many
collisions. Since the average number of items per bucket is nm/m = n, it follows
from the pigeonhole principle that there must be a bucket with at least n items
in it. The n items in this bucket, taken by themselves, will prove a nightmare
for hash function h.
    How can we make such a worst-case input go away? We are protected if we
pick our hash function at random from a large set of possibilities, because we
182          CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

can only construct such a bad example by knowing the exact hash function we
will be working with.
    So how can we construct a family of random hash functions? Recall that
typically h(x) = f (x) (mod m), where f (x) turns the key into a huge value, and
taking the remainder mod m reduces it to the desired range. Our desired range
is typically determined by application and memory constraints, so we would not
want to select m at random. But what about first reducing with a larger integer
p? Observe that in general

                    f (x) (mod m) ?= (f (x) mod p) (mod m)

For example:

21347895537127 (mod 17) = 8 ?= (21347895537127 (mod 2342343)) (mod 17) = 12

Thus, we can select p at random to define the hash function

                         h(x) = ((f (x) mod p) mod m)

and things will work out just fine provided (a) f (x) is large relative to p, (b) p
is large relative to m, and (c) m is relatively prime to p.
    This ability to select random hash functions means we can now use hashing to
provide legitimate randomized guarantees, thus making the worst-case input go
away. It also lets us build powerful algorithms involving multiple hash functions,
such as Bloom filters, discussed in Section 6.4.

6.4     Bloom Filters
Recall the problem of detecting duplicate documents faced by search engines like
Google. They seek to build an index of all the unique documents on the web.
Identical copies of the same document often exist on many different websites,
including (unfortunately) pirated copies of my book. Whenever Google crawls
a new link, they need to establish whether what they found is a not previously
encountered document worth adding to the index.
    Perhaps the most natural solution here is to build a hash table of the docu-
ments. Should a freshly crawled document hash to an empty bucket, we know
it must be new. But when there is a collision, it does not necessarily mean we
have seen this document before. To be sure, we must explicitly compare the
new document against all other documents in the bucket, to detect spurious
collisions between a and b, where h(a) = s and h(b) = s, but a ?= b. This is
what was discussed back in Section 3.7.2.
    But in this application, spurious collisions are not really a tragedy: they
only mean that Google will fail to index a new document it has found. This can
be an acceptable risk, provided the probability of it happening is low enough.
Removing the need to explicitly resolve collisions has big benefits in making the
table smaller. By reducing each bucket from a pointer link to a single bit (is
this bucket occupied or not?), we reduce the space by a factor of 64 on typical
6.4. BLOOM FILTERS                                                               183

Figure 6.6: Hashing the integers 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 into an n = 8 bit Bloom filter,
using hash functions h1 (x) = 2x + 1 (blue) and h2 (x) = 3x + 2 (red). Searching
for x = 5 would yield a false positive, since the two corresponding bits have
been set by other elements.

machines. Some of this space can then be taken back to make the hash table
larger, thus reducing the probability of collisions in the first place.
    Now suppose we build such a bit-vector hash table, with a capacity of n bits.
If we have distinct bits corresponding to m documents occupied, the probability
that a new document will spuriously hash to one of these bits is p = m/n. Thus,
even if the table is only 5% full, there is still a p = 0.05 probability that we will
falsely discard a new discovery, which is much higher than is acceptable.
    Much better is to employ a Bloom filter, which is also just a bit-vector
hash table. But instead of each document corresponding to a single position
in the table, a Bloom filter hashes each key k times, using k different hash
functions. When we insert document s into our Bloom filter, we set all the
bits corresponding to h1 (s), h2 (s), . . . hk (s) to be 1, meaning occupied. To test
whether a query document s is present in the data structure, we must test that
all k of these bits equal 1. For a document to be falsely convicted of already
being in the filter, it must be unlucky enough that all k of these bits were set
in hashes of previous documents, as in the example of Figure 6.6.
    What are the chances of this? Hashes of m documents in such a Bloom
filter will occupy at most km bits, so the probability of a single collision rises
to p1 = km/n, which is k times greater than the single hash case. But all k
bits must collide with those of our query document, which only happens with
probability pk = (p1 )k = (km/n)k . This is a peculiar expression, because a
probability raised to the kth power quickly becomes smaller with increasing k,
yet here the probability being raised simultaneously increases with k. To find
the k that minimizes pk , we could take the derivative and set it to zero.
    Figure 6.7 graphs this error probability ((km/n)k ) as a function of load
(m/n), with a separate line for each k from 1 to 5. It is clear that using a large
number of hash functions (increased k) reduces false positive error substantially
over a conventional hash table (the blue line, k = 1), at least for small loads.
But observe that the error rate associated with larger k increases rapidly with
load, so for any given load there is always a point where adding more hash
functions becomes counter-productive.
    For a 5% load, the error rate for a simple hash table of k = 1 will be 51.2
times larger than a Bloom filter with k = 5 (9.77 × 10−4 ), even though they
use exactly the same amount of memory. A Bloom filter is an excellent data
structure for maintaining an index, provided you can live with occasionally
184          CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

Figure 6.7: Bloom filter error probability as a function of load (m/n) for k from
1 to 5. By selecting the right k for the given load, we can dramatically reduce
false positive error rate with no increase in table space.

saying yes when the answer is no.

6.5      The Birthday Paradox and Perfect Hashing
Hash tables are an excellent data structure in practice for the standard dic-
tionary operations of insert, delete, and search. However, the Θ(n) worst-case
search time for hashing is an annoyance, no matter how rare it is. Is there a
way we can guarantee worst-case constant time search?
     Perfect hashing offers us this possibility for static dictionaries. Here we are
given all possible keys in one batch, and are not allowed to later insert or delete
items. We can thus build the data structure once and use it repeatedly for
search/membership testing. This is a fairly common use case, so why pay for
the flexibility of dynamic data structures when you don’t need them?
     One idea for how this might work would be to try a given hash function
h(x) on our set of n keys S and hope it creates a hash table with no collisions,
that is, h(x) ?= h(y) for all pairs of distinct x, y ∈ S. It should be clear that our
chances of getting lucky improve as we increase the size of our table relative to
n: the more empty slots there are available for the next key, the more likely we
find one.
     How large a hash table m do we need before we can expect zero collisions
among n keys? Suppose we start from an empty table, and repeatedly insert
keys. For the (i + 1)th insertion, the probability that we hit one of the m − i
still-open slots in the table is (m − i)/m. For a perfect hash, all n inserts must
succeed, so
                                     n−1
                                     ?     m−i             m!
                P (no collision) =                =
                                     i=0
                                            m         mn ((m − n)!)

   What happens when you evaluate this is famously called the birthday para-
dox. How many people do you need in a room before it is likely that at least
two of them share the same birthday? Here the table size is m = 365. The
6.5. THE BIRTHDAY PARADOX AND PERFECT HASHING                                      185

Figure 6.8: The probability of no collisions in a hash table decreases rapidly
with n, the number of keys to hash. Here the hash table size is m = 365.

probability of no collisions drops below 1/2 for n = 23 and is less than 3% when
n ≥ 50, as shown in Figure 6.8. In other words, odds are we have a collision
when only 23 people are in the√room. Solving this asymptotically, we begin to
expect collisions when n = Θ( m) or equivalently when m = Θ(n2 ).
    But quadratic space seems like an awful large penalty to pay for constant
time access to n elements. Instead, we will create a two-level hash table. First,
we hash the n keys of set S into a table with n slots. We expect collisions, but
unless we are very unlucky all the lists will be short enough.
    Let li be the length of the ith list in this table. Because of collisions, many
lists will be of length longer than 1. Our definition of short enough is that n
items are distributed around the table such that the sum of squares of the list
lengths is linear, that is,
                                     ? n
                                N=        li 2 = Θ(n)
                                      i=1

Suppose that it happened that all elements were in lists of length l, meaning
that we have n/l non-empty lists. The sum of squares of the list lengths is
N = (n/l)l2 = nl, which is linear because  √ l is a constant. We can even get away
with a fixed number of lists of length n and still use linear space.
   In fact, it can be shown that N ≤ 4n with high probability. So if this isn’t
true on S for the first hash function we try, we can just try another. Pretty
soon we will find one with short-enough list lengths that we can use.
   We will use an array of length N for our second-level table, allocating li 2
space for the elements of the ith bucket. Note that this is big enough relative to
the number of elements to avoid the birthday paradox—odds are we will have
no collision in any given hash function. And if we do, simply try another hash
function until all elements end up in unique places.
   The complete scheme is illustrated in Figure 6.9. The contents of the ith
entry in the first-level hash table include the starting and ending positions for
the li 2 entries in the second-level table corresponding to this list. It also contains
186          CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

                                              55                                  53
                               63   58   10   33   17              71        47   42
                               0    1    2    3    4    5     6    7    8    9    10

            63   58   10            55                  77    33        17   71   47   42   53
                           0    1   2    3    4    5    6     7    8                    0   1    2   3

Figure 6.9: Perfect hashing uses a two-level hash table to guarantee lookup in
constant time. The first-level table encodes an index range of li 2 elements in
the second-level table, allocated to store the li items in first-level bucket i.

a description (or identifier) of the hash function that we will use for this region
of the second-level table.
    Lookup for an item s starts by calling hash function h1 (s) to compute the
right spot in the first table, where we will find the appropriate start/stop
position and hash function parameters. From this we can compute start +
(h2 (s) (mod (stop − start))), the location where item s will appear in the sec-
ond table. Thus, search can always be performed in Θ(1) time, using linear
storage space between the two tables.
    Perfect hashing is a very useful data structure in practice, ideal for whenever
you will be making large numbers of queries to a static dictionary. There is a
lot of fiddling you can do with this basic scheme to minimize space demands
and construction/search cost, such as working harder to find second-level hash
functions with fewer holes in the table. Indeed, minimum perfect hashing guar-
antees constant time access with zero empty hash table slots, resulting in an
n-element second hash table for n keys.

6.6     Minwise Hashing
Hashing lets you quickly test whether a specific word w in document D1 also
occurs in document D2 : build a hash table on the words of D2 and then hunt
for h(w) in this table T . For simplicity and efficiency we can remove duplicate
words from each document, so each contains only one entry for each vocabulary
term used. By so looking up all the vocabulary words wi ∈ D1 in T , we can
get a count of the intersection, and compute the Jaccard similarity J(D1 , D2 )
of the two documents, where

                                                             |D1 ∩ D2 |
                                    J(D1 , D2 ) =
                                                             |D1 ∪ D2 |

This similarity measure ranges from 0 to 1, sort of like a probability that the
two documents are similar.
   But what if you want to test whether two documents are similar without
looking at all the words? If we are doing this repeatedly, on a web scale, effi-
6.6. MINWISE HASHING                                                          187

Figure 6.10: The words associated with the minimum hash code from each of
two documents are likely to be the same, if the documents are very similar.

ciency matters. Suppose we are allowed to look at only one word per document
to make a decision. Which word should we pick?
    A first thought might be to pick the most frequent word in the original
document, but it is likely to be “the” and tell you very little about similarity.
Picking the most representative word, perhaps according to the TD–IDF statis-
tic, would be better. But it still makes assumptions about the distribution of
words, which may be unwarranted.
    The key idea is to synchronize, so we pick the same word out of the two
documents while looking at the documents separately. Minwise hashing is a
clever but simple idea to do this. We compute the hash code h(wi ) of every
word in D1 , and select the code with smallest value among all the hash codes.
Then we do the same thing with the words in D2 , using the same hash function.
    What is cool about this is that it gives a way to pick the same random word
in both documents, as shown in Figure 6.10. Suppose the vocabularies of each
document were identical. Then the word with minimum hash code will be the
same in both D1 and D2 , and we get a match. In contrast, suppose we had
picked completely random words from each document. Then the probability of
picking the same word would be only 1/v, where v is the vocabulary size.
    Now suppose that D1 and D2 do not have identical vocabularies. The proba-
bility that the minhash word appears in both documents depends on the number
of words in common, that is, the intersection of the vocabularies, and also on
the total vocabulary size of the documents. In fact, this probability is exactly
the Jaccard similarity described above.
    Sampling a larger number of words, say, the k smallest hash values in each
document, and reporting the size of intersection over k gives us a better estimate
of Jaccard similarity. But the alert reader may wonder why we bother. It takes
time linear in the size of D1 and D2 to compute all the hash values just to find
the minhash values, yet this is the same running time that it would take to
compute the exact size of intersection using hashing!
    The value of minhash comes in building indexes for similarity search and
clustering over large corpora of documents. Suppose we have N documents,
each with an average of m vocabulary words in them. We want to build an index
to help us determine which of these is most similar to a new query document Q.
Hashing all words in all documents gives us a table of size O(N m). Storing k ?
m minwise hash values from each document will be much smaller at O(N k), but
the documents at the intersection of the buckets associated with the k minwise
hashes of Q are likely to contain the most similar documents—particularly if
the Jaccard similarity is high.
188          CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

Stop and Think: Estimating Population Size

Problem: Suppose we will receive a stream S of n numbers one by one. This
stream will contain many duplicates, possibly even a single number repeated n
times. How can we estimate the number of distinct values in S using only a
constant amount of memory?

Solution: If space was not an issue, the natural solution would be to build a
dictionary data structure on the distinct elements from the stream, each with
an associated count of how often it has occurred. For the next element we see
in the stream, we add one to the count if it exists in the dictionary, or insert it
if it is not found. But we only have enough space to store a constant number
of elements. What can we do?
     Minwise hashing comes to the rescue. Suppose we hash each new element s
of S as it comes in, and only save h(s) if it is smaller than the previous minhash.
     Why is this interesting? Suppose the range of possible hash values is between
0 and M − 1, and we select k values in this range uniformly at a random. What
is the expected minimum of these k values? If k = 1, the expected value will
(obviously) be M/2. For general k, we might hand wave and say that if our k
values were equally spaced in the interval, the minhash should be M/(k + 1).
     In fact, this hand waving happens to produce the right answer. Define X as
the smallest of k samples. Then
                                                               k                k
                                                    M −i               M −i−1
      P (X = i) = P (X ≥ i) − P (X ≥ i + 1) =                      −
                                                     M                   M

Taking the limit of the expected value as M gets large gives the result
                      M
                      ? −1               k                 k
                                  M −i           M −i−1                 M
             E(X) =          i(              −                 ) −→
                      i=0
                                   M               M                   k+1

    The punch line is that M divided by the minhash value gives an excellent
estimate of the number of distinct values we have seen. This method will not
be fooled by repeated values in the stream, since repeated occurrences will yield
precisely the same value every time we evaluate the hash function.

6.7      Efficient String Matching
Strings are sequences of characters where the order of the characters matters:
the string ALGORITHM is different than LOGARITHM. Text strings are fundamen-
tal to a host of computing applications, from programming language pars-
ing/compilation, to web search engines, to biological sequence analysis.
    The primary data structure for representing strings is an array of characters.
This allows us constant-time access to the ith character of the string. Some
6.7. EFFICIENT STRING MATCHING                                                  189

     H(s, j)                      0       1      2      5        3    6       5
    ?
        Ci + j                    0       1      1      2        2    2       2
                 A       A        A       B      A      B        B    A       B

Figure 6.11: The Rabin–Karp hash function H(s, j) gives distinctive codes to
different substrings (in blue), while a less powerful hash function that just adds
the character codes yields many collisions (shown in purple). Here the pattern
string (BBA) has length m = 3, and the character codes are A = 0 and B = 1.

auxiliary information must be maintained to mark the end of the string: either
a special end-of-string character or (perhaps more usefully) a count n of the
characters in the string.
   The most fundamental operation on text strings is substring search, namely:
Problem: Substring Pattern Matching
Input: A text string t and a pattern string p.
Output: Does t contain the pattern p as a substring, and if so where?
    The simplest algorithm to search for the presence of pattern string p in
text t overlays the pattern string at every position in the text, and checks
whether every pattern character matches the corresponding text character. As
demonstrated in Section 2.5.3 (page 43), this runs in O(nm) time, where n = |t|
and m = |p|.
    This quadratic bound is worst case. More complicated, worst-case linear-
time search algorithms do exist: see Section 21.3 (page 685) for a complete
discussion. But here I give a linear expected-time algorithm for string matching,
called the Rabin–Karp algorithm. It is based on hashing. Suppose we compute
a given hash function on both the pattern string p and the m-character substring
starting from the ith position of t. If these two strings are identical, clearly the
resulting hash values must be the same. If the two strings are different, the hash
values will almost certainly be different. These false positives should be so rare
that we can easily spend the O(m) time it takes to explicitly check the identity
of two strings whenever the hash values agree.
    This reduces string matching to n − m + 2 hash value computations (the
n − m + 1 windows of t, plus one hash of p), plus what should be a very small
number of O(m) time verification steps. The catch is that it takes O(m) time to
compute a hash function on an m-character string, and O(n) such computations
seems to leave us with an O(mn) algorithm again.
    But let’s look more closely at our previously defined (in Section 3.7) hash
function, applied to the m characters starting from the jth position of string S:
                                  m−1
                                  ?
                      H(S, j) =         αm−(i+1) × char(si+j )
                                  i=0
190          CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

   What changes if we now try to compute H(S, j + 1)—the hash of the next
window of m characters? Note that m − 1 characters are the same in both
windows, although this differs by one in the number of times they are multiplied
by α. A little algebra reveals that

            H(S, j + 1) = α(H(S, j) − αm−1 char(sj )) + char(sj+m )

    This means that once we know the hash value from the jth position, we can
find the hash value from the (j +1)th position for the cost of two multiplications,
one addition, and one subtraction. This can be done in constant time (the value
of αm−1 can be computed once and used for all hash value computations). This
math works even if we compute H(S, j) mod M , where M is a reasonably large
prime number. This keeps the size of our hash values small (at most M ) even
when the pattern string is long.
    Rabin–Karp is a good example of a randomized algorithm (if we pick M in
some random way). We get no guarantee the algorithm runs in O(n + m) time,
because we may get unlucky and have the hash values frequently collide with
spurious matches. Still, the odds are heavily in our favor—if the hash function
returns values uniformly from 0 to M − 1, the probability of a false collision
should be 1/M . This is quite reasonable: if M ≈ n, there should only be one
false collision per string, and if M ≈ nk for k ≥ 2, the odds are great we will
never see any false collisions.

6.8     Primality Testing
One of the first programming assignments students get is to test whether an
integer n is a prime number, meaning that its only divisors are 1 and itself. The
sequence of prime numbers starts with 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, . . ., and never ends.
    That program you presumably wrote employed trial division as the algo-
rithm: using a loop where i runs from 2 to n − 1, and check whether n/i is an
integer. If so, then i is a factor of n, and so n must be composite. Any integer
that survives
         √      this gauntlet of tests is prime. In fact, the loop only needs to run
up to      n ?, since that is the largest possible value of the smallest non-trivial
factor of n.
    Still, such trial division is not
                                   √ cheap. If we assume that each division takes
constant time this gives an O( n) algorithm, but here n is the value of the
integer being factored. A 1024-bit number (the size of a small RSA encryption
key) encodes numbers up to 21024 − 1,     √ with the security of RSA depending on
factoring being hard. Observe that 21024 = 2512 , which is greater than the
number of atoms in the universe. So expect to spend some time waiting before
you get the answer.
    Randomized algorithms for primality testing (not factoring) turn out to be
much faster. Fermat’s little theorem states that if n is a prime number then

                  an−1 = 1(mod n) for all a not divisible by n
6.9. WAR STORY: GIVING KNUTH THE MIDDLE INITIAL                              191

For example, when n = 17 and a = 3, observe that (317−1 − 1)/17 = 2, 532, 160,
so 317−1 = 1(mod 17). But for n = 16, 316−1 = 11(mod 16), which proves that
16 cannot be prime.
    What makes this interesting is that the mod of this big power always is 1 if
n is prime. This is a pretty good trick, because the odds of it being 1 by chance
should be very small—only 1/n if the residue was uniform in the range.
    Let’s say we can argue that the probability of a composite giving a residue
of 1 is less than 1/2. This suggests the following algorithm: Pick 100 random
integers aj , each between 1 and n − 1. Verify that none of them divide n. Then
compute (aj )n−1 (mod n). If all hundred of these come out to be 1, then the
probability that n is not prime must be less than (1/2)100 , which is vanishingly
small. Because the number of tests (100) is fixed, the running time is always
fast, which makes this a Monte Carlo type of randomized algorithm.
    There is a minor issue in our probability analysis, however. It turns out
that a very small fraction of integers (roughly 1 in 50 billion up to 1021 ) are
not prime, yet also satisfy the Fermat congruence for all a. Such Carmichael
numbers like 561 and 1105 are doomed to be always be misclassified as prime.
Still, this randomized algorithm proves very effective at distinguishing likely
primes from composite integers.

  Take-Home Lesson: Monte Carlo algorithms are always fast, usually correct,
  and most of them are wrong in only one direction.
    One issue that might concern you is the time complexity of computing
an−1 (mod n). In fact, it can be done in O(log n) time. Recall that we can
compute a2m as (am )2 by divide and conquer, meaning we only need a number
of multiplications logarithmic in the size of the exponent. Further, we don’t
have to work with excessively large numbers to do it. Because of the properties
of modular arithmetic,

                (x · y) mod n = ((x mod n) · (y mod n)) mod n

so we never need multiply numbers larger than n over the course of the compu-
tation.

6.9     War Story: Giving Knuth the Middle Initial
The great Donald Knuth is the seminal figure in creating computer science as
an intellectually distinct academic discipline. The first three volumes of his Art
of Computer Programming series (now four), published between 1968 and 1973,
revealed the mathematical beauty of algorithm design, and still make fun and
exciting reading. Indeed, I give you my blessing to put my book aside to pick
up one of his, at least for a little while.
   Knuth is also a co-author of the textbook Concrete Mathematics, which
focuses on mathematical analysis techniques for algorithms and discrete math-
ematics. Like his other books it contains open research questions in addition
192          CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

to homework problems. One problem that caught my eye concerned middle
binomial coefficients, asking whether it is true that

                  2n
                       = (−1)n (mod (2n + 1)) iff 2n + 1 is prime.
                   n

This is suggestive of Fermat’s little theorem, discussed in Section 6.8 (page 190).
   The congruence is readily shown to hold whenever 2n + 1 is prime. By basic
modular arithmetic,

      (2n)(2n − 1)...(n + 1) = (−1)(−2)...(−n) = (−1)n · n! (mod (2n + 1))

Since ad = bd(mod m) implies a = b(mod m) if d is relatively prime to m and
n! divides (2n)!/n!, n! can be divided from both sides, giving the result.
    But does this formula hold only when 2n + 1 is prime, as conjectured? That
didn’t sound right to me, for logic that is dual to the randomized primality
testing algorithm. If we treat the residue mod 2n + 1 as a random integer, the
probability that it would happen to be (−1)n is very small, only 1/n. Thus,
not seeing a counterexample over a small number of tests is not very impressive
evidence, because chance counterexamples should be rare.
    So I wrote a 16-line Mathematica program, and left it running for the week-
?5906?When I got back,1775
end.                     the program has stopped at n = 2,953. It turns out that
 2953   ≈ 7.93285 ×  10      is congruent to 5,906 when taken modulo 5,907. But
since 5,907 = 3 · 11 · 179, this shows that 2n + 1 is not prime and the conjecture
is refuted.
    It was a big thrill sending this result to Knuth himself, who said he would
put my name in the next edition of his book. A notorious stickler for detail,
he asked me to give him my middle initial. I proudly replied “S”, and asked
him when he would send me my check. Knuth famously offered $2.56 checks to
anyone who found mistakes in one of his books,2 and I wanted one as a souvenir.
But he nixed it, explaining that solving an open problem did not count as fixing
an error in his book. I have always regretted that I did not send him my middle
initial as “T”, because then I would have had an error for him to correct in a
future printing.

6.10       Where do Random Numbers Come From?
All the clever randomized algorithms discussed in this chapter raises a question:
Where do we get random numbers? What happens when you call the random
number generator associated with your favorite programming language?
    We are used to employing physical processes to generate randomness, such as
flipping coins, tossing dice, or even monitoring radioactive decay using a Geiger
counter. We trust these events to be unpredictable, and hence indicative of true
randomness.
  2 I would go broke were I ever to make such an offer.
6.11. EXERCISES                                                                    193

   But this is not what your random number generator does. Most likely it
employs what is essentially a hash function, called a linear congruential gener-
ator. The nth random number Rn is a simple function of the previous random
number Rn−1 :
                           Rn = (aRn−1 + c) mod m
where a, c, m, and R0 are large and carefully selected constants. Essentially,
we hash the previous random number (Rn−1 ) to get the next one.
    The alert reader may question exactly how random such numbers really
are. Indeed, they are completely predictable, because knowing Rn−1 provides
enough information to construct Rn . This predictability means that a suffi-
ciently determined adversary could in principle construct a worst-case input to
a randomized algorithm provided they know the current state of your random
number generator.
    Linear congruential generators are more accurately called pseudo-random
number generators. The stream of numbers produced looks random, in that
they have the same statistical properties as would be expected from a truly
random source. This is generally good enough for randomized algorithms to
work well in practice. However, there is a philosophical sense of randomness
which has been lost that occasionally comes back to bite us, typically in cryp-
tographic applications whose security guarantees rest on an assumption of true
randomness.
    Random number generation is a fascinating problem. Look ahead to section
16.7 in the Hitchhiker’s Guide for a more detailed discussion of how random
numbers should and should not be generated.

Chapter Notes
Readers interested in more formal and substantial treatments of randomized
algorithms are referred to the book of Mitzenmacher and Upfal [MU17] and the
older text by Motwani and Raghavan [MR95]. Minwise hashing was invented
by Broder [Bro97].

6.11          Exercises
Probability
 6-1. [5] You are given n unbiased coins, and perform the following process to generate
      all heads. Toss all n coins independently at random onto a table. Each round
      consists of picking up all the tails-up coins and tossing them onto the table
      again. You repeat until all coins are heads.
      (a) What is the expected number of rounds performed by the process?
      (b) What is the expected number of coin tosses performed by the process?
 6-2. [5] Suppose we flip n coins each of known bias, such that pi is the probability of
      the ith coin being a head. Present an efficient algorithm to determine the exact
      probability of getting exactly k heads given p1 , . . . , pn ∈ [0, 1].
194           CHAPTER 6. HASHING AND RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS

 6-3. [5] An inversion of a permutation is a pair of elements that are out of order.

       (a) Show that a permutation of n items has at most n(n − 1)/2 inversions.
           Which permutation(s) have exactly n(n − 1)/2 inversions?
       (b) Let P be a permutation and P r be the reversal of this permutation. Show
           that P and P r have a total of exactly n(n − 1)/2 inversions.
       (c) Use the previous result to argue that the expected number of inversions in
           a random permutation is n(n − 1)/4.

 6-4. [8] A derangement is a permutation p of {1, . . . , n} such that no item is in its
      proper position, that is, pi ?= i for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. What is the probability that a
      random permutation is a derangement?

Hashing
 6-5. [easy] An all-Beatles radio station plays nothing but recordings by the Beatles,
      selecting the next song at random (uniformly with replacement). They get
      through about ten songs per hour. I listened for 90 minutes before hearing a
      repeated song. Estimate how many songs the Beatles recorded.
 6-6. [5] Given strings S and T of length n and m respectively, find the shortest
      window in S that contains all the characters in T in expected O(n + m) time.
 6-7. [8] Design and implement an efficient data structure to maintain a least recently
      used (LRU) cache of n integer elements. A LRU cache will discard the least
      recently accessed element once the cache has reached its capacity, supporting
      the following operations:

          • get(k)– Return the value associated with the key k if it currently exists in
            the cache, otherwise return -1.
          • put(k,v) – Set the value associated with key k to v, or insert if k is not
            already present. If there are already n items in the queue, delete the least
            recently used item before inserting (k, v).

      Both operations should be done in O(1) expected time.

Randomized Algorithms
 6-8. [5] A pair of English words (w1 , w2 ) is called a rotodrome if one can be circularly
      shifted (rotated) to create the other word. For example, the words (windup,
      upwind) are a rotodrome pair, because we can rotate “windup” two positions
      to the right to get “upwind.”
      Give an efficient algorithm to find all rotodrome pairs among n words of length
      k, with a worst-case analysis. Also give a faster expected-time algorithm based
      on hashing.
 6-9. [5] Given an array w of positive integers, where w[i] describes the weight of
      index i, propose an algorithm that randomly picks an index in proportion to its
      weight.
6-10. [5] You are given a function rand7, which generates a uniform random integer
      in the range 1 to 7. Use it to produce a function rand10, which generates a
      uniform random integer in the range 1 to 10.
6.11. EXERCISES                                                                  195

6-11. [5] Let 0 < α < 1/2 be some constant, independent of the input array length
      n. What is the probability that, with a randomly chosen pivot element, the
      partition subroutine from quicksort produces a split in which the size of both
      the resulting subproblems is at least α times the size of the original array?
6-12. [8] Show that for any given load m/n, the error probability of a Bloom filter is
      minimized when the number of hash functions is k = exp(−1)/(m/n).

LeetCode
 6-1. https://leetcode.com/problems/random-pick-with-blacklist/
 6-2. https://leetcode.com/problems/implement-strstr/
 6-3. https://leetcode.com/problems/random-point-in-non-overlapping-rectangles/

HackerRank
 6-1. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/ctci-ransom-note/
 6-2. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/matchstick-experiment/
 6-3. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/palindromes/

Programming Challenges
These programming challenge problems with robot judging are available at
https://onlinejudge.org:
 6-1. “Carmichael Numbers”—Chapter 10, problem 10006.
 6-2. “Expressions”—Chapter 6, problem 10157.
 6-3. “Complete Tree Labeling”—Chapter 6, problem 10247.
