Chapter 11

NP-Completeness

I will now introduce techniques for proving that no efficient algorithm can exist
for a given problem. The practical reader is probably squirming at the notion
of proving anything, and will be particularly alarmed at the idea of investing
time to prove that something does not exist. Why are you better off knowing
that something you don’t know how to do in fact can’t be done at all?
    The truth is that the theory of NP-completeness is an immensely useful tool
for the algorithm designer, even though all it provides are negative results. The
theory of NP-completeness enables us to focus our efforts more productively,
by revealing when the search for an efficient algorithm is doomed to failure.
Whenever one tries and fails to show a problem is hard, that suggests there
may well be an efficient algorithm to solve it. Two war stories in Chapter 10
described happy results springing from bogus claims of hardness.
    The theory of NP-completeness also enables us to identify which proper-
ties make a particular problem hard. This can provide direction to model it in
different ways, or exploit more benevolent characteristics of the problem. De-
veloping a sense for which problems are hard is an important skill for algorithm
designers, and only comes from hands-on experience with proving hardness.
    The fundamental concept we will use here is reduction, showing that two
problems are really equivalent. We illustrate this idea through a series of re-
ductions, each of which either yields an efficient algorithm for one problem or
an argument that no such algorithm can exist for the other. We also provide a
brief introduction to the complexity-theoretic aspects of NP-completeness, one
of the most fundamental notions in computer science.

11.1        Problems and Reductions
We have encountered several problems in this book where we couldn’t find any
efficient algorithm. The theory of NP-completeness provides the tools needed
to show that these problems are all, on some level, really the same problem.
    The key idea to demonstrating the hardness of a problem is that of a re-
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   355
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_11
356                                        CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

duction, or translation, between two problems. The following allegory of NP-
completeness may help explain the idea. A bunch of kids take turns fighting
each other in the school yard to prove how “tough” they are. Adam beats
up Bill, who then beats up Dwayne. So who if any among them qualifies as
“tough?” The truth is that there is no way to know without an external stan-
dard. If I tell you that the action takes place in a kindergarten school yard,
then the fight results don’t mean very much. But suppose instead that I tell
you Dwayne was in fact Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson, certified tough guy. You
have to be impressed—both Adam and Bill must be at least as tough as he is.
In this telling, each fight represents a reduction, and Dwayne Johnson takes on
the role of satisfiability—a certifiably hard problem.
    Reductions are algorithms that convert one problem into another. To de-
scribe them, we must be somewhat rigorous in our definitions. An algorithmic
problem is a general question, with parameters for input and conditions on what
constitutes a satisfactory answer or solution. An instance is a problem with the
input parameters specified. The difference can be made clear by an example:
Problem: The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
Input: A weighted graph G.
                                                 ?n−1
Output: Which tour (v1 , v2 , ..., vn ) minimizes i=1 d[vi , vi+1 ] + d[vn , v1 ]?
    Any weighted graph defines an instance of TSP. Each particular instance has
at least one minimum cost tour. The general traveling salesman problem asks
for an algorithm to find the optimal tour for any possible instance.

11.1.1      The Key Idea
Now consider two algorithmic problems, called Bandersnatch and Bo-billy. Sup-
pose that I gave you the following reduction/algorithm to solve the Bandersnatch
problem:

         Bandersnatch(G)
            Translate the input G to an instance Y of the Bo-billy problem.
            Call the subroutine Bo-billy to solve instance Y .
            Return the answer of Bo-billy(Y ) as the answer to Bandersnatch(G).

   This algorithm will correctly solve the Bandersnatch problem provided that
the translation to Bo-billy always preserves the correctness of the answer. In
other words, provided that the translation has the property that for any instance
G,
                        Bandersnatch(G) = Bo-billy(Y )

A translation of instances from one type of problem to instances of another such
that the answers are preserved is what we mean by a reduction.
   Now suppose this reduction translates instance G to Y in O(P (n)) time.
There are two possible implications:
11.1. PROBLEMS AND REDUCTIONS                                                 357

   • If my Bo-billy subroutine ran in O(P ? (n)), this yields an algorithm to
     solve the Bandersnatch problem in O(P (n) + P ? (n)), by translating the
     problem and then executing the Bo-billy subroutine to solve it.

   • If I know that Ω(P ? (n)) is a lower bound on computing Bandersnatch,
     meaning there definitely cannot exist a faster algorithm to solve it, then
     Ω(P ? (n) − P (n)) must be a lower bound to compute Bo-billy. Why? If I
     could solve Bo-billy faster than this, the above reduction would violate my
     lower bound on solving Bandersnatch. Because this is impossible, there
     can be no way to solve Bo-billy any faster than claimed.

    Essentially, this reduction shows that Bo-billy is no easier than Bander-
snatch. Therefore, if Bandersnatch is hard this means Bo-billy must also be
hard. We will illustrate this point by giving a variety of problem reductions in
this chapter.

 Take-Home Lesson: Reductions are a way to show that two problems are es-
 sentially identical. A fast algorithm (or the lack of one) for one of the problems
 implies a fast algorithm (or the lack of one) for the other.

11.1.2     Decision Problems
Reductions translate between problems so that their answers are identical in
every problem instance. Problems differ in the range or type of possible answers.
The traveling salesman problem returns a permutation of vertices as the answer,
while other types of problems may return strings or numbers as answers, perhaps
restricted to positive numbers or integers.
    The simplest interesting class of problems have answers restricted to true
and false. These are called decision problems. It proves convenient to re-
duce/translate answers between decision problems because both only allow true
and false as possible answers.
    Fortunately, most interesting optimization problems can be phrased as de-
cision problems that capture the essence of the computation. For example, the
traveling salesman decision problem is defined as:
Problem: The Traveling Salesman Decision Problem (TSDP)
Input: A weighted graph G and integer k.
Output: Does there exist a TSP tour with cost ≤ k?
    This decision version captures the heart of the traveling salesman problem,
in that if you had a fast algorithm for the decision problem, you could do a
binary search with different values of k and quickly home in on the cost of the
optimal TSP solution. With just a bit more cleverness, you could reconstruct
the actual tour permutation using a fast solution to the decision problem.
    From now on I will generally talk about decision problems, because they
prove easier to work with and still capture the power of the theory of NP-
completeness.
358                                       CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

11.2         Reductions for Algorithms
Reductions are an honorable way to generate new algorithms from old ones.
Whenever we can translate the input for a problem we want to solve into input
for a problem we know how to solve, we can compose the translation and the
solution into an algorithm to deal with our problem.
    In this section, we look at several reductions that lead to efficient algorithms.
To solve problem A, we translate/reduce the A instance to an instance of B,
and then solve this instance using an efficient algorithm for problem B. The
overall running time is the time needed to perform the reduction plus that to
solve the B instance.

11.2.1       Closest Pair
The closest-pair problem asks to find the pair of numbers within a set S that
have the smallest difference between them. For example, the closest pair in
S = {10, 4, 8, 3, 12} is (3, 4). We can make it a decision problem by asking if
this value is less than some threshold:
Input: A set S of n numbers, and threshold t.
Output: Is there a pair si , sj ∈ S such that |si − sj | ≤ t?
   Finding the closest pair is a simple application of sorting, since the closest
pair must be neighbors after sorting. This gives the following algorithm:

           CloseEnoughPair(S,t)
               Sort S.
               Is min1≤i<n |si+1 − si | ≤ t?

      There are several things to note about this simple reduction:

      • The decision version captured what is interesting about the general prob-
        lem, meaning it is no easier than finding the actual closest pair.

      • The complexity of this algorithm depends upon the complexity of sorting.
        Use an O(n log n) algorithm to sort, and it takes O(n log n + n) to find the
        closest pair.

      • This reduction and the fact that there is an Ω(n log n) lower bound on sort-
        ing does not prove that the close-enough pair problem must take Ω(n log n)
        time in the worst case. Perhaps this is just a slow algorithm for close-
        enough pair, and there is a faster approach that avoids sorting?

      • On the other hand, if we knew that a close-enough pair required Ω(n log n)
        time to solve in the worst case, this reduction would suffice to prove that
        sorting couldn’t be solved any faster than Ω(n log n) because that would
        imply a faster algorithm for close-enough pair.
11.2. REDUCTIONS FOR ALGORITHMS                                                 359

11.2.2     Longest Increasing Subsequence
Recall Chapter 10, where dynamic programming was used to solve a variety of
problems, including string edit distance. To review:
Problem: Edit Distance
Input: Integer or character sequences S and T ; penalty costs for each insertion
(cins ), deletion (cdel ), and substitution (csub ).
Output: What is the cost of the least expensive sequence of operations that
transforms S to T ?
   It was shown that many other problems can be solved using edit distance.
But these algorithms can often be viewed as reductions. Consider:
Problem: Longest Increasing Subsequence (LIS)
Input: An integer or character sequence S.
Output: What is the length of the longest sequence of positions p1 , . . . , pm such
that pi < pi+1 and Spi < Spi+1 ?
   In Section 10.3 (page 324) I demonstrated that longest increasing subse-
quence can be solved as a special case of edit distance:

         LongestIncreasingSubsequence(S)
            T = Sort(S)
            cins = cdel = 1
            csub = ∞
            Return (|S|− EditDistance(S,T ,cins ,cdel ,csub )/2)

    Why does this work? By constructing the second sequence T as the elements
of S sorted in increasing order, we ensure that any common subsequence must
be an increasing subsequence. If we are never allowed to do any substitutions
(because csub = ∞), the optimal alignment of S and T finds the longest common
subsequence between them and removes everything else. For example, trans-
forming S = cab to abc costs two, namely inserting and deleting the unmatched
c. The length of S minus half this cost gives the length of the LIS.
    What are the implications of this reduction? The reduction takes O(n log n)
time because of the cost of sorting. Because edit distance takes time O(|S| · |T |),
this gives a quadratic algorithm to find the longest increasing subsequence of
S. In fact, there exists a faster O(n log n) algorithm for LIS using clever data
structures, while edit distance is known to be quadratic in the worst case. Hence,
our reduction gives us a simple but not optimal polynomial-time algorithm.

11.2.3     Least Common Multiple
The least common multiple (lcm) and greatest common divisor (gcd) problems
arise often in working with integers. We say b divides a (written b | a) if there
exists an integer d such that a = bd. Then:
360                                        CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

Problem: Least Common Multiple (lcm)
Input: Two positive integers x and y.
Output: Return the smallest positive integer m such that m is a multiple of x
and also a multiple of y.

Problem: Greatest Common Divisor (gcd)
Input: Two positive integers x and y.
Output: Return the largest integer d such that d divides both x and y.
    For example, lcm(24, 36) = 72 and gcd(24, 36) = 12. Both problems can
be solved easily after reducing x and y to their prime factorizations, but no
efficient algorithm is known for factoring integers (see Section 16.8 (page 490)).
Fortunately, Euclid’s algorithm gives an efficient way to solve greatest common
divisor without factoring. It is a recursive algorithm that rests on two observa-
tions. First,
        if (b | a), then gcd(a, b) = b.
This should be pretty clear. if b divides a, then a = bk for some integer k, and
thus gcd(bk, b) = b. Second,
        If a = bt + r for integers t and r, then gcd(a, b) = gcd(b, r).
   Then, for a ≥ b, Euclid’s algorithm repeatedly replaces (a, b) by (b, a mod b)
until b = 0. Its worst-case running time is O(log b).
   Since x · y is a multiple of both x and y, lcm(x, y) ≤ xy. The only way that
there can be a smaller common multiple is if there is some non-trivial factor
shared between x and y. This observation, coupled with Euclid’s algorithm,
provides an efficient way to compute least common multiple, namely:

           LeastCommonMultiple(x,y)
               Return (xy/gcd(x, y)).

      This reduction gives us a nice way to reuse Euclid’s efforts for lcm.

11.2.4       Convex Hull (*)
My final example of a reduction from an “easy” problem (meaning one that
can be solved in polynomial time) involves finding convex hulls of point sets.
A polygon is convex if the straight line segment drawn between any two points
inside the polygon P lies completely within the polygon. This is the case when
P contains no notches or concavities, so convex polygons are nicely shaped.
The convex hull provides a very useful way to provide structure to a point set.
Applications are presented in Section 20.2 (page 626).
Problem: Convex Hull
Input: A set S of n points in the plane.
Output: Find the smallest convex polygon containing all the points of S.
11.3. ELEMENTARY HARDNESS REDUCTIONS                                         361

                           5           11   13        17

Figure 11.1: Reducing sorting to convex hull by mapping points to a parabola

    I will now show how to transform an instance of sorting (say {13, 5, 11, 17})
to an instance of the convex hull problem. This means we must translate each
number to a point in the plane. We do so by mapping x to (x, x2 ). Why? This
maps each integer to a point on the parabola y = x2 , as shown in Figure 11.1.
Since the region above this parabola is convex, every point must be on the convex
hull. Furthermore, since neighboring points on the convex hull have neighboring
x values, the convex hull returns the points sorted by the x-coordinate—that is,
the original numbers. Creating and reading off these points takes O(n) time:

        Sort(S)
            For each i ∈ S, create point (i, i2 ).
            Call subroutine convex-hull on this point set.
            From the left-most point in the hull,
                read off the points from left to right.

   What does this mean? Recall the sorting lower bound of Ω(n log n). If we
could compute convex hull in better than n log n, this reduction would imply
that we could sort faster than Ω(n log n), which violates our lower bound. Thus,
convex hull must take Ω(n log n) as well! Observe that any O(n log n) convex hull
algorithm also gives us a complicated but correct O(n log n) sorting algorithm
when coupled with this reduction.

11.3      Elementary Hardness Reductions
The reductions in Section 11.2 (page 358) demonstrate transformations between
pairs of problems for which efficient algorithms exist. However, we are mainly
concerned with using reductions to prove hardness, by showing that Bo-billy is
at least as hard as Bandersnatch.
    For now, I want you to trust me when I say that Hamiltonian cycle and
vertex cover are hard problems. The entire picture (presented in Figure 11.2)
will become clear by the end of the chapter.
362                                             CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

                            All of NP (Cook’s Theorem)

                          Satisfiability

                            3−SAT          Integer Programming

        Inequivalence     Vertex Cover
         of Programs
       with Assignments

         Uniconnected      Hamiltonian               Independent Set            Integer Partition
          Subgraph           Cycle

                                                  Clique            General
                            Traveling                                Movie
                            Salesman                               Scheduling

Figure 11.2: A portion of the reduction tree for NP-complete problems. Blue
lines denote the reductions presented in this chapter.

11.3.1        Hamiltonian Cycle
The Hamiltonian cycle problem is one of the most famous in graph theory. It
seeks a tour that visits each vertex of a given graph exactly once. Hamiltonian
cycle has a long history and many applications, as discussed in Section 19.5.
Formally, it is defined as:
Problem: Hamiltonian Cycle
Input: An unweighted graph G.
Output: Does there exist a simple tour that visits each vertex of G without
repetition?
    Hamiltonian cycle has some obvious similarity to the traveling salesman
problem. Both problems seek a tour that visits each vertex exactly once. There
are also differences between the two problems. TSP works on weighted graphs,
while Hamiltonian cycle works on unweighted graphs. The following reduction
from Hamiltonian cycle to traveling salesman shows that the similarities are
greater than the differences:

      HamiltonianCycle(G = (V, E))
         Construct a complete weighted graph G? = (V ? , E ? ) where V ? = V .
         n = |V |
         for i = 1 to n do
              for j = 1 to n do
                   if (i, j) ∈ E then w(i, j) = 1 else w(i, j) = 2
         Return the answer to Traveling-Salesman-Decision-Problem(G? , n).
11.3. ELEMENTARY HARDNESS REDUCTIONS                                               363

  Figure 11.3: Graphs with (left) and without (right) a Hamiltonian cycle.

    The actual reduction is quite simple, with the translation from unweighted
to weighted graph designed to ensure that the answers of the two problems will
be identical. If the graph G has a Hamiltonian cycle (v1 , . . . , vn ), then this very
same tour will correspond to n edges in E ? each of weight 1: this defines a TSP
tour in G? of weight exactly n. If G does not have a Hamiltonian cycle, then
every tour in G? must contain at least one weight 2 edge, so there cannot be a
TSP tour of weight n.
    This reduction is truth preserving and fast, running in Θ(n2 ) time. A fast
algorithm for TSP would imply a fast algorithm for Hamiltonian cycle, while a
hardness proof for Hamiltonian cycle would imply that TSP is hard. Since the
latter is the case, this reduction shows that TSP is hard, at least as hard as
Hamiltonian cycle.

11.3.2      Independent Set and Vertex Cover
The vertex cover problem, discussed more thoroughly in Section 19.3 (page 591),
asks for a small set of vertices that touch every edge in a graph. More formally:
Problem: Vertex Cover
Input: A graph G = (V, E) and integer k ≤ |V |.
Output: Is there a subset S of at most k vertices such that every e ∈ E contains
at least one vertex in S?
    It is trivial to find a vertex cover of a graph: consider the cover that consists
of all the vertices. More tricky is to cover the edges using as small a set of
vertices as possible. For the graph in Figure 11.4, four of the eight vertices are
sufficient to cover.
    A set of vertices S of graph G is independent if there are no edges (x, y)
where both x ∈ S and y ∈ S. This means there are no edges between any two
vertices in an independent set. Again, finding an independent set is trivial: just
take any single vertex. As discussed in Section 19.2 (page 589), independent
set arises in facility location problems. The maximum independent set decision
problem is defined:
Problem: Independent Set
Input: A graph G and integer k ≤ |V |.
Output: Does there exist a set of k independent vertices in G?
364                                     CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

Figure 11.4: Red vertices form a vertex cover of G, so the blue vertices must
define an independent set.

   Both vertex cover and independent set are problems that revolve around
finding special subsets of vertices: the first with representatives of every edge,
the second with no edges. If S is a vertex cover of G, then the remaining vertices
V − S must form an independent set, for if there was an edge (x, y) that had
both vertices in V − S, then S could not have been a vertex cover. This gives
us a reduction between the two problems:

        VertexCover(G, k)
            G? = G
            k ? = |V | − k
            Return the answer to IndependentSet(G? , k ? )

    Again, a simple reduction shows that one problem is at least as hard as the
other. Notice how translation occurs without any knowledge of the answer: we
transform the input, not the solution. This reduction shows that the hardness
of vertex cover implies that independent set must also be hard. It is easy to
reverse the roles of the two problems in this particular reduction, thus proving
that the two problems are equally hard.

Stop and Think: Hardness of General Movie Scheduling

Problem: Recall the movie scheduling problem, discussed in Section 1.2 (page
8). There, each possible movie project came with a single time interval during
which filming took place. We sought the largest possible subset of movie projects
such that no two conflicting projects (meaning both requiring the actor at the
same time) were selected.
    The general problem allows movie projects to have discontinuous schedules.
For example, Project A running both January–March and May–June does not
intersect Project B running in April and August, but does collide with Project
C running from June to July.
    Prove that the general movie scheduling problem is NP-complete, with a
reduction from independent set.
11.3. ELEMENTARY HARDNESS REDUCTIONS                                          365

            2                                   A    B   C    D    E    F     G

                            5               1
                                            2
        A       B       E
                                            3
  1                 3        F              4
        C       D       G                   5
                                6           6

Figure 11.5: Reduction from independent set to generalized movie scheduling,
with numbered vertices and lettered edges.

Problem: General Movie Scheduling Decision Problem
Input: A set I = {I1 , . . . , In } of n sets of intervals on the line, integer k.
Output: Can a subset of at least k mutually non-overlapping interval sets be
selected from I?

Solution: To prove a problem hard, we first need to establish which is Ban-
dersnatch and which is Bo-billy. Here we need to show how to translate all
independent set instances into instances of general movie scheduling—meaning
sets of disjoint line intervals. Thus, independent set is Bandersnatch and general
movie scheduling is Bo-billy.
    What is the correspondence between the two problems? Both problems
involve selecting the largest subsets possible—of vertices and movies, respec-
tively. This suggests we must translate vertices into movies. Furthermore, both
require the selected elements not to interfere, by sharing an edge or overlapping
an interval, respectively.
    My construction is as follows. Create an interval on the line for each of the
m edges of the graph. The movie associated with each vertex will contain the
intervals for the edges adjacent with it, as shown in Figure 11.5.
        IndependentSet(G, k)
            I=∅
            For the ith edge (x, y), 1 ≤ i ≤ m
                Add interval [i, i + 0.5] to movie x’s interval set Ix in I
                Add interval [i, i + 0.5] to movie y’s interval set Iy in I
            Return the answer to GeneralMovieScheduling(I, k)

    Each pair of vertices sharing an edge (forbidden to be in an independent
set) defines a pair of movies sharing a time interval (forbidden to be in the
actor’s schedule). Thus, the largest satisfying subsets for both problems are the
same, and a fast algorithm for solving general movie scheduling gives us a fast
algorithm for solving independent set. Thus, general movie scheduling must be
at least as hard as independent set, and hence NP-complete.
366                                     CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

Figure 11.6: A small graph with a four-vertex clique (left), with the corre-
sponding independent set in black forming a two-vertex clique in the graph’s
complement (right).

11.3.3     Clique
A social clique is a group of mutual friends who all hang around together.
Everyone knows everybody. A graph-theoretic clique is a complete subgraph,
where each vertex pair has an edge between them. Cliques are the densest
possible subgraphs:
Problem: Maximum Clique
Input: A graph G = (V, E) and integer k ≤ |V |.
Output: Does the graph contain a clique of k vertices, meaning is there a subset
of vertices S where |S| = k such that every pair of vertices in S defines an edge
of G?
    The graph in Figure 11.6 contains a clique of four blue vertices. Within the
friendship graph, we would expect to see large cliques corresponding to families,
workplaces, neighborhoods, religious organizations, and schools. Applications
of clique are further discussed in Section 19.1 (page 586).
    In the independent set problem, we looked for a subset S with no edges
between two vertices of S. This contrasts with clique, where we insist that there
always be an edge between two vertices. A reduction between these problems
follows by reversing the roles of edges and non-edges—an operation known as
complementing the graph:
         IndependentSet(G, k)
             Construct a graph G? = (V ? , E ? ) where V ? = V , and
                For all (i, j) ?∈ E, add (i, j) to E ?
             Return Clique(G? , k)
    These last two reductions provide a chain linking three different problems
together. The hardness of clique is implied by the hardness of independent set,
which is implied by the hardness of vertex cover. By constructing reductions
in a chain, we link together pairs of problems in implications of hardness. Our
work is complete once all these chains begin with a single “Dwayne Johnson”
problem that is accepted as hard. Satisfiability is the problem that will serve
as the first link in this chain.
11.4. SATISFIABILITY                                                                367

11.4       Satisfiability
To demonstrate the hardness of problems by using reductions, we must start
from a single problem that is absolutely, certifiably, undeniably hard to compute.
The mother of all NP-complete problems is a logic problem named satisfiability:
Problem: Satisfiability (SAT)
Input: A set of Boolean variables V and a set of logic clauses C over V .
Output: Does there exist a satisfying truth assignment for C—in other words,
a way to set each of the variables {v1 , . . . , vn } either true or false so that every
clause contains at least one true literal?
    This can be made clear with two examples. Consider C = {{v1 , v 2 }, {v 1 , v2 }}
over the Boolean variables V = {v1 , v2 }. We use v i to denote the complement
of the variable vi , because v i means “not vi .” We get credit for satisfying a
particular clause containing vi if vi = true, or a clause containing v i if vi = false.
Therefore, satisfying a particular set of clauses involves making a series of n
true or false decisions, trying to find the right truth assignment to satisfy all
of them. The example clause set C = {{v1 , v 2 }, {v 1 , v2 }} corresponds to the
logical expression
                                (v1 ∨ v̄2 ) ∧ (v̄1 ∨ v2 )
and can be satisfied either by setting v1 = v2 = true or v1 = v2 = false.
    However, consider the set of clauses {{v1 , v2 }, {v1 , v 2 }, {v 1 }}. Here there
can be no satisfying assignment, because v1 must be false to satisfy the third
clause, which means that v2 must be false to satisfy the second clause, which
then leaves the first clause unsatisfiable. Although you try, and you try, and
you try, you can’t get no satisfaction.
    For a combination of social and technical reasons, it is well accepted that
satisfiability is a hard problem; one for which no worst-case polynomial-time
algorithm exists. Literally every top-notch algorithm expert in the world (and
countless lesser lights) has directly or indirectly tried to come up with a fast
algorithm to test whether any given set of clauses is satisfiable. All have failed.
Furthermore, many strange and impossible-to-believe things in the field of com-
putational complexity have been shown to be true if there exists a fast satisfia-
bility algorithm. Proving something is as hard as satisfiability means that it is
hard. See Section 17.10 (page 537) for more on the satisfiability problem and
its applications.

11.4.1      3-Satisfiability
Satisfiability’s role as the first NP-complete problem implies that the problem
is hard to solve in the worst case. But certain special-case instances of the
problem are not necessarily so tough. Suppose that each clause contains exactly
one literal, say {vi } or {v̄j }. There is only one way to set the literal so as to
satisfy such a clause: clearly vi had better be set true and vj set false to have
any hope of satisfying the full set of clauses. Only when we have two clauses
368                                                   CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

that directly contradict each other, such as C = {{v1 }, {v 1 }}, will the set not
be satisfiable.
    Since it is so easy to determine whether clause sets with exactly one literal
per clause are satisfiable, we are interested in slightly larger classes. How many
literals per clause do you need to turn the problem from polynomial to hard?
This transition occurs when each clause contains three literals, that is,
Problem: 3-Satisfiability (3-SAT)
Input: A collection of clauses C where each clause contains exactly 3 literals,
over a set of Boolean variables V .
Output: Is there a truth assignment to V such that each clause is satisfied?
    Since 3-SAT is a restricted case of satisfiability, the hardness of 3-SAT would
imply that general satisfiability is hard. The converse isn’t true, since the hard-
ness of general satisfiability could conceivably depend upon having long clauses.
But we can show the hardness of 3-SAT using a reduction that translates every
instance of satisfiability into an instance of 3-SAT without changing whether it
is satisfiable.
    This reduction transforms each clause independently based on its length, by
adding new clauses and Boolean variables along the way. Suppose clause Ci
contained k literals:
   • k = 1, say Ci = {z1 } – We create two new variables v1 , v2 and four new
     3-literal clauses: {v1 , v2 , z1 }, {v1 , v 2 , z1 }, {v 1 , v2 , z1 }, {v 1 , v 2 , z1 }. Observe
     that the only way that all four of these clauses can be simultaneously sat-
     isfied is if z1 = true, which means the original Ci will have been satisfied.
      • k = 2, say Ci = {z1 , z2 } – We create one new variable v1 and two new
        clauses: {v1 , z1 , z2 }, {v 1 , z1 , z2 }. Again, the only way to satisfy both of
        these clauses is to have at least one of z1 and z2 be true, thus satisfying
        Ci .
   • k = 3, say Ci = {z1 , z2 , z3 } – We copy Ci into the 3-SAT instance un-
     changed: {z1 , z2 , z3 }.
   • k > 3, say Ci = {z1 , z2 , ..., zk } – Here we create k−3 new variables and k−2
     new clauses in a chain, where Ci,1 = {z1 , z2 , v i,1 }, Ci,j = {vi,j−1 , zj+1 , v i,j }
     for 2 ≤ j ≤ k − 3, and Ci,k−2 = {vi,k−3 , zk−1 , zk }. This is best illustrated
     with an example. The clause

                                        Ci = {z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z5 , z6 }

        gets transformed into the following set of four 3-literal clauses with three
        new Boolean variables: vi,1 , vi,2 , and vi,3 :

                  {{z1 , z2 , v̄i,1 }, {vi,1 , z3 , v̄i,2 }, {vi,2 , z4 , v̄i,3 }, {vi,3 , z5 , z6 }}

    The most complicated case is that of the large clauses. If none of the original
literals in Ci are true, then there are not enough new free variables to be able
11.5. CREATIVE REDUCTIONS FROM SAT                                             369

to satisfy all the new subclauses. You can satisfy Ci,1 by setting vi,1 = false,
but this forces vi,2 = false, and so on until finally Ci,k−2 cannot be satisfied.
However, if any single literal zi = true, then we have k − 3 free variables and
k − 3 remaining 3-clauses, so we can satisfy all of them.
    This transform takes O(n + c) time if there were c clauses and n total literals
in the SAT instance. Since any solution to the original SAT problem instance
also satisfies the 3-SAT instance we have constructed, and vice versa, the trans-
formed problem is equivalent to the original.
    Note that a slight modification to this construction would serve to prove
that 4-SAT, 5-SAT, or any (k ≥ 3)-SAT is also NP-complete. However, this
construction breaks down if we try to use it for 2-SAT, since there is no way to
stuff anything into the chain of clauses. It turns out that a breadth-first search
on an appropriate graph can be used to give a linear-time algorithm for 2-SAT,
as discussed in Section 17.10 (page 537).

11.5      Creative Reductions from SAT
Since both satisfiability and 3-SAT are known to be hard, we can use either
of them in future reductions. Usually 3-SAT is the better choice, because it
is simpler to work with. What follows are a pair of more complicated reduc-
tions, designed to serve as examples and also increase our repertoire of known
hard problems. Many reductions are quite intricate, because we are essentially
programming one problem in the language of a significantly different problem.
    One perpetual point of confusion is getting the direction of the reduction
right. Recall that we must transform any instance of a known NP-complete
problem (Bandersnatch) into an instance of the problem we are really interested
in (Bo-billy). If we perform the reduction the other way, all we get is a slow way
to solve the problem of interest, by using a subroutine that takes exponential
time. This always is confusing at first, because it seems backwards. Make sure
you understand the direction of reduction now, and think back to this whenever
you get confused.

11.5.1     Vertex Cover
Algorithmic graph theory proves to be a fertile ground for hard problems. The
prototypical NP-complete graph problem is vertex cover, previously defined in
Section 11.3.2 (page 363) as follows:
Problem: Vertex Cover
Input: A graph G = (V, E) and integer k ≤ |V |.
Output: Is there a subset S of at most k vertices such that every e ∈ E has at
least one vertex in S?
   Demonstrating the hardness of vertex cover proves more difficult than the
previous reductions we have seen, because the structure of the two relevant
problems seems very different. A reduction from 3-SAT to vertex cover must
 370                                              CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

v1    v1   v2    v2 v3        v3   v4        v4     v1    v1 v2    v2 v3        v3   v4        v4

      v3                           v2                     v3                         v2

 v1             v4       v1             v4           v1           v4       v1             v4

 Figure 11.7: Reducing 3-SAT instance {{v1 , v¯3 , v¯4 }, {v¯1 , v2 , v¯4 }} to vertex cover
 (left). The red vertices (on right) define a minimum vertex cover, and hence the
 red variable vertices on top define a satisfying truth assignment.

 construct a graph G and bound k from the variables and clauses of the satisfi-
 ability instance.
     Here is a way to do it. First, we translate the variables of the 3-SAT problem.
 For each Boolean variable vi , we create two vertices vi and v¯i connected by an
 edge. At least n of these 2n vertices will be needed just to cover these edges,
 because we need at least one vertex per pair.
     Second, we translate the clauses of the 3-SAT problem. For each of the c
 clauses, we create three new vertices: one for each literal in the clause. These
 three vertices will be connected so as to form a triangle for each clause. At least
 two vertices per triangle must be included in any vertex cover of these triangles,
 for a total of 2c cover vertices.
     Finally, we will connect these two sets of components together. Each literal
 in a vertex “gadget” is connected to vertices in the clause gadgets (triangles)
 that share the given literal. From a 3-SAT instance with n variables and c
 clauses, this constructs a graph with 2n + 3c vertices. The complete reduction
 for the 3-SAT problem {{v1 , v¯3 , v¯4 }, {v¯1 , v2 , v¯4 }} is shown in Figure 11.7.
     This graph has been very carefully designed to have a vertex cover of size
 n+2c iff the original expression is satisfiable. By the earlier analysis, any vertex
 cover must contain at least n+2c vertices. To show that our reduction is correct,
 we must demonstrate that:

      • Every satisfying truth assignment gives a vertex cover of size n + 2c –
        Given a satisfying truth assignment for the clauses, select the n vertices
        from the vertex gadgets that correspond to true literals to be members of
        the vertex cover. Since this defines a satisfying truth assignment, a true
        literal from each clause must cover at least one of the three cross edges
        connecting each triangle vertex to a vertex gadget. Therefore, by selecting
        the other two vertices of each clause triangle, we also pick up all remaining
        cross edges.

      • Every vertex cover of size n + 2c gives a satisfying truth assignment – In
        any vertex cover C of this size, exactly n of the vertices must belong to the
        vertex gadgets. Let these first stage vertices define the truth assignment,
        with the remaining 2c cover vertices distributed at two per clause-gadget
11.5. CREATIVE REDUCTIONS FROM SAT                                              371

      for otherwise a clause-gadget edge would go uncovered. These clause-
      gadget vertices can cover only two of the three connecting edges per clause.
      Therefore, if C gives a vertex cover, at least one connecting edge per clause
      must be covered by first-stage vertices, meaning that the corresponding
      truth assignment satisfies all clauses.

   This proof of the hardness of vertex cover, chained with the clique and
independent set reductions of Section 11.3.2 (page 363), gives us a library of
hard graph problems that we can use to make future hardness proofs easier.

 Take-Home Lesson: A small set of NP-complete problems (3-SAT, vertex
 cover, integer partition, and Hamiltonian cycle) suffice to prove the hardness
 of most other hard problems.

11.5.2     Integer Programming
As discussed in Section 16.6 (page 482), integer programming is a fundamental
combinatorial optimization problem. It is best thought of as linear program-
ming, with the variables restricted to take only integer (instead of real) values.

Problem: Integer Programming (IP)
Input: A set of integer variables V , a set of linear inequalities over V , a linear
maximization function f (V ), and an integer B.
Output: Does there exist an assignment of integers to V such that all inequalities
are true and f (V ) ≥ B?
   Consider the following two examples. Suppose

                                 V1 ≥ 1,        V2 ≥ 0

                                    V1 + V2 ≤ 3
                               f (V ) : 2V2 ,    B=3
A solution to this would be V1 = 1, V2 = 2. Note that this respects integrality,
and yields an objective value f (V ) = 4 ≥ B. Not all problems have realizable
solutions, however. For the following problem:

                                 V1 ≥ 1,        V2 ≥ 0

                                    V1 + V2 ≤ 3
                               f (V ) : 2V2 ,    B=5
the maximum possible value of f (V ) given the constraints is 2 × 2 = 4, so there
can be no solution to the associated decision problem.
    We show that integer programming is hard using a reduction from general
satisfiability. 3-SAT generally makes reductions easier, and would work equally
as well here—in an identical manner.
372                                          CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

    In which direction must the reduction go? We want to prove integer program-
ming is hard, and know that satisfiability is hard. If we could solve satisfiability
using integer programming and integer programming were easy, this would mean
that satisfiability would be easy. Now the direction should be clear: we must
translate satisfiability (Bandersnatch) into integer programming (Bo-billy).
    What should the translation look like? Every satisfiability instance contains
Boolean (true/false) variables and clauses. Every integer programming instance
contains integer variables and constraints. A reasonable idea is to make the
integer variables correspond to Boolean variables and use constraints to serve
the same role as the clauses do in the original problem.
    Our translated integer programming problem will have twice as many vari-
ables as the SAT instance—one for each Boolean variable and one for its com-
plement. For each variable vi in the satisfiability problem, we add the following
constraints:
      • We restrict each integer programming variable Vi to values of either 0 or
        1, by adding constraints 0 ≤ Vi ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ V i ≤ 1. Coupled with
        integrality, they correspond to values of true and false.
      • We ensure that exactly one of the two integer programming variables
        associated with a given SAT variable is true, by adding constraints so
        that 1 ≤ Vi + V i ≤ 1.
      For each clause Ci = {z1 , . . . , zk }, construct the constraint
                                    Z 1 + . . . + Zk ≥ 1
To satisfy this constraint, at least one literal per clause must be set to 1, thus
corresponding to a true literal. Satisfying this constraint is therefore equivalent
to satisfying the clause.
    The maximization function and bound prove relatively unimportant here,
because we have already encoded the entire satisfiability instance. By using
f (V ) = V1 and B = 0, we ensure that they will not interfere with any variable
assignment satisfying all the inequalities. Clearly, this reduction can be done
in polynomial time. To establish that this reduction preserves the answer, we
must verify two things:
   • Every SAT solution gives a solution to the IP problem – In any SAT
     solution, a true literal corresponds to a 1 in the integer program, since the
     clause is satisfied. Therefore, the sum in each clause inequality is ≥ 1.
   • Every IP solution gives a solution to the original SAT problem – All vari-
     ables must be set to either 0 or 1 in any solution to this integer program-
     ming instance. If Vi = 1, then set literal zi = true. If Vi = 0, then set
     literal zi = false. This is a legal assignment that satisfies all the clauses.
   This reduction works both ways, so integer programming must be hard.
Notice the following properties, which hold true in general for NP-completeness
proofs:
11.6. THE ART OF PROVING HARDNESS                                             373

   • This reduction preserved the structure of the problem. It did not solve
     the problem, just put it into a different format.
   • The possible IP instances resulting from this transformation represent only
     a small subset of all possible IP instances. But because the instances in
     this small subset are hard, the more general problem is obviously hard.
   • The transformation captures the essence of why IP is hard. It has noth-
     ing to do with big coefficients or large ranges on the variables, because
     restricting them all to 0/1 is enough. It has nothing to do with having in-
     equalities having large numbers of variables. Integer programming is hard
     because satisfying a large set of constraints is hard. A careful study of the
     properties needed for a reduction can tell us a lot about the problem.

11.6      The Art of Proving Hardness
Proving that problems are hard is a skill. But once you get the hang of it,
reductions can be surprisingly straightforward and pleasurable to do. Indeed,
the dirty little secret of NP-completeness proofs is that they are usually easier
to create than explain, in much the same way that it can be easier to rewrite
old code than to understand and modify it.
    It takes experience to judge which problems are likely to be hard. The
quickest way to gain this experience is through careful study of the catalog.
Slightly changing the wording of a problem can make the difference between it
being polynomial or NP-complete. Finding the shortest path in a graph is easy,
but finding the longest path in a graph is hard. Constructing a tour that visits
all the edges once in a graph is easy (Eulerian cycle), but constructing a tour
that visits all the vertices once is hard (Hamiltonian cycle).
    The first place to look when you suspect a problem might be NP-complete is
Garey and Johnson’s book Computers and Intractability [GJ79], which contains
a list of several hundred problems known to be NP-complete. Likely one of these
is the problem you are interested in.
    Otherwise I offer the following advice to those seeking to prove the hardness
of a given problem:

   • Make your source problem as simple (meaning restricted) as possible –
     Never try to use the general traveling salesman problem (TSP) as a source
     problem. Better, use Hamiltonian cycle: TSP where all the weights are
     restricted 1 or ∞. Even better, use Hamiltonian path instead of cycle,
     so you never have to worry about closing up the cycle. Best of all, use
     Hamiltonian path on directed planar graphs where each vertex has total
     degree 3. All of these problems are equally hard, but the more you can
     restrict the problem that you are translating from, the less work your
     reduction has to do.
     As another example, never try to use full satisfiability to prove hardness.
     Start with 3-satisfiability. In fact, you don’t even have to use full 3-
374                                       CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

        satisfiability. Instead, you can use planar 3-satisfiability, where there must
        exist a way to draw the clauses as a graph in the plane such that you can
        connect all instances of the same literal together without edges crossing.
        This property tends to be useful in proving the intractability of geometric
        problems. All these variants are equally hard, and hence NP-completeness
        reductions using any of them are equally convincing.
      • Make your target problem as hard as possible – Don’t be afraid to add
        extra constraints or freedoms to make your target problem more general
        and therefore harder. Perhaps your undirected graph problem can be
        generalized into a directed graph problem, and can hence only be easier
        to prove hard. After you have a proof of hardness for the harder problem,
        you can then go back and try to simplify the target.
      • Select the right source problem for the right reason – Selecting the right
        source problem makes a big difference in how difficult it is to prove hard-
        ness. This is the first and easiest place to go wrong, although theoretically
        any NP-complete problem works as well as any other. When trying to
        prove that a problem is hard, some people fish around through lists of
        dozens of problems, looking for the best fit. These people are amateurs:
        odds are they will never recognize the problem they are looking for when
        they see it.
        I use four (and only four) problems as candidates for my hard source
        problem. Limiting them to four means that I can know a lot about each
        one, like which variants of the problems are hard and which are not. My
        favorite source problems are:

           – 3-SAT: The old reliable. When none of the three problems below
             seem appropriate, I go back to the original source.
           – Integer partition: This is the one and only choice for problems whose
             hardness seems to require using large numbers.
           – Vertex cover: This is the answer for any graph problem whose hard-
             ness depends upon selection. Chromatic number, clique, and inde-
             pendent set all involve trying to select the right subset of vertices or
             edges.
           – Hamiltonian path: This is my choice for any graph problem whose
             hardness depends upon ordering. If you are trying to route or sched-
             ule something, Hamiltonian path is likely your lever into the problem.

      • Amplify the penalties for making the undesired selection – Many people are
        too timid in their thinking about hardness proofs. You want to translate
        one problem into another, while keeping the problems as close to their
        original identities as possible. The easiest way to do this is by being bold
        with your penalties, to punish for deviating from your intended solution.
        Your thinking should be, “if you select this element, then you must pick
        up this huge set that blocks you from finding an optimal solution.” The
11.7. WAR STORY: HARD AGAINST THE CLOCK                                      375

     sharper the consequences for doing what is undesired, the easier it is to
     prove the equivalence of the results.

   • Think strategically at a high level, then build gadgets to enforce tactics –
     You should be asking yourself questions, like:

        1. How can I force that A or B is chosen but not both?
        2. How can I force that A is taken before B?
        3. How can I clean up the things I did not select?

     Once you know what you want your gadgets to do, you can then worry
     about how to actually craft them.

   • When you get stuck, switch between looking for an algorithm and a re-
     duction – Sometimes the reason you cannot prove hardness is that there
     exists an efficient algorithm to solve your problem! Techniques such as
     dynamic programming or reducing problems to powerful but polynomial-
     time graph problems like matching or network flow can yield surprising
     algorithms. When you can’t prove hardness, it pays to stop and try to
     find an algorithm—just to keep yourself honest.

11.7      War Story: Hard Against the Clock
My class’s attention span was running down like sand through an hourglass.
Eyes were starting to glaze, even in the front row. Breathing had become soft
and regular in the middle of the room. Heads were tilted back and eyes shut in
the back.
    There were twenty minutes left to go in my lecture on NP-completeness, and
I couldn’t really blame them. They had already seen several reductions like the
ones presented here. But NP-completeness reductions are often easier to create
than to explain. They had to watch one being created in order to appreciate
how things worked.
    I reached for my trusty copy of Garey and Johnson’s book [GJ79], which
contains a list of over three hundred different known NP-complete problems in
an appendix.
    “Enough of this!” I announced loudly enough to startle those in the back
row. “NP-completeness proofs are sufficiently routine that we can construct
them on demand. I need a volunteer with a finger. Can anyone help me?”
    A few students in the front held up their hands. A few students in the back
held up their fingers. I opted for one from the front row.
    “Select a problem at random from the back of this book. I can prove the
hardness of any of these problems in the now seventeen minutes remaining in
this class. Stick your finger in and read me a problem.”
    I had definitely gotten their attention. But I could have done that by offering
to juggle chain saws. Now I had to deliver results without cutting myself into
ribbons.
376                                    CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

    The student picked out a problem. “OK, prove that Inequivalence of Pro-
grams with Assignments is hard,” she said.
    “Huh? I’ve never heard of that problem before. What is it? Read me the
entire problem description so I can write it on the board.” The problem was as
follows:
Problem: Inequivalence of Programs with Assignments
Input: A finite set X of variables, two programs P1 and P2 , each a sequence of
assignments of the form

                      x0 ← if (x1 = x2 ) then x3 else x4

where the xi are in X; and a value set V .
Output: Is there an initial assignment of a value from V to each variable in X
such that programs P1 and P2 yield different final values for some variable in
X?
    I looked at my watch. Fifteen minutes to go. But everything was now on
the table. I was faced with a language problem. The input was two programs
with variables, and I had to test whether they always do the same thing.
    “First things first. We need to select a source problem for our reduction. Do
we start with integer partition? 3-SAT? Vertex cover or Hamiltonian path?”
    Since I had an audience, I tried thinking out loud. “Our target is not a
graph problem or a numerical problem, so let’s start thinking about the old
reliable: 3-SAT. There seem to be some similarities. 3-SAT has variables. This
thing has variables. To be more like 3-SAT, we could try limiting the variables
in this problem so they only take on Boolean values—V = {true, false}. Yes.
That seems convenient.”
    My watch said fourteen minutes left. “So, class, which way does the reduc-
tion go? 3-SAT to program or program to 3-SAT?”
    The front row correctly murmured, “3-SAT to program.”
    “Right. So we have to translate our set of clauses into two programs. How
can we do that? We might consider trying to split the clauses into two sets
and write separate programs for each of them. But how do we split them?
I don’t see any natural way to do it, because eliminating any single clause
from the problem might suddenly make an unsatisfiable formula satisfiable, thus
completely changing the answer.
    Instead, let’s try something else. We can translate all the clauses into one
program, and then let the second program be trivial. For example, the second
program might ignore the input and always output either only true or only false.
This sounds better. Much better.”
    I was still talking out loud to myself, which wasn’t that unusual. But I had
people listening to me, which was.
    “Now, how can we turn a set of clauses into a program? We want to know
whether the set of clauses can be satisfied, or in other words if there is an
assignment of the variables to make it true. Suppose we constructed a program
to evaluate whether C1 = {x1 , x2 , x3 } is satisfied.”
11.8. WAR STORY: AND THEN I FAILED                                            377

   It took me a few minutes of scratching before I found the right program to
simulate a clause. I assumed that I had access to constants for true and false:

        C1 = if (x1 = true) then true else false
        C1 = if (x2 = false) then true else C1
        C1 = if (x3 = true) then true else C1

   “Great. Now I have a way to evaluate the truth of each clause. I can do the
same thing at the end to evaluate whether all the clauses are satisfied:”

         sat = if (C1 = true) then true else false
         sat = if (C2 = true) then sat else false
        ..
         .
        sat = if (Cc = true) then sat else false

    Now the back of the classroom was getting excited. They were starting to
see a ray of hope that class would end on time.
    “Great. So now we have a program that can evaluate to be true if and only
if there is a way to assign the variables to satisfy the set of clauses. We need a
second program to finish the job. What about sat = false? Yes, that is all we
need. Our language problem asks whether the two programs always output the
same thing, regardless of the possible variable assignments. If the clauses are
satisfiable, that means that there must be an assignment of the variables such
that the long program would output true. Testing whether the programs are
equivalent is exactly the same as asking if the clauses are satisfiable.”
    I lifted my arms in triumph. “And so, the problem is neat, sweet, and
NP-complete.” I got the last word out just before the bell rang.

11.8      War Story: And Then I Failed
This exercise of picking a random NP-complete problem from Garey and John-
son’s book and proving hardness on demand was so much fun that I have re-
peated it each time I have taught the algorithms course. Sure enough, I got it
eight times in a row. But just as Joe DiMaggio’s 56-game hitting streak came
to an end, and Google will eventually have a losing quarter financially, the time
came for me to get my comeuppance.
    The class had voted to see a reduction from the graph theory section of the
catalog, and a randomly selected student picked number 30. Problem GT30
turned out to be the following:
Problem: Uniconnected Subgraph
Input: A directed graph G = (V, A), positive integer k ≤ |A|.
Output: Is there a subset of arcs A? ⊆ A with |A? | ≥ k such that G? = (V, A? )
has at most one directed path between any pair of vertices?
   It took a while for me to grok this problem. An undirected version of this
would be finding a spanning tree, because that defines exactly one path between
378                                       CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

any pair of vertices. Adding even a single edge (x, y) to this tree would create
a cycle, meaning two distinct paths between x and y.
    Any form of directed tree would also be uniconnected. But this problem asks
for the largest such subgraph. Consider a bipartite-DAG consisting of directed
edges (li , rj ) all going from a given set of “left” vertices to distinct “right”
vertices. No path in this graph consists of more than one edge, yet the graph
can contain Ω(n2 ) edges.
    “It is a selection problem,” I realized after grokking. After all, we had to
select the largest possible subset of arcs so that there were no pair of vertices with
multiple paths between them. This meant that vertex cover was the problem of
choice.
    I worked through how the two problems stacked up. Both sought subsets,
although vertex cover wanted subsets of vertices and uniconnected subgraph
wanted subsets of edges. Vertex cover wanted the smallest possible subset, while
unidirected subgraph wanted the largest possible subset. My source problem
had undirected edges while my target had directed arcs, so somehow I would
have to add edge direction into the reduction.
    I had to do something to direct the edges of the vertex cover graph. I could
try to replace each undirected edge (x, y) with a single arc, say from y to x. But
quite different directed graphs would result depending upon which direction I
selected. Finding the “right” orientation of edges might be a hard problem,
certainly too hard to use in the translation phase of the reduction.
    I realized I could direct the edges so the resulting graph was a DAG. But
then, so what? DAGs certainly can have many different directed paths between
pairs of vertices.
    Alternately, I could try to replace each undirected edge (x, y) with two arcs,
from x to y and y to x. Now there was no need to chose the right arcs for my
reduction, but the graph certainly got complicated. I couldn’t see how to force
things to prevent vertex pairs from having unwanted multiple paths between
them.
    Meanwhile, the clock was running and I knew it. A sense of panic set in
during the last ten minutes of the class, and I realized I wasn’t going to get it
this time.
    There is no feeling worse for a professor than botching up a lecture. You
stand up there flailing away, knowing (1) that the students don’t understand
what you are saying, but (2) they do understand that you also don’t understand
what you are saying. The bell rang and the students left the room with faces
either sympathetic or smirking.
    I promised them a solution for the next class, but somehow I kept getting
stuck in the same place each time I thought about it. I even tried to cheat and
look up the proof in a journal. But the reference cited by Garey and Johnson
was a 30-year old unpublished technical report. It wasn’t on the web or in our
library.
    I dreaded returning to give my next class, the last lecture of the semester.
But the night before class the answer came to me in a dream. “Split the edges,”
the voice said. I awoke with a start and looked at the clock. It was 3:00 AM.
11.9. P VS. NP                                                                 379

                                                                       5
          2
                           5
                                              1            3

  1            3
                                                      4
                               6

                                                               s

Figure 11.8: Reducing vertex cover to unidirected subgraph, by dividing edges
and adding a sink node.

    I sat up in bed and scratched out the proof. Suppose I replace each undi-
rected edge (x, y) with a gadget consisting of a new central vertex vxy with arcs
going from it to x and y, respectively. This is nice. Now, which vertices are
capable of having multiple paths between them? The new vertices have only
outgoing edges, so only they can serve as the source of multiple paths. The old
vertices have only incoming edges. There is at most one way to get from one of
the new source vertices to any of the original vertices of the vertex cover graph,
so these could not result in multiple paths.
    But now add a sink node s with edges from all the original vertices. There
are exactly two paths from each new source vertex to this sink—one through
each of the two original vertices it is adjacent to. One of these has to be broken
to create a uniconnected subgraph. How could we break it? We could pick one
of these two vertices to disconnect from the sink by deleting either arc (x, s)
or (y, s) for new vertex vxy . We maximize the size of our subgraph by finding
the smallest number of arcs to delete. We must delete the outgoing arc from at
least one of the two vertices defining each original edge. But this is exactly the
same as finding the vertex cover in this graph! The reduction is illustrated in
Figure 11.8.
    Presenting this proof in class provided some personal vindication, because it
validates the principles I teach for proving hardness. Observe that the reduction
really wasn’t that difficult after all: just split the edges and add a sink node.
NP-completeness reductions are often surprisingly simple once you look at them
the right way.

11.9      P vs. NP
The theory of NP-completeness rests on a foundation of rigorous but subtle
definitions from automata and formal language theory. This terminology is
typically confusing to (or misused by) beginners who lack a mastery of these
380                                       CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

foundations. These details are not really essential to the practical aspects of
designing and applying reductions. That said, the question “Is P=NP?” is
the most profound open problem in computer science, so any educated algorist
should have some idea what the stakes are.

11.9.1       Verification vs. Discovery
The primary issue in P vs. NP is whether verification is really an easier task
than initial discovery. Suppose that while taking an exam you “happen” to
notice the answer of the student next to you. Are you now better off? You
wouldn’t dare turn it in without checking, since an able student like you could
answer the question correctly if you spent enough time to solve it. The question
here is whether you really can verify the answer faster than you can find it from
scratch.
    For the NP-complete decision problems we have studied here, the answer
seems obvious:

      • Can you verify that a proposed TSP tour has weight of at most k in a
        given graph? Sure. Just add up the weights of the edges on the tour and
        show it is at most k. That is easier than finding the tour from scratch,
        isn’t it?

      • Can you verify that a given truth assignment represents a solution to a
        given satisfiability problem? Sure. Just check each clause and make sure
        it contains at least one true literal from the given truth assignment. That
        is easier than finding the satisfying assignment from scratch, isn’t it?

      • Can you verify that a given k-vertex subset S is a vertex cover of graph
        G? Sure. Just traverse each edge (u, v) of G, and check that either u or v
        is in S. That is easier than finding the vertex cover from scratch, isn’t it?

    At first glance, this seems obvious. The given solutions can be verified
in linear time for all three of these problems, while no algorithm faster than
exponential brute-force search is known for any of them. The catch is that we
have no rigorous lower bound proof that prevents the existence of fast algorithms
to solve these problems. Perhaps there are in fact polynomial algorithms (say
O(n87 )) that we have just been too blind to see yet.

11.9.2       The Classes P and NP
Every well-defined algorithmic problem must have an asymptotically fastest-
possible algorithm solving it, as measured in the Big Oh, worst-case sense of
fastest.
    We can think of the class P as an exclusive club for algorithmic problems
where there exists a polynomial-time algorithm to solve it from scratch. Shortest
path, minimum spanning tree, and the original movie scheduling problem are
all members in good standing of this class P. The P stands for polynomial time.
11.9. P VS. NP                                                                         381

    A less exclusive club welcomes all the algorithmic problems whose solutions
can be verified in polynomial time. As shown above, this club contains travel-
ing salesman, satisfiability, and vertex cover, none of which currently have the
credentials to join P. However, all the members of P get a free pass into this
less exclusive club. If you can solve a decision problem from scratch in polyno-
mial time, you certainly can verify another solution to it that fast: just check
whether you agree on the yes–no answer.
    We call this less-exclusive club NP. You can think of this as standing for Not
necessarily Polynomial time.1
    The $1,000,000 question is whether there are problems in NP that are not
members of P. If no such problem exists, the classes must be the same and
P = NP . If even one such a problem exists, the two classes are different and
P ?= NP . The opinion of most algorists and complexity theorists is that P ?=
NP , meaning that some NP problems do not have polynomial-time algorithms,
but a much stronger proof than “I can’t find a fast enough algorithm” is needed.

11.9.3      Why Satisfiability is Hard
An enormous tree of NP-completeness reductions has been established that
entirely rests on the hardness of satisfiability. The portion of this tree demon-
strated and/or stated in this chapter is shown in Figure 11.2.
    This may seem like a fragile foundation. What would it mean if someone
did find a polynomial-time algorithm for satisfiability? A fast algorithm for any
given NP-complete problem (say traveling salesman) implies fast algorithm for
all the problems on the path in the reduction tree between TSP and satisfia-
bility (Hamiltonian cycle, vertex cover, and 3-SAT). But a fast algorithm for
satisfiability doesn’t immediately yield us anything because the reduction path
from SAT to SAT is empty.
    Fear not. There exists an extraordinary super-reduction called Cook’s the-
orem reducing all the problems in NP to satisfiability. Thus, if you prove that
satisfiability (or equivalently any single NP-complete problem) is in P, then all
other problems in NP follow and P = NP. Since essentially every problem
mentioned in this book is in NP, this would be an enormously powerful and
surprising result.
    Cook’s theorem proves that satisfiability is as hard as any problem in NP.
Furthermore, it proves that every NP-complete problem is as hard as any other.
Any domino falling (meaning a polynomial-time algorithm to solve just one NP-
complete problem) knocks them all down. Our inability to find a fast algorithm
for any of these problems is a strong reason for believing that they are all truly
hard, meaning P ?= NP.

   1 In fact, it stands for non-deterministic polynomial time. This is in the sense of non-

deterministic automata, if you happen to know about such things.
382                                       CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

11.9.4     NP-hard vs. NP-complete?
The final technicality we will discuss is the difference between a problem being
NP-hard and NP-complete. I tend to be somewhat loose with my terminology,
but there is a subtle (usually irrelevant) distinction between the two concepts.
    We say that a problem is NP-hard if, like satisfiability, it is at least as hard as
any problem in NP. We say that a problem is NP-complete if it is NP-hard, and
also in NP itself. Because NP is such a large class of problems, most NP-hard
problems you encounter will actually be in NP and thus NP-complete. The
issue can always be settled by giving a (usually simple) verification strategy
for the problem. All the NP-hard problems encountered in this book are also
NP-complete.
    That said, there are some problems that appear to be NP-hard yet are not
in NP. These problems might be even harder than NP-complete! Two-player
games such as chess provide examples of problems that are not in NP. Imagine
sitting down to play chess with some know-it-all who is playing white. He pushes
his king’s pawn up two squares to start the game, and announces “checkmate.”
The only obvious way to verify that he is right would be to construct the full
tree of all your possible moves with his irrefutable replies and demonstrate that
you, in fact, cannot win from the current position. This full tree will have a
number of nodes exponential in its height, which is the number of moves before
you lose playing your most spirited possible defense. Clearly this tree cannot
be constructed and analyzed in polynomial time, so the problem is not in NP.

Chapter Notes
The notion of NP-completeness was first developed by Cook [Coo71]. Satisfia-
bility really is a $1,000,000 problem, and the Clay Mathematics Institute has
offered such a prize to any person who resolves the P = NP question. See
http://www.claymath.org/ for more on the problem and the prize.
    Karp [Kar72] showed the importance of Cook’s result by providing reduc-
tions from satisfiability to more than twenty important algorithmic problems.
I recommend Karp’s paper for its sheer beauty and economy—he condenses
each reduction to three line descriptions showing the problem equivalence. To-
gether, these provided the tools to resolve the complexity of literally hundreds
of important problems where no efficient algorithms were known.
    The best introduction to the theory of NP-completeness remains Garey and
Johnson’s book Computers and Intractability [GJ79]. It introduces the general
theory, including an accessible proof of Cook’s theorem [Coo71] that satisfiabil-
ity is as hard as anything in NP. They also provide an essential reference catalog
of more than 300 NP-complete problems, which is a great resource for learn-
ing what is known about the most interesting hard problems. The reductions
claimed but omitted from this chapter can be found in Garey and Johnson, or
textbooks like Cormen et al. [CLRS09].
    Factor Man [Gin18] is an exciting novel about a man who discovers a polynomial-
11.10. EXERCISES                                                                           383

time algorithm for satisfiability, and must dodge government agents and assas-
sins for his troubles. I give it two thumbs up. The Golden Ticket [For13] is an
accessible tour of complexity theory, and the question of P = NP.
    A few catalog problems exist in a limbo state where it is not yet known
whether the problem has a fast algorithm or is NP-complete. The most promi-
nent of these are graph isomorphism (see Section 19.9 (page 610)) and integer
factorization (see Section 16.8 (page 490)). That this limbo list is so short is
quite a tribute to the state-of-the-art in algorithm design, and the power of
the theory of NP-completeness. For almost every important problem we either
know a fast algorithm or have a good solid reason why one doesn’t exist.
    For an alternative and inspiring view of NP-completeness, check out the
videos of Erik Demaine’s MIT course Algorithmic Lower Bounds: Fun with
Hardness Proofs at http://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.890/fall14/. The war
story problem on unidirected subgraph was originally proven hard in Mahesh-
wari [Mah76].

11.10         Exercises
Transformations and Satisfiability
11-1. [2] Give the 3-SAT formula that results from applying the reduction of satisfi-
      ability to 3-SAT for the formula:

      (x ∨ y ∨ z ∨ w ∨ u ∨ v) ∧ (x ∨ y ∨ z ∨ w ∨ u ∨ v) ∧ (x ∨ y ∨ z ∨ w ∨ u ∨ v) ∧ (x ∨ y)

11-2. [3] Draw the graph that results from the reduction of 3-SAT to vertex cover for
      the expression

                       (x ∨ y ∨ z) ∧ (x ∨ y ∨ z) ∧ (x ∨ y ∨ z) ∧ (x ∨ y ∨ x)

11-3. [3] Prove that 4-SAT is NP-hard.
11-4. [3] Stingy SAT is the following problem: given a set of clauses (each a disjunction
      of literals) and an integer k, find a satisfying assignment in which at most k
      variables are true, if such an assignment exists. Prove that stingy SAT is NP-
      hard.
11-5. [3] The Double SAT problem asks whether a given satisfiability problem has
      at least two different satisfying assignments. For example, the prob-
      lem {{v1 , v2 }, {v¯1 , v2 }, {v¯1 , v¯2 }} is satisfiable, but has only one solution (v1 =
      F, v2 = T ). In contrast, {{v1 , v2 }, {v¯1 , v¯2 }} has exactly two solutions. Show
      that Double-SAT is NP-hard.
11-6. [4] Suppose we are given a subroutine that can solve the traveling salesman
      decision problem on page 357 in (say) linear time. Give an efficient algorithm
      to find the actual TSP tour by making a polynomial number of calls to this
      subroutine.
11-7. [7] Implement a SAT to 3-SAT reduction that translates satisfiability instances
      into equivalent 3-SAT instances.
 384                                          CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

 11-8. [7] Design and implement a backtracking algorithm to test whether a set of
       clause sets is satisfiable. What criteria can you use to prune this search?
 11-9. [8] Implement the vertex cover to satisfiability reduction, and run the resulting
       clauses through a satisfiability solver code. Does this seem like a practical way
       to compute things?

 Basic Reductions
11-10. [4] An instance of the set cover problem consists of a set X of n elements, a
       family F of subsets of X, and an integer k. The question is, does there exist k
       subsets from F whose union is X?
       For example, if X = {1, 2, 3, 4} and F = {{1, 2}, {2, 3}, {4}, {2, 4}}, there
       does not exist a solution for k = 2, but there does for k = 3 (for example,
       {1, 2}, {2, 3}, {4}).
       Prove that set cover is NP-hard with a reduction from vertex cover.
11-11. [4] The baseball card collector problem is as follows. Given packets P1 , . . . , Pm ,
       each of which contains a subset of this year’s baseball cards, is it possible to
       collect all the year’s cards by buying ≤ k packets?
       For example, if the players are {Aaron, M ays, Ruth, Skiena} and the packets
       are
                {{Aaron, M ays}, {M ays, Ruth}, {Skiena}, {M ays, Skiena}},
       there does not exist a solution for k = 2, but there does for k = 3, such as

                           {Aaron, M ays}, {M ays, Ruth}, {Skiena}

       Prove that the baseball card collector problem is NP-hard using a reduction
       from vertex cover.
11-12. [4] The low-degree spanning tree problem is as follows. Given a graph G and an
       integer k, does G contain a spanning tree such that all vertices in the tree have
       degree at most k (obviously, only tree edges count towards the degree)? For
       example, in the following graph, there is no spanning tree such that all vertices
       have a degree at most three.

         (a) Prove that the low-degree spanning tree problem is NP-hard with a reduc-
             tion from Hamiltonian path.
        (b) Now consider the high-degree spanning tree problem, which is as follows.
            Given a graph G and an integer k, does G contain a spanning tree whose
            highest degree vertex is at least k? In the previous example, there exists
            a spanning tree with a highest degree of 7. Give an efficient algorithm to
            solve the high-degree spanning tree problem, and an analysis of its time
            complexity.
 11.10. EXERCISES                                                                       385

11-13. [5] In the minimum element set cover problem, we seek a set cover S ⊆ C of
       a universal set U = {1, . . . , n} such that sum of the sizes of the subsets in S is
       at most k. (a) Show that C = {{1, 2, 3}, {1, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {3, 4, 5}} has a cover
       of size 6, but none of size 5 because of a repeated element. (b) Prove that this
       problem is NP-hard. (Hint: set cover remains hard if all subsets are of the same
       size.)
11-14. [3] The half-Hamiltonian cycle problem is, given a graph G with n vertices,
       determine whether G has a simple cycle of length exactly ?n/2?, where the floor
       function rounds its input down to the nearest integer. Prove that this problem
       is NP-hard.
11-15. [5] The 3-phase power balance problem asks for a way?  to partition
                                                                      ? a set?of n
       positive integers into three sets A, B, or C such that i ai = i bi = i ci .
       Prove that this problem is NP-hard using a reduction from integer partition or
       subset sum (see Section 10.5 (page 329)).
11-16. [4] Show that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Dense Subgraph
       Input: A graph G, and integers k and y.
       Output: Does G contain a subgraph of exactly k vertices and at least y edges?

11-17. [4] Show that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Clique, No-clique
       Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E) and an integer k.
       Output: Does G contain both a clique of size k and an independent set of size
       k?

11-18. [5] An Eulerian cycle is a tour that visits every edge in a graph exactly once.
       An Eulerian subgraph is a subset of the edges and vertices of a graph that has
       an Eulerian cycle. Prove that the problem of finding the number of edges in the
       largest Eulerian subgraph of a graph is NP-hard. (Hint: the Hamiltonian circuit
       problem is NP-hard even if each vertex in the graph is incident upon exactly
       three edges.)
11-19. [5] Show that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Maximum Common Subgraph
       Input: Two graphs G1 = (V1 , E1 ) and G2 = (V2 , E2 ), and a budget b.
       Output: Two sets of nodes S1 ⊆ V1 and S2 ⊆ V2 whose deletion leaves at least
       b nodes in each graph, and makes the two graphs identical.

11-20. [5] A strongly independent set is a subset of vertices S in a graph G such that for
       any two vertices in S, there is no path of length two in G. Prove that strongly
       independent set is NP-hard.
11-21. [5] A kite is a graph on an even number of vertices, say 2n, in which n of the
       vertices form a clique and the remaining n vertices are connected in a tail that
       consists of a path joined to one of the vertices of the clique. Given a graph and
       a goal g, the max kite problem asks for a subgraph that is a kite and contains
       2g nodes. Prove that max kite is NP-hard.
 386                                        CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

Creative Reductions
11-22. [5] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Hitting Set
       Input: A collection C of subsets of a set S, positive integer k.
       Output: Does S contain a subset S ? such that |S ? | ≤ k and each subset in C
       contains at least one element from S ? ?

11-23. [5] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Knapsack
       Input: A set S of n items, such that the ith item has value vi and weight wi .
       Two positive integers: weight limit W and value requirement V .
                                                                ?
       Output: Does there exist a subset S ? ⊆ S such that
       ?                                                          i∈S ? wi ≤ W and
         i∈S ? v i ≥ V ? (Hint: start from integer partition.)

11-24. [5] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Hamiltonian Path
       Input: A graph G, and vertices s and t.
       Output: Does G contain a path that starts from s, ends at t, and visits all vertices
       without visiting any vertex more than once? (Hint: start from Hamiltonian
       cycle.)

11-25. [5] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Longest Path
       Input: A graph G and positive integer k.
       Output: Does G contain a path that visits at least k different vertices without
       visiting any vertex more than once?

11-26. [6] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Dominating Set
       Input: A graph G = (V, E) and positive integer k.
       Output: Is there a subset V ? ⊆ V such that |V ? | ≤ k where for each vertex x ∈ V
       either x ∈ V ? or there exists an edge (x, y) ∈ E such that y ∈ V ? .

11-27. [7] Prove that the vertex cover problem (does there exist a subset S of k vertices
       in a graph G such that every edge in G is incident upon at least one vertex in
       S?) remains NP-hard even when all the vertices in the graph are restricted to
       have even degrees.
11-28. [7] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Set Packing
       Input: A collection C of subsets of a set S, positive integer k.
       Output: Does C contain at least k disjoint subsets (i.e., such that no pair of
       subsets has any elements in common)?
 11.10. EXERCISES                                                                   387

11-29. [7] Prove that the following problem is NP-hard:

       Problem: Feedback Vertex Set
       Input: A directed graph G = (V, A) and positive integer k.
       Output: Is there a subset V ? ⊆ V such that |V ? | ≤ k, such that deleting the
       vertices of V ? from G leaves a DAG?

11-30. [8] Give a reduction from Sudoku to the vertex coloring problem in graphs.
       Specifically, describe how to take any partially filled Sudoku board and construct
       a graph that can be colored with nine colors iff the Sudoku board is solvable.

Algorithms for Special Cases
11-31. [5] A Hamiltonian path P is a path that visits each vertex exactly once. The
       problem of testing whether a graph G contains a Hamiltonian path is NP-
       complete. There does not have to be an edge in G from the ending vertex
       to the starting vertex of P , unlike in the Hamiltonian cycle problem.
       Give an O(n + m)-time algorithm to test whether a directed acyclic graph G (a
       DAG) contains a Hamiltonian path. (Hint: think about topological sorting and
       DFS.)
11-32. [3] Consider the k-clique problem, which is the general clique problem restricted
       to graphs in which every vertex has degree at most k. Prove that k-clique has
       an efficient algorithm for any given k, meaning that k is a constant.
11-33. [8] The 2-SAT problem is, given a Boolean formula in 2-conjunctive normal form
       (CNF), to decide whether the formula is satisfiable. 2-SAT is like 3-SAT, except
       that each clause can have only two literals. For example, the following formula
       is in 2-CNF:
                              (x1 ∨ x2 ) ∧ (x̄2 ∨ x3 ) ∧ (x1 ∨ x̄3 )
       Give a polynomial-time algorithm to solve 2-SAT.

P = NP?
11-34. [4] Show that the following problems are in NP:
          • Does graph G have a simple path (i.e., with no vertex repeated) of length
            k?
          • Is integer n composite (i.e., not prime)?
          • Does graph G have a vertex cover of size k?
11-35. [7] Until 2002, it was an open question whether the decision problem “Is integer
       n a composite number, in other words, not prime?” could be computed in time
       polynomial in the size of its input. Why doesn’t the following algorithm suffice
       to prove it is in P, since it runs in O(n) time?
               PrimalityTesting(n)
                   composite = false
                   for i := 2 to n − 1 do
                        if (n mod i) = 0 then
                             composite = true
388                                   CHAPTER 11. NP-COMPLETENESS

LeetCode
11-1. https://leetcode.com/problems/target-sum/
11-2. https://leetcode.com/problems/word-break-ii/
11-3. https://leetcode.com/problems/number-of-squareful-arrays/

HackerRank
11-1. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/spies-revised
11-2. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/brick-tiling/
11-3. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/tbsp/

Programming Challenges
These programming challenge problems with robot judging are available at
https://onlinejudge.org:
11-1. “The Monocycle”—Chapter 12, problem 10047.
11-2. “Dog and Gopher”—Chapter 13, problem 111301.
11-3. “Chocolate Chip Cookies”—Chapter 13, problem 10136.
11-4. “Birthday Cake”—Chapter 13, problem 10167.
   These are not particularly relevant to NP-completeness, but are added for
completeness.
