Chapter 12

Dealing with Hard
Problems

For the practical person, demonstrating that a problem is NP-complete is never
the end of the line. Presumably, there was a reason why you wanted to solve
it in the ﬁrst place. That application won’t go away after you learn there is no
polynomial-time algorithm. You still seek a program that solves the problem
of interest. All you know is that you won’t ﬁnd one that quickly solves the
problem to optimality in the worst case. There are still three possibilities:

    • Algorithms fast in the average case – Examples of such algorithms include
      backtracking algorithms with substantial pruning.

    • Heuristics – Heuristic methods like simulated annealing or greedy ap-
      proaches can be used to quickly ﬁnd a solution, albeit with no guarantee
      that it will be the best one.

    • Approximation algorithms – The theory of NP-completeness stipulates
      that it is hard to get the exact answer. With clever, problem-speciﬁc
      heuristics, we can get provably close to the optimal answer on all possible
      instances.

    This chapter will investigate these possibilities deeper. I include a brief
introduction to quantum computing, an exciting technology that is shaking (but
not really breaking) the boundaries of what problems are eﬃciently computable.

12.1        Approximation Algorithms
Approximation algorithms produce solutions with a guarantee attached, namely
that the quality of the optimal solution is provably bounded by the quality
of your heuristic solution. Thus, no matter what your input instance is and
how lucky you are, such an approximation algorithm is destined to produce a
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   389
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_12
390                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

Figure 12.1: Failing to pick the center vertex leads to a terrible vertex cover.

correct answer. Furthermore, provably good approximation algorithms are often
conceptually simple, fast, and easy to program.
    One thing that is usually not clear, however, is how well the solution from
an approximation algorithm compares to what you might get from a heuristic
that gives you no guarantees. The answer may be worse, or it could be better.
Leaving your money in a bank savings account may guarantee you 3% interest
without risk. Still, you likely will do much better investing your money in stocks
than leaving it in the bank, even though performance is not guaranteed.
    One way to get the best of approximation algorithms and unwashed heuris-
tics is to run both of them on the given problem instance, and pick the solution
giving the better result. This way, you will get a solution that comes with a
guarantee and a second chance to do even better. When it comes to heuristics
for hard problems, sometimes you can have it both ways.

12.2        Approximating Vertex Cover
Recall the vertex cover problem, where we seek a small subset S of the vertices
of a given graph G such that for every edge (x, y) in G, at least one of x or
y is in S. As we have seen, ﬁnding the minimum vertex cover of a graph is
NP-complete. However, a very simple procedure will always ﬁnd a cover that is
at most twice as large as the optimal cover. It repeatedly selects an uncovered
edge, and picks both of its vertices for the cover:

      VertexCover(G = (V, E))
          While (E = ∅) do:
             Select an arbitrary edge (u, v) ∈ E
             Add both u and v to the vertex cover
             Delete all edges from E that are incident to either u or v.

    It should be apparent that this procedure always produces a vertex cover,
since each edge is deleted only after an incident vertex has been added to the
cover. More interesting is the claim that the best vertex cover must use at least
half as many vertices as this one. Why? Consider only the k edges selected
by the algorithm that constitute a matching in the graph. No two of these
matching edges can share a vertex, so any cover of just these k edges must
12.2. APPROXIMATING VERTEX COVER                                               391

Figure 12.2: A bad example for the greedy heuristic for vertex cover. The
optimal cover of this bipartite graph is the row of vertices on top, yet the
greedy heuristic will select the vertices from the bottom row from left to right.
This example can be enlarged to create an instance where the greedy solution
is Θ(log n) times larger than the minimum vertex cover.

include at least one vertex per edge, which makes it at least half the size of this
2k-vertex greedy cover.
    There are several interesting things to notice about this algorithm:

   • Although the procedure is simple, it is not stupid – Many seemingly smarter
     heuristics can give a far worse performance in the worst case. For example,
     why not modify the above procedure to select only one of the two vertices
     for the cover, instead of both? After all, the selected edge will be equally
     well covered by only one vertex. But consider the star-shaped graph of
     Figure 12.1. The original heuristic will produce a two-vertex cover, while
     the single-vertex heuristic might return a cover as large as n − 1 vertices,
     should we get unlucky and repeatedly select the leaf instead of the center
     as the cover vertex we retain.
   • Greedy isn’t always the answer – Perhaps the most natural heuristic for
     vertex cover would repeatedly select (and then delete) the vertex with
     highest remaining degree for the vertex cover. After all, this vertex will
     cover the largest number of possible edges. However, in the case of ties or
     near ties, this heuristic can go seriously astray. In the worst case, it can
     yield a cover that is Θ(lg n) times optimal, as shown by the example of
     Figure 12.2.
   • Making a heuristic more complicated does not necessarily make it better –
     It is easy to complicate heuristics by adding more special cases or details.
     For example, the procedure above did not specify which edge should be
     selected next for the matching. It might seem reasonable to pick the edge
     whose endpoints have the highest total degree. However, this does not
     improve the worst-case bound, and just makes it more diﬃcult to analyze.
   • A post-processing cleanup step can’t hurt – The ﬂip side of designing sim-
     ple heuristics is that they can often be modiﬁed to yield better-in-practice
392                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

      solutions without weakening the approximation bound. For example, a
      post-processing step that deletes any unnecessary vertex from the cover
      can only improve things in practice, even though it won’t help the worst-
      case bound. And it is fair to repeat the process multiple times with dif-
      ferent starting edges and take the best of the resulting runs.

    The important property of approximation algorithms is relating the size of
the solution produced to a lower bound on the optimal solution. Instead of
thinking about how well we might do, we must think about the worst case—
that is, how badly the algorithm might perform.

Stop and Think: Leaving Behind a Vertex Cover

Problem: Suppose we do a depth-ﬁrst search of graph G, naturally building a
depth-ﬁrst search tree T in the process. A leaf node in a tree is any non-root
vertex of degree 1. Delete every leaf node from T . Show that (1) the set of all
non-leaf nodes of T form a vertex cover of graph G, and (2) that this vertex
cover is of size at most twice that of the minimum vertex cover.

Solution: Why must the set of all non-leaf nodes in the DFS tree T form a
vertex cover? Recall that the magic property of depth-ﬁrst search is that it
partitions all edges into tree edges and back edges. If a vertex v is a leaf of T ,
then there is a single tree edge (x, v) containing it, which will be covered by
taking non-leaf vertex x. If there are other edges containing v, they must be
back edges going to ancestors of v, all of which were selected to be in the cover.
So all edges will be covered by the set of non-leaves.
    But why is the set of non-leaves at most twice the size of the optimal cover?
Start from any leaf v and walk up the tree to the root. Suppose this path is
of length k edges, meaning k + 1 vertices leaf-to-root. This heuristic will select
the k non-leaf vertices for the cover. But the best possible cover for this path
requires k/2 vertices, so we are always within a factor of at most two times
optimal.

12.2.1     A Randomized Vertex Cover Heuristic
Although we proved that our original vertex cover heuristic of selecting arbitrary
uncovered edges and adding both vertices to the cover yields a factor two approx-
imation algorithm, it feels wrong to grow the cover by two vertices when either
one would equally cover the given edge. However, the star-shaped example of
Figure 12.1 shows that if we repeatedly pick the wrong (meaning non-center)
vertex for each edge, we could end up with a cover of size n − 1 instead of 1.
    Such a horrible performance requires making the wrong decision n − 1 times
in a row, which implies either a special talent or horrendous luck. We can make
it a matter of luck by choosing the vertex at random:
12.3. EUCLIDEAN TSP                                                             393

                                   v

                        u                                w

Figure 12.3: The triangle inequality, that d(u, w) ≤ d(u, v) + d(v, w), holds for
distances deﬁned between geometric points.

    VertexCover(G = (V, E))
        While (E = ∅) do:
           Select an arbitrary edge (u, v) ∈ E
           Randomly pick either u or v, and add it to the vertex cover
           Delete all edges from E that are incident to the selected vertex.
    At the end of this procedure, we will end up with a vertex cover, but how well
does its expected size compare to a particular minimum size cover C? Observe
that with each edge (u, v) we select, at least one of the two endpoints must
appear in the optimal cover C. Thus, at least half the time we get lucky and
pick the “right” vertex. At the end of this procedure we will have picked a set
C  ⊂ C of cover vertices plus a set D of vertices from V − C for our cover. We
know that |C  | always must be less than or equal to |C|. Further, the expected
size of D is equal to that of C  . Thus, in expectation |C  | + |D| ≤ 2|C|, and we
get a solution whose size is expected to be at most twice that of optimal.
    Randomization is a very powerful tool for developing approximation algo-
rithms. Its role is to make bad special cases go away by making it very unlikely
that they will occur. The careful analysis of such probabilities often requires
sophisticated eﬀorts, but the heuristics themselves are generally very simple and
easy to implement.

12.3      Euclidean TSP
In most natural applications of the traveling salesman problem (TSP), direct
routes are inherently shorter than indirect routes. For example, when a graph’s
edge weights are the straight-line distances between pairs of cities, the shortest
path from x to y must always be “as the crow ﬂies.”
    The edge weights induced by Euclidean geometry satisfy the triangle in-
equality, namely that d(u, w) ≤ d(u, v) + d(v, w) for all triples of vertices u, v,
and w. The general reasonableness of this condition is demonstrated in Figure
12.3. The cost of airfares is an example of a distance function that violates the
triangle inequality, because it is often cheaper to ﬂy through an intermediate
city than to ﬂy direct to the destination—which is why ﬁnding the cheapest
fare can be such a pain. But the triangle inequality holds naturally for many
problems and applications.
    The traveling salesman problem remains hard when the edge weights are
deﬁned by Euclidean distances between points. But we can approximate the
394                       CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

                   1                                                  1

         2                 4                          2                   4
                  3                                              3
                                        7                                          7
             5                                             5
                          6                                               6
                                10        11                                  10   11
         8            9                               8               9

Figure 12.4: A depth-ﬁrst traversal of a spanning tree, with the shortcut tour
(left). The same DFS tree with a minimum weight matching between odd degree
vertices, creating an Eulerian graph for the Christoﬁdes heuristic (right).

optimal traveling salesman tour on such graphs that obey the triangle inequality
using minimum spanning trees. First, observe that the weight of the minimum
spanning tree of graph G must be a lower bound on the cost of the optimal TSP
tour T of G. Why? Distances are always non-negative, so deleting any edge
from tour T leaves a path with total weight no greater than that of T . This
path has no cycles, and hence is a tree, which means its weight must be at least
that of the minimum spanning tree. The weight of the minimum spanning tree
thus gives a lower bound on the cost of the optimal TSP tour.
    Consider now what happens when performing a depth-ﬁrst traversal of a
spanning tree. We visit each edge twice, once going down the tree when discov-
ering the edge and once more going up after exploring the entire subtree. For
example, the depth-ﬁrst search of Figure 12.4 (left) visits the vertices in order:
                 1, 2, 1, 3, 5, 8, 5, 9, 5, 3, 6, 3, 1, 4, 7, 10, 7, 11, 7, 4, 1
This circuit travels along each edge of the minimum spanning tree twice, and
hence costs at most twice the optimal tour.
   However, many vertices will be repeated on this depth-ﬁrst search circuit.
To remove the extra copies, we can take a direct path to the next unvisited
vertex at each step. The shortcut tour for the circuit above is
                               1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 6, 4, 7, 10, 11, 1
Because we have replaced a chain of edges by a single direct edge, the triangle
inequality ensures that the tour can only get shorter. Thus, this shortcut tour,
which can be constructed in O(n + m) time on an n-vertex and m-edge graph
G, always has weight at most twice that of the optimal TSP tour of G.

12.3.1       The Christoﬁdes Heuristic
There is another way of looking at this minimum spanning tree doubling idea,
which will lead to an even better approximation algorithm for TSP. Recall that
12.3. EUCLIDEAN TSP                                                               395

an Eulerian cycle in graph G is a circuit traversing each edge of G exactly once.1
There is a simple characterization to test when a connected graph contains an
Eulerian cycle, namely each vertex must be of even degree. This even-degree
condition is obviously necessary, because you must be able to walk out of each
vertex exactly the number of times you walk in. But it is also suﬃcient, and
furthermore an Eulerian cycle on any connected, even-degree graph can be easily
found in linear time.
    We can reinterpret the minimum spanning tree heuristic for TSP in terms
of Eulerian cycles. Construct a multigraph M , which consists of two copies of
each edge of the minimum spanning tree of G. This n-vertex, 2(n − 1)-edge
multigraph must be Eulerian, because every vertex has degree twice that of the
minimum spanning tree of G. Any Eulerian cycle of M will deﬁne a circuit with
exactly the same properties as the DFS circuit described above, and hence can
be shortcut in the same way to construct a TSP tour with cost at most twice
that of the optimal tour.
    This suggests that we might ﬁnd an even better approximation for TSP if we
could ﬁnd a cheaper way to ensure that all vertices are of even degree. Recall
(from Section 8.5.1 (page 267)) that a matching in a graph G = (V, E) is a
subset of edges E  ⊂ E such that no two edges of E  share a vertex. Adding a
set of matching edges to a given graph thus raises the degree of aﬀected vertices
by one, turning odd-degree vertices even and even-degree vertices odd, as shown
in Figure 12.4 (right).
    So let’s start by identifying the odd-degree vertices in the minimum span-
ning tree of G, which are the obstacle preventing us from ﬁnding an Eulerian
cycle on the minimum spanning tree itself. There must be an even number of
odd-degree vertices in any graph. By adding a set of matching edges between
these odd-degree vertices, we make the graph Eulerian. The lowest cost perfect
matching (meaning every vertex must appear in exactly one matching edge) can
be computed eﬃciently, as discussed in Section 18.6 (page 562).
    The Christoﬁdes heuristic constructs a multigraph M consisting of the mini-
mum spanning tree of G plus the minimum weight set of matching edges between
odd-degree vertices in this tree. Thus, M is an Eulerian graph, and contains an
Eulerian cycle that can be shortcut to build a TSP tour of weight at most M .
    Note that the cost of this matching of just the odd-degree vertices must
be a lower bound on the cost of the lowest cost matching of the full graph G,
presuming it satisﬁes the triangle inequality.
    Observe in Figure 12.5 that the alternating edges of any TSP tour must
deﬁne a matching, because each vertex appears only once in the given edge set.
These red edges (or blue edges) must cost at least as much as the minimum
weight matching of G, and (for the lighter color) weigh at most half that of the
TSP tour. The matching edges we added to M thus must have cost at most
half that of the optimal TSP tour.
    In conclusion, the total weight of M must be at most (1 + (1/2)) = (3/2)
times that of the optimal TSP tour, and thus the Christoﬁdes heuristic con-
  1 Or, if you don’t recall this, tour Section 18.7 (page 565) for a refresher.
396                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

Figure 12.5: Any TSP tour in a graph with an even number of vertices that
observes the triangle inequality can be partitioned into red and blue matchings,
one of which must be at most half the cost of the tour.

structs a tour of weight at most 3/2 times that of the optimal tour. As with the
minimum spanning tree heuristic, the weight lost due to shortcuts might mean
the resulting tour is even better than this guarantee. But it can never do worse.

12.4      When Average is Good Enough
In the mythical land of Lake Wobegon, all the children are above average. For
certain optimization problems, all (or most) of the solutions are seemingly close
to the best possible. Recognizing this yields very simple approximation al-
gorithms with provable guarantees, that can often be reﬁned by the heuristic
search strategies we will discuss in Section 12.6 (page 399) into something even
better.

12.4.1     Maximum k-SAT
Recall the problem of 3-SAT discussed in Section 11.4.1 (page 367), where we
are given a set of three-element logic clauses like

                                v3 or v̄17 or v24

and asked to ﬁnd an assignment of either true or false to each variable vi so as
to make all the clauses true.
    A more general problem is maximum 3-SAT, where we seek the Boolean
variable assignment that makes the largest number of these clauses true. Asking
whether you can satisfy 100% of the clauses is the original 3-SAT problem, so
maximum 3-SAT must still be hard. But now it is an optimization problem, so
we can think about approximation algorithms for it.
    What happens when we ﬂip a coin to decide the value of each variable vi , and
thus construct a completely random truth assignment? What fraction of clauses
would we expect to satisfy? Consider the clause above. It will be satisﬁed unless
we pick v3 = false , v17 = true , and v24 = false . The probability we get a good
assignment for the clause is 1 − (1/2)3 = 7/8. Thus, we expect that any random
assignment will satisfy (7/8) of the clauses, in other words 87.5% of them.
12.5. SET COVER                                                               397

   That seems pretty good for a mindless approach to an NP-complete problem.
For a maximum k-SAT instance with m input clauses, we expect to satisfy
m(1 − (1/2)k ) of them with any random assignment. From an approximation
standpoint, the longer the clauses, the easier it is to get close to the optimum.

12.4.2     Maximum Acyclic Subgraph
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are easier to work with than general directed
graphs. Sometimes it is useful to simplify a given graph by deleting a set of
edges or vertices that suﬃce to break all cycles. Such feedback set problems are
discussed in Section 19.11 (page 618).
    Here we consider an interesting problem in this class, where we seek to retain
as many edges as possible while breaking all directed cycles:
Problem: Maximum Directed Acyclic Subgraph
Input: A directed graph G = (V, E).
Output: Find the largest possible subset E  ⊆ E such that G = (V, E  ) is
acyclic.
    In fact, there is a very simple algorithm that guarantees you a solution with
at least half as many edges as optimum. I encourage you to try to ﬁnd it now
before peeking.

Problem: Construct any permutation of the vertices, and interpret it as a left-
to-right ordering, akin to topological sorting. Now some of the edges will point
from left to right, while the rest point from right to left.
    One of these two edge subsets must be at least as large as the other. This
means it contains at least half the edges. Furthermore, each of these two edge
subsets must be acyclic for the same reason only DAGs can be topologically
sorted—you cannot form a cycle by repeatedly moving in one direction. Thus,
the larger edge subset must be acyclic, and contain at least half the edges of the
optimal solution.
    This approximation algorithm is simple almost to the point of being stupid.
But note that heuristics can make it perform better in practice without losing
this guarantee. Perhaps we can try many random permutations, and pick the
best. Or we can try to exchange pairs of vertices in the permutations retaining
those swaps that throw more edges onto the bigger side.

12.5      Set Cover
The previous sections may encourage a false belief that every problem can be
approximated to within a constant factor. Indeed, several catalog problems such
as maximum clique cannot be approximated to any interesting factor.
   Set cover occupies a middle ground between these extremes, having a factor-
Θ(lg n) approximation algorithm. Set cover is a more general version of the
vertex cover problem. As deﬁned in Section 21.1 (page 678):
398                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

           milestone class 6    5       4           3    2 1 0
      uncovered elements 64 51 40 30 25 22 19 16 13 10 7 4 2 1
      selected subset size 13 11 10 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 1 1

Figure 12.6: The coverage process for the greedy heuristic on a particular in-
stance of set cover. The width w is deﬁned by the ﬁve subsets in milestone class
4, when the number of uncovered elements gets halved from at least 2 5 − 1 to
at most 24 .

Problem: Set Cover
Input: A collection of subsets S = {S1 , . . . , Sm } of the universal set U =
{1, . . . , n}.
Output: What is the smallest subset T of S whose union equals the universal
                |T |
set—i.e., ∪i=1 Ti = U ?
    The natural heuristic is greedy. Repeatedly select the subset that covers the
largest collection of thus-far uncovered elements, until everything is covered. In
pseudocode,

      SetCover(S)
          While (U = ∅) do:
             Identify the subset Si with the largest intersection with U
             Select Si for the set cover
             U = U − Si

    One consequence of this selection process is that the number of freshly
covered elements deﬁnes a non-increasing sequence as the algorithm proceeds.
Why? If not, greedy would have picked the more powerful subset earlier if it,
in fact, existed.
    Thus we can view this heuristic as reducing the number of uncovered ele-
ments from n down to zero by progressively smaller amounts. A trace of such
an execution is shown in Figure 12.6. An important milestone in such a trace
occurs each time the number of remaining uncovered elements reduces past a
power of two. Clearly there can be at most lg n such events.
    Let wi denote the number of subsets that were selected by the heuristic to
cover elements between milestones 2i+1 − 1 and 2i . Deﬁne the width w to be the
maximum wi , where 0 ≤ i ≤ lg n. In the example of Figure 12.6, the maximum
width is given by the ﬁve subsets needed to go from 25 − 1 down to 24 .
    Since there are at most lg n such milestones, the solution produced by the
greedy heuristic must contain at most w · lg n subsets. But I claim that the
optimal solution must contain at least w subsets, so the heuristic solution is no
worse than lg n times optimal.
    Why? Consider the average number of new elements covered as we move
between milestones 2i+1 − 1 and 2i . These 2i elements require wi subsets, so
the average coverage is μi = 2i /wi . More to the point, the last/smallest of these
12.6. HEURISTIC SEARCH METHODS                                                 399

subsets can cover at most μi subsets. Thus, no subset exists in S that can cover
more than μi of the remaining 2i elements. So, to ﬁnish the job, we need at
least 2i /μi = wi subsets.
    The surprising thing here is that there are set cover instances where the
greedy heuristic ﬁnds solutions that are Ω(lg n) times optimal: recall the bad
vertex cover instance of Figure 12.2. This logarithmic approximation ratio is an
inherent property of the problem/heuristic, not an artifact of weak analysis.

 Take-Home Lesson: Approximation algorithms guarantee answers that are
 always close to the optimal solution. They can provide a practical approach to
 dealing with NP-complete problems.

12.6      Heuristic Search Methods
Backtracking gave us a method to ﬁnd the best of all possible solutions, as scored
by a given objective function. However, any algorithm searching all conﬁgura-
tions is doomed to be impossibly expensive on large instances. Heuristic search
methods provide an alternate approach to diﬃcult combinatorial optimization
problems.
    In this section, I will discuss approaches to heuristic search. The bulk of our
attention will be devoted to simulated annealing, which I ﬁnd to be the most
reliable method to apply in practice. Heuristic search algorithms have an air of
voodoo about them, but how they work and why one method can work better
than another follows logically enough if you think them through.
    In particular, we will look at three diﬀerent heuristic search methods: ran-
dom sampling, gradient descent search, and simulated annealing. The traveling
salesman problem will be our ongoing example for comparing heuristics. All
three heuristics share two common components:

   • Solution candidate representation – This is a complete yet concise de-
     scription of possible solutions for the problem, just like we used for back-
     tracking. For traveling salesman, the solution space consists of (n − 1)!
     elements—namely all possible circular permutations of the vertices. We
     need a data structure that can represent each element of the solution space.
     For TSP, the candidate solutions can naturally be represented using an
     array S of n − 1 vertices, where Si deﬁnes the (i + 1)st vertex on the tour
     starting from v1 .

   • Cost function – Search methods need a cost or evaluation function to
     assess the quality of each possible solution. Our search heuristic identiﬁes
     the element with the best score—either the highest or lowest depending
     upon the nature of the problem. For TSP, the cost function for evaluating
     candidate solutions S just sums up the weights of all edges (Si , Si+1 ),
     where S0 and Sn both denote v1 .
400                      CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

12.6.1       Random Sampling
The simplest approach to search in a solution space uses random sampling, also
known as the Monte Carlo method. We repeatedly construct random solutions
and evaluate them, stopping as soon as we get a good enough solution, or (more
likely) when we get tired of waiting. We report the best solution found over the
course of our sampling.
    True random sampling requires that we select elements from the solution
space uniformly at random. This means that each of the elements of the solu-
tion space must have an equal probability of being the next candidate selected.
Such sampling can be a subtle problem. Algorithms for generating random per-
mutations, subsets, partitions, and graphs are discussed in Sections 17.4 through
17.7.

void random_sampling(tsp_instance *t, int nsamples, tsp_solution *s) {
    tsp_solution s_now;             /* current tsp solution */
    double best_cost;               /* best cost so far */
    double cost_now;                /* current cost */
    int i;                          /* counter */

       initialize_solution(t->n, &s_now);
       best_cost = solution_cost(&s_now, t);
       copy_solution(&s_now, s);

       for (i = 1; i <= nsamples; i++) {
           random_solution(&s_now);
           cost_now = solution_cost(&s_now, t);

            if (cost_now < best_cost) {
                best_cost = cost_now;
                copy_solution(&s_now, s);
            }

            solution_count_update(&s_now, t);
       }
}

      When might random sampling do well?
      • When there is a large proportion of acceptable solutions – Finding a piece of
        hay in a haystack is easy, since almost anything you grab is a straw. When
        good solutions are plentiful, a random search should ﬁnd one quickly.
        Finding prime numbers is a domain where a random search proves suc-
        cessful. Generating large random prime numbers for keys is an important
        aspect of cryptographic systems such as RSA. Roughly one out of every
        ln n integers is prime, so only a modest number of random samples need
        to be taken to discover primes that are several hundred digits long.
12.6. HEURISTIC SEARCH METHODS                                             401

Figure 12.7: Search time/quality tradeoﬀs for TSP using random sampling.
Progress is made infrequently, whenever a new best (here smallest) solution is
stumbled upon.

   • When there is no coherence in the solution space – Random sampling is
     the right thing to do when there is no sense of when we are getting closer
     to a solution. Suppose you wanted to ﬁnd one of your friends who has a
     social security number that ends in 00. There is not much else you can do
     but tap an arbitrary fellow on the shoulder and ask. No cleverer method
     will be better than random sampling.
     Consider again the problem of hunting for a large prime number. Primes
     are scattered quite arbitrarily among the integers. Random sampling is
     as systematic as anything else would be.

    How does random sampling do on TSP? Pretty lousy. The best solution I
found after testing 100 million random permutations of a TSP instance with 150
sites was 43,251, which is more than eight times the cost of the optimal tour!
The solution space consists almost entirely of mediocre to bad solutions, so
quality grows very slowly with the amount of sampling/running time we invest.
Figure 12.7 shows the arbitrary up-and-down movements of the generally poor
quality solutions encountered using random sampling, so you can get a sense of
how the score varied over each iteration.
    Most problems we encounter, like TSP, have relatively few good solutions
and a highly coherent solution space. More powerful heuristic search algorithms
are required to hunt where the needle in the haystack is likely to be.

Stop and Think: Picking the Pair

Problem: We need an eﬃcient and unbiased way to generate random pairs
of vertices to perform random vertex swaps. Propose an eﬃcient algorithm
402                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS
                                n
to generate elements from the    2    unordered pairs on {1, . . . , n} uniformly at
random.

Solution: Uniformly generating random structures is a surprisingly subtle prob-
lem. Consider the following procedure to generate random unordered pairs:

            i = random int(1,n-1);
            j = random int(i+1,n);

     It is clear thatthis
                        indeed generates unordered pairs, since i < j. Further,
it is clear that all n2 unordered pairs can indeed be generated, presuming that
random int generates integers uniformly between its two arguments.
     But are they uniform? The answer is no. What is the probability that pair
(1, 2) is generated? There is a 1/(n − 1) chance of getting the 1, and then a
1/(n − 1) chance of getting the 2, which yields p(1, 2) = 1/(n − 1) . But what
is the probability of getting (n − 1, n)? Again, there is a 1/(n − 1) chance of
getting the ﬁrst number, but now there is only one possible choice for the second
candidate! This pair will occur n − 1 times more often than (1, 2)!
     The problem is that fewer pairs start with big numbers than little numbers.
We could solve this problem by calculating exactly how many unordered pairs
start with i (exactly (n − i)) and appropriately bias the probability. The second
value could then be selected uniformly at random from i + 1 to n.
     But instead of working through the math, let’s exploit the fact that ran-
domly generating the n2 ordered pairs uniformly is easy. Just pick two integers
independently of each other. Ignoring the ordering, by permuting the ordered
pair to unordered pair (x, y) where x < y, gives us a 2/n2 probability of gener-
ating each unordered pair of distinct elements. If we happen to generate a pair
(x, x), we discard it and try again. We will get unordered pairs uniformly at
random in constant expected time by using the following algorithm:

            do {
                i = random int(1,n);
                j = random int(1,n);
                if (i > j) swap(&i,&j);
            } while (i==j);

12.6.2     Local Search
Now suppose you want to hire an algorithms expert as a consultant to solve
your problem. You could dial a phone number at random, ask if they are an
algorithms expert, and hang up if they say no. After many repetitions you will
eventually ﬁnd one, but it would probably be more eﬃcient to ask the person
12.6. HEURISTIC SEARCH METHODS                                                403

                          1                       1

                   2                  8   2                  8

                   3                  7   3                  7

                   4                  6   4                  6

                              5                       5

Figure 12.8: Improving a candidate TSP tour by swapping vertices 3 and 7
replaces four old tour edges with four new ones.

on the phone for someone more likely to be an algorithms expert, and call them
up instead.
    A local search scans the neighborhood around elements in the solution space.
Think of each such candidate solution x as a vertex, with a directed edge (x, y)
to every other candidate solution y that is a neighbor of x. Our search proceeds
from x to the most promising candidate in x’s neighborhood.
    We certainly do not want to explicitly construct this neighborhood graph for
any sizable solution space. Think about TSP, which will have (n − 1)! vertices
in this graph. We are conducting a heuristic search precisely because we cannot
hope to do this many operations in a reasonable amount of time.
    Instead, we want a general transition mechanism that takes us to a nearby
solution by slightly modifying the current one. Typical transition mechanisms
include swapping a random pair of items or changing (inserting or deleting) a
single item in the solution.
    A reasonable transition mechanism for TSP would be to swap the current
tour positions of a random pair of vertices Si and Sj , as shown in Figure 12.8.
This changes up to eight edges on the tour, deleting the four edges currently
adjacent to both Si and Sj , and adding their replacements. The eﬀect of such
an incremental change on the quality of the solution can be computed incre-
mentally, so the cost function evaluation takes time proportional to the size of
the change (typically constant), which is a big win over being linear in the size
of the solution. Even better might be to swap two edges on the tour with two
others that replace it, since it may be easier to ﬁnd moves that improve the cost
of the tour.
    Local search heuristics start from an arbitrary element of the solution space,
and then scan the neighborhood looking for a favorable transition to take. In a
favorable vertex swap, the four edges we insert are cheaper than the four edges
we delete, a computation performed by the transition function. In a greedy
hill-climbing procedure, we try to ﬁnd the top of a mountain (or alternately, the
lowest point in a ditch) by starting at some arbitrary point and taking any step
404                      CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

that leads in the direction we want to travel. We repeat until we have reached a
point where all our neighbors lead us in the wrong direction. We are now King
of the Hill, or for a minimization problem Dean of the Ditch.
    But unfortunately, we are probably not King of the Mountain. Suppose you
wake up in a ski lodge, eager to reach the top of the neighboring peak. Your ﬁrst
transition to gain altitude might be to go upstairs to the top of the building.
And then you are trapped. To reach the top of the mountain, you must go
downstairs and walk outside, but this violates the requirement that each step
must increase your score. Hill climbing and closely related heuristics such as
greedy search or local search are great at ﬁnding local optima quickly, but often
fail to ﬁnd the globally best solution.

        void hill_climbing(tsp_instance *t, tsp_solution *s) {
            double cost;            /* best cost so far */
            double delta;           /* swap cost */
            int i, j;               /* counters */
            bool stuck;             /* did I get a better solution? */

             initialize_solution(t->n, s);
             random_solution(s);
             cost = solution_cost(s, t);

             do {
                 stuck = true;
                 for (i = 1; i < t->n; i++) {
                     for (j = i + 1; j <= t->n; j++) {
                         delta = transition(s, t, i, j);
                         if (delta < 0) {
                             stuck = false;
                             cost = cost + delta;
                         } else {
                              transition(s, t, j, i);
                         }
                         solution_count_update(s, t);
                     }
                 }
             } while (stuck);
        }

      When does local search do well?
      • When there is great coherence in the solution space – Hill climbing is at
        its best when the solution space is convex. In other words, it consists of
        exactly one hill. No matter where you start on the hill, there is always a
        direction to walk up until you are at the absolute global maximum.
12.6. HEURISTIC SEARCH METHODS                                                            405

    Figure 12.9: Search time/quality tradeoﬀs for TSP using hill climbing.

      Many natural problems have this property. We can think of a binary
      search as starting in the middle of a search space, where exactly one of
      the two possible directions we can walk will get us closer to the target key.
      The simplex algorithm for linear programming (see Section 16.6 (page
      482)) is nothing more than hill climbing over the right solution space, yet
      it guarantees us the optimal solution to any linear programming problem.

    • Whenever the cost of incremental evaluation is much cheaper than global
      evaluation – It costs Θ(n) to evaluate the cost of an arbitrary n-vertex
      candidate TSP solution, because we must sum up the cost of each edge
      in the circular permutation describing the tour. Once that is found, how-
      ever, the cost of the tour after swapping a given pair of vertices can be
      determined in constant time.
      If we are given a very large value of n and a very small budget of how much
      time we can spend searching, we are better oﬀ using it to do a bunch of
      incremental evaluations than a few random samples, even if we are looking
      for a needle in a haystack.

    The primary drawback of a local search is that there isn’t anything more for
us to do after we ﬁnd the local optimum. Sure, if we have more time we could
restart from diﬀerent random points, but in landscapes of many low hills we are
unlikely to stumble on the optimum.
    How does local search do on TSP? Much better than random sampling for a
similar amount of time. This best local search tour found on our hard 150-site
TSP instance had a length of 15,715—improving the quality of our solution by
almost a factor of three over random sampling.2
    This is good, but not great. You would not be happy to learn you are paying
twice the taxes than you should be. Figure 12.9 illustrates the trajectory of a
local search: repeated streaks from random tours down to decent solutions of
   2 This is still more than double the optimal solution cost of 6,828, so the minimum spanning

tree approximation of Section 12.3 (page 393) would beat it.
406                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

fairly similar quality. We need more powerful methods to get closer to the
optimal solution.

12.6.3     Simulated Annealing
Simulated annealing is a heuristic search procedure that allows occasional tran-
sitions leading to more expensive (and hence inferior) solutions. This may not
sound like progress, but it helps keep our search from getting stuck in local
optima. That poor fellow trapped on the second ﬂoor of the ski lodge would do
better to break the glass and jump out the window if they really want to reach
the top of the mountain.
    The inspiration for simulated annealing comes from the physical process of
cooling molten materials down to the solid state. In thermodynamic theory,
the energy state of a system is described by the energy state of each parti-
cle constituting it. But a particle’s energy state jumps about randomly, with
such transitions governed by the temperature of the system. In particular,
the backwards transition from a low energy (high quality) state ei to higher
energy (lower quality) state ej at temperature T is accepted with probability
P (ei , ej , T ), where
                           P (ei , ej , T ) = e(ei −ej )/(kB T )
Here kB is a positive constant—called Boltzmann’s constant, used to tune the
desired frequency of backwards moves.
    What does this formula mean? Transitioning from a low energy state to
higher energy state, ei − ej < 0, implies that the exponent is negative. Note
that 0 ≤ e−x = 1/ex ≤ 1 for any positive x. This makes it a probability, one
that gets smaller as |ei − ej | gets larger. There is thus a non-zero probability
of accepting a transition into a high-energy (lower quality) state. Small jumps
are much more likely than big ones. The higher the temperature T is, the more
likely such energy jumps will occur.

         Simulated-Annealing()
            Create initial solution s
            Initialize temperature T
            repeat
                 for i = 1 to iteration-length do
                      Randomly select a neighbor of s to be si
                      If (C(s) ≥ C(si )) then s = si
                      else if (e(C(s)−C(si ))/(kB ·T ) > random[0, 1)) then s = si
                 Reduce temperature T
            until (no change in C(s))
            Return s

   What relevance does this have for combinatorial optimization? A physical
system, as it cools, seeks to reach a minimum-energy state. Minimizing the total
energy is a combinatorial optimization problem for any set of discrete particles.
12.6. HEURISTIC SEARCH METHODS                                                407

Through random transitions generated according to the given probability distri-
bution, we can mimic the physics to solve arbitrary combinatorial optimization
problems.

 Take-Home Lesson: Don’t worry about this molten metal business. Simulated
 annealing is eﬀective because it spends much more of its time working on good
 elements of the solution space than on bad ones, and because it avoids getting
 trapped in local optimum.

    As with a local search, the problem representation includes both a repre-
sentation of the solution space and an easily computable cost function C(s)
measuring the quality of a given solution. The new component is the cooling
schedule, whose parameters govern how likely we are to accept a bad transition
as a function of time.
    At the beginning of the search, we are eager to use randomness to explore the
search space widely, so the probability of accepting a bad transition should be
high. As the search progresses, we seek to limit transitions to local improvements
and optimizations. This cooling schedule can be regulated by the following
parameters:

   • Initial system temperature – Typically T1 = 1.

   • Temperature decrement function – Typically Ti = α·Ti−1 , where 0.8 ≤ α ≤
     0.99. This implies an exponential decay in the temperature, as opposed
     to a linear decay.

   • Number of iterations between temperature change – Typically, 1,000 itera-
     tions or so might be permitted before lowering the temperature. Also, it
     generally pays to stay at a given temperature for multiple rounds so long
     as we are making progress there.

   • Acceptance criteria – A typical criterion is to accept any good transition,
     and also accept a bad transition whenever
                                      C(si−1 )−C(si )
                                           kB T
                                  e                     > r,

     where r is a random number 0 ≤ r < 1. The “Boltzmann” constant kB
     scales this cost function so that almost all transitions are accepted at the
     starting temperature.

   • Stop criteria – Typically, when the value of the current solution has not
     changed or improved within the last iteration or so, the search is termi-
     nated and the current solution reported.

    Creating the proper cooling schedule is a trial-and-error process of mucking
with constants and seeing what happens. It probably pays to start from an
existing implementation of simulated annealing, so experiment with my full
implementation at www.algorist.com.
408                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

Figure 12.10: Search time/quality tradeoﬀs for TSP using simulated annealing.

    Compare the time/quality proﬁles of our three heuristics. Simulated anneal-
ing does best of all. Figure 12.10 shows three runs from three diﬀerent random
initializations, each looking like a dying heartbeat as it converges to a minima.
Because they don’t get stuck in a local optimum, all three runs lead to much
better solutions than the best hill-climbing result. Further, the rapid plunges
toward optimum show that it takes relatively few iterations to score most of the
improvement.
    After ten million iterations simulated annealing gave us a solution of cost
7,212—only 10.4% over the optimum. Even better solutions are available to
those willing to wait a bit longer. Letting it run for one billion iterations (taking
only 5 minutes, 21 seconds on my laptop) got the score down to 6,850, just 4.9%
over the optimum.
    In expert hands, the best problem-speciﬁc heuristics for TSP will slightly
outperform simulated annealing. But here the simulated annealing solution
works admirably. It is my heuristic method of choice for optimization problems.

Implementation
The implementation follows the pseudocode quite closely:
12.6. HEURISTIC SEARCH METHODS                                 409

void anneal(tsp_instance *t, tsp_solution *s) {
    int x, y;                       /* pair of items to swap */
    int i, j;                       /* counters */
    bool accept_win, accept_loss;   /* conditions to accept transition */
    double temperature;             /* the current system temp */
    double current_value;           /* value of current state */
    double start_value;             /* value at start of loop */
    double delta;                   /* value after swap */
    double exponent;                /* exponent for energy funct */

    temperature = INITIAL_TEMPERATURE;

    initialize_solution(t->n, s);
    current_value = solution_cost(s, t);

    for (i = 1; i <= COOLING_STEPS; i++) {
        temperature *= COOLING_FRACTION;

        start_value = current_value;

        for (j = 1; j <= STEPS_PER_TEMP; j++) {
            /* pick indices of elements to swap */
            x = random_int(1, t->n);
            y = random_int(1, t->n);

            delta = transition(s, t, x, y);
            accept_win = (delta < 0);       /* did swap reduce cost? */

            exponent = (-delta / current_value) / (K * temperature);
            accept_loss = (exp(exponent) > random_float(0,1));

            if (accept_win || accept_loss) {
                current_value += delta;
            } else {
                transition(s, t, x, y);      /* reverse transition */
            }
            solution_count_update(s, t);
        }

        if (current_value < start_value) { /* rerun at this temp */
            temperature /= COOLING_FRACTION;
        }
    }
}
410                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

12.6.4     Applications of Simulated Annealing
We provide several examples to demonstrate how careful modeling of the state
representation and cost function can lead to elegant simulated annealing solu-
tions for real combinatorial search problems.

Maximum Cut
The maximum cut problem seeks to partition the vertices of a weighted graph G
into sets V1 and V2 to maximize the weight (or number) of edges with one vertex
in each set. For graphs that specify an electronic circuit, the maximum cut in
the graph deﬁnes the largest amount of simultaneous data communication that
can take place in the circuit. As discussed in Section 19.6 (page 601), maximum
cut is NP-complete.
    How can we formulate maximum cut for simulated annealing? The solution
space consists of all 2n−1 possible vertex partitions. We save a factor of two over
all vertex subsets by ﬁxing vertex v1 to be on the left side of the partition. The
subset of vertices accompanying it can be represented using a bit vector. The
cost of a solution is the sum of the weights cut in the current conﬁguration. A
natural transition mechanism selects one vertex at random and moves it across
the partition simply by ﬂipping the corresponding bit in the bit vector. The
change in the cost function will be the weight of its old neighbors minus the
weight of its new neighbors. This can be computed in time proportional to the
degree of the vertex.
    This kind of simple, natural modeling represents the right type of heuristic
to seek in practice.

Independent Set
An independent set of a graph G is a subset of vertices S such that there is no
edge with both endpoints in S. The maximum independent set of a graph is the
largest vertex set that induces an empty (i.e. edgeless) subgraph. Finding large
independent sets arises in dispersion problems associated with facility location
and coding theory, as discussed in Section 19.2 (page 589).
    The natural state space for a simulated annealing solution would consist
of all 2n possible subsets of the vertices, represented as a bit vector. As with
maximum cut, a simple transition mechanism would add or delete one vertex
from S.
    One natural objective function for subset S might be 0 if the S-induced
subgraph contains an edge, and |S| if it is indeed an independent set. Such a
function would ensures that we work towards an independent set at all times.
However, this condition is so strict that we are liable to move in only a narrow
portion of the total search space. More ﬂexibility and quicker objective function
computations can result from allowing non-empty graphs at the early stages of
cooling. This can be obtained with an objective function like C(S) = |S| − λ ·
mS /T , where λ is a constant, T is the temperature, and mS is the number of
edges in the subgraph induced by S. This objective likes large subsets with few
12.7. WAR STORY: ONLY IT IS NOT A RADIO                                                 411

edges, and the dependence of C(S) on T ensures that the search will eventually
drive the edges out as the system cools.

Circuit Board Placement
In designing printed circuit boards, we are faced with the problem of position-
ing modules (typically, integrated circuits) appropriately on the board. Desired
criteria in a layout may include (1) minimizing the area or optimizing the as-
pect ratio of the board so that it properly ﬁts within the allotted space, and
(2) minimizing the total or longest wire length in connecting the components.
Circuit board placement is representative of the type of messy, multicriterion
optimization problems for which simulated annealing is ideally suited.
    Formally, we are given a collection of rectangular modules r1 , . . . , rn , each
with associated dimensions hi × li . Further, for each pair of modules ri , rj , we
are given the number of wires wij that must connect the two modules. We seek
a placement of the rectangles that minimizes area and wire length, subject to
the constraint that no two rectangles overlap each other.
    The state space for this problem must describe the positions of each rectangle
on the board. To make this discrete, these rectangles can be restricted to lie on
vertices of an integer grid. Reasonable transition mechanisms include moving
one rectangle to a diﬀerent location, or swapping the position of two rectangles.
A natural cost function might be:
                                       n 
                                        n
  C(S) = λarea (Sheight · Swidth ) +             (λwire · wij · dij + λoverlap (ri ∩ rj ))
                                       i=1 j=1

where λarea , λwire , and λoverlap are weights governing the impact of these com-
ponents on the cost function. Presumably, λoverlap should be a decreasing func-
tion of temperature, so after gross placement it adjusts the rectangle positions
to not overlap.

 Take-Home Lesson: Simulated annealing is a simple but eﬀective technique
 for eﬃciently obtaining good but not optimal solutions to combinatorial search
 problems.

12.7       War Story: Only it is Not a Radio
“Think of it as a radio,” he chuckled. “Only it is not a radio.”
    I’d been whisked by corporate jet to the research center of a large but very
secretive company located somewhere east of California. They were so paranoid
that I never did get to see the object we were working on, but the people who
brought me in did a great job of abstracting the problem.
    The issue concerned a manufacturing technique known as selective assembly.
Eli Whitney helped kick start the Industrial Revolution through his system of
interchangeable parts. He carefully speciﬁed the manufacturing tolerances on
each part in his machine so that the parts were interchangeable, meaning that
412                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

                                    17             14         15

                                    5              33         11

                                    11             6          32

Figure 12.11: Part assignments for three not-radios, such that each had at most
ﬁfty defect points.

any legal cog-widget could be used to replace any other legal cog-widget. This
greatly sped up the process of manufacturing, because the workers could just
put parts together instead of having to stop to ﬁle down rough edges and the
like. It made replacing broken parts a snap. This was a very good thing.
    Unfortunately, it also resulted in large piles of cog-widgets that were slightly
outside the manufacturing tolerance, and thus had to be discarded. Another
clever fellow then observed that maybe one of these defective cog-widgets could
be used when all the other parts in the given assembly exceeded their required
manufacturing tolerances. Good plus bad could well equal good enough. This
is the idea of selective assembly.
    “Each not-radio is made up of n diﬀerent types of not-radio parts,” he told
me. For the ith part type (say the right ﬂange gasket), we have a pile of si
instances of this part type. Each part (ﬂange gasket) comes with a measure of
how much it deviates from perfection. We need to match up the parts so as to
create the greatest number of working not-radios as possible.”
    The situation is illustrated in Figure 12.11. Each not-radio consists of three
parts, and the sum of the defects in any functional not-radio must total at most
ﬁfty. By cleverly balancing the good and bad parts in each machine, we can use
all the parts and make three working not-radios.
    I thought about the problem. The simplest procedure would take the best
part for each part type, make a not-radio out of them, and repeat until the not-
radio didn’t play (or do whatever a not-radio is supposed to do). But this would
create a small number of not-radios drastically varying in quality, whereas they
wanted as many decent not-radios as possible.
    The goal was to match up good parts and bad parts so the total amount
of badness wasn’t so bad. Indeed, the problem sounded related to matching
in graphs (see Section 18.6 (page 562)). Suppose we build a graph where the
vertices were the part instances, and add an edge for all two part instances that
were within the total error tolerance. In graph matching, we seek the largest
number of edges such that no vertex appears more than once in the matching.
This is analogous to the largest number of two-part assemblies we can form from
the given set of parts.
12.7. WAR STORY: ONLY IT IS NOT A RADIO                                             413

    “I can solve your problem using bipartite matching,” I announced, “provided
not-radios are each made of only two parts.”
    There was silence. Then they all started laughing at me. “Everyone knows
not-radios have more than two parts,” they said, shaking their heads.
    That spelled the end of this algorithmic approach. Extending to more than
two parts turned the problem into matching on hypergraphs3 —a problem that
is NP-complete. Further, it might take exponential time in the number of part
types just to build the graph, since we had to explicitly construct each possible
hyperedge/assembly.
    I went back to the drawing board. They wanted to put parts into assemblies
so that no assembly would have more total defects than allowed. Described
that way, it sounded like a packing problem. In the bin packing problem (see
Section 20.9 (page 652)), we are given a collection of items of diﬀerent sizes and
asked to store them using the smallest possible number of bins, each of which
has a ﬁxed capacity of size k. Here, the assemblies represented the bins, each
of which could absorb total defect ≤ k. The items to pack were the individual
parts, whose size would reﬂect its quality of manufacture.
    It wasn’t pure bin packing, however, because parts came in diﬀerent types,
and the task imposed constraints on the allowable contents of each bin. Creat-
ing the maximum number of not-radios meant that we sought a packing that
maximized the number of bins that contained exactly one part for each of the
m diﬀerent parts types.
    Bin packing is NP-complete, but is a natural candidate for a heuristic search
approach. The solution space consists of assignments of parts to bins. We
initially assign a random part of each type for each bin to provide a starting
conﬁguration for the search.
    The local neighborhood operation involves moving parts around from one bin
to another. We might move one part at a time, but more eﬀective was swapping
parts of the same type between two randomly chosen bins. In such a swap,
both bins remain complete not-radios, hopefully with better error tolerance than
before. Thus, our swap operator required three random integers—one to select
the appropriate part type (from 1 to m) and two more to select the assembly
bins involved (between 1 and b).
    The key decision was the cost function to use. They supplied the hard limit
k on the total defect level for each individual assembly. But what was the best
way to score a set of assemblies? We could just return the number of acceptable
complete assemblies as our score—an integer from 1 to b. Although this was
indeed what we wanted to optimize, it would not be sensitive enough to detect
when we were making partial progress towards a solution. Suppose one of our
swaps succeeded in bringing one of the non-functional assemblies much closer to
the not-radio limit k. That would be a better starting point for further progress
than the original, and should be favored.
    My ﬁnal cost function was as follows. I gave one point for every working
   3 A hypergraph is made up of edges that can contain more than two vertices each. They

can be thought of as general collections of subsets of vertices/elements.
414                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

assembly, and a signiﬁcantly smaller credit for each non-working assembly based
on how close to the threshold k it was. The score for a nonworking assembly
decreased exponentially based on how much it was over k. The optimizer would
thus seek to maximize the number of working assemblies, and then try to drive
down the number of defects in another assembly that was close to the limit.
    I implemented this algorithm, and then ran the search on the test case they
provided. It was an instance taken directly from the factory ﬂoor. It turns
out that not-radios contain m = 8 important parts types. Some parts types
are more expensive than others, and so they have fewer candidates available to
consider. The most constrained parts type had only eight representatives, so
there could be at most eight possible assemblies from this given mix.
    I watched as simulated annealing chugged and bubbled on this problem
instance. The number of completed assemblies instantly climbed (one, two,
three, four) before progress started to slow a bit. Then came ﬁve and six in a
hiccup, with a pause before assembly seven came triumphantly together. But
try as it might, the program could not put eight not-radios together before I
lost interest in watching.
    I called and tried to admit defeat, but they wouldn’t hear of it. It turned
out that the best the factory had managed after extensive eﬀorts was only six
working not-radios, so my result represented a signiﬁcant improvement!

12.8      War Story: Annealing Arrays
The war story of Section 3.9 (page 98) reported how we used advanced data
structures to simulate a new method for sequencing DNA. Our method, inter-
active sequencing by hybridization (SBH), required building arrays of speciﬁc
oligonucleotides on demand.
    A biochemist at Oxford University got interested in our technique, and more-
over he had in his laboratory the equipment we needed to test it out. The
Southern Array Maker, manufactured by Beckman Instruments, prepared dis-
crete oligonucleotide sequences in 64 parallel rows across a polypropylene sub-
strate. The device constructs arrays by appending single characters to each cell
along speciﬁc rows and columns of arrays. Figure 12.12 shows how to construct
an array of all 24 = 16 purine (A or G) 4-mers by building the preﬁxes along
four rows and the suﬃxes along four columns. This technology provided an
ideal environment for testing the feasibility of interactive SBH in a laboratory,
because with proper programming it gave a way to fabricate a wide variety of
oligonucleotide arrays on demand.
    However, we had to provide the proper programming. Fabricating compli-
cated arrays required solving a diﬃcult combinatorial problem. We were given
as input a set of n strings (representing oligonucleotides) to fabricate in an
m × m array (where m = 64 on the Southern apparatus). We had to produce
a schedule of row and column commands to realize the set of strings S. We
proved that the problem of designing dense arrays was NP-complete, but that
didn’t really matter. My student Ricky Bradley and I had to solve it anyway.
12.8. WAR STORY: ANNEALING ARRAYS                                              415

                                    suﬃx
                 preﬁx     AA        AG        GA         GG
                  AA      AAAA      AAAG      AAGA       AAGG
                  AG      AGAA      AGAG      AGGA       AGGG
                  GA      GAAA      GAAG      GAGA       GAGG
                  GG      GGAA      GGAG      GGGA       GGGG

           Figure 12.12: A preﬁx–suﬃx array of all purine 4-mers.

    “We are going to have to use a heuristic,” I told him. “So how can we model
this problem?”
    “Well, each string can be partitioned into preﬁx and suﬃx pairs that realize
it. For example, the string ACC can be realized in four diﬀerent ways: preﬁx ‘’
and suﬃx ACC, preﬁx A and suﬃx CC, preﬁx AC and suﬃx C, or preﬁx ACC
and suﬃx ‘’. We seek the smallest set of preﬁxes and suﬃxes that together
realize all the given strings,” Ricky said.
    “Good. This gives us a natural representation for simulated annealing. The
state space will consist of all possible subsets of preﬁxes and suﬃxes. The
natural transitions between states might include inserting or deleting strings
from our subsets, or swapping a pair in or out.”
    “What’s a good cost function?” he asked.
    “Well, we need as small an array as possible that covers all the strings.
How about taking the maximum of the number of rows (preﬁxes) or columns
(suﬃxes) used in our array, plus the number of strings from S that are not yet
covered. Try it and let’s see what happens.”
    Ricky went oﬀ and implemented a simulated annealing program along these
lines. It printed out the state of the solution each time a transition was accepted
and was fun to watch. The program quickly kicked out unnecessary preﬁxes
and suﬃxes, and the array began shrinking rapidly in size. But after several
hundred iterations, progress started to slow. A transition would knock out an
unnecessary suﬃx, wait a while, then add a diﬀerent suﬃx back again. After a
few thousand iterations, no real improvement was happening.
    “The program doesn’t seem to recognize when it is making progress. The
evaluation function only gives credit for minimizing the larger of the two dimen-
sions. Why not add a term to give some credit to the other dimension.”
    Ricky changed the evaluation function, and we tried again. This time, the
program did not hesitate to improve the shorter dimension. Indeed, our arrays
started to turn into skinny rectangles instead of squares.
    “OK. Let’s add another term to the evaluation function to give it points for
being roughly square.”
    Ricky tried again. Now the arrays were the right shape, and progress was in
the right direction. But the progress was still slow.
    “Too many of the insertion moves don’t aﬀect many strings. Maybe we
should skew the random selections so that the important preﬁx/suﬃxes get
416                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

Figure 12.13: Compression of the HIV array by simulated annealing—after 0,
500, 1,000, and 5,750 iterations.

picked more often.”
    Ricky tried again. Now it converged faster, but sometimes it still got stuck.
We changed the cooling schedule. It did better, but was it doing well? Without
a lower bound knowing how close we were to optimal, it couldn’t really tell how
good our solution was. We tweaked and tweaked until our program stopped
improving.
    Our ﬁnal solution reﬁned the initial array by applying the following random
moves:

      • Swap – swap a preﬁx/suﬃx on the array with one that isn’t.
      • Add – add a random preﬁx/suﬃx to the array.
      • Delete – delete a random preﬁx/suﬃx from the array.
   • Useful add – add the preﬁx/suﬃx with the highest usefulness to the array.
      • Useful delete – delete the preﬁx/suﬃx with the lowest usefulness from the
        array.
      • String add – randomly select a string not on the array, and add the most
        useful preﬁx and/or suﬃx to cover this string.

    We used a standard cooling schedule, with an exponentially decreasing tem-
perature (dependent upon the problem size) and a temperature-dependent Boltz-
mann criterion for accepting states that have higher costs. Our ﬁnal cost func-
tion was deﬁned as
                                     (max − min)
           cost = 2 × max + min +                + 4(strtotal − strin )
where max is the size of the maximum chip dimension, min is the size of the
minimum chip dimension, strtotal = |S|, and strin is the number of strings from
S currently on the chip.
   How well did we do? Figure 12.13 shows the convergence of an array consist-
ing of the 5,716 unique 7-mers of the HIV virus. Figure 12.13 shows snapshots
12.9. GENETIC ALGORITHMS AND OTHER HEURISTICS                                  417

of the state of the chip at four points during the annealing process, after 0, 500,
1,000, and ﬁnally 5,750 iterations. Red pixels represent the ﬁrst occurrence of
an HIV 7-mer. The ﬁnal chip size here is 130 × 132—quite an improvement over
the initial size of 192 × 192. It took about ﬁfteen minutes of computation to
complete the optimization, which was perfectly acceptable for the application.
    But how well did we do? Since simulated annealing is only a heuristic, we
really don’t know how close to optimal our solution is. I think we did pretty
well, but can’t really be sure. Simulated annealing is a good way to handle
complex optimization problems. However, to get the best results, expect to
spend more time tweaking and reﬁning your program than you did in writing it
in the ﬁrst place. This is dirty work, but sometimes you have to do it.

12.9      Genetic Algorithms and Other Heuristics
Many heuristic search methods have been proposed for combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems. Like simulated annealing, many of these techniques rely on
analogies to real-world processes, including genetic algorithms, neural networks,
and ant colony optimization.
    The intuition behind these methods is highly appealing, but skeptics decry
them as voodoo optimization techniques that rely more on superﬁcial analo-
gies to nature than producing superior computational results on real problems
compared to other methods.
    The question isn’t whether you can get decent answers for many problems
given enough eﬀort using these techniques. Clearly you can. The real question
is whether they lead to better solutions with less implementation complexity or
greater eﬃciency than the other methods we have discussed.
    In general, I don’t believe that they do. But in the spirit of free inquiry, I
introduce genetic algorithms, which is the most popular of these methods. See
the Chapter Notes section for more detailed readings.

Genetic Algorithms

Genetic algorithms draw their inspiration from evolution and natural selection.
Through the process of natural selection, organisms adapt to optimize their
chances for survival in a given environment. Random mutations occur in an
organism’s genetic description, which then get passed on to its oﬀspring. Should
a mutation prove helpful, these children are more likely to survive and reproduce.
Should it prove harmful, they won’t, and so the bad trait will die with them.
    Genetic algorithms maintain a “population” of solution candidates for the
given problem. Elements are drawn at random from this population and allowed
to “reproduce” by combining aspects of the two-parent solutions. The probabil-
ity that an element is chosen to reproduce is based on its “ﬁtness,” essentially
the quality of the solution it represents. Unﬁt elements are removed from the
population, to be replaced by a successful-solution oﬀspring.
418                    CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

    The idea behind genetic algorithms is extremely appealing. However, they
just don’t seem to work as well on practical combinatorial optimization problems
as simulated annealing does. There are two primary reasons for this. First,
it is quite unnatural to model applications in terms of genetic operators like
mutation and crossover on bit strings. The pseudo-biology adds another level of
complexity between you and your problem. Second, genetic algorithms take a
very long time on non-trivial problems. The crossover and mutation operations
typically make no use of problem-speciﬁc structure, so most transitions lead to
inferior solutions, and convergence is slow. Indeed, the analogy with evolution—
where signiﬁcant progress require millions of years—can be quite appropriate.
    I will not discuss genetic algorithms further, except to discourage you from
considering them for your applications. However, pointers to implementations
of genetic algorithms are provided in Section 16.5 (page 478) if you really insist
on playing with them.

 Take-Home Lesson: I have never encountered any problem where genetic
 algorithms seemed to me the right way to attack it. Further, I have never seen
 any computational results reported using genetic algorithms that favorably
 impressed me. Stick to simulated annealing for your heuristic search voodoo
 needs.

12.10       Quantum Computing
We live in an era where the random access machine (RAM) model of computa-
tion introduced in Section 2.1 is being augmented by a new class of computing
devices. These devices are powered by the principles of quantum mechanics,
which ascribes seemingly impossible properties to how systems of atoms be-
have. Quantum computers exploit these properties to perform certain types of
computations with algorithmic eﬃciencies asymptotically faster than conven-
tional machines.
    Quantum mechanics is well known for being so completely unintuitive that no
one really understands it. Superposition! Quantum weirdness! Entanglement!
Schrödinger’s cat! Collapsing wave functions! Gaa!! I must make clear that
there is absolutely no controversy about the rules of how quantum computers
will behave. People in the know agree on the properties of quantum mechanics
and the theoretical powers of these machines. You don’t have to understand
why a law exists in order to follow it to the letter. Research in quantum com-
puting revolves around developing technologies to implement large and reliable
quantum systems, and devising new algorithms to exploit this power.
    I presume that you the reader may well never have taken a physics course,
and are likely rusty with linear algebra and complex numbers, so I will try
to dispense with such matters. My goal here is to show why these machines
have great potential power, and to provide some insight as how this can be
exploited to yield asymptotically faster algorithms for certain problems. My
approach is to make up a new model of a “quantum” computer. This model isn’t
really correct, but hopefully provides insight as to what makes these machines
12.10. QUANTUM COMPUTING                                                         419

exciting. I provide a taste of how three of the most famous quantum algorithms
work. Finally, I make some predictions on what the future holds for quantum
computing, and confess some of my model’s lies in Section 12.10.5.

12.10.1      Properties of “Quantum” Computers
Consider a conventional deterministic computer with n bits of memory labeled
b0 , . . . , bn−1 . There are exactly N = 2n possible states this computer can exist
in, because each bit can be set to either 0 or 1. The ith state of the machine
corresponds to the string of bits corresponding to the binary representation of
integer i. Each instruction that is executed changes the state of the machine,
ﬂipping a speciﬁc set of bits.
      We can think of a conventional deterministic computer as maintaining a
probability distribution of the machine’s current state. At any moment, the
probability p(i) of being in state i equals zero for 2n − 1 of the possible states,
with p(j) = 1 if the computer happens to be in state j. Yes, this is a probability
distribution over states, but not a very interesting one.
      Quantum computers come with n qubits of memory, q0 , . . . , qn−1 . Thus,
there are also N = 2n possible bit patterns associated with this computer, but
the actual state it is in at any moment is a probability distribution. Each of
the 2n bit patterns has an associated probability, where p(i) is the probability
that when the machine is read, it would report being in state i. This probability
distribution is much richer than with conventional deterministic machines: there
can be a non-zero probability of being in all N states at any given time. Being
able to manipulate probability distribution in parallel for all N = 2n states is
the real win of quantum computing. As is true  N −1 of any probability distribution,
all these probabilities must sum to one, so i=0 p(i) = 1.
      “Quantum” computers support the following operations:

   • Initialize-state(Q,n,D) – Initialize the probability distribution of the n
     qubits of machine Q as per the description D. Obviously this would take
     Θ(2n ) time if D was given as an explicit list of the desired probability of
     each state. We thus seek general descriptions that are smaller, say O(n)
     in size, like “set each of the N = 2n states to be of equal probability, so
     p(i) = 1/2n .” The time of the Initialize-state operation is O(|D|), not
     O(N ).

   • Quantum-gate(Q,c) – Change the probability distribution of machine Q
     according to a quantum gate condition c. Quantum gates are logic oper-
     ations akin to and or or, changing the probabilities of states according to
     the current contents of (say) qubits qx and qy . The time of this operation
     is proportional to the number of qubits involved with condition c, but
     typically is O(1).

   • Jack(Q,c) – Increase the probabilities of all states deﬁned by condition
     c. For example, we might want to jack up the probabilities of all states
420                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

      Figure 12.14: Jacking the probability of all states where qubit q2 = 1.

       where c = “qubit q2 = 1”, as shown in Figure 12.14. This takes time
       proportional to the number of qubits in condition c, but typically is O(1).
       That this can be done in constant time should be recognized as surprising.
       Even if the condition raises the probability of just one state i, in order to
       keep the sum totaling to one the probabilities of all 2n − 1 other states
       must be lowered. That this can be done in constant time is one of the
       strange properties of “quantum” physics.
   • Sample(Q) – Select exactly one of the 2n states at random as per the
     current probability distribution of machine Q, and return the values of
     the n qubits q0 , . . . , qn−1 . This takes O(n) time to report the state of the
     machine.

   “Quantum” algorithms are sequences of these powerful operations, perhaps
augmented with control logic from conventional computers.

12.10.2       Grover’s Algorithm for Database Search
The ﬁrst algorithm we will consider is for database search, or more generally
function inversion. Suppose we think of the unique binary string deﬁning each
of the N = 2n states as a key, with each state i associated with a value v(i). If
these values take m bits to store, we can think of our database as consisting of
2n unsorted strings with non-zero probability each n + m qubits long, with the
value v(i) stored in the m highest-order qubits.
    We can create such a system Q using the Initialize-state(Q,n,D) instruction,
with an appropriate condition D. To any n + m qubit string of the form i
concatenated to v(i) we assign a probability of 1/2n . All of the 2m −1 other n+m
qubit strings with preﬁx i are assigned probability zero. For a given m-bit search
string S, we seek to return an n + m qubit string such that S = qn . . . qn+m−1 .
    The instruction set described above does not give us a print statement, other
than Sample(Q). To make it likely that this sample returns what we want, we
12.10. QUANTUM COMPUTING                                                         421

must jack up the probability of all strings with the right value qubits. This
suggests an algorithm like the following:

    Search(Q,S)
        Repeat
            Jack(Q,“all strings where S = qn . . . qn+m−1 ”)
        Until probability of success is high enough
        Return the ﬁrst n bits of Sample(Q)

    Each such Jack operation takes constant time,
                                                √ which is fast. But it increases
the probabilities at a slow-enough rate that Θ( N ) rounds are necessary and
suﬃcient to √make success likely. Thus, this algorithm returns the appropriate
string in Θ( N ), a big win over the Θ(N ) complexity of sequential search.

Solving Satisﬁability?
An interesting application of Grover’s database searching algorithm is an al-
gorithm for solving satisﬁability, the mother of all NP-complete problems dis-
cussed in Section 11.4. As we have seen, an n-qubit quantum system represents
all N = 2n binary strings of length n. By thinking of each 1 as true and 0 as
false, each such string deﬁnes a truth assignment on n Boolean variables.
    Now let’s add an (n + 1)st qubit to the system, to store whether the ith
string satisﬁes a given Boolean logic formula F . Testing whether a given truth
assignment satisﬁes a given set of clauses is easy: explicitly test whether each
clause contains at least one true literal. Such testing can be done in parallel
using a sequence of quantum gates. If F is a 3-SAT formula with k clauses, this
testing can be done making a pass over each clause, using a total of roughly
3k quantum gates. We set qubit qn = 1 if q0 , . . . , qn−1 is a satisfying truth
assignment, and qn = 0 if not. This means that all strings s corresponding to
incorrect values of F get set to p(s) = 0.
    Now suppose we perform a Search(Q,(qn == 1)) operation, returning quan-
tum state {q0 , . . . , qn−1 }. With high probability, this is a satisfying truth as-
signment, so this gives us an eﬃcient quantum
                                            √      algorithm to solve satisﬁability!
                                                                               √
√ Grover’s√ search      algorithm runs in O( N ) time, where N = 2n . Since N =
  2n = ( 2)n , this runs in O(1.414n ) vs. the naive bound, which is a big
improvement. For√n = 100, this cuts the number of steps from 1.27 × 1030 to
1.13×1015 . But ( 2)n still grows exponentially, so this is not a polynomial-time
algorithm. This quantum algorithm is a big win over brute-force search, but it
is not enough to have the eﬀect of P = N P .

 Take-Home Lesson: Despite their powers, quantum computers cannot
 solve NP-complete problems in polynomial time. Of course, the world
 changes if P = N P , but presumably P = N P . We believe that the class of
 problems that can be solved in polynomial time on a quantum computer (called
 BQP) does not contain NP with roughly the same conﬁdence that we believe
 P = NP .
422                            CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

              Frequency Domain                                     Time Domain

                                                                    6       8        10        4

                                                           4        3       4    9   5         3

                                                   2   3   2   5    2   7   2    3   2    11   2
2     3   4   5    6   7   8    9   10   11   12   2   3   4   5    6   7   8    9   10   11   12

Figure 12.15: Transforming the integers from the frequency to the time domain
computes the number of factors for each integer.

12.10.3           The Faster “Fourier Transform”
The fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is the most important algorithm in signal
processing, converting an N -element numerical time series to an equivalent rep-
resentation as the sum of N periodic functions of diﬀerent frequencies. Many ﬁl-
tering and compression algorithms on signals reduce to eliminating high and/or
low frequency components from the Fourier transform of the signal, as discussed
in Section 16.11.
    Computing Fourier transforms is most simply done using an O(N 2 ) algo-
rithm, with each of the N elements produced as the sum of N terms. The FFT
is a divide-and-conquer algorithm for evaluating this convolution in O(N log N ),
which we discussed in Section 5.9. The FFT can be also implemented as a circuit
with log M stages, where each stage involves M independent, parallel multipli-
cations.
    It happens that each of these stages of the FFT circuit can be implemented
using log M quantum gates. Thus, the Fourier transform of the N = 2n states
of an n-qubit system can be solved on a “quantum” computer in O((log N )2 ) =
O(n2 ) time. This is an exponential-time improvement over the FFT!
    But there is a catch. We now have an n-qubit quantum system Q, where
the Fourier coeﬃcient associated with each input element 0 ≤ ai ≤ N − 1 is
represented as the probability of string i in Q. There is no way to get even
one of these 2n coeﬃcients out of machine Q. All we can do is call Sample(Q)
and get the index of a (presumably) large coeﬃcient, selected with probability
proportional to its magnitude.
    This is a very restricted type of “Fourier transform,” returning just the
index of what is likely to have a large coeﬃcient. But it lays the groundwork
for perhaps the most famous quantum algorithm, Shor’s algorithm for integer
factorization.

12.10.4           Shor’s Algorithm for Integer Factorization
There is an interesting connection between periodic functions (meaning they
repeat at ﬁxed intervals) and the integers that have a given integer k as a
factor, or equivalently as a divisor. It should be clear that these integers must
12.10. QUANTUM COMPUTING                                                                            423

        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20   21

Figure 12.16: Sampling from multiples of the factors of M (here 21) is unlikely
to directly yield a factor, but the greatest common divisor of multiple samples
is almost certain to give a factor.

occur k positions apart on a number line. What are the integers that have 7
as factor? They are 7, 14, 21, 28, . . ., clearly a periodic function with a period of
k = 7.
    The FFT enables us to convert a series in the “time domain” (here consisting
of all multiples of 7 less than N ) into the “frequency domain,”with a non-zero
value for the seventh Fourier coeﬃcient signifying a repeating function of period
seven. And vice versa. As Figure 12.15 shows, an n-qubit system Q with each
state i initialized to a probability p(i) = 1/2n represents the period of every
possible factor i. Taking an FFT of Q takes us into the time domain, yielding
the number of factors for every integer 0 ≤ i ≤ N − 1.
    Now suppose we are interested in factoring a given integer M < N . Through
quantum magic we can set up system Q in a time domain where exactly the
integers that are multiples of factors of M have large probabilities, as shown in
Figure 12.16. Whenever we sample from this system, we get a random multiple
of a factor of M . For M = 77 = 7 × 11, we might get samples like 33, 42, and
55. These seem helpful, but note that none of these is actually a factor of M .
    The greatest common divisor gcd(x, y) is the largest integer d such that d
divides x and d also divides y. Fast algorithms exist to compute gcd(x, y), as dis-
cussed in Section 11.2.3. Whenever the greatest common divisor is greater than
1, we have an excellent candidate for a factor of M . Observe that gcd(33, 55) =
11.
    The complete Shor’s algorithm for factoring, in pseudocode, is as follows:

    Factor(M )
        Set up an n-qubit quantum system Q, where N = 2n and M < N .
        Initialize Q so that p(i) = 1/2n for all 0 ≤ i ≤ N − 1.
        Repeat
             Jack(Q,“all i such that (gcd(i, M ) > 1)”)
        Until the probabilities of all terms relatively prime to M are very small.
        FFT(Q).
        For j = 1 to n
             Sj = Sample(Q)
             If ((d = GCD(Sj , Sk )) > 1) and (d divides M )), for some k < j
                  Return(d) as a factor of M
        Otherwise report no factor was found

   Each of these operations takes time proportional to n, not M = Θ(2n ),
424                      CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

so this is an exponential-time improvement over divide-and-test factoring. No
polynomial-time algorithm is known for integer factoring on conventional ma-
chines, but neither is it NP-complete. Thus, no complexity-theoretic assump-
tions are violated by having a fast algorithm for integer factorization.

12.10.5        Prospects for Quantum Computing
What are the prospects for quantum computing? I write this in the year of
normal vision (2020), and developments are happening quickly. My vision is not
necessarily better than anyone else’s, but I will make some educated guesses:

      • Quantum computing is a real thing, and is gonna happen – One develops a
        reasonably trustworthy bullsh*t detector after watching technology hype-
        cycles for forty years, and quantum computing now passes my sniﬀ test
        by a safe margin. I see very smart people excited by the prospects of the
        ﬁeld, clear and steady technological progress, and substantial investment
        by big companies and other important players. At this point, I would be
        surprised if it ﬁzzles out completely.

      • Quantum computing is unlikely to impact the problems considered in this
        book – The value of your hard-won algorithms expertise gained from read-
        ing my book will hold up just ﬁne in the quantum computing era. I see it
        as a technology with specialized applications, akin to the way the fastest
        supercomputers are seen primarily in scientiﬁc computing instead of in-
        dustry. With the exception of factoring integers, there is nothing in this
        book that I see as potentially better done on quantum computers.
        The fastest technology does not necessarily take over the world. The
        highest achievable data transmission rates involve giant aircraft packed
        with DVDs or an even denser storage media. Still, no one has ﬁgured
        out a way to exploit this technology commercially. Similarly, quantum
        computing is not necessarily a good ﬁt with most of traditional computing.

      • The big wins are likely to be in problems computer scientists don’t really
        care about – It is not yet clear what the killer app for quantum computing
        will be, but the most promising applications seem to involve simulating
        quantum systems. This is a big deal in chemistry and material science,
        and may well lead to amazing revolutions in drug design and engineering.
        But it is unclear to what degree computer scientists will lead the ﬁght in
        this revolution.

    We shall see. I look forward to writing the fourth edition of this book,
perhaps in 2035, to learn how well these predictions held up.
    You should be aware that the “quantum” computing model I describe here
diﬀers from real quantum computers in several important ways, although I be-
lieve it basically captures the ﬂavor of how they work. Still, in real quantum
computers:
12.10. QUANTUM COMPUTING                                                     425

   • The role of probabilities are played by complex numbers – Probabilities
     are real numbers between 0 and 1 that add up to 1 over all elements of
     the probability space. Quantum probabilities are complex numbers whose
     squares lie between 0 and 1 that add up to 1 over all elements of the
     probability space. Recall that the FFT algorithm described in Section 5.9
     works on complex numbers, which is the source of its power.

   • Reading the state of a quantum system destroys it – When we randomly
     sample from the state of a quantum system, we lose all information about
     the remaining 2n − 1 states. Thus, we cannot repeatedly sample from
     the distribution, as we did above. But we can recreate the system from
     scratch as many times as we need, and sample each of these to get the
     eﬀect of repeated sampling.
     The key hurdle of quantum computing is how to extract the answer we
     want, because this measurement yields only a tiny bit of the information
     inherent in Q. If some but not all of the qubits in Q are measured, then
     the remaining qubits also get “measured” in that their state collapses
     accordingly. This is the real source of magic in quantum computing, and
     is referred to as entanglement.

   • Real quantum systems breakdown (or decohere) easily – Manipulating indi-
     vidual atoms to do complex things is not child’s play. Quantum computers
     are generally run at extremely low temperatures and in shielded environ-
     ments to get them to hang together as long as possible. With current
     technologies this isn’t very long, limiting the complexity of algorithms
     that can be run and mandating the development of error-correction tech-
     nologies for quantum systems.

   • Initializing quantum states and the powers of quantum gates are somewhat
     diﬀerent than described above – I have played fast and loose with exactly
     how you can initialize quantum states and what operations you can do with
     them. Quantum gates are essentially unitary matrices, multiplication by
     which changes the probabilities of Q. These operations are well deﬁned
     by the properties of quantum mechanics, but the details matter here.

Chapter Notes
Kirkpatrick et al.’s original paper on simulated annealing [KGV83] included an
application to VLSI module placement problems. The applications from Section
12.6.4 (page 410) are based on material from Aarts and Korst [AK89]. There is
a class of quantum computers manufactured by D-Wave that aspire to quantum
annealing to solve optimization problems, but the jury is still out as to whether
this is an important technology.
    The heuristic TSP solutions presented here employ vertex-swap as the local
neighborhood operation. In fact, edge-swap is a more powerful operation. Each
edge-swap changes two edges in the tour at most, as opposed to at most four
426                          CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

edges with a vertex-swap. This improves the possibility of a local improvement.
However, more sophisticated data structures are necessary to eﬃciently maintain
the order of the resulting tour. See Fredman et al. [FJMO93].
    The diﬀerent heuristic search techniques are ably presented in Aarts and
Lenstra [AL97], which I strongly recommend for those interested in learning
more about heuristic searches. Their coverage includes tabu search, a variant
of simulated annealing that uses extra data structures to avoid transitions to
recently visited states. Ant colony optimization is discussed in Dorigo and Stut-
zle [DT04]. Livnat and Papadimitriou [LP16] propose a theory for why genetic
algorithms are generally lousy: the purpose of sexual reproduction is to create
diverse populations, not highly optimized individuals. Still, see Michalewicz
and Fogel [MF00] for a more favorable view of genetic algorithms and the like.
    Our work using simulated annealing to compress DNA arrays was reported
in Bradley and Skiena [BS97]. See Pugh [Pug86] and Coullard et al. [CGJ98]
for more on selective assembly.
    If my introduction to quantum computing whetted your interest, I would
encourage you to look at more deﬁnitive sources. Books with interesting treat-
ments of quantum computing include [Aar13, Ber19, DPV08], with Yanofsky
and Mannucci [YM08] particularly gentle and accessible. Scott Aaronson’s blog
https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/ is fascinating reading, covering the
latest in quantum computing algorithms, as well as the broader world of com-
plexity theory.

12.11          Exercises
Special Cases of Hard Problems
12-1. [5] Dominos are tiles represented by integer pairs (xi , yi ), where each of the
      values xi and yi are integers between 1 and n. Let S be a sequence of m inte-
      ger pairs [(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), ..., (xm , ym )]. The goal of the game is to create long
      chains [(xi1 , yi1 ), (xi2 , yi2 ), ..., (xit , yit )] such that yij = xi(j+1) . Dominos can be
      ﬂipped, so (xi , yi ) equivalent to (yi , xi ). For S = [(1, 3), (4, 2), (3, 5), (2, 3), (3, 8)],
      the longest domino sequences include [(4, 2), (2, 3), (3, 8)] and [(1, 3), (3, 2), (2, 4)].
      (a) Prove that ﬁnding the longest domino chain is NP-complete.
      (b) Give an eﬃcient algorithm to ﬁnd the longest domino chain where the
      numbers increase along the chain. For S above, the longest such chains are
      [(1, 3), (3, 5)] and [(2, 3), (3, 5)].
12-2. [5] Let G = (V, E) be a graph and x and y be two distinct vertices of G. Each
      vertex v contains a given number of tokens t(v) that you can collect if you visit
      v.
      (a) Prove that it is NP-complete to ﬁnd the path from x to y where you can
      collect the greatest possible number of tokens.
      (b) Give an eﬃcient algorithm if G is a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
12-3. [8] The Hamiltonian completion problem takes a given graph G and seeks an
      algorithm to add the smallest number of edges to G so that it contains a Hamil-
      tonian cycle. This problem is NP-complete for general graphs; however, it has
 12.11. EXERCISES                                                                        427

       an eﬃcient algorithm if G is a tree. Give an eﬃcient and provably correct algo-
       rithm to add the minimum number of possible edges to tree T so that T plus
       these edges is Hamiltonian.

Approximation Algorithms
 12-4. [4] In the maximum satisﬁability problem, we seek a truth assignment that
       satisﬁes as many clauses as possible. Give an heuristic that always satisﬁes at
       least half as many clauses as the optimal solution.
 12-5. [5] Consider the following heuristic for vertex cover. Construct a DFS tree of
       the graph, and delete all the leaves from this tree. What remains must be a
       vertex cover of the graph. Prove that the size of this cover is at most twice as
       large as optimal.
 12-6. [5] The maximum cut problem for a graph G = (V, E) seeks to partition the
       vertices V into disjoint sets A and B so as to maximize the number of edges
       (a, b) ∈ E such that a ∈ A and b ∈ B. Consider the following heuristic for
       maximum cut. First assign v1 to A and v2 to B. For each remaining vertex,
       assign it to the side that adds the most edges to the cut. Prove that this cut is
       at least half as large as the optimal cut.
 12-7. [5] In the bin-packing problem, we are given n objects with weights w1 , w2 , ..., wn ,
       respectively. Our goal is to ﬁnd the smallest number of bins that will hold the
       n objects, where each bin has a capacity of at most one kilogram.
       The ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic considers the objects in the order in which they are given.
       For each object, place it into the ﬁrst bin that has room for it. If no such bin
       exists, start a new bin. Prove that this heuristic uses at most twice as many
       bins as the optimal solution.
 12-8. [5] For the ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic described just above, give an example where the
       packing it ﬁnds uses at least 5/3 times as many bins as optimal.
 12-9. [5] Given an undirected graph G = (V, E) in which each node has degree ≤ d,
       show how to eﬃciently ﬁnd an independent set whose size is at least 1/(d + 1)
       times that of the largest independent set.
12-10. [5] A vertex coloring of graph G = (V, E) is an assignment of colors to vertices of
       V such that each edge (x, y) implies that vertices x and y are assigned diﬀerent
       colors. Give an algorithm for vertex coloring G using at most Δ + 1 colors,
       where Δ is the maximum vertex degree of G.
12-11. [5] Show that you can solve any given Sudoku puzzle by ﬁnding the minimum
       vertex coloring of a speciﬁc, appropriately constructed (9×9)+9 vertex graph.

Combinatorial Optimization
       For each of the problems below, design and implement a simulated annealing
       heuristic to get reasonable solutions. How well does your program perform in
       practice?
12-12. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the bandwidth minimization problem
       discussed in Section 16.2 (page 470).
12-13. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the maximum satisﬁability problem
       discussed in Section 17.10 (page 537).
 428                     CHAPTER 12. DEALING WITH HARD PROBLEMS

12-14. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the maximum clique problem discussed
       in Section 19.1 (page 586).
12-15. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the minimum vertex coloring problem
       discussed in Section 19.7 (page 604).
12-16. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the minimum edge coloring problem
       discussed in Section 19.8 (page 608).
12-17. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the minimum feedback vertex set prob-
       lem discussed in Section 19.11 (page 618).
12-18. [5] Design and implement a heuristic for the set cover problem discussed in
       Section 21.1 (page 678).

“Quantum” Computing
12-19. [5] Consider an n qubit “quantum” system Q, where each of the N = 2n states
       start out with equal probability p(i) = 1/2n . Say the Jack(Q, 0n ) operation
       doubles the probability of the state where all qubits are zero. How many calls
       to this Jack operation are necessary until the probability of sampling this null
       state becomes ≥ 1/2?
12-20. [5] For the satisﬁability problem, construct (a) an instance on n variables that
       has exactly one solution, and (b) an instance on n variables that has exactly 2n
       diﬀerent solutions.
12-21. [3] Consider the ﬁrst ten multiples of 11, namely 11, 22, . . . 110. Pick two of
       them (x and y) at random. What is the probability that gcd(x, y) = 11?
12-22. [8] IBM quantum computing (https://www.ibm.com/quantum-computing/) of-
       fers the opportunity to program a quantum computing simulator. Take a look
       at an example quantum computing program and run it to see what happens.

 LeetCode
 12-1. https://leetcode.com/problems/split-array-with-same-average/
 12-2. https://leetcode.com/problems/smallest-sufficient-team/
 12-3. https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-palindromic-substring/

 HackerRank
 12-1. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/mancala6/
 12-2. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/sams-puzzle/
 12-3. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/walking-the-approximate longest-path/

 Programming Challenges
 These programming challenge problems with robot judging are available at
 https://onlinejudge.org:
 12-1. “Euclid Problem”—Chapter 7, problem 10104.
 12-2. “Chainsaw Massacre”—Chapter 14, problem 10043.
 12-3. “Hotter Colder”—Chapter 14, problem 10084.
 12-4. “Useless Tile Packers”—Chapter 14, problem 10065.
