Chapter 13

How to Design Algorithms

Designing the right algorithm for a given application is a major creative act—
that of taking a problem and pulling a solution out of the air. The space of
choices you can make in algorithm design is enormous, leaving you plenty of
freedom to hang yourself.
    This book has been designed to make you a better algorithm designer. The
techniques presented in Part I provide the basic ideas underlying all combina-
torial algorithms. The problem catalog of Part II will help you with modeling
your application, and inform you what is known about the relevant problems.
However, being a successful algorithm designer requires more than book knowl-
edge. It requires a certain attitude—the right problem-solving approach. It is
diﬃcult to teach this mindset in a book, yet getting it is essential to becoming
a successful algorithm designer.
    The key to algorithm design (or any other problem-solving task) is to proceed
by asking yourself questions to guide your thought process. “What if we do this?
What if we do that?” Should you get stuck on the problem, the best thing to do
is move onto the next question. In any group brainstorming session, the most
useful person in the room is the one who keeps asking “Why can’t we do it this
way?”; not the nitpicker who keeps telling them why. Because he or she will
eventually stumble on an approach that can’t be shot down.
    Towards this end, I provide a sequence of questions designed to guide your
search for the right algorithm for your problem. To use it eﬀectively, you must
not only ask the questions, but answer them. The key is working through the
answers carefully by writing them down in a log. The correct answer to “Can
I do it this way?” is never “no,” but “no, because. . . .” By clearly articulating
your reasoning as to why something doesn’t work, you can check whether you
have glossed over a possibility that you didn’t think hard enough about. It
is amazing how often the reason you can’t ﬁnd a convincing explanation for
something is because your conclusion is wrong.
    The distinction between strategy and tactics is important to keep aware of
during any design process. Strategy represents the quest for the big picture—
the framework around which we construct our path to the goal. Tactics are used
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   429
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_13
430                       CHAPTER 13. HOW TO DESIGN ALGORITHMS

to win the minor battles we must ﬁght along the way. In problem-solving, it is
important to repeatedly check whether you are thinking on the right level. If
you do not have a global strategy of how to attack your problem, it is pointless
to worry about the tactics. An example of a strategic question is “Can I model
my application as a graph algorithm problem?” A tactical question might be
“Should I use an adjacency list or adjacency matrix data structure to represent
my graph?” Of course, such tactical decisions are critical to the ultimate quality
of the solution, but they can be properly evaluated only in light of a successful
strategy.
    Too many people freeze up in their thinking when faced with a design prob-
lem. After reading or hearing the problem, they sit down and realize that they
don’t know what to do next. Avoid this fate. Follow the sequence of questions I
provide below and in most of the catalog problem sections. I will try to tell you
what to do next.
    Obviously, the more experience you have with algorithm design techniques
such as dynamic programming, graph algorithms, intractability, and data struc-
tures, the more successful you will be at working through the list of questions.
Part I of this book has been designed to strengthen this technical background.
However, it pays to work through these questions regardless of how strong your
technical skills are. The earliest and most important questions on the list focus
on obtaining a detailed understanding of your problem and do not require any
speciﬁc expertise.
    This list of questions was inspired by a passage in The Right Stuﬀ [Wol79]—a
wonderful book about the US space program. It concerned the radio transmis-
sions from test pilots just before their planes crashed. One might have ex-
pected that they would panic, so ground control would hear the pilot yelling
“Ahhhhhhhhhhh—,” terminated only by the sound of smacking into a moun-
tain. Instead, the pilots ran through a list of what their possible actions could
be. “I’ve tried the ﬂaps. I’ve checked the engine. Still got two wings. I’ve reset
the—.” They had the right stuﬀ. Because of this, they sometimes managed to
miss the mountain.
    I hope this book has provided you with the right stuﬀ to be a successful
algorithm designer. And that prevents you from crashing along the way.

  1. Do I really understand the problem?

      (a) What exactly does the input consist of?
      (b) What exactly are the desired results or output?
       (c) Can I construct an input example small enough to solve by hand?
           What happens when I try to solve it?
      (d) How important is it to my application that I always ﬁnd the optimal
          answer? Might I settle for something close to the best answer?
       (e) How large is a typical instance of my problem? Will I be working on
           10 items? 1,000 items? 1,000,000 items? More?

    (f) How important is speed in my application? Must the problem be
        solved within one second? One minute? One hour? One day?
   (g) How much time and eﬀort can I invest in implementation? Will I be
       limited to simple algorithms that can be coded up in a day, or do
       I have the freedom to experiment with several approaches and see
       which one is best?
   (h) Am I trying to solve a numerical problem? A graph problem? A
       geometric problem? A string problem? A set problem? Which for-
       mulation seems easiest?

2. Can I ﬁnd a simple algorithm or heuristic for my problem?

   (a) Will brute force solve my problem correctly by searching through all
       subsets or arrangements and picking the best one?
          i. If so, why am I sure that this algorithm always gives the correct
             answer?
         ii. How do I measure the quality of a solution once I construct it?
        iii. Does this simple, slow solution run in polynomial or exponential
             time? Is my problem small enough that a brute-force solution
             will suﬃce?
        iv. Am I certain that my problem is suﬃciently well deﬁned to ac-
             tually have a correct solution?
   (b) Can I solve my problem by repeatedly trying some simple rule, like
       picking the biggest item ﬁrst? The smallest item ﬁrst? A random
       item ﬁrst?
          i. If so, on what types of inputs does this heuristic work well? Do
             these correspond to the data that might arise in my application?
         ii. On what inputs does this heuristic work badly? If no such ex-
             amples can be found, can I show that it always works well?
        iii. How fast does my heuristic come up with an answer? Does it
             have a simple implementation?

3. Is my problem in the catalog of algorithmic problems in the back of this
   book?

   (a) What is known about the problem? Is there an available implemen-
       tation that I can use?
   (b) Did I look in the right place for my problem? Did I browse through
       all the pictures? Did I look in the index under all possible keywords?
   (c) Are there relevant resources available on the World Wide Web? Did
       I do a Google Scholar search? Did I go to the page associated with
       this book: www.algorist.com?

4. Are there special cases of the problem that I know how to solve?
432                      CHAPTER 13. HOW TO DESIGN ALGORITHMS

      (a) Can I solve the problem eﬃciently when I ignore some of the input
          parameters?
      (b) Does the problem become easier to solve when some of the input
          parameters are set to trivial values, such as 0 or 1?
      (c) How can I simplify the problem to the point where I can solve it
          eﬃciently? Why can’t this special-case algorithm be generalized to
          a wider class of inputs?
      (d) Is my problem a special case of a more general problem in the catalog?

  5. Which of the standard algorithm design paradigms are most relevant to
     my problem?

      (a) Is there a set of items that can be sorted by size or some key? Does
          this sorted order make it easier to ﬁnd the answer?
      (b) Is there a way to split the problem into two smaller problems, perhaps
          by doing a binary search? How about partitioning the elements into
          big and small, or left and right? Does this suggest a divide-and-
          conquer algorithm?
      (c) Does the set of input objects have a natural left-to-right order among
          its components, like the characters in a string, elements of a permu-
          tation, or the leaves of a rooted tree? Could I use dynamic program-
          ming to exploit this order?
      (d) Are there certain operations being done repeatedly, such as searching,
          or ﬁnding the largest/smallest element? Can I use a data structure
          to speed up these queries? Perhaps a dictionary/hash table or a
          heap/priority queue?
      (e) Can I use random sampling to select which object to pick next? What
          about constructing many random conﬁgurations and picking the best
          one? Can I use a heuristic search technique like simulated annealing
          to zoom in on a good solution?
      (f) Can I formulate my problem as a linear program? How about an
          integer program?
      (g) Does my problem resemble satisﬁability, the traveling salesman prob-
          lem, or some other NP-complete problem? Might it be NP-complete
          and thus not have an eﬃcient algorithm? Is it in the problem list in
          the back of Garey and Johnson [GJ79]?

  6. Am I still stumped?

      (a) Am I willing to spend money to hire an expert (like the author) to tell
          me what to do? If so, check out the professional consulting services
          mentioned in Section 22.4 (page 718).
      (b) Go back to the beginning and work through these questions again.
          Did any of my answers change during my latest trip through the list?
13.1. PREPARING FOR TECH COMPANY INTERVIEWS                                    433

    Problem-solving is not a science, but part art and part skill. It is one of
the skills most worth developing. My favorite book on problem-solving remains
Pólya’s How to Solve It [Pol57], which features a catalog of problem-solving
techniques that is fascinating to browse through.

13.1      Preparing for Tech Company Interviews
I gather that many of you reading this book have been inspired more by a fear
of technical job interviews than an inherent love of algorithms. Hopefully you
are enjoying your reading—and coming to understand the beauty and power of
algorithmic thinking. But this section is devoted to some brief suggestions to
help you when it comes time to interview at tech companies.
    First, with respect to algorithm design people know what they know, and
hence cramming the night before an interview won’t help much. I think you can
learn something valuable about algorithm design with one serious week spent
with this book, and even more with additional time. The material I cover here
is useful and well worth knowing, so you are not cramming for an exam whose
contents you will forget in 24 hours. Algorithm design techniques tend to stick
with you after you learn them, so it pays to put in the time with my book.
    Algorithm design problems tend to creep into the interview process in two
ways: preliminary coding tests and blackboard design problems. The major tech
companies attract so many applications that the ﬁrst round of screening is often
mechanical: can you solve some programming challenge problem on an interview
site like HackerRank (https://www.hackerrank.com/)? These programming
challenge problems test coding speed and correctness, and are generally used to
screen out less promising candidates.
    That said, performance on these programming challenge problems improves
with practice. If you are a college student, try to get involved with your school’s
ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest (ICPC) team. Each team
consists of three students working together to solve ﬁve to ten programming
challenge problems within ﬁve hours. These problems are often algorithmic and
usually interesting. There is much to be gained even if you don’t make the
regional championships.
    For self-study, I recommend solving some coding problems on judging sites
like HackerRank and LeetCode (https://leetcode.com/). Indeed, I suggest
appropriate coding challenges on each of these sites in the exercises at the end
of each chapter. Start simple and build up your speed, and do it to have
fun. But ﬁgure out whether your weak spot is in the correctness of boundary
cases or errors in your algorithm itself, and then work to improve. I humbly
recommend my book Programming Challenges [SR03], which is designed as a
training manual for such programming problems. If you like this book, you may
well beneﬁt from that one as well.
    After you get past the preliminary screening, you will be granted a video or
on-site interview. Here you may well be asked to solve some algorithm design
problems on a whiteboard at the prompting of your interviewer. These will
434                       CHAPTER 13. HOW TO DESIGN ALGORITHMS

generally be like the exercises at the end of each chapter. Some have been
designated interview questions because they have been rumored to be used by
certain tech companies. But all of my exercises are good for self-study and
interview preparation.
    What should you do at the whiteboard to look like you know what you are
talking about? First, I encourage you to ask enough clarifying questions to
make sure you understand exactly what the problem is. You are likely to get
few points for correctly solving the wrong problem. I strongly encourage you
to ﬁrst present a simple, slow, and correct algorithm before trying to get fancy.
After that you can, and should, see whether you can do better. Usually the
questioners want to see how you think, and are less concerned with the actual
ﬁnal algorithm than seeing an active thought process.
    Students of mine who take these interviews often report that they are given
incorrect solutions by their interviewers! Getting a job at a nice company does
not turn you into an algorithms expert by osmosis. Often the interviewers are
just asking questions that other people asked them, so don’t be intimidated. Do
the best you can, and it will likely be good enough.
    Finally, I have a confession to make. For several years, I served as Chief
Scientist at a startup company named General Sentiment, and interviewed all
the developers we hired. Most of them knew me as the author of this book, and
feared they were in for a grilling. But I never asked them a single algorithm
puzzle question. We needed developers who could wrangle a complicated dis-
tributed system, not solve puzzles. I asked a lot of questions about the biggest
program they had worked on and what they did with it, in order to get a sense
of the sophistication of what they could handle and what they liked to do. I am
very proud of the excellent people we hired at General Sentiment, all of whom
have gone on to even more exciting places.
    Of course I strongly encourage that other companies continue to base their
screening on algorithm questions. The more companies that do this, the more
copies of this book I am going to sell.
    Good luck to you on your job quest, and may what you learn from this book
help you with your job, professional growth, and career. Follow me on Twitter
at @StevenSkiena!
