Chapter 14

A Catalog of Algorithmic
Problems

This is a catalog of algorithmic problems that arise commonly in practice. It
describes what is known about them, and gives suggestions about how best to
proceed if the problem arises in your application.
    What is the best way to use this catalog? First, think about your prob-
lem. If you recall the name, look up the catalog entry in the index or table of
contents. Read through the entire entry, since it contains pointers to other rel-
evant problems. Leaf through the catalog, looking at the pictures and problem
names to see if anything strikes a chord. Don’t be afraid to use the index, for
every problem in the book is listed there under several possible keywords and
applications.
    The catalog entries contain a variety of diﬀerent types of information that
were never really collected in one place before. Diﬀerent ﬁelds in each entry
present information of practical and historical interest.
    To make this catalog more accessible, I introduce each problem with a pair
of graphics representing the problem instance or input on the left and the result
of solving the problem on the right. Considerable thought has been invested
in creating stylized examples that illustrate desired behaviors, more than just
deﬁnitions. For example, the minimum spanning tree ﬁgures illustrate how
points can be clustered using minimum spanning trees. I hope that you will be
able to ﬂip through the pictures and identify problems that might be relevant
to you. These pictures are augmented with more formal problem descriptions
to eliminate the ambiguity inherent in a purely pictorial representation.
    Once you have identiﬁed your problem, the discussion section tells you what
you should do about it. I describe applications where the problem is likely to
arise, and any special issues with associated data. I also discuss the kind of
results you might reasonably hope for and, most importantly, what you should
do to get them. For each problem, a quick-and-dirty solution is outlined, with
pointers to more powerful algorithms to try if the ﬁrst attempt is not suﬃcient.

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   437
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_14
438            CHAPTER 14. A CATALOG OF ALGORITHMIC PROBLEMS

    Available software implementations are discussed in the implementation ﬁeld
of each catalog entry. Many of these routines are quite good, and can perhaps be
plugged directly into your application. Others may be inadequate for production
use, but they can provide a good model for your own implementation. In general,
implementations are listed in order of descending usefulness, but I will explicitly
recommend the best one available for each problem if a clear winner exists. More
detailed information for many of these implementations appears in Chapter 22.
Just about all of the implementations are available at the website associated
with this book: www.algorist.com.
    Finally, in deliberately smaller print, the history of each problem will be dis-
cussed, and results of primarily theoretical interest presented. I have attempted
to report the best results known for each problem, and point out empirical com-
parisons of algorithms or survey articles if they exist. These should interest
students, researchers, and practitioners who need to know whether anything
better is possible.

Caveats
This is a catalog of algorithmic problems. It is not a cookbook. It cannot be,
because there are too many recipes and too many possible variations on what
people want to eat. My goal is to point you in the right direction so that you
can solve your own problems. I try to identify the issues you will encounter
along the way. In particular:

      • For each problem, I suggest algorithms and directions to attack it. These
        recommendations are based on my experience, and are aimed toward what
        I see as typical applications. I feel it is better to make concrete recom-
        mendations for the masses than to try to cover all possible situations. If
        you don’t agree with my advice, you don’t have to follow it. But try to
        understand my reasoning so you can articulate why your needs violate my
        assumptions.
      • The implementations I recommend are not necessarily complete solutions
        to your problem. Some programs are useful only as models for you to write
        your own codes. Others are embedded in large systems and so might be
        too painful to extract and run on their own. All of them contain bugs.
        Many are quite serious, so beware.
      • Please respect the licensing conditions for any implementations you use
        commercially. Many of these codes are not open source, and most have
        license restrictions. See Section 22.1 for a further discussion of this issue.
      • I would be interested in hearing about your experiences with my recom-
        mendations, both positive and negative. I would be especially interested
        in learning about any other implementations that you know about.
