Chapter 15

Data Structures

Data structures are not so much algorithms as they are the fundamental con-
structs around which you build your application. Becoming fluent in what the
standard data structures can do is essential to get full value from them.
    This puts data structures slightly out of sync with the rest of the catalog.
Perhaps the most useful aspect of it will be the pointers to various implementa-
tions and data structure libraries. Many of these data structures are non-trivial
to implement well, so the programs I point to will be useful as models even if
they do not do exactly what you need. Certain fundamental data structures,
like kd-trees and suffix trees, are not as well known as they should be. Hopefully,
this catalog will serve to better publicize them.
    There are a large number of books on elementary data structures available.
My favorites include:

    • Sedgewick [SW11] – This comprehensive introduction to algorithms and
      data structures stands out for the clever and beautiful images of algorithms
      in action. It comes in C, C++, and Java editions.
    • Weiss [Wei11] – A nice text, emphasizing data structures more than algo-
      rithms. It comes in Java, C, C++, and Ada editions.

    • Goodrich and Tamassia [GTG14] – The Java edition makes particularly
      good use of the author’s Java Data Structures Library (JDSL).

    • Brass [Bra08] – This is a good treatment of more advanced data structures
      than those covered in other texts, with implementations in C++.

   The Handbook of Data Structures and Applications [MS18] provides a com-
prehensive and up-to-date survey of research in data structures. The student
who took only an elementary course in data structures is likely to be surprised
and impressed by the volume of recent work on the subject.

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   439
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_15
440                                     CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

                  Input                                    Output

15.1      Dictionaries
Input description: A set of n records, each identified by one or more keys.

Problem description: Build and maintain a data structure to efficiently lo-
cate, insert, and delete the record associated with any query key q.

Discussion: The abstract data type “dictionary” is one of the most impor-
tant structures in computer science. Dozens of data structures have been pro-
posed for implementing dictionaries, including hash tables, skip lists, and bal-
anced/unbalanced binary search trees. This means that choosing the best one
can be tricky. However, in practice, it is more important to avoid using a bad
data structure than to identify the single best option available.
    An essential piece of advice is to carefully isolate the implementation of
your dictionary data structure from its interface. Use explicit calls to methods
or subroutines that initialize, search, and modify the data structure, rather
than embed them within the code. This leads to a much cleaner program, but
it also makes it easy to experiment with different implementations to see how
they perform. Do not obsess about the costs of procedure calls inherent in
such an abstraction. If your application is so time-critical that such overhead is
meaningful, then it is even more essential that you experiment to find the right
dictionary implementation.
    To choose the right data structure for your dictionary, answer the following
questions:
15.1. DICTIONARIES                                                                441

   • How many items will you have in your data structure? – Will you know
     this number in advance? Are you looking at a problem small enough that
     a simple data structure will suffice? Or one so large that we must worry
     about running out of memory or virtual memory performance?

   • Do you know the relative frequencies of insert, delete, and search opera-
     tions? – Static data structures (like sorted arrays) suffice in applications
     when there will be no modifications to the data structure after it is first
     constructed. Semi-dynamic data structures, which support insertion but
     not deletion, can have significantly simpler implementations than fully
     dynamic ones.

   • Will the access pattern for keys be uniform and random? – Search queries
     exhibit a skewed access distribution in many applications, meaning that
     certain elements are much more popular than others. Further, queries
     often have a sense of temporal locality, meaning elements are likely to be
     repeatedly accessed in clusters instead of at fairly regular intervals. Data
     structures such as splay trees can take advantage of a skewed and clustered
     universe.

   • Is it critical that each individual operation be fast, or only that the total
     amount of work done over the entire program be minimized? – When
     response time is critical, such as in a program controlling a heart–lung
     machine, you can’t wait too long between steps. But when you are doing
     a lot of queries over the database, such as identifying all criminals who
     happen to be politicians, it is not critical that you pick out any particular
     legislator quickly. Just get them all with the minimum total effort.

   An object-oriented generation has emerged that is no more likely to write
their own container class than to fix the engine in their car. This is good: default
containers should work just fine for most applications. Still, it is sometimes
valuable to know exactly what you have under the hood:

   • Unsorted linked lists or arrays – For small data sets, an unsorted array
     is probably the easiest data structure to maintain. Linked structures can
     have terrible cache performance compared with sleek, compact arrays.
     However, once your dictionary becomes larger than (say) fifty to a hundred
     items, the linear search time will kill you for either lists or arrays.
      A particularly interesting and useful variant is the self-organizing list.
      Whenever a key is accessed or inserted, we move it to the head of the list.
      Thus, the key will be near the front if it is accessed again in the near future,
      and so require only a short search to find it. Most applications exhibit both
      uneven access frequencies and locality of reference, so the average time for
      a successful search in a self-organizing list is typically much better than
      in a sorted or unsorted list. Self-organizing data structures can be built
      from arrays as well as linked lists and trees.
442                                         CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      • Sorted linked lists or arrays – Maintaining a sorted linked list is usually
        not worth the effort unless you are trying to eliminate duplicates, since we
        cannot perform binary searches in such a data structure. A sorted array
        will be appropriate iff there are not many insertions or deletions.
      • Hash tables – For applications involving a moderate-to-large number of
        keys, a hash table is probably the right way to go. We use a function
        that maps keys (be they strings, numbers, or whatever) to integers be-
        tween 0 and m − 1. We maintain an array of m buckets, each typically
        implemented using an unsorted linked list. The hash function immedi-
        ately identifies which bucket contains a given key. Presuming the hash
        function spreads the keys out nicely through a sufficiently large hash ta-
        ble, each bucket should contain very few items, thus making linear search
        acceptable. Insertion and deletion from a hash table reduce to insertion
        and deletion from the bucket/list. Section 3.7 (page 93) provides a more
        detailed discussion of hashing and its applications.
        A well-tuned hash table will outperform a sorted array in most applica-
        tions. However, several design decisions go into creating good hash tables:
          – How do I deal with collisions? Open addressing can lead to more
            concise tables with better cache performance than bucketing, but
            performance will be more brittle if the load factor (ratio of occupancy
            to capacity) of the hash table gets too high.
          – How big should the table be? With bucketing, m should be about
            the same as the maximum number of items you expect to put in the
            table. With open addressing, make the table 30% to 50% larger.
            Selecting m to be a prime number minimizes the dangers of a bad
            hash function.
          – What hash function should I use? For strings, something like
                                      |S|−1
                                      ?
                      H(S) = α|S| +           α|S|−(i+1) × char(si ) (mod m)
                                      i=0

             should work, where α is the size of the alphabet and char(x) is
             the function that maps each character x to its character code. Use
             Horner’s rule (or precompute values of αx ) to implement this hash
             function computation efficiently, as discussed in Section 16.9 (page
             493). A variant of this hash function (discussed in Section 6.7 (page
             188)) has the nifty property that hash codes of successive k-character
             windows of a string can be computed in constant time, instead of
             O(k).
        When evaluating a hash function/table implementation, print statistics on
        the distribution of keys per bucket to see how uniform it really is. Odds
        are the first hash function you try will not prove to be the best. Botching
        up the hash function is an excellent way to slow down any application.
15.1. DICTIONARIES                                                           443

  • Binary search trees – Binary search trees are elegant data structures that
    support fast insertions, deletions, and queries reviewed in Section 3.4 (page
    81). The primary distinction between different types of trees is whether
    they are explicitly rebalanced after insertion or deletion, and how this
    rebalancing is done. In simple random search trees, we insert each node
    at the leaf position where we can find it, with no rebalancing. Although
    such trees perform well under random insertions, most applications are not
    random. Indeed, unbalanced search trees constructed by inserting keys in
    sorted order are a disaster, degenerating to a linked list.
    Balanced search trees use local rotation operations for restructuring, mov-
    ing more distant nodes closer to the root while maintaining the in-order
    search structure of the tree. Among balanced search trees, AVL and 2/3
    trees are now passé, and red–black trees seem to be most popular. A par-
    ticularly interesting self-organizing data structure is the splay tree, which
    uses rotations to move any accessed key to the root. Frequently used or
    recently accessed nodes thus sit near the top of the tree, allowing faster
    searches.
    Bottom line: Which tree is best for your application? Probably the one
    of which you have the best implementation. Which flavor of balanced tree
    is likely not as important as the skill of the programmer who coded it.

  • B-trees – For data sets so large that they will not fit in main memory
    your best bet will be some flavor of a B-tree. The search time of a data
    structure grows by several orders of magnitude once it is stored outside
    of main memory. With modern cache architectures, similar effects can
    happen on a smaller scale, because cache is much faster than RAM.
    The idea behind a B-tree is to collapse several levels of a binary search
    tree into a single large node, so that we can make the equivalent of sev-
    eral search steps before another disk access is needed. B-trees can access
    enormous numbers of keys using only a few disk accesses. To get the full
    benefit from using a B-tree, it is important to understand how the sec-
    ondary storage device and virtual memory systems interact—in particular,
    constants such as page size and virtual/real address space. Cache-oblivious
    algorithms (described below) can mitigate such concerns.
    Even for modest-sized data sets, unexpectedly poor performance of a data
    structure may result from excessive swapping, so listen to your disk to help
    decide whether you should be using a B-tree.

  • Skip lists – These are somewhat of a cult data structure. A hierarchy of
    sorted linked lists is maintained, where a coin is flipped for each element
    to decide whether it gets copied into the next highest list. This implies
    roughly lg n lists, each roughly half as large as the one above it. Search
    starts in the smallest list. The search key lies in an interval between two
    elements, which is then explored in the next larger list. Each searched
    interval contains an expected constant number of elements per list, for a
444                                        CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      total expected O(lg n) query time. The primary benefits of skip lists are
      ease of analysis and implementation relative to balanced trees.

Implementations: Modern programming languages provide libraries offering
complete and efficient container implementations. The C++ Standard Template
Library (STL) is now provided with most compilers. See Josuttis [Jos12], Meyers
[Mey01], and Musser [MDS01] for more detailed guides to using STL and the
C++ standard library. Java Collections (JC), a small library of data structures,
is included in the java.util package of the Java standard edition.
    LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) provides a complete collection of dic-
tionary data structures in C++, including hashing, perfect hashing, B-trees,
red-black trees, random search trees, and skip lists. Experiments reported in
Mehlhorn and Naher [MN99] declared hashing to be the best dictionary choice,
with skip lists and 2–4 trees (a special case of B-trees) as the most efficient
tree-like structures.
Notes: Knuth [Knu97a] provides the most detailed analysis and exposition on fun-
damental dictionary data structures, but misses certain modern data structures as
red–black and splay trees. Spending some time with his books is an important rite of
passage for all computer science students.
    The Handbook of Data Structures and Applications [MS18] provides up-to-date
surveys on all aspects of dictionary data structures. Other surveys include Mehlhorn
and Tsakalidis [MT90b] and Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [GBY91]. Good textbook ex-
positions on dictionary data structures include Sedgewick [Sed98], Weiss [Wei11], and
Goodrich et al. [GTG14]. I defer to all these sources to avoid giving original references
for each of the data structures described above.
    The 1996 DIMACS implementation challenge focused on elementary data struc-
tures, including dictionaries. See Goldwasser et al. [GJM02]. Data sets, and codes are
accessible from http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/Challenges.
    The cost of transferring data back and forth between levels of the memory hierarchy
(RAM-to-cache or disk-to-RAM) dominates the cost of actual computation for many
problems. Each data transfer moves one block of size b, so efficient algorithms seek
to minimize the number of block transfers. The complexity of fundamental algorithm
and data structure problems on such an external memory model has been extensively
studied by Vitter [Vit01]. Cache-oblivious data structures offer performance guar-
antees under such a model without explicit knowledge of the block-size parameter
b. Hence, good performance can be obtained on any machine without architecture-
specific tuning. See [ABF05, Dem02] for excellent surveys on cache-oblivious data
structures.
    Splay trees and other modern data structures have been studied using amortized
analysis, where we bound the total amount of time used by any sequence of operations.
In an amortized analysis, a single operation can be very expensive, but only because
we have already benefited from enough cheap operations to pay off the higher cost. A
data structure realizing an amortized complexity of O(f (n)) is less desirable than one
whose worst-case complexity is O(f (n)) (since a very bad operation might still occur)
but better than one with an average-case complexity O(f (n)), since the amortized
bound will achieve this average on any input.

Related problems: Sorting (see page 506), searching (see page 510).
15.2. PRIORITY QUEUES                                                                     445

                 October 30                                        1/1

                 December 7
                 July 4
                                                     7/4                          1/30
                 January 1
                 February 2
                 December 25
                                             10/30         2/2            12/25          12/7
                 January 30

                  Input                                          Output

15.2      Priority Queues
Input description: A set of records with totally ordered keys.
Problem description: Build and maintain a data structure for providing quick
access to the smallest or largest key in the set.
Discussion: Priority queues are useful data structures in simulations, partic-
ularly for maintaining a set of future events ordered by time. They are called
“priority” queues because you retrieve items not according to the insertion time
(as in a stack or queue), nor by a key match (as in a dictionary), but by highest
priority of retrieval.
    If your application will perform no insertions after the initial query, there is
no need for an explicit priority queue. Simply sort the records by priority and
proceed from top to bottom, maintaining a pointer to the last record retrieved.
This situation occurs in Kruskal’s minimum spanning tree algorithm, or when
simulating a completely scripted set of events.
    However, you will need a real priority queue when mixing queries with in-
sertions and deletions. The following questions will help select the right one:
   • What other operations do you need? – Will you be searching for arbitrary
     keys, or just searching for the smallest? Will you be deleting arbitrary
     elements from the data, or just repeatedly deleting the top or smallest
     element?
   • Do you know the maximum data structure size in advance? – The issue
     here is whether you can pre-allocate space for the data structure.
   • Might you raise or lower the priority of elements already in the queue?
     – Changing the priority of elements requires that we are able to retrieve
     elements from the queue based on their key, in addition to finding the
     largest element.
446                                       CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      Your choices are between the following basic priority queue implementations:

      • Sorted array or list – A sorted array is very efficient to both identify the
        smallest element and “delete” it by decrementing the top index. However,
        maintaining the total order makes inserting new elements slow. Sorted
        arrays are suitable when there will be no insertions into the queue. Basic
        priority queue implementations are reviewed in Section 3.5 (page 87).
      • Binary heaps – This simple, elegant data structure supports both insertion
        and extract-min in O(lg n) time each. Heaps maintain an implicit binary
        tree structure in an array, such that the key of the root of any subtree is
        less than that of all its descendants. Thus, the minimum key always sits
        at the top of the heap. New keys are inserted by placing them at an open
        leaf and percolating the element upwards until it sits at its proper place
        in the partial order. An implementation of binary heap construction and
        retrieval in C appears in Section 4.3.1 (page 116).
        Binary heaps are the right answer when you know an upper bound on the
        number of items in your priority queue, since you must specify the array
        size at creation time. Even this constraint can be mitigated by using
        dynamic arrays (see Section 3.1.1 (page 70)).
  • Bounded-height priority queue – This array-based data structure permits
    constant-time insertion and find-min operations whenever the range of
    possible key values is limited. Suppose we know that all key values will
    be integers between 1 and n. We can set up an array of n linked lists,
    such that the ith list serves as a bucket containing all items with key
    i. We will maintain a top pointer to the smallest non-empty list. To
    insert an item with key k into the queue, add it to the kth bucket and
    set top = min(top, k). To extract the minimum, report the first item from
    bucket top, delete it, and move top down if the bucket has become empty.
        Bounded-height priority queues are very useful to maintain the vertices
        of a graph sorted by degree, which is a fundamental operation in graph
        algorithms. Still, they are not as widely known as they should be. They
        are usually the right priority queue for any small, discrete range of keys.
      • Binary search trees – Binary search trees make effective priority queues,
        since the smallest element is always the left-most leaf, while the largest
        element is always the right-most leaf. The min (max) is found by simply
        tracing down left (right) pointers until the next pointer is nil. Binary
        tree heaps prove most appropriate when you also need other dictionary
        operations, or if you have an unbounded key range and do not know the
        maximum priority queue size in advance.
      • Fibonacci and pairing heaps – These complicated priority queues are de-
        signed to speed up decrease-key operations, where the priority of an item
        already in the priority queue is reduced. This arises, for example, in
        shortest path computations when we discover a shorter route to a vertex
15.2. PRIORITY QUEUES                                                            447

      v than previously established. Properly implemented and used, they lead
      to better performance on very large computations.

Implementations: Modern programming languages provide libraries offering
complete and efficient priority queue implementations. The Java Collections
PriorityQueue class is included in the java.util package of Java Standard
Edition. Member functions push, top, and pop of the C++ Standard Tem-
plate Library (STL) priority queue template mirror heap operations insert,
findmax, and deletemax. See Meyers [Mey01] and Musser [MDS01] for more
detailed guides to using STL.
    LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) provides a complete collection of pri-
ority queues in C++, including Fibonacci heaps, pairing heaps, van Emde Boas
trees, and bounded-height priority queues. Experiments reported in Mehlhorn
and Naher [MN99] identified simple binary heaps as quite competitive in most
applications, with pairing heaps beating Fibonacci heaps in head-to-head tests.
Sanders [San00] did extensive experiments demonstrating that his sequence
heap, based on k-way merging, was roughly twice as fast as a well-implemented
binary heap.
Notes: The Handbook of Data Structures and Applications [MS18] provides several
up-to-date surveys on all aspects of priority queues. Empirical comparisons between
priority queue data structures include [CGS99, GBY91, Jon86, LL96, San00].
    Double-ended priority queues extend the basic heap operations to simultaneously
support both find-min and find-max. See Sahni [Sah05] for a survey of four different
implementations of double-ended priority queues.
    Bounded-height priority queues are useful data structures in practice, but do not
promise good worst-case performance for unbounded key ranges. However, van Emde
Boas priority queues [vEBKZ77] support O(lg lg n) insertion, deletion, search, max,
and min operations where each key is an element from 1 to n.
    Fibonacci heaps [FT87, BLT12] support insert and decrease-key operations in con-
stant amortized time, with O(lg n) amortized time extract-min and delete operations.
The constant-time decrease-key operation leads to faster implementations of classical
algorithms for shortest paths, weighted bipartite matching, and minimum spanning
tree. In practice, Fibonacci heaps are difficult to implement and have large constant
factors associated with them. However, pairing heaps appear to realize the same
bounds with less overhead. Experiments with pairing and other heaps are reported in
[LST14, SV87].
    Heaps define a partial order that can be built using a linear number of compar-
isons. The familiar linear-time merging algorithm for heap construction is due to
Floyd [Flo64]. In the worst case, 1.625n comparisons suffice, see [GM86]. Further,
1.5n − O(lg n) comparisons are necessary for heap construction, see [CC92].

Related problems: Dictionaries (see page 440), sorting (see page 506), short-
est path (see page 554).
448                                     CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

         XYZXYZ$
          YZXYZ$
                                                   XYZ                               $
           ZXYZ$                                             YZ              Z

            XYZ$                                                                         7
             YZ$                          XYZ$     $ XYZ$         $   XYZ$       $

              Z$                             1     4     2        5     3        6
               $

                  Input                                       Output

15.3      Suffix Trees and Arrays
Input description: A reference string S.
Problem description: Build a data structure for quickly finding all places
where an arbitrary query string q occurs in S.
Discussion: Suffix trees and arrays are phenomenally useful data structures
for solving string problems elegantly and efficiently. The proper use of suffix
trees often speeds up string processing algorithms from O(n2 ) to linear time.
Indeed, suffix trees were the hero of the war story reported in Section 3.9 (page
98).
    In its simplest instantiation, a suffix tree is simply a trie of the n suffixes of
an n-character string S. A trie is a tree structure, where each edge represents
one character, and the root represents the null string. Each path from the root
represents a string, described by the characters labeling the edges traversed.
Every finite set of words defines a distinct trie, and two words with common
prefixes branch off from each other at the first distinguishing character. Each
leaf denotes the end of a string. Figure 15.1 illustrates a simple trie.
    Tries are useful in testing whether a given query string q is in the set of
strings. We traverse the trie from the root, along branches defined by successive
characters of q. If a branch does not exist in the trie, then q cannot be in the
set of strings. Otherwise we find the query string in |q| character comparisons
regardless of how many other strings are in the trie. Tries are very simple to
build (repeatedly insert new strings) and very fast to search (just walk down),
although they can be expensive in terms of memory.
    A suffix tree is simply a trie of all proper suffixes of S. The suffix tree enables
15.3. SUFFIX TREES AND ARRAYS                                                 449

                           t                   w           1 XYZXYZ$
                                                           4 XYZ$
                       h                   a       h
                                                           2 YZXYZ$
                       e               s               e   5 YZ$
                   i           r                       n
                                                           3 ZXYZ$
                                                           6 Z$
               r                   e
                                                           7 $
Figure 15.1: A trie on strings the, their, there, was, and when (on left). The
suffix array of XY ZXY Z$ (on right).

you to test whether q is a substring of S, because any substring of S is the prefix
of some suffix (got it?). The search time is again linear in |q|.
    The catch is that constructing a full suffix tree in this manner can require
O(n2 ) time and, even worse, O(n2 ) space, since the average length of the n
suffixes is n/2. But if we are clever, linear space suffices to represent a full suffix
tree. Observe that most of the nodes in a trie-based suffix tree occur on simple
unbranching paths between nodes of outdegree ≥ 2 in the tree. Each simple
path corresponds to a substring of the original string. If we store the original
string in an array, we can represent any such collapsed path by the starting and
ending array indices representing the substring. Thus, each of the tree edges is
labeled using only two integers, so we have all the information of the full suffix
tree in only O(n) space. The output figure for this section displays a collapsed
suffix tree in all its glory.
    Even better, there exist O(n) algorithms to construct this collapsed tree, by
making clever use of pointers to minimize construction time. These additional
pointers can also be used to speed up many applications of suffix trees.
    But what can you do with suffix trees? Consider the following applications:

   • Find all occurrences of q as a substring of S – Just as with a trie, we can
     walk from the root to the node nq associated with q. The positions of all
     occurrences of q in S are represented by the descendants of nq , which can
     be identified using a depth-first search from nq . With a collapsed suffix
     tree, it takes O(|q| + k) time to find the k occurrences of q in S.

   • Longest substring common to a set of strings – Build a single collapsed
     suffix tree containing all suffixes of all strings, with each leaf labeled with
     its original string. In the course of doing a depth-first search on this tree,
     we mark each node with both the length of its common prefix and the
     number of distinct strings that are children of it. From this information,
     the best node can be selected in linear time.
450                                       CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      • Find the longest palindrome in S – A palindrome is a string that reads the
        same if the order of characters is reversed, such as madam. To find the
        longest palindrome in a string S, build a single suffix tree containing all
        suffixes of S and the reversal of S, with each leaf identified by its starting
        position. A palindrome is defined by any node in this tree that has forward
        and reversed children from the same position.

    Since linear-time suffix tree construction algorithms are non-trivial, I rec-
ommend using an existing implementation. But another good option is to use
suffix arrays, which do most of what suffix trees do, but are easier to implement.
    A suffix array is in principle just an array that contains all the n suffixes
of S in sorted order. Thus, a binary search of this array for string q suffices
to locate the prefix of a suffix that matches q, permitting an efficient substring
search in O(lg n) string comparisons. With the addition of an index specifying
the common prefix length of all bounding suffixes, only lg n + |q| character
comparisons need be performed on any query, since we can identify the next
character position that must be tested in the binary search. For example, if the
lower range of the search is cowabunga and the upper range is cowslip, all keys
in between must share the same first three letters, so only the fourth character
of any intermediate key needs to be tested against q.
    In practice, suffix arrays are typically as fast or faster to search than suffix
trees. They also use much less memory, typically by a factor of four. Each suffix
is represented completely by its unique starting position (from 1 to n) and can
be read off as needed using a single reference copy of the input string.
    Some care must be taken to construct suffix arrays efficiently, because there
are O(n2 ) characters in the strings being sorted. One solution is to first build
a suffix tree, then perform an in-order traversal of it to read the strings off in
sorted order! However, recent breakthroughs have led to space/time efficient
algorithms for constructing suffix arrays directly.
Implementations: There now exist a wealth of suffix array implementations
available. Indeed, all of the recent linear-time construction algorithms have been
implemented and benchmarked [PST07]. Schürmann and Stoye [SS07] provide
an excellent C implementation at https://bibiserv.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.
de/bpr/.
    No less than eight different C/C++ implementations of compressed text
indexes appear at the Pizza&Chili corpus http://pizzachili.dcc.uchile.
cl/. These data structures go to great lengths to minimize space usage, typically
compressing the input string to near the empirical entropy while still achieving
excellent query times!
    Suffix tree implementations are also readily available. A SuffixTree class
is provided in BioJava (http://www.biojava.org/)—an open source project
providing a Java framework for processing biological data. Libstree is a C
implementation of Ukkonen’s algorithm, available at http://www.icir.org/
christian/libstree/. Strmat is a collection of C programs implementing ex-
act pattern matching algorithms in association with Gusfield [Gus97], including
15.3. SUFFIX TREES AND ARRAYS                                                      451

an implementation of suffix trees. It is available at https://web.cs.ucdavis.
edu/~gusfield/strmat.html.
Notes: Tries were first proposed by Fredkin [Fre62], the name coming from the central
letters of the word “retrieval.” A survey of basic trie data structures with extensive
references appears in Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [GBY91].
    Efficient algorithms for suffix tree construction are due to Weiner [Wei73], Mc-
Creight [McC76], and Ukkonen [Ukk92]. Good expositions on these algorithms in-
clude Crochmore and Rytter [CR03] and Gusfield [Gus97]. The interesting forty-year
history of suffix trees is recounted in Apostolico et al. [ACFC+ 16].
    Suffix arrays were invented by Manber and Myers [MM93], although an equiv-
alent idea called Pat trees due to Gonnet and Baeza-Yates appears in [GBY91].
Three teams independently emerged with linear-time suffix array algorithms in 2003
[KSPP03, KA03, KSB06], and progress has continued rapidly. See Puglisi et al.
[PST07] for a survey covering all these developments.
    Recent work has resulted in the development of compressed full text indexes that
offer essentially all the power of suffix trees/arrays in a data structure whose size is
proportional to the compressed text string. Makinen and Navarro [MN07] survey these
remarkable data structures.
    The power of suffix trees can be further augmented by using a data structure
to compute the least common ancestor (LCA) of any pair of nodes x, y in a tree in
constant time, after linear-time preprocessing of the tree. The original data structure
due to Harel and Tarjan [HT84], has been progressively simplified by Schieber and
Vishkin [SV88] and later Bender and Farach [BF00]. Expositions include Gusfield
[Gus97]. The least common ancestor of two nodes in a suffix tree or trie defines the
node representing the longest common prefix of the two associated strings. That we
can answer such queries in constant time is amazing, and proves useful as a building
block for many other algorithms.

Related problems: String matching (see page 685), text compression (see
page 693), longest common substring (see page 706).
452                                      CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

           1          2                         1       2      5

                                                2       1      3      4     5
                               3                3       2      4      6

                                                4       2      3      5     6
           5          4
                                                5       1      2      4     6

                                                6       3      4      5
                               6

                    Input                                   Output

15.4           Graph Data Structures
Input description: A graph G.
Problem description: Represent the graph G using a flexible, efficient data
structure.
Discussion: The two basic data structures for representing graphs are adja-
cency matrices and adjacency lists. Full descriptions of both these data struc-
tures appear in Section 7.2 (page 203), along with an implementation of adja-
cency lists. In general, for most things, adjacency lists are the way to go.
   The issues in deciding which data structure to use include:

   • How big will your graph be? – How many vertices will it have, both
     typically and in the worst case? Ditto for the number of edges. Graphs
     with 1,000 vertices imply adjacency matrices with 1,000,000 entries. This
     is within the boundary of reality. But adjacency matrices make sense only
     for small or very dense graphs.

   • How dense will your graph be? – If your graph is very dense, meaning
     that a large fraction of the vertex pairs define edges, there is probably no
     compelling reason to use adjacency lists. You are doomed to use Θ(n2 )
     space anyway. Indeed, for complete graphs, matrices will be more concise
     due to the elimination of pointers.

      • Which algorithms will you be implementing? – Certain algorithms are
        more natural on adjacency matrices, such as all-pairs shortest path, but
        most DFS-based algorithms favor adjacency lists. Adjacency matrices win
        for algorithms that repeatedly ask, “Is (i, j) in G?” However, most graph
        algorithms can be designed to eliminate such queries—and if this is all
        you are doing you would be better off using a hash table of edges.
15.4. GRAPH DATA STRUCTURES                                                   453

   • Will you modify the graph over the course of the computation? – Efficient
     static graph implementations can be used when no edge insertion/deletion
     operations will be done following initial construction. Indeed, more com-
     mon than modifying the topology of the graph is modifying the attributes
     of a vertex or edge of the graph, such as size, weight, label, or color. At-
     tributes are best handled as extra fields in the vertex or edge records of
     adjacency lists.

   • Will your graph be a persistent, online structure? – Data structures
     and databases are two different things. People use databases to sup-
     port commercial-strength applications that must maintain access to large
     amounts of data. I trust that Facebook is not storing its friendship graph
     in a memory-resident adjacency list. Graph databases like Neo4j are useful
     for representing networks in a persistent, online fashion.

    Building a good general purpose graph type is a substantial project. I thus
suggest that you check out existing implementations (particularly LEDA) before
hacking up your own. Note that it costs only time linear in the size of the larger
data structure to convert between adjacency matrices and adjacency lists. This
conversion is unlikely to be the bottleneck in any application, so you might use
both data structures if you have the space to store them. This usually isn’t
necessary, but could prove simplest if you are confused about the alternatives.
    Planar graphs are those that can be drawn in the plane so no two edges cross.
Graphs arising in many applications are planar by definition, such as maps of
countries. Others are planar by happenstance, like trees. Planar graphs are
always sparse, since any n-vertex planar graph can have at most 3n − 6 edges.
They should thus be represented using adjacency lists. If the planar drawing
(or embedding) of the graph is fundamental to what is being computed, planar
graphs are best represented geometrically. See Section 18.12 (page 581) for
algorithms for constructing planar embeddings from graphs.
    Hypergraphs are generalized graphs where each edge may link subsets of more
than two vertices. Suppose we want to encode which representative is on what
congressional committee. The vertices of our hypergraph would be the individ-
ual congressmen, while each hyperedge would represent one committee. Such
arbitrary collections of subsets of a set are naturally thought of as hypergraphs.
    Two basic data structures for hypergraphs are:

   • Incidence matrices, which are analogous to adjacency matrices. They
     require n × m space, where m is the number of hyperedges. Each row
     corresponds to a vertex, and each column to an edge, with a non-zero
     entry in M [i, j] iff vertex i is incident to edge j. Traditional graphs have
     exactly two non-zero entries in each column. The degree of each vertex
     governs the number of non-zero entries in each row.

   • Bipartite incidence structures, which are analogous to adjacency lists, and
     thus suited for sparse hypergraphs. We create a vertex of the incidence
     structure associated for every edge and vertex of the hypergraph, and
454                                     CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      add an edge (i, j) in the incidence structure whenever vertex i of the
      hypergraph appears in edge j of the hypergraph. Adjacency lists should
      be used to represent this incidence structure. Drawing the associated
      bipartite graph provides a natural way to visualize the hypergraph.

    Special efforts must be taken to represent very large graphs efficiently. How-
ever, interesting problems have been solved on graphs with millions of edges
and vertices. The first step is to make your data structure as lean as possible,
by packing your adjacency matrix in a bit vector (see Section 15.5 (page 456))
or removing unnecessary pointers from your adjacency list representation. For
example, in static graphs (which do not support edge insertions or deletions)
each edge list can be replaced by a packed array of vertex identifiers, eliminating
pointers and thus potentially saving half the space.
    If your graph is extremely large, it may become necessary to switch to a
hierarchical representation, where the vertices are clustered into subgraphs that
are compressed into single vertices. Two approaches exist to construct such
a hierarchical decomposition. The first breaks the graph into components in
a natural or application-specific way. For example, a network of roads and
cities suggests a natural decomposition—partition the map into districts, towns,
counties, and states. Alternatively, you can run a graph partition algorithm as
discussed in Section 19.6 (page 601). A natural decomposition will likely do
a better job than some naive heuristic for an NP-complete problem. If your
graph is really unmanageably large, you cannot afford to do a very good job of
algorithmically partitioning it. First verify that standard data structures fail
on your problem before attempting such heroic measures.

Implementations: LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) is a commercial prod-
uct that provides the best graph data type currently implemented in C++.
Study the methods it provides for graph manipulation, so as to see how the
right level of abstract graph type makes implementing algorithms clean and
easy.
    The C++ Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/
graph) is more readily available. Implementations of adjacency lists, matri-
ces, and edge lists are included, along with a reasonable library of basic graph
algorithms. Its interface and components are generic in the same sense as the
C++ standard template library (STL).
    Neo4j (https://neo4j.com/) is a widely used graph database, where the J
stands for Java. Needham and Hodler [NH19] present examples of graph algo-
rithms in Neo4j. JUNG (http://jung.sourceforge.net/) is a Java graph li-
brary particularly popular in the social networks community. JGraphT (https:
//jgrapht.org/) is a more recent development with similar functionality.
    The Stanford Graphbase (see Section 22.1.7 (page 715)) provides a simple
but flexible graph data structure in CWEB, a literate version of the C language.
It is instructive to see what Knuth does and does not place in his basic data
structure, although I recommend other implementations as a better basis for
further development.
15.4. GRAPH DATA STRUCTURES                                                         455

    My (biased) preferences in C language graph types include the libraries from
this book, as well as my book Programming Challenges [SR03]. See Section
22.1.9 (page 716) for details. Simple graph data structures in Mathematica
are provided by Combinatorica [PS03], with a library of algorithms and display
routines. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: The advantages of adjacency list data structures for graphs became apparent
with the linear-time algorithms of Hopcroft and Tarjan [HT73b, Tar72]. The basic
adjacency list and matrix data structures are presented in essentially all books on
algorithms or data structures, including [CLRS09, AHU83, Tar83]. Hypergraphs are
presented in Berge [Ber89].
    The improved efficiency of static graph types was revealed by Naher and Zlotowski
[NZ02], who sped up certain LEDA graph algorithms by a factor of four by simply
switching to a more compact graph structure.
    Matrix representations of graphs can exploit the power of linear algebra in problems
ranging from shortest paths to partitioning. Laplacians and other matrix structures
are presented in Bapat [Bap10]. An interesting question concerns minimizing the
number of bits needed to represent arbitrary graphs on n vertices, particularly if
certain operations must be supported efficiently. Such issues are surveyed in van
Leeuwen [vL90b].
    Dynamic graph algorithms [EGI98] are data structures that maintain quick access
to an invariant (such as minimum spanning tree or connectivity) under edge insertion
and deletion. Sparsification [EGIN97] is a general approach to constructing dynamic
graph algorithms. Jeff Westbrook, a pioneer in dynamic graph algorithms [Wes89],
went on to become a writer for the TV show The Simpsons.
    Hierarchically defined graphs often arise in VLSI design problems, because de-
signers make extensive use of cell libraries [Len90]. Algorithms specifically for hier-
archically defined graphs include planarity testing [Len89], connectivity [LW88], and
minimum spanning trees [Len87a].

Related problems: Set data structures (see page 456), graph partition (see
page 601).
456                                     CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

                                                          (X ∪ Y) ∩ Z

      X                           Y            X                            Y

                    Z                                         Z

                  Input                                   Output

15.5      Set Data Structures
Input description: A universe of items U = {u1 , . . . , un } on which is defined
a collection of subsets S = {S1 , . . . , Sm }.
Problem description: Represent each subset so as to efficiently (1) test
whether ui ∈ Sj , (2) compute the union or intersection of Si and Sj , and
(3) insert or delete members of S.
Discussion: In mathematical terms, a set is an unordered collection of objects
drawn from a fixed universal set. However, it is usually useful to represent each
set in a single canonical order, typically sorted, to speed up or simplify various
operations. Sorted order turns the problem of finding the union or intersection
of two subsets into a linear-time operation—just sweep from left to right and
see what you are missing. It makes possible element searching in sublinear time.
Finally, printing the elements of a set in a canonical order paradoxically reminds
us that order doesn’t really matter.
    We distinguish sets from two other types of objects: dictionaries and strings.
A collection of objects not drawn from a fixed-size universal set is best thought
of as a dictionary, discussed in Section 15.1 (page 440). Strings are structures
where order matters, meaning that {A, B, C} is not the same as {B, C, A}.
Section 15.3 and Chapter 21 discuss data structures and algorithms for strings,
respectively.
    Multisets permit elements to have more than one occurrence. Data structures
for sets can generally be extended to multisets by maintaining a count field, or
a linked list of equivalent entries for each element.
    When every subset contains exactly two elements, they can be thought of as
edges in a graph whose vertices represent the universal set. A system of subsets
with no restrictions on the cardinality of its members is called a hypergraph. It
is worth considering whether your problem has a graph-theoretical analogy, like
15.5. SET DATA STRUCTURES                                                      457

connected components or shortest path in a graph/hypergraph.
   Your primary alternatives for representing arbitrary subsets are:
   • Bit vectors – An n-bit vector or array can represent any subset S on a
     universal set U containing n items. Bit i is set to 1 if i ∈ S, and 0 if
     not. Because only one bit is needed per element, bit vectors can be very
     space efficient for surprisingly large values of |U |. Element insertion and
     deletion simply flips the appropriate bit. Intersection and union are done
     by “and-ing” or “or-ing” the bits together. The primary drawback of a bit
     vector is its performance on sparse subsets. For example, it takes O(n)
     time to explicitly identify all the members of a sparse (or even empty)
     subset S.
   • Containers or dictionaries – A subset S can also be represented using
     a linked list, array, or dictionary containing exactly the elements in S.
     No notion of a fixed universal set is needed for such a data structure.
     Dictionaries can be more space and time efficient for sparse subsets than
     bit vectors, and easier to work with. For efficient union and intersection
     operations, it pays to keep the elements in each subset sorted, so a linear-
     time merge of both subsets identifies all duplicates.
   • Bloom filters – We can emulate a bit vector in the absence of a fixed
     universal set by hashing each subset element to an integer from 0 to n − 1
     and setting the corresponding bit. Thus, bit H(e) is set to 1 if e ∈ S.
     Collisions leave some possibility for error under this scheme, however,
     because a different key might have hashed to the same position.
     A Bloom filter uses several (say k) different hash functions H1 , . . . Hk , and
     sets all k bits Hi (e) upon insertion of key e. Now e can be in S only if
     all k bits are 1. The probability of false positives can be made arbitrarily
     low by increasing the number of hash functions k and the table size n.
     This hashing-based data structure is much more space-efficient than dic-
     tionaries, for static subset applications that can tolerate a small proba-
     bility of error. Many can. For instance, spell checkers that occasionally
     leave some rare random string uncorrected would prove no great tragedy.
     Bloom filters are more fully described in Section 6.4.
    Many applications involve collections of subsets that are pairwise disjoint,
meaning that each element occurs in exactly one subset. For example, consider
maintaining the connected components of a graph or the party affiliations of
politicians. Each vertex/scoundrel appears in exactly one component/party.
Such a system of subsets is called a set partition. Algorithms for generating
partitions of a given set are provided in Section 17.6 (page 524).
    The primary issue with set partition data structures is maintaining changes
over time, perhaps as edges get added or party members defect. Typical queries
include “which set is a particular item in?” and “are two items in the same
set?” as we modify the set by (1) changing one item, (2) merging or unioning
two sets, or (3) breaking a set apart. Your basic options are:
458                                       CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      • Collection of containers – Representing each subset in its own container
        or dictionary permits fast access to all their elements, which facilitates
        union and intersection operations. The cost comes in membership testing,
        since we must search each subset data structure independently until we
        find our target.

      • Generalized bit vector – Let the ith element of an array denote the num-
        ber/name of the subset that contains it. Set identification queries and
        single element modifications can be performed in constant time. However,
        operations like performing the union of two subsets take time proportional
        to the size of the universe, since each element in the two subsets must be
        identified and have its name changed.

   • Dictionary with a subset attribute – Similarly, each item in a binary tree
     can be associated with a field that records the name of its subset. Set
     identification queries and single element modifications can be performed
     in the time it takes to search the dictionary. But union/intersection oper-
     ations are again slow. The need to perform such union operations quickly
     provides the motivation for the . . .

   • Union–find data structure – We represent a subset using a rooted tree
     where each node points to its parent instead of its children. The name of
     each subset will be the name of the item at the root. To find the subset
     name for a given element, keep traversing up the parent pointers until you
     hit the root. Unioning two subsets is also easy. Assign the root of one of
     two trees to point to the other, so now all elements have the same root
     and hence the same subset name.
        Implementation details have a big impact on asymptotic performance here.
        Always selecting the larger (or taller) tree as the root in a merger guaran-
        tees logarithmic height trees, as with our implementation in Section 8.1.3
        (page 250). Shrinking the path traced after each find, by explicitly point-
        ing each path node directly to the root, is called path compression and
        reduces the tree to almost constant height. Union–find is a fast, simple
        data structure that every programmer should know.

Implementations: Modern programming languages provide libraries offering
complete and efficient set implementations. The C++ Standard Template Li-
brary (STL) provides set and multiset containers. LEDA (see Section 22.1.1
(page 713)) provides efficient dictionary data structures, sparse arrays, and
union–find data structures to maintain set partitions, all in C++. Java Col-
lections (JC) contains HashSet and TreeSet containers and is included in the
java.util package of Java Standard Edition.
    An implementation of union–find underlies any implementation of Kruskal’s
minimum spanning tree algorithm. For this reason, all the graph libraries of Sec-
tion 15.4 (page 452) presumably contain an implementation. Minimum spanning
tree codes are described in Section 18.3 (page 549).
15.5. SET DATA STRUCTURES                                                             459

   The computer algebra system REDUCE (http://www.reduce-algebra.
com/) contains SETS, a package supporting set-theoretic operations on both
explicit and implicit (symbolic) sets. Other computer algebra systems may sup-
port similar functionality.
Notes: Optimal algorithms for set operations such as intersection and union were pre-
sented in Reingold [Rei72]. Raman [Ram05] provides an excellent survey on data struc-
tures for a variety of different set operations. Bloom filters are ably surveyed in Broder
and Mitzenmacher [BM05], with experimental results presented in [PSS07]. The
cuckoo filter [FAKM14] is an improved Bloom filter variant offering better space/time
performance and support for deletions.
     Certain balanced tree data structures support merge/meld/link/cut operations,
which permit fast ways to union and intersect disjoint subsets. See Tarjan [Tar83]
for a nice presentation of such structures. Jacobson [Jac89] augmented the bit-vector
data structure to support select operations (where is the ith 1 bit?) efficiently in both
time and space.
     Galil and Italiano [GI91] survey data structures for disjoint set union. The upper
bound of O(mα(m, n)) on m union–find operations on an n-element set is due to Tarjan
[Tar75], as is a matching lower bound on a restricted model of computation [Tar79].
The inverse Ackerman function α(m, n) grows notoriously slowly, so this performance
is close to linear. An interesting connection between the worst-case of union–find and
the length of Davenport–Schinzel sequences—a combinatorial structure that arises in
computational geometry—is established in Sharir and Agarwal [SA95].
     The power set of a set S is the collection of all 2|S| subsets of S. Explicit manipu-
lation of power sets quickly becomes intractable due to their size. Implicit representa-
tions of power sets in symbolic form becomes necessary for non-trivial computations.
See [BCGR92] for algorithms on, and computational experience with, symbolic power
set representations.

Related problems: Generating subsets (see page 521), generating partitions
(see page 524), set cover (see page 678), minimum spanning tree (see page 549).
460                                      CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

                  Input                                    Output

15.6      Kd-Trees
Input description: A set S of n points (or more complicated geometric ob-
jects) in k dimensions.
Problem description: Construct a tree that partitions space by half-planes
such that each object is contained in its own box-shaped region.
Discussion: Kd-trees and related spatial data structures hierarchically decom-
pose space into a small number of cells, each containing only a few representa-
tives from an input set of points. This provides a fast way to access an object
by position. We traverse down the hierarchy to find the smallest cell containing
it, and then scan through the objects in this cell until we find what we want.
    Typical algorithms construct kd-trees by partitioning point sets. Each node
in the tree is defined by a plane cutting through one of the dimensions. Ideally,
this plane partitions the subset of points into equal-sized left/right (or up/down)
subsets. These children are again partitioned into equal halves, using planes
through a different dimension. Partitioning stops after lg n levels, with every
point in its own leaf cell.
    The cutting planes along any path from the root to another node defines a
unique box-shaped region of space. Each subsequent plane cuts this box into two
boxes. Each box-shaped region is defined by 2k planes, where k is the number
of dimensions. Indeed, the “kd” in kd-tree is short for “k-dimensional.” We
maintain the region of interest defined by the intersection of these half-spaces
as we move down the tree.
    Flavors of kd-trees differ in exactly how the splitting plane is selected, but
options include:
15.6. KD-TREES                                                                   461

   • Cycling through the dimensions – partition first on d1 , then d2 , . . . , dk
     before cycling back to d1 .

   • Cutting along the largest dimension – select the partition dimension that
     makes the resulting boxes as square or cube-like as possible. Selecting a
     plane to partition the points equally does not always put the splitter in
     the middle of the box-shaped region, because all the points may happen
     to lie in the left side of the box.

   • Quadtrees or octtrees – Instead of partitioning with single planes, use all
     axis-parallel planes that pass through a given partition point. In two
     dimensions, this creates four child cells. In three dimensions, we get eight
     child cells. Quadtrees seem particularly popular on image data, where leaf
     cells imply that all pixels in the regions have the same color.

   • Random projection trees – Here the cutting plane for a node is defined by
     a random slope/direction (or more generally, a d − 1 dimensional plane
     through the origin). We identify a line/plane perpendicular to this direc-
     tion that evenly partitions the points into two halves: such a line must
     exist and can be easily found. Then recur. These trees must have log-
     arithmic height, yet can follow the points better than kd-trees when low
     dimensional structures occur in higher dimensionsional data.

   • BSP-trees – Binary space partitions use general (i.e.not just axis-parallel)
     cutting planes to carve up space into cells such that each cell ends up con-
     taining only one object (say a polygon). Such partitions are not possible
     using only axis-parallel cuts for certain sets of objects. The downside is
     that such polyhedral cell boundaries are more complicated to work with
     than boxes.

   • Ball trees – A ball tree is a hierarchical data structure on points, where
     each node is associated with a ball, defined by its center and radius. Each
     node’s ball is the smallest that contains the balls of its children. Unlike
     kd-trees, this means that sibling balls can intersect, and do not partition
     the entire space. But they are very good for nearest-neighbor search in
     high dimensions, where kd-trees break down.

    Ideally, our partitions will split both the space (ensuring fat, regular regions)
and the set of points (ensuring a log height tree) evenly, but doing both simulta-
neously can be impossible on a given input. The advantages of fat cells become
clear in many applications of kd-trees:

   • Point location – To identify which cell a query point q lies in, start at the
     root and test which side of the partition plane contains q. By repeating
     this process on the appropriate child node, we travel down the tree to find
     the leaf cell containing q in time proportional to its height. See Section
     20.7 (page 644) for more on point location.
462                                         CHAPTER 15. DATA STRUCTURES

      • Nearest-neighbor search – To find the point in S closest to a given query
        point q, we perform point location to find the cell c containing q. Since
        this cell is associated with some point p, we can compute the distance
        d(p, q) from p to q.
        Point p is likely close to q, but it might not be the absolute closest neighbor.
        Why? Suppose q lies at the right boundary of its cell. Then q’s nearest
        neighbor might well lie towards the left of the boundary of the neighboring
        cell. Thus, we must traverse all cells that lie within a distance of d(p, q)
        of q and verify that none of them contain any closer points. In trees with
        nice, fat cells, very few cells should need to be tested. See Section 20.5
        (page 637) for more on nearest-neighbor search.
   • Range search – Which points lie within a query box or region? Starting
     from the root, check whether the query region intersects (or contains) the
     cell defining the current node. If it does, check the children; if not, none of
     the leaf cells below this node can possibly be of interest. We quickly prune
     away irrelevant portions of the space. Section 20.6 (page 641) focuses on
     range search.
   • Partial key search – Suppose we want to find a point p in S, but we do
     not have full information about p. Say we are looking for someone of age
     59 and height 5 feet 8 inches but of unknown weight in a kd-tree with
     dimensions of age, weight, and height. Starting from the root, we can
     identify the correct descendant for all but the weight dimension. To be
     sure we find the right point, we must search both children of these nodes.
     The more fields we know the better, but such partial key search can be
     substantially faster than checking all points against the key.

    Kd-trees are most useful for a small to moderate number of dimensions,
say from two up to maybe twenty dimensions. They lose effectiveness as the
dimensionality increases, primarily because the ratio of the volume of a unit
sphere in k-dimensions shrinks exponentially compared to the unit cube. Thus,
exponentially many cells will have to be searched within a given radius of a
query point, say for nearest-neighbor search. Also, the number of neighbors for
any cell grows to 2k and eventually becomes unmanageable.
    The bottom line is you should try to avoid working in high-dimensional
spaces, perhaps by discarding (or projecting away) the least important dimen-
sions.
Implementations: KDTREE 2 contains C++ and Fortran 95 implementations
of kd-trees for efficient nearest-neighbor search in many dimensions. See http:
//arxiv.org/abs/physics/0408067. Ball trees are included as part of the
popular Python package scikit-learn, again for nearest-neighbor search in high
dimensional data.
    Samet’s spatial index demos (http://donar.umiacs.umd.edu/quadtree/)
provide a series of Java applets illustrating many variants of kd-trees, in asso-
ciation with his book [Sam06].
15.6. KD-TREES                                                                   463

    The 1999 DIMACS implementation challenge focused on data structures
for nearest-neighbor search [GJM02]. Data sets and codes are accessible from
http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/Challenges.
Notes: Samet [Sam06] is the best reference on kd-trees and other spatial data
structures. All major (and many minor) variants are developed in substantial de-
tail. Samet’s shorter survey [Sam05] is also available. Bentley [Ben75] is generally
credited with developing kd-trees, although they have the murky history associated
with most folk data structures.
     The performance of spatial data structures degrades with high dimensionality.
Balltrees [Omo89] and random projection trees [DF08] are examples of data structures
designed to address this issue.
     Projecting high-dimensional spaces onto a random lower-dimensional hyperplane
has recently emerged as a simple but powerful method for dimensionality reduction.
Both theoretical [IMS18] and empirical [BM01] results indicate that this method pre-
serves distances quite nicely.
     Algorithms that quickly produce a point provably close to the query point are an
important aspect higher-dimensional nearest-neighbor search. See [ML14] for recent
experimental results on finding high-dimensional near neighbors. Locality sensitive
hashing methods such as Andoni and Indyk [AI06] are very popular and effective.
Another approach by Arya et al. [AMN+ 98] builds a sparse weighted-graph structure
from the data set, with the nearest neighbor found by starting at a random point and
walking greedily in the graph towards the query point. The closest point found over
several random trials is declared the winner. Similar methods hold promise for other
problems in high-dimensional spaces.

Related problems: Nearest-neighbor search (see page 637), point location
(see page 644), range search (see page 641).
