Chapter 16

Numerical Problems

If most problems you encounter are numerical in nature, there is an excellent
chance that you are reading the wrong book. Numerical Recipes [PFTV07]
gives a terriﬁc overview of the fundamental problems in numerical computing,
including linear algebra, numerical integration, statistics, and diﬀerential equa-
tions. Diﬀerent ﬂavors of the book include source code for all the algorithms in
C++, Fortran, and even Pascal. Their coverage is somewhat skimpier on the
combinatorial/numerical problems considered in this section, but you should be
aware of it. Check them out at http://numerical.recipes/.
    Numerical computation has been of increasing importance because of ma-
chine learning, which heavily relies on linear algebra and unconstrained opti-
mization. But note that numerical algorithms tend to be diﬀerent beasts than
combinatorial algorithms for at least two reasons:

    • Issues of precision and error – Numerical algorithms typically perform
      repeated ﬂoating-point computations, which accumulate error at each op-
      eration until, eventually, the results are meaningless. My favorite example
      concerns the Vancouver Stock Exchange, which over a 22-month period
      accumulated enough round-oﬀ error to reduce its index from the correct
      value of 1098.982 to 574.081 [MV99].
       A simple and dependable way to test for round-oﬀ errors in numerical
       programs is to run them both at single and double precision, and then
       think hard if there is a substantial disagreement.

    • Extensive libraries of codes – Large, high-quality libraries of numerical
      algorithms have existed since the 1960s, which is still not yet the case for
      combinatorial algorithms. There are several reasons for this, including (1)
      the early emergence of Fortran as a standard for numerical computation,
      (2) the nature of numerical computations to be recognizably independent
      modules instead of embedded in large applications, and (3) the existence
      of large scientiﬁc communities needing general numerical libraries.
       Regardless of why, you should exploit this software base. There is probably
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   465
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_16
466                                 CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

        no reason to implement algorithms for any of the problems in this section,
        as opposed to using existing codes. Searching Netlib (see Section 22.1.4)
        is an excellent place to start.

    Many scientists and engineers have ideas about algorithms that culturally
derive from the simple control and data structures of numerical methods. In
contrast, computer scientists grow up programming with pointers and recursion,
and hence are comfortable with the more sophisticated data structures required
for combinatorial algorithms. Both sides can and should learn from each other,
since many problems can be modeled either numerically or combinatorially.
    There is a vast literature on numerical algorithms. In addition to Numerical
Recipes, recommended books include:

      • Chapra and Canale [CC16] – The contemporary market leader in numer-
        ical analysis texts.
      • Mak [Mak02] – This enjoyable text introduces Java to the world of nu-
        merical computation, and vice versa. Source code is provided.
      • Hamming [Ham87] – This oldie but goodie provides a clear and lucid treat-
        ment of fundamental methods in numerical computation. It is available
        in a low-priced Dover Publications edition.
      • Skeel and Keiper [SK00] – A readable and interesting treatment of ba-
        sic numerical methods, avoiding overly detailed algorithm descriptions
        through its use of the computer algebra system Mathematica. I like it.

      • Cheney and Kincaid [CK12] – A traditional Fortran-based numerical anal-
        ysis text, with discussions of optimization and Monte Carlo methods in
        addition to such standard topics as root-ﬁnding, numerical integration,
        linear systems, splines, and diﬀerential equations.
      • Buchanan and Turner [BT92] – Thorough language-independent treat-
        ment of all standard topics, including parallel algorithms. It is the most
        comprehensive of the texts described here.
16.1. SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS                                               467

       y                                        y

           y = -x + 2
       2
                                y = x/2 + 1     2

       1                                        1

                                                            (2,0)

              1         2   3     4     x              1     2      3    4    x

                   Input                                   Output

16.1       Solving Linear Equations
Input description: An m × n matrix A and an m × 1 vector b, together
representing m linear equations on n variables.
Problem description: What is the vector x such that A · x = b?
Discussion: The need to solve linear systems arises in an estimated 75% of all
scientiﬁc computing problems [DB74]. For example, applying Kirchhoﬀ’s laws
to analyze electrical circuits generates a system of equations—the solution of
which predicts the current through each branch of the circuit. Many machine
learning algorithms reduce to solving linear systems, including linear regression
and singular value decomposition (SVD). Even ﬁnding the point of intersection
between two or more lines reduces to solving a small linear system.
    Not all systems of equations have solutions. Just try to solve 2x + 3y = 5
and 2x + 3y = 6. Some systems of equations have multiple solutions, such as
2x + 3y = 5 and 4x + 6y = 10. Such degenerate systems of equations are called
singular, and they can be recognized by testing whether the determinant of the
coeﬃcient matrix is zero.
    Solving linear systems is a problem of such scientiﬁc and commercial impor-
tance that excellent codes are readily available. There is never a good reason to
implement your own solver, even though the basic algorithm (Gaussian elimi-
nation) is one you learned in high school. This is especially true when working
with large systems.
    Gaussian elimination is based on the observation that the solution to a sys-
tem of linear equations is invariant under scaling (if x = y, then 2x = 2y) and
adding equations (the solution to x = y and w = z is the same as the solution
to x = y and x + w = y + z). Gaussian elimination scales and adds equations
to eliminate each variable from all but one equation, leaving the system in such
a state that the solution can be directly read oﬀ from the resulting equations.
    The time complexity of Gaussian elimination on an n×n system of equations
is O(n3 ), because we add a scaled copy of the n-term ith row to each of the n−1
468                               CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

other equations to clear the ith (of n) variable. But on this problem, constants
matter. Algorithms that only partially reduce the coeﬃcient matrix and then
back substitute to get the answer use 50% fewer ﬂoating-point operations than
the naive algorithm.
   Issues to worry about include:
   • Are round-oﬀ errors and numerical stability aﬀecting my solution? –
     Gaussian elimination would be quite straightforward to implement ex-
     cept for round-oﬀ errors. These accumulate with each row operation and
     quickly wreak havoc on the solution, particularly with matrices that are
     almost singular.
      To eliminate the danger of numerical errors, it pays to substitute the
      solution back into each of the original equations and test how close they
      are to the desired value. Iterative techniques for solving linear systems,
      like the Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel methods, reﬁne initial solutions to obtain
      more accurate answers. Good linear systems packages will include such
      routines.
      The key to minimizing round-oﬀ errors in Gaussian elimination is selecting
      the right equations and variables to pivot on, and to scale the equations
      to eliminate large coeﬃcients. This is an art as much as a science, which
      is why you should use a well-crafted library routine as described below.
   • Which routine in the library should I use? – Selecting the right code is
     also somewhat of an art. If you are taking your advice from this book,
     start with a general linear system solver and hope it will suﬃce for your
     needs. But search through the manual for more eﬃcient procedures solving
     special types of linear systems. If your matrix happens to be one of these
     special types, the solution time can reduce from cubic to quadratic or even
     linear.
   • Is my system sparse? – A key to recognizing that you have a special-case
     linear system is establishing how many matrix elements you really need
     to describe A. If there are only a few non-zero elements, your matrix is
     sparse and you are in luck. If these few non-zero elements are clustered
     near the diagonal, your matrix is banded and you are in even more luck.
     Algorithms for reducing the bandwidth of a matrix are discussed in Section
     16.2. Many other regular patterns of sparse matrices can also be exploited,
     so consult the manual of your solver or a good book on numerical analysis
     for details.
   • Will I be solving many systems using the same coeﬃcient matrix? – In
     applications such as least-squares curve ﬁtting, people often solve A·x = b
     repeatedly with diﬀerent b vectors. We can preprocess A to make this
     easier. The lower-upper or LU-decomposition of A creates lower- and
     upper-triangular matrices L and U such that L · U = A. We can use this
     decomposition to solve A · x = b, since
                         A · x = (L · U ) · x = L · (U · x) = b
16.1. SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS                                                  469

      This is eﬃcient because back substitution solves a triangular system of
      equations in quadratic time. Solving L · y = b and then U · x = y gives
      the solution x using two O(n2 ) steps instead of one O(n3 ) step, after the
      LU-decomposition was computed in O(n3 ) time.

    The problem of solving linear systems is equivalent to that of matrix inver-
sion, since Ax = B ↔ A−1 Ax = A−1 B, where I = A−1 A is the identity matrix.
Avoid it, however, because matrix inversion proves to be three times slower
than Gaussian elimination. LU-decomposition is very useful to invert matrices
as well as compute determinants (see Section 16.4 (page 475)).
Implementations: The library of choice for solving linear systems is appar-
ently LAPACK—a descendant of LINPACK [DMBS79]. Both of these Fortran
codes, as well as many others, are available from Netlib (https://www.netlib.
org/). Variants of LAPACK exist for other languages, like CLAPACK (C) and
LAPACK++ (C++). The Template Numerical Toolkit is an interface to such
routines in C++, and is available at http://math.nist.gov/tnt/.
    JScience provides an extensive linear algebra package (including determi-
nants) as part of its comprehensive scientiﬁc computing library. JAMA is an-
other matrix package written in Java. Links to both and many related libraries
are available at http://math.nist.gov/javanumerics/.
    Numerical Recipes [PFTV07] (http://numerical.recipes/) provides guid-
ance and routines for solving linear systems. Lack of conﬁdence in dealing with
numerical procedures is the most compelling reason to use these ahead of the
free codes.
Notes: Golub and van Loan [GL96] is the standard reference on algorithms for
linear systems. Good expositions on algorithms for Gaussian elimination and LU-
decomposition include [CLRS09] and a host of numerical analysis texts [BT92, CK12,
SK00]. Data structures for linear systems are surveyed in [PT05].
    Parallel algorithms for linear systems are discussed in [Gal90, GO14, HNP91,
KSV97]. Solving linear systems is one of the most important applications where par-
allel architectures are used widely in practice.
    Matrix inversion and (hence) linear systems solving can be done in matrix multi-
plication time using Strassen’s algorithm plus a reduction. Good expositions on the
equivalence of these problems include [AHU74, CLRS09].
    The HHL quantum computing algorithm has been proposed to solve n × n linear
systems in O(log n) time [HHL09], which would be an exponential-time speedup over
what is possible on conventional computers. This would be a real game-changer but
there are many caveats, clearly explained by Aaronson [Aar15].

Related problems: Matrix multiplication (see page 472), determinant/permanent
(see page 475).
470                               CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

                 Input                                   Output

16.2      Bandwidth Reduction
Input description: A graph G = (V, E), representing an n × n matrix M of
zero and non-zero elements.
Problem description: Which permutation p of the vertices minimizes the
length of the longest edge—i.e., minimizes max(i,j)∈E |p(i) − p(j)|?
Discussion: Bandwidth reduction lurks as a hidden but important problem for
both graphs and matrices. Applied to matrices, bandwidth reduction permutes
the rows and columns of a sparse matrix to minimize the distance b of the
furthest non-zero entry from the center diagonal. This is important in solving
linear systems, because Gaussian elimination can be performed in O(nb2 ) on
matrices of bandwidth b: a big win over the general O(n3 ) algorithm if b ? n.
    Bandwidth minimization on graphs arises in more subtle ways. Arranging
n circuit components in a row to minimize the length of the longest wire (and
hence time delay) is a bandwidth problem, where each vertex of graph G cor-
responds to a circuit component and there is an edge for every wire linking
two components. More general formulations such as rectangular circuit layouts
inherit the same hardness and classes of heuristics from the linear versions.
    The bandwidth problem seeks a linear ordering of the vertices, which min-
imizes the length of the longest edge. But there are other variations of the
problem. In linear arrangement, we seek to minimize the sum of the lengths
of the edges. This has application to circuit layout, where we seek to position
the chips to minimize the total wire length. In proﬁle minimization, we seek
to minimize the sum of one-way distances, for each vertex v the length of the
longest edge whose other vertex is to the left of v.
    Unfortunately, all these variants of bandwidth minimization are NP-complete.
It stays NP-complete even if the input graph is a tree whose maximum vertex
degree is 3, which is about as strong a condition as I have seen on any problem.
Therefore, our only options are brute-force search and heuristics.
    Fortunately, ad hoc heuristics have been well studied and production-quality
implementations of the best heuristics are available. These are based on per-
forming a breadth-ﬁrst search from a given vertex v, where v is placed at the
16.2. BANDWIDTH REDUCTION                                                        471

left-most point of the ordering. All of the vertices that are distance 1 from v are
placed to its immediate right, followed by all the vertices at distance 2, and so
forth until all vertices in G are accounted for. The popular heuristics diﬀer ac-
cording to how many diﬀerent start vertices are considered, and how equidistant
vertices are ordered among themselves. Breaking ties with low-degree vertices
over to the left generally seems to be a good idea.
    Implementations of the most popular heuristics—the Cuthill–McKee and
Gibbs–Poole–Stockmeyer algorithms—are discussed below. The worst case time
of the Gibbs–Poole–Stockmeyer algorithm is O(n3 ), but its performance in prac-
tice is close to linear.
    Brute-force search programs can ﬁnd the exact minimum bandwidth, by
backtracking through the set of all n! possible permutations of vertices. Con-
siderable pruning can be achieved to reduce the search space by starting with
a good heuristic bandwidth solution and alternately adding vertices to the left-
and rightmost open slots in the partial permutation.
Implementations: Del Corso and Manzini’s [CM99] code for exact solutions
to bandwidth problems is available at https://people.unipmn.it/manzini/
bandmin. Caprara and Salazar-González [CSG05] developed improved methods
based on integer programming. Their branch-and-bound implementation in C
is available at the Algorithms Repository.
    Fortran language implementations of both the Cuthill-McKee algorithm
[CM69] and the Gibbs-Poole-Stockmeyer algorithm [GPS76] are available from
Netlib. Empirical evaluations of these and other algorithms on a test suite
of thirty matrices [Eve79], show Gibbs–Poole–Stockmeyer to be the consistent
winner. Petit [Pet03] performed an extensive experimental study on heuristics
for the minimum linear arrangement problem. His codes and data are available
at http://www.lsi.upc.edu/~jpetit/MinLA/Experiments/.
Notes: Diaz et al. [DPS02] provide an excellent survey on algorithms for bandwidth
and related graph layout problems. See [CCDG82] for graph-theoretic and algorithmic
results on bandwidth minimization, up to 1981. Ad hoc heuristics have been widely
studied—a tribute to its importance in numerical computation. Everstine [Eve79] cites
no less than 49 diﬀerent bandwidth reduction algorithms!
    The hardness of the bandwidth problem was ﬁrst established by Papadimitriou
[Pap76b], and its hardness on trees of maximum degree 3 in [GGJK78]. There are
algorithms that run in polynomial time for ﬁxed bandwidth k [Sax80]. Approxima-
tion algorithms oﬀering a polylogarithmic guarantee exist for the general problem
[BKRV00, FL07], beyond which the problem is hard to approximate [DFU11].

Related problems: Solving linear equations (see page 467), topological sorting
(see page 546).
472                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

      0 0 1 0                   0 1                             4 5
      1 0 0 0                   2 3                             0 1
      0 0 0 1                   4 5                             6 7
      0 1 0 0                   6 7                             2 3

                 Input                                          Output

16.3      Matrix Multiplication
Input description: An x × y matrix A and a y × z matrix B.
Problem description: Compute the x × z matrix A × B.
Discussion: Matrix multiplication is a fundamental problem in linear algebra.
Its main signiﬁcance for combinatorial algorithms is its equivalence to many
other problems, including transitive closure/reduction, parsing, solving linear
systems, and matrix inversion. A faster algorithm for matrix multiplication
implies faster algorithms for all of these problems. Matrix multiplication arises
in its own right in computing the results of such coordinate transformations as
scaling, rotation, and translation for robotics and computer graphics.
    Matrix multiplication is often used for data rearrangement problems instead
of hard-coded logic. Multiplying by the identity matrix does nothing at all.
But consider the input/output ﬁgures above. Observe that multiplying by the
permutation matrix (on left) rearranged the rows of the output matrix. Eﬃ-
cient sparse matrix multiplication libraries can be astonishingly fast on such
operations.
    The following tight algorithm computes the product of x × y matrix A and
y × z matrix B, and runs in O(xyz). Remember to ﬁrst initialize M [i, j] to 0
for all 1 ≤ i ≤ x and i ≤ j ≤ z:

            for i = 1 to x do
                 for j = 1 to z
                      for k = 1 to y
                           M [i, j] = M [i, j] + A[i, k] · B[k, j]

   An implementation in C appears in Section 2.5.4 (page 45). This straightfor-
ward algorithm would seem to be tough to beat in practice. That said, observe
that the three loops can be arbitrarily permuted without changing the resulting
16.3. MATRIX MULTIPLICATION                                                    473

answer. Such a permutation will change the memory access patterns and thus
how eﬀectively the cache is used. One can expect a 10–20% variation in run
time among the six possible implementations, but probably not conﬁdently pre-
dict the winner (typically ikj) without running it on your machine with your
particular matrices.
    When multiplying two bandwidth-b matrices, a speedup to O(xbz) is possi-
ble. Zero values cannot contribute to the product, and all non-zero elements of
A and B must lie within b positions of their main diagonals.
    Asymptotically faster algorithms for matrix multiplication exist, using clever
divide-and-conquer recurrences. However, these prove diﬃcult to program, re-
quire very large matrices, and are less numerically stable to boot. The most
famous of these is Strassen’s O(n2.81 ) algorithm. Empirical results (discussed
below) disagree on the exact crossover point where Strassen’s algorithm beats
the simple cubic algorithm, but it is in the ballpark of n ≈ 100.
    There is a better way to save computation when you are multiplying a chain
of more than two matrices together. Recall that multiplying an x×y matrix by
a y×z matrix creates an x×z matrix. Thus, multiplying a chain of matrices from
left to right might create large intermediate matrices, each taking a lot of time
to compute. Matrix multiplication is not commutative, but it is associative,
so we can parenthesize the chain in whatever manner we deem best without
changing the ﬁnal product. A standard dynamic programming algorithm can
be used to construct the optimal parenthesization. Whether it pays to do this
optimization will depend upon whether your matrix dimensions are suﬃciently
irregular and your chain multiplied often enough to justify it. Note that we
are optimizing over the sizes of the dimensions in the chain, not the matrices
themselves. No improvement is possible when all your matrices have the same
dimensions.
    Matrix multiplication has a particularly interesting interpretation in count-
ing the number of paths between two vertices in a graph. Let A be the adjacency
matrix of a graph G, meaning A[i, j] = 1 if there is an edge between i and j.
Otherwise, A[i, j] = 0. Now consider the square of this matrix, A2 = A × A.
If A2 [i, j] ≥ 1, there must be a vertex k such that A[i, k] = A[k, j] = 1, so i to
k to j is a path of length 2 in G. More generally, Ak [i, j] counts the number
of paths of length exactly k between i and j. This count includes non-simple
paths, where vertices are repeated, such as i to k to i to j.

Implementations: D’Alberto and Nicolau [DN07] have engineered a very ef-
ﬁcient matrix multiplication code, which switches from Strassen’s to the cubic
algorithm at the optimal point. It is available at http://www.fastmmw.com.
Earlier experiments put the crossover point where Strassen’s algorithm beats
the cubic algorithm at about n = 128 [BLS91, CR76].
    An O(n3 ) algorithm will likely be your best bet unless your matrices are
very large. The linear algebra library of choice is LAPACK, a descendant of
LINPACK [DMBS79], which includes several routines for matrix multiplication.
These Fortran codes are available from Netlib.
474                                   CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

Notes: Winograd’s algorithm [Win68] for fast matrix multiplication reduces the
number of multiplications by a factor of two over the straightforward algorithm. This
can be a win despite the additional bookkeeping required [DN09].
     In my opinion, the history of theoretical algorithm design began when Strassen
[Str69] published his O(n2.81 )-time matrix multiplication algorithm. For the ﬁrst time,
improving an algorithm in the asymptotic sense became a respected goal in its own
right. Progressive improvements to Strassen’s algorithm have gotten progressively
less practical. The current best result for matrix multiplication is Williams’ [Wil12]
O(n2.3727 ) algorithm, beating the previous champion (Coppersmith and Winograd
[CW90]) by a factor of n0.003 . The conjecture is that Θ(n2 ) suﬃces.
     The problem of Boolean matrix multiplication can be reduced to that of general
matrix multiplication [CLRS09]. The four-Russians algorithm for Boolean matrix
multiplication [ADKF70] uses preprocessing to construct all subsets of lg n rows for fast
retrieval in performing the actual multiplication, yielding a complexity of O(n3 / lg n).
Additional preprocessing can improve this to O(n3 / lg2 n) [Ryt85].
     Engineering eﬃcient matrix multiplication algorithms requires careful management
of cache memory. See [BDN01, HUW02] for studies on these issues.
     The inverse of multiplying matrices is factoring them, reducing M to A and B such
that M = A · B. LU-decomposition is an example of exact matrix factorization, but
there is now increasing interest in low dimensional factorization of feature matrices for
data science and machine learning [KBV09].
     The interest in the squares of graphs goes beyond counting paths. Fleischner
[Fle74] proved that the square of any biconnected graph has a Hamiltonian cycle. See
[LS95] for results on ﬁnding the square roots of graphs—that is, ﬁnding A given A2 .
     Good expositions of the matrix-chain algorithm include [BvG99, CLRS09], where
it is given as a standard textbook example of dynamic programming.

Related problems: Solving linear equations (see page 467), shortest path (see
page 554).
16.4. DETERMINANTS AND PERMANENTS                                                              475

           a b c                               a      e
                                                      h
                                                           f
                                                           i
                                                                — b
                                                                         d
                                                                         g
                                                                             f
                                                                             i
                                                                                 + c
                                                                                       d
                                                                                       g
                                                                                           e
                                                                                           h

           d e f                              a(ei — fh) — b(di — fg) + c(dh — eg)

           g h i                              aei — bfg + cdh — ceg — bdi — afh

                 Input                                                  Output

16.4      Determinants and Permanents
Input description: An n × n matrix M .
Problem description: What is the determinant |M | or permanent perm(M )
of the matrix M ?
Discussion: Determinants of matrices provide a clean and useful abstraction
that can be used to solve a variety of linear algebra problems:

   • Testing whether a matrix is singular, meaning that the matrix does not
     have an inverse. A matrix M is singular iﬀ |M | = 0.
   • Testing whether a set of d points lies on a plane in fewer than d dimensions.
     If so, the system of equations they deﬁne is singular, so |M | = 0.
   • Testing whether a point lies to the left or right of a line or plane. This
     problem reduces to evaluating whether the sign of a determinant is positive
     or negative, as discussed in Section 20.1 (page 622).
   • Computing the area or volume of a triangle, tetrahedron, or other sim-
     plicial complex. These quantities are a function of the magnitude of the
     determinant, also discussed in Section 20.1 (page 622).

   The determinant of a matrix M is deﬁned as a sum over all n! possible
permutations πi of the n columns of M :
                               n!
                               ?                     n
                                                     ?
                      |M | =         (−1)sign(πi )         M [j, πj ]
                               i=1                   j=1

where sign(πi ) denotes the number of pairs of elements out of order (called
inversions) in permutation πi .
476                                 CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

    Directly implementing this deﬁnition yields an O(n!) algorithm, as does
the cofactor expansion method I learned in high school. Better algorithms
to evaluate determinants are based on LU-decomposition, discussed in Section
16.1 (page 467). The determinant of M is simply the product of the diagonal
elements of the LU-decomposition of M , which can be found in O(n3 ) time.
    The permanent is a closely related function that arises in combinatorial prob-
lems. For example, the permanent of the adjacency matrix of a graph G counts
the number of perfect matchings in G. The permanent of a matrix M is deﬁned
by
                                        ?n! ?n
                          perm(M ) =           M [j, πj ]
                                         i=1 j=1

diﬀering from the determinant only in that all products are positive.
    Surprisingly, it is NP-hard to compute the permanent, even though the de-
terminant can easily be computed in O(n3 ) time. The fundamental diﬀerence
is that det(AB) = det(A) × det(B), while perm(AB) ?= perm(A) × perm(B).
There are permanent algorithms running in O(n2 2n ) time that are considerably
faster than the O(n!) deﬁnition. Thus, ﬁnding the permanent of a 20×20 matrix
is not out of the realm of possibility.
Implementations: The linear algebra package LINPACK contains a variety
of Fortran routines for computing determinants, optimized for diﬀerent data
types and matrix structures. JScience provides an extensive linear algebra
package (including determinants) as part of its comprehensive scientiﬁc com-
puting library. JAMA is another matrix package written in Java. Links to
both and many related libraries are available from http://math.nist.gov/
javanumerics/.
    Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] provide an eﬃcient Fortran routine to compute
the permanent of a matrix. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716). Cash [Cas95] provides
a C routine to compute the permanent, motivated by the Kekulé structure count
of computational chemistry.
    Two diﬀerent codes for approximating the permanent are provided by Barvi-
nok. The ﬁrst, based on [BS07], provides codes for approximating the permanent
and a Hafnian of a matrix, as well as the number of spanning forests in a graph.
See http://www.math.lsa.umich.edu/~barvinok/manual.html. The second,
based on [SB01], can provide estimates of the permanent of 200 × 200 matrices
in seconds. See http://www.math.lsa.umich.edu/~barvinok/code.html.
Notes: Cramer’s rule reduces the problems of matrix inversion and solving lin-
ear systems to that of computing determinants. However, algorithms based on LU-
decomposition are faster. See [BM53] for an exposition on Cramer’s rule.
    Determinants can be computed in o(n3 ) time using fast matrix multiplication, as
shown in [AHU83]. Section 16.3 (page 472) discusses such algorithms. A fast algorithm
for computing the sign of the determinant—an important problem in performing robust
geometric computations—is due to Clarkson [Cla92].
    The problem of computing the permanent was shown to be #P-complete by Valiant
[Val79], where #P is the class of problems solvable on a “counting” machine in polyno-
16.4. DETERMINANTS AND PERMANENTS                                               477

mial time. A counting machine returns the number of distinct solutions to a problem.
Counting the number of Hamiltonian cycles in a graph is a #P-complete problem that
is trivially NP-hard (and presumably harder), since a count greater than zero proves
that the graph is Hamiltonian. But counting problems can be #P-complete even if
the corresponding decision problem can be solved in polynomial time, as shown by the
permanent and perfect matchings.
     Minc [Min78] is the primary reference on permanents. A variant of an O(n2 2n )-
time algorithm due to Ryser for computing the permanent is presented in [NW78].
     Probabilistic algorithms have been developed for estimating the permanent, cul-
minating in a fully polynomial randomized approximation scheme that provides an
arbitrary close approximation in time that depends polynomially upon the input ma-
trix and the desired error [JSV04].

Related problems: Solving linear systems (see page 467), matching (see page
562), geometric primitives (see page 622).
478                                 CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

                                             MAX

                                             MIN

                   Input                                   Output

16.5       Constrained/Unconstrained Optimization
Input description: A function f (x1 , . . . , xn ).
Problem description: Which point p = (p1 , . . . , pn ) maximizes (or minimizes)
the function f ?
Discussion: Of the seventy-ﬁve problems in this catalog, this is the one whose
importance has grown most dramatically since the previous edition of my book.
Convex and non-convex optimization are the algorithmic problems most asso-
ciated with machine learning, from linear regression to deep learning.
    Optimization arises whenever you have an objective function that must be
tuned for optimal performance. Suppose you are building a program to identify
good stocks to invest in. You have certain ﬁnancial data available to analyze—
such as the price–earnings ratio, the interest rate, and the stock price—all as a
function of time t. The key question is how much weight we should give to each
of these factors, where these weights correspond to coeﬃcients of a formula:

      stock-goodness(t) = c1 × price(t) + c2 × interest(t) + c3 × PE-ratio(t)

We seek the numerical values c1 , c2 , c3 whose stock-goodness function does
the best job of evaluating stocks from past data. Similar issues arise in tuning
evaluation functions for any pattern recognition or machine learning task.
    Unconstrained optimization problems also arise in scientiﬁc computation.
Physical systems from protein molecules to galaxies of stars naturally seek to
minimize their “energy” or “potential function.” Programs that simulate nature
thus often deﬁne potential functions assigning a score to each possible object
conﬁguration, and then select the conﬁguration that minimizes this potential.
    Global optimization problems tend to be hard, and there are many ways
to go about them. Ask the following questions to steer yourself in the right
direction:
16.5. CONSTRAINED/UNCONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION                                   479

  • Am I doing constrained or unconstrained optimization? – In unconstrained
    optimization, there are no limitations on the values of the parameters
    other than they maximize the value of f . However, many applications
    impose constraints on these parameters that make certain points illegal,
    points that might otherwise be the global optimum. For example, compa-
    nies cannot employ less than zero employees, no matter how much money
    they think they might save doing so. Constrained optimization problems
    typically require mathematical programming approaches like linear pro-
    gramming, discussed in Section 16.6 (page 482).

  • Is the function I am trying to optimize described by a formula? – Some-
    times you need to ﬁnd the maxima or minima of a function presented as an
    algebraic formula, such as ﬁnding the minimum of f (n) = n2 − 6n + 2n+1 .
    If so, the solution is to analytically take its derivative f ? (n) and test for
    which points p? we have f ? (p? ) = 0. These points are either local maxima
    or minima, which can be distinguished by taking a second derivative or just
    plugging p? back into f and seeing what happens. Be aware that things
    get more complicated in multivariate functions. Symbolic computation
    systems such as Mathematica and Maple are quite eﬀective at computing
    derivatives. Although using computer algebra systems eﬀectively is some-
    what of a black art, they are deﬁnitely worth a try. And you can always
    use them to plot a picture of your function, in order to get a better idea
    of what you are dealing with.

  • Is your function convex? The main diﬃculty of global optimization is get-
    ting trapped in local optima. Consider the problem of ﬁnding the highest
    point in a mountain range. If there is only one mountain and it is nicely
    shaped, we can ﬁnd the top by just walking in whatever direction heads
    up. However, when there are many false summits, or other mountains in
    the area, it is diﬃcult to convince ourselves whether we really are at the
    highest possible point.
    Convex functions have exactly one maxima (or minima), corresponding to
    a world with a single mountain peak. Gradient descent search analyzes the
    partial derivatives (slope) to determine the fastest way up (or down) the
    mountain. The optima is reached when the derivatives at this point are
    zero. Convex optimization can be used to quickly solve massive problems,
    even in a large number of dimensions. Consider the task of ﬁnding the set
    of coeﬃcients that minimize ﬁtting error for a linear regression problem in
    (say) 1,000 input variables or dimensions. The optimal solution (minimal
    point) here deﬁnes 1,000 parameters. If the objective function is convex
    (as it is in the case of linear regression) gradient descent search will make
    short work of the problem.
    How do you know whether your function is convex? This is beyond the
    scope of my book, involving analysis of its derivatives. But trust somebody
    smart when they tell you a function is convex.
480                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

      • How continuous or smooth is my function? – Even if your function is
        non-convex, there is a good chance that it is at least smooth. Smoothness
        is the property that points in the local neighborhood of point p should
        have a value close to that of p. We assume smoothness in any search
        procedure. If the height at any given point was a completely random
        value, there would be no algorithm that could hope to ﬁnd the optima
        short of sampling every single point.
      • Is it expensive to compute the function at a given point? – Sometimes we
        are given a program or subroutine that evaluates f at a given point X,
        instead of an analytical function. We can request the value at any given
        point on demand by calling this function, so we can poke around and hunt
        for the maximum or minimum value.
        Our freedom to search in such a situation depends upon how eﬃciently we
        can evaluate f (X). When point evaluation is expensive, the best approach
        is a simple grid search. Suppose you can aﬀord to test m ≈ sk possible
        points, for some integer s. Identify a smallest and largest possible value
        along each of your k dimensions, and then partition each range into s
        equally spaced values. There are sk distinct points that can be deﬁned by
        picking one value from each of these k ranges, points that broadly cover
        the set of possibilities. Evaluate f (X) on each one of the points, and call
        the best performing one the “optima.” The winner can also be used as a
        starting point to do a more systematic search.
        Such a situation arises in tuning evaluation functions for games. Suppose
        that f (x1 , . . . , xn ) is the board evaluation function in a computer chess
        program, such that x1 is how much a pawn is worth, x2 is how much a
        bishop is worth, and so forth. To evaluate how good a set of coeﬃcients
        is as a board evaluator, we must play a bunch of games with it or test it
        on a library of known positions. Clearly, this is time-consuming, so we
        must be frugal in the number of evaluations of f we use to optimize the
        coeﬃcients.

    The most eﬃcient algorithms for convex optimization use derivatives and
partial derivatives to ﬁnd local optima, to point out which direction to move
from the current point so as to most rapidly increase or decrease the func-
tion. Such derivatives can sometimes be computed analytically, or they can
be estimated numerically by taking the diﬀerence between the values of nearby
points. A variety of steepest descent and conjugate gradient methods to ﬁnd local
optima have been developed—similar in many ways to numerical root-ﬁnding
algorithms.
    For constrained optimization, ﬁnding a point that satisﬁes all the constraints
is often the diﬃcult part of the problem. One approach is to use a method for
unconstrained optimization, but add a penalty according to how many con-
straints are violated. This is the idea behind Lagrangian relaxation, which you
might recall from calculus. Determining the right penalty function is problem-
speciﬁc, but it often makes sense to vary the penalties as optimization proceeds.
16.5. CONSTRAINED/UNCONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION                                     481

At the end, the penalties should be very high to ensure that all constraints are
satisﬁed.
    Simulated annealing is a fairly robust approach to constrained optimization,
particularly when we are optimizing over combinatorial structures (permuta-
tions, graphs, subsets). Techniques for simulated annealing are described in
Section 12.6.3 (page 406).
    It is a good idea to try several diﬀerent methods on any given optimization
problem. For this reason, I recommend experimenting with the implementations
below before attempting to implement your own method. Clear descriptions of
these algorithms are provided in many numerical algorithms books. My favorite
is Numerical Recipes [PFTV07].
Implementations: The world of constrained/unconstrained optimization is
suﬃciently complex that several guides have been created to point people to
the right codes. Particularly nice is Hans Mittlemann’s Decision Tree for Opti-
mization Software at http://plato.asu.edu/guide.html.
    NEOS (Network-Enabled Optimization System) provides a unique service—
the opportunity to solve your problem remotely on computers and software at
the Wisconsin Institute of Discovery. Linear programming and unconstrained
optimization are both supported. Check out https://neos-server.org when
you need a solution instead of a program.
    General purpose simulated annealing implementations are available, and are
likely the best place to start experimenting with this technique for constrained
optimization. Feel free to try my code from Section 12.6.3 (page 406). Partic-
ularly popular is Adaptive Simulated Annealing (ASA), written in C by Lester
Ingber and available at http://asa-caltech.sourceforge.net/.
Notes: Bertsekas [Ber15], Boyd and Vandenberghe [BV04], and Nesterov [Nes13]
provide comprehensive treatments of convex optimization, including methods based
on gradient descent. Unconstrained optimization and Lagrangian relaxation are the
topics of several books, including [Ber82, PFTV07].
    The full objective functions associated with machine learning problems are often
linear in the size of the training data, which makes it very expensive to compute
partial derivatives for gradient descent. Much better in practice is to estimate the
derivatives at the current position using a small random sample of the training data.
Such stochastic gradient descent algorithms are discussed in [Bot12]. Good books
about machine learning include [Bis06, FHT01].
    Simulated annealing was devised by Kirkpatrick et al. [KGV83] as a modern
variation of the Metropolis algorithm [MRRT53]. Both use Monte Carlo techniques to
compute the minimum energy state of a system. Good expositions on all local search
variations, including simulated annealing, appear in [AL97].
    Genetic algorithms were developed and popularized by Holland [Hol75, Hol92].
Books more partial to genetic algorithms than mine include [LP02, MF00].

Related problems: Linear programming (see page 482), satisﬁability (see page
537).
482                                       CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

                    Input                                              Output

16.6         Linear Programming
Input description: A set S of n linear inequalities on m variables
                                   m
                                   ?
                            Si =         cij · xj ≥ bi , 1 ≤ i ≤ n
                                   j=1
                                                    ?m
and a linear optimization function f (X) =             j=1 cj · xj .

Problem description: Which variable assignment X ? maximizes the objective
function f while satisfying all inequalities S?
Discussion: Linear programming is the most important problem in mathemat-
ical optimization and operations research. Applications include:

      • Resource allocation – We seek to invest a given amount of money to maxi-
        mize our return. Often our possible options, payoﬀs, and expenses can be
        expressed as a system of linear inequalities such that we seek to maximize
        our possible proﬁt given the constraints. Very large linear programming
        problems are routinely solved by airlines and other corporations.
      • Approximating the solution of inconsistent equations – A set of n linear
        equations on m variables xi , 1 ≤ i ≤ m is over-determined if n > m.
        Such over-determined systems are often inconsistent, meaning that there
        does not exist an assignment to the variables that simultaneously solves
        all the equations. To ﬁnd an assignment that best ﬁts the equations, we
        can replace each variable xi by x?i + ?i and solve the new system as a linear
        program, minimizing the sum of the error terms.
      • Graph algorithms – Many graph problems described in this book, includ-
        ing shortest path, bipartite matching, and network ﬂow, can be solved as
16.6. LINEAR PROGRAMMING                                                       483

     special cases of linear programming. Most of the rest, including travel-
     ing salesman, set cover, and knapsack, can be solved using integer linear
     programming.

    The simplex method is the standard algorithm for linear programming. Each
constraint in a linear programming problem acts like a knife that carves away
a region from the space of possible solutions. We seek the point within the re-
maining region that maximizes (or minimizes) f (X). By appropriately rotating
the solution space, this optimal point can always be made to be the highest
point in the region. The region (simplex) deﬁned by the intersection of a set of
linear constraints is convex, so there is always a higher vertex neighboring any
starting point unless we are already at the top. When we cannot ﬁnd a higher
neighbor to walk to, we must have reached the optimal solution.
    While the basic simplex algorithm is not particularly complex, there is con-
siderable art to producing an eﬃcient implementation capable of solving large
linear programs. Large programs tend to be sparse (meaning that most inequal-
ities use few variables), so sophisticated data structures must be used. There are
issues of numerical stability and robustness, as well as choosing the best neigh-
bor to walk to next (the so-called pivoting rule). There also exist sophisticated
interior-point methods, algorithms that cut through the interior of the simplex
instead of walking along the outside, and beat simplex in many applications.
    The bottom line on linear programming is that you are much better oﬀ using
an existing LP code than writing your own. Further, you might be better oﬀ
paying money for it than surﬁng the web. Linear programming is an algorithmic
problem of such economic importance that commercial implementations are
superior to free versions.
    Issues that arise in linear programming include:

   • Do any variables have integrality constraints? – It is impossible to send
     6.54 airplanes from New York to Washington each business day, even if
     that value maximizes proﬁt according to your model. Such variables often
     have natural integrality constraints. A linear program is called an integer
     program if all its variables have integrality constraints, and a mixed integer
     program if some of them do.
     Unfortunately, it is NP-complete to solve integer or mixed programs to
     optimality. But there are integer programming techniques that work rea-
     sonably well in practice. Cutting plane techniques solve the problem ﬁrst
     as a linear program, and then add extra constraints to enforce integral-
     ity around the optimal solution point before solving it again. After suﬃ-
     ciently many iterations, the optimum point of the resulting linear program
     matches that of the original integer program. As with most exponential-
     time algorithms, run times for integer programming depend upon the dif-
     ﬁculty of the problem instance and are unpredictable.

   • Do I have more variables or constraints? – Any linear program with m
     variables and n inequalities can be written as an equivalent dual linear
484                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

        program with n variables and m inequalities. This is important to know,
        because the running time of a given solver might be quite diﬀerent on the
        two formulations. In general, linear programs (LPs) with more variables
        than constraints should be solved directly. If there are more constraints
        than variables, it is usually better to solve the dual linear program or
        (equivalently) apply the dual simplex method to the primal LP.
      • What if my optimization function or constraints are not linear? – In
        least-squares curve ﬁtting, we seek the line that best approximates a set
        of points by minimizing the sum of squares of the distance between each
        point and the line. In formulating this as a mathematical program, the
        natural objective function is no longer linear, but quadratic. Although fast
        algorithms exist for least squares ﬁtting, general quadratic programming
        is NP-complete.
        There are three possible courses of action when you must solve a non-
        linear program. The best is to try and model it in some other way, as
        is the case with least-squares ﬁtting. The second is to try to track down
        special codes for quadratic programming. Finally, you can model your
        problem as a constrained or unconstrained optimization problem and try
        to solve it with the codes discussed in Section 16.5 (page 478).
      • What if my model does not match the input format of my LP solver? –
        Many linear programming implementations accept models only in so-called
        standard form, where all variables are constrained to be non-negative, the
        object function must be minimized, and all constraints must be equalities
        (instead of inequalities).
        Do not fear. There exist standard transformations to map arbitrary LP
        models into standard form. To convert a maximization problem to a
        minimization one, just multiply each coeﬃcient of the objective function
        by −1. The remaining problems can be solved by adding slack variables to
        the model. See any textbook on linear programming for details. Modeling
        languages such as AMPL can provide a nice interface to your solver and
        deal with these issues for you.

Implementations: There are at least three reasonable choices in free LP-
solvers. Lp solve, written in ANSI C by Michel Berkelaar, can also han-
dle integer and mixed-integer problems. It is available at http://lpsolve.
sourceforge.net/5.5/, and a substantial user community exists. The simplex
solver CLP produced under the Computational Infrastructure for Operations Re-
search is available (with other optimization software) at http://www.coin-or.
org/. Finally, the GNU Linear Programming Kit (GLPK) is intended for solving
large-scale linear programming, mixed integer programming (MIP), and other
related problems. It is available at http://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/.
    Benchmark studies [GAD+ 13, MT12] agree that commercial solvers perform
much better than open codes. But they are split as to whether CLP or GLPK is
the better choice. Read the reports for details.
16.6. LINEAR PROGRAMMING                                                            485

   NEOS (Network-Enabled Optimization System) provides a unique service—
the opportunity to solve your problem remotely on computers and software at
the Wisconsin Institute of Discovery. Linear programming and unconstrained
optimization are both supported. Check out https://neos-server.org when
you need a solution instead of a program.
Notes: The need for optimization via linear programming arose in logistics problems
in World War II. The simplex algorithm was invented by George Danzig in 1947
[Dan63]. Klee and Minty [KM72] proved that the simplex algorithm is exponential in
worst case, but it is very eﬃcient in practice.
    Smoothed analysis measures the complexity of algorithms assuming that their
inputs are subject to small amounts of random noise. Carefully constructed worst-
case instances for many problems break down under such perturbations. Spielman and
Teng [ST04] used smoothed analysis to explain the eﬃciency of simplex in practice.
Kelner and Spielman developed a randomized simplex algorithm running in polynomial
time [KS05b].
    Khachian’s ellipsoid algorithm [Kha79] ﬁrst proved that linear programming was
polynomial in 1979. Karmarkar’s algorithm [Kar84] is an interior-point method that
has proven to be both a theoretical and practical improvement of the ellipsoid algo-
rithm, as well as a challenge for the simplex method. Good expositions on the simplex
and ellipsoid algorithms for linear programming include [Chv83, Gas03, MG07].
    Semideﬁnite programming deals with optimization problems over symmetric posi-
tive semideﬁnite matrix variables, with linear cost function and linear constraints. Im-
portant special cases include linear programming and convex quadratic programming
with convex quadratic constraints. Semideﬁnite programming and its applications to
combinatorial optimization problems are surveyed in [Goe97, VB96].
    Linear programming is P-complete under log-space reductions [DLR79]. This
makes it unlikely to have an NC parallel algorithm, where a problem is in NC iﬀ
it can be solved on a PRAM in polylogarithmic time using a polynomial number of
processors. Any problem that is P-complete under log-space reduction cannot be in NC
unless P=NC. See [GHR95] for a thorough exposition of the theory of P-completeness,
including an extensive list of P-complete problems.

Related problems: Constrained and unconstrained optimization (see page
478), network ﬂow (see page 571).
486                              CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

                                         HTHTTHTHTHHTTHHHHHTTHTHTT
                                         HTHTHHHTTHHHTTHHTHHHTTTTT
                                         THTHTTTTHTTHHHHTHHHTHTHTT
                                         THTTHHHTHTTTHHHHHHHHHTTTT
                                         HTHTHHHHHHTHTHTTHHHTHTTHT
                                         THHTTHHTHHTHHHTHHTTHTTHTT
                                         THTTHTHHHHHHTHTHTHHHTHHHT
                                         HTTTTTHHTTHTHHHTTHHTHTTHH
                                         HHHHHTHTHHTTHHHTTTHTTHTTH
                                         HHTHHHTTHTTTHHHHTHHHHTTTT

                  Input                                Output

16.7        Random Number Generation
Input description: Nothing, or perhaps a seed.
Problem description: Generate a sequence of random integers.
Discussion: Random numbers have a surprising variety of interesting and im-
portant applications. They form the foundation of simulated annealing and
related heuristic optimization techniques. Discrete event simulations run on
streams of random numbers, and are used to model everything from transporta-
tion systems to casino poker. Passwords and cryptographic keys are typically
generated randomly. Randomized algorithms for graph and geometric problems
are revolutionizing these ﬁelds, and establishing randomization as one of the
fundamental ideas of computer science.
    Unfortunately, generating random numbers looks much easier than it really
is. Indeed, it is fundamentally impossible to produce truly random numbers
on any deterministic device. Von Neumann [Neu63] said it best: “Anyone who
considers arithmetical methods of producing random digits is, of course, in a
state of sin.” The best we can hope for are pseudorandom numbers, a stream
of numbers that appear as if they were generated randomly.
    There can be serious consequences to using a bad random-number generator.
In one famous case, a web browser’s encryption scheme was broken after the
discovery that the seeds of its random-number generator employed too few ran-
dom bits [GW96]. Simulation accuracy is regularly compromised or invalidated
by poor random number generation. This is an area where people shouldn’t fool
around, but they do. Issues to think about include:

      • Should my program produce the same “random” numbers each time it
        runs? – A poker game that deals you the exact same hand every time
16.7. RANDOM NUMBER GENERATION                                               487

    you play quickly loses interest. One common solution uses the lower-order
    bits of the machine clock as the seed or starting point for a stream of
    random numbers, so that each time the program runs it does something
    diﬀerent.
    Such methods are adequate for games, but not for serious simulations.
    There are liable to be periodicities in the distribution of random numbers
    whenever calls are made in a loop. Also, debugging is seriously com-
    plicated when program results are not repeatable. Should your program
    crash, you can’t go back and discover why. A possible compromise is to use
    a deterministic pseudorandom-number generator, but write the current
    seed to a ﬁle between runs. During debugging, this ﬁle can be overwritten
    with a ﬁxed initial value of the seed.

  • How good is my compiler’s built-in random number generator? – If you
    need uniformly generated random numbers, and are not betting the farm
    on the accuracy of your simulation, my recommendation is simply to use
    what your compiler provides. Your best opportunity to mess things up
    will be with a bad choice of the initial seed, so read the manual for its
    recommendations.
    If you are going to bet the farm on the results of your simulation, you had
    better test your random number generator. Be aware that it is diﬃcult to
    eyeball the results and decide whether the output is really random. This
    is because people have very skewed ideas of how random sources should
    behave, and often see patterns that don’t really exist. Several diﬀerent
    tests should be used to evaluate a random number generator, and the
    statistical signiﬁcance of the results established. The National Institute of
    Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed test suites for evaluating
    random number generators, discussed below.

  • What if I must implement my own random-number generator? – The
    standard algorithm of choice is the linear congruential generator. It is
    fast, simple, and (if instantiated with the right constants) gives reasonable
    pseudorandom numbers. The nth random number Rn is a function of the
    (n − 1)st random number:

                            Rn = (aRn−1 + c)     mod m

    Linear congruential generators work the same way roulette wheels do.
    The long path of the ball around and around the wheel (captured by
    aRn−1 + c) ends in one of a relatively small number of bins, the choice of
    which is extremely sensitive to the length of the path (captured by the
    mod m-truncation).
    A substantial theory has been developed to properly select the constants
    a, c, m, and R0 . The period length is largely a function of the modulus
    m, which is typically constrained by the word length of your machine.
488                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

        Note that the stream of numbers produced by a linear congruential gen-
        erator starts to cycle the instant the ﬁrst number repeats. Computers
        are fast enough to make 232 calls to a random-number generator in a few
        minutes. Thus, any 32-bit linear congruential generator is in danger of
        cycling, motivating generators with signiﬁcantly longer periods.

      • What if I don’t want such large random numbers? – The linear congru-
        ential generator Rn produces a uniformly distributed sequence of integers
        between 0 and m − 1 that can be easily scaled to produce other uniform
        distributions. To generate real numbers between 0 and 1, use Rn /m. Note
        that 1 cannot be realized this way, although 0 can. If you need uniformly
        distributed integers between l and h, use ?l + (h − l + 1)Rn /m .
      • What if I need non-uniformly distributed random numbers? – Generat-
        ing random numbers according to a given non-uniform distribution can
        be a tricky business. The most reliable way to do this correctly is the
        acceptance–rejection method. We bound the geometric region we seek to
        sample from by a box, and then select a random point p from the box. This
        in-the-box point can be generated by selecting the x- and y-coordinates
        independently at random. If p lies within the region of interest, we can
        return it as being selected at random. Otherwise we throw it away and
        repeat with another random point. Essentially, we throw darts at random
        and report those that hit the target.
        This method is correct, but can be slow. When the volume of the region
        of interest is small relative to that of the bounding box, most of our darts
        will miss the target. Eﬃcient generators for Gaussian and other special
        distributions are described in the references and implementations below.
        Be cautious about inventing your own technique, because it can be tricky
        to obtain the right probability distribution. For example, an incorrect way
        to select points uniformly from a circle of radius r would be to generate
        polar coordinates by selecting an angle from 0 to 2π and a displacement
        between 0 and r—both uniformly at random. In such a scheme, half the
        generated points will lie within r/2 of the center, when only one-fourth of
        them should be! This is diﬀerent enough to seriously distort the results,
        while being suﬃciently subtle that the skew could easily escape detection.

  • How long should I run my Monte Carlo simulation? – The longer you
    run a simulation, the more accurately the results should approximate the
    limiting distribution. But this is true only until you exceed the period,
    or cycle length, of your random-number generator. From then on, your
    sequence of random numbers repeats itself, so longer runs generate no
    additional information.
        Instead of jacking up the length of a simulation run to the max, it is
        usually more informative to do many shorter runs (say ten to a hundred)
        each with diﬀerent seeds. Then consider the range of results you obtain.
        The variance provides a healthy measure of the degree to which your
16.7. RANDOM NUMBER GENERATION                                                  489

      results are repeatable. This exercise corrects the natural tendency to see
      a simulation as giving “the” correct answer.

Implementations: See https://www.agner.org/random for an excellent web-
site on random-number generation, including pointers to papers and many im-
plementations of random-number generators.
    Parallel simulations make special demands on random-number generators.
How can we ensure that random streams are independent on each machine?
L’Ecuyer et.al [LSCK02] provides object-oriented generators with a period length
of approximately 2191 . Implementations in C, C++, and Java are available at
http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~lecuyer/myftp/streams00/. Independent
streams of random numbers are supported for parallel applications. Another
possibility is the Scalable Parallel Random Number Generators Library (SPRNG)
[MS00], available at http://sprng.cs.fsu.edu/.
    The National Institute of Standards [BRS+ 10] has prepared an extensive sta-
tistical test suite to validate random number generators. Both the software and
the report describing it are available at https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/
random-bit-generation/documentation-and-software.
    True random-number generators extract random bits by observing physical
processes. The website http://www.random.org makes available random num-
bers derived from atmospheric noise that pass the NIST statistical tests. This
presents an amusing solution if you need a small quantity of random numbers
(say to run a lottery), instead of a random-number generator.
Notes: Knuth [Knu97b] provides a thorough treatment of random-number gener-
ation, which I heartily recommend. He gives the theory behind several methods,
including the middle-square and shift-register methods I have not described, plus a
detailed discussion of statistical tests for validating random-number generators.
    That said, see [Gen06, L’E12] for more recent developments in random number gen-
eration. The Mersenne twister [MN98] is a fast random number generator of period
219937 − 1. Other modern methods include [Den05, PLM06]. Methods for generat-
ing non-uniform random variates are surveyed in [HLD04]. Comparisons of diﬀerent
random-number generators in practice include [PM88].
    Tables of random numbers appear in most mathematical handbooks as relics from
the days before there was ready access to computers. Most notable is [RC55], which
provides one million random digits. For a good laugh, I encourage you to check out
the hundreds of reviews of this book on Amazon. You will be impressed just how
many wiseguys exist on the Internet.
    The deep relationship between randomness and information is explored within the
theory of Kolmogorov complexity, which measures the complexity of a string by its
compressibility. Truly random strings are incompressible. The string of seemingly
random digits of π are not random under this deﬁnition, since the entire sequence is
deﬁned by a program implementing the series expansion for π. Li and Vitáni [LV97]
provide a thorough treatment of the theory of Kolmogorov complexity.

Related problems: Constrained/unconstrained optimization (see page 478),
generating permutations (see page 517), generating subsets (see page 521).
490                                CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

                                                                      179424673
                                                                     2038074743
8338169264555846052842102071
                                            x                       22801763489

                                           8338169264555846052842102071

                  Input                                    Output

16.8      Factoring and Primality Testing
Input description: An integer n.
Problem description: Is n a prime number? If not, what are its factors?
Discussion: The dual problems of integer factorization and primality testing
have surprisingly many applications for a problem long suspected of being only
of mathematical interest. The security of the RSA public-key cryptography sys-
tem (see Section 21.6 (page 697)) is based on the computational intractability
of factoring large integers. It is known that hash table performance typically
improves when the table size is a prime number. To get this beneﬁt, an initial-
ization routine must identify a prime near the desired table size. Finally, prime
numbers are just interesting to play with. This is why the program to generate
large primes used to reside in the games directory of UNIX systems.
    Factoring and primality testing are closely related problems, although they
are quite diﬀerent algorithmically. There exist algorithms that can demonstrate
that an integer is composite (i.e. not prime) without actually giving the factors.
To convince yourself of the plausibility of this, note that you can demonstrate
the compositeness of any non-trivial integer whose last digit is 0, 2, 4, 5, 6, or
8 without doing the actual division.
    The simplest algorithm for both of these problems is brute-force√trial di-
vision. To factor n, compute the remainder of n/i for all 1 < i ≤ n. The
prime factorization of n will contain at least one instance of every i such that
n/i = ?n/i , unless n is prime. Make sure√you handle the multiplicities correctly,
and account for any primes larger than n.
    Such algorithms can be sped up by using a precomputed table of small primes
to avoid testing all possible i. Surprisingly many primes can be represented in
surprisingly little space by using bit vectors (see Section 15.5 (page 456)). A bit
16.8. FACTORING AND PRIMALITY TESTING                                           491

vector of all odd numbers less than 1,000,000 ﬁts in under 64 kilobytes. Even
tighter encodings become possible by eliminating all multiples of 3 and other
small primes.
                                        √
    Although trial division runs in O( n) time, it is not a polynomial-time algo-
rithm. It only takes lg n bits to represent n, so trial division takes time exponen-
tial in the input size. Considerably faster (but still exponential time) factoring
algorithms exist, whose correctness depends upon more substantial number the-
ory. The fastest known algorithm, the number ﬁeld sieve, uses randomness to
construct a system of congruences—the solution of which usually gives a factor
of the integer. Integers with 250 digits (829 bits) have been factored using this
method, although such feats require enormous amounts of computation.
    Randomized algorithms make it much easier to test whether an integer is
prime. Fermat’s little theorem states that an−1 = 1(mod n) for all a not divis-
ible by n, provided n is prime. Suppose we pick a random value 1 ≤ a < n and
compute the residue of an−1 (mod n). If this residue is not 1, we have just proven
that n must be composite. Such randomized primality tests are very eﬃcient.
PGP (see Section 21.6 (page 697)) ﬁnds 300+ digit primes using hundreds of
these tests in minutes, for use as cryptographic keys.
    Although the primes are scattered in a seemingly random way throughout
the integers, there is some regularity to their distribution. The prime number
theorem states that the number of primes less than n (commonly denoted by
π(n)) is approximately n/ ln n. Further, there never are large gaps between
primes, so in general one should expect to examine about ln n integers to ﬁnd the
ﬁrst prime larger than n. This distribution, coupled with the fast randomized
primality test, explains how PGP can ﬁnd such large primes so quickly.
    Quantum computers are (theoretically!) capable of factoring large integers
very fast, indeed exponentially faster than conventional machines. I would not
be shocked if quantum computers capable of fast factoring exist before I write
the fourth edition of this book. But serious technical challenges remain: a recent
proposal to factor RSA-scale (2,048 bit) integers using Shor’s algorithm require
20 million qubits because of the need for extensive error correction [GE19]. I’ve
heard RSA factoring described as the “suicide app” for quantum computing:
because the moment it succeeds, RSA stops being used and the application
goes away.

Implementations: Several general systems for computational number theory
are available. PARI is capable of handling complex number-theoretic problems
on arbitrary-precision integers (to be precise, limited to 80,807,123 digits on 32-
bit machines), as well as reals, rationals, complex numbers, polynomials, and
matrices. It is written mainly in C, with assembly code for inner loops on ma-
jor architectures, and includes more than 200 special predeﬁned mathematical
functions. PARI can be used as a library, but it also possesses a calculator mode
that gives instant access to all the types and functions. PARI is available at
http://pari.math.u-bordeaux.fr/
    A Library for doing Number Theory (NTL) is a high-performance, portable
C++ library providing data structures and algorithms to manipulate signed, ar-
492                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

bitrary length integers and vectors, matrices, and polynomials over the integers
and over ﬁnite ﬁelds. It is available at http://www.shoup.net/ntl/.
    Finally, MIRACL (Multiprecision Integer and Rational Arithmetic C/C++
Library) implements six diﬀerent integer factorization algorithms, including the
quadratic sieve. It is available at https://github.com/miracl/MIRACL.
Notes: Expositions on modern algorithms for factoring and primality testing include
Crandall and Pomerance [CP05] and Yan [Yan03]. More general surveys of computa-
tional number theory include Bach and Shallit [BS96] and Shoup [Sho09].
    Agrawal, Kayal, and Saxena [AKS04] solved a long-standing open problem giv-
ing the ﬁrst polynomial-time deterministic algorithm to test whether an integer is
composite. Their algorithm is surprisingly elementary for such an important result,
involving a careful analysis of techniques from earlier randomized algorithms. Its ex-
istence serves as somewhat of a rebuke to researchers (like me) who shy away from
classical open problems due to fear. Dietzfelbinger [Die04] provides a self-contained
treatment of this result.
    The complexity class co-NP is the set of problems for which a polynomial-time
algorithm can verify “no” instances given the appropriate certiﬁcate. An important
problem in computational complexity theory is whether P = NP ∩ co-NP. The decision
problem “is n a composite number?” used to be the best candidate for a counterex-
ample. By exhibiting the factors of n, it is trivially in NP. It must be co-NP because
every prime has a short proof of its primality [Pra75]. The recent proof that compos-
ite numbers testing is in P shot down this line of reasoning. For more information on
complexity classes, see [AB09, GJ79].
    Shor [Sho99] sparked great interest in quantum computing with his algorithm for
factoring integers in polynomial time. Factoring 15 = 3 × 5 remains the experimental
state of the art [MNM+ 16] as of this writing. Introductions to quantum computing
include [Aar13, Ber19].
    The Miller–Rabin [Mil76, Rab80] randomized primality testing algorithm elimi-
nates problems with Carmichael numbers, which are composite integers that always
satisfy Fermat’s theorem. The best algorithms for integer factorization include the
quadratic-sieve [Pom84] and the elliptic-curve methods [Len87b].
    Mechanical sieving devices provided the fastest way to factor integers surprisingly
far into the computing era. See [SWM95] for a fascinating account of one such device,
built during World War I. Hand-cranked, it proved the primality of 231 − 1 in 15
minutes of sieving time.
    The integer RSA-129 was factored in eight months using over 1,600 computers.
This was particularly noteworthy because in the original RSA paper [RSA78] they
had originally predicted such a factorization would take 40 quadrillion years using
1970s technology. The current record for integer factorization is the successful attack
on the 250-digit integer RSA-250 in February 2020.

Related problems: Cryptography (see page 697), high precision arithmetic
(see page 493).
16.9. ARBITRARY-PRECISION ARITHMETIC                                         493

                 Input                                    Output

16.9      Arbitrary-Precision Arithmetic
Input description: Two very large integers, x and y.
Problem description: What is x + y, x − y, x × y, and x/y?
Discussion: Every programming language rising above basic assembler sup-
ports single- and perhaps double-precision integer/real addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. But what if we wanted to represent the national
debt of the United States in pennies? $22.4 trillion worth of pennies requires
16 decimal digits, which is far more than can ﬁt into a 32-bit integer (although
it still ﬁts comfortably in 64-bits).
    Other applications require much larger integers. The RSA algorithm for
public-key cryptography recommends integer keys of at least 2,048 bits or equiv-
alently 617 digits to achieve adequate security. Experimenting with number-
theoretic conjectures for fun or research requires playing with large numbers. I
once solved
          ?    a? minor open problem by performing an exact computation on the
           2953 ≈ 9.93285 × 10
integer 5906                    1775
                                     , as presented in Section 6.9 (page 191).
    What should you do when you need large integers?

   • Am I solving a problem instance requiring large integers, or do I have an
     embedded application? – If all you need is the answer to a speciﬁc com-
     putation with large integers, as in the number theory example above, you
     should consider using a Python interpreter or a computer algebra system
     like Maple or Mathematica. These provide arbitrary-precision arithmetic
     as a default with easy-to-use language interpreters as the front end—
     together often reducing your problem to a 5-to-10-line program.
     If you have an embedded application requiring high-precision arithmetic
     instead, you should use an existing arbitrary precision math library. You
     are likely to get additional functions beyond the four basic operations, for
     computing things like greatest common divisor and square roots. See the
     Implementations section for details.
494                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

      • Do I need high- or arbitrary-precision arithmetic? – Is there an upper
        bound on how big your integers can get, or do you really need unbounded
        arbitrary-precision? This determines whether you can use a ﬁxed-length
        array to represent your integer instead of a linked-list of digits. The array
        should be simpler and not prove a constraint in most applications.
      • What base should I do arithmetic in? – It is perhaps simplest to implement
        your own high-precision arithmetic package in decimal, thus representing
        each integer as a string of base-10 digits. However, it is far more compu-
        tationally eﬃcient to use a higher base, ideally equal to the square root of
        the largest integer supported fully by hardware arithmetic.
        Why? The higher the base, the fewer digits we need to represent a number.
        Compare 64 decimal with 1000000 binary. Since hardware addition usually
        takes one clock cycle independent of the value of the numbers being added,
        the best performance is achieved
                                      √ by using the highest supported base. The
        factor limiting us to base b = maxint is the desire to avoid overﬂow when
        multiplying two of these “digits” together.
        The primary complication of using a larger base is that integers must be
        converted to and from base-10 for input and output. The conversion is
        easy to perform using the four basic high-precision arithmetical operations.
      • How low-level are you willing to go for fast computation? – Hardware
        addition is much faster than a subroutine call, so you take a signiﬁcant hit
        on speed using high-precision arithmetic when low-precision arithmetic
        suﬃces. High-precision arithmetic is one of few problems in this book
        where inner loops in assembly language prove the right idea to speed
        things up. Similarly, using bit-level masking and shift operations instead of
        arithmetical operations can be a performance win if you really understand
        the machine integer representation.
      The algorithms of choice for the basic arithmetic operations are as follows:
      • Addition – The basic schoolhouse method of lining up the decimal points
        and then adding the digits from right to left with “carries” runs in time
        linear in the number of digits. More sophisticated carry-look-ahead paral-
        lel algorithms are available for low-level hardware implementation. They
        are presumably used in your microprocessor for low-precision addition.
      • Subtraction – By fooling with the sign bits of the numbers, subtraction can
        be a special considered case of addition: (A−(−B)) = (A+B). The tricky
        part of subtraction is performing the “borrow.” This can be simpliﬁed
        by always subtracting the smaller number from the larger absolute value
        and adjusting the signs afterwards, so we can be certain there is always
        something to borrow from. Computer architects use two’s complement
        representation to simplify subtraction with signed integers.
      • Multiplication – The repeated addition method takes exponential time
        on large integers, so stay away from it. The digit-by-digit schoolhouse
16.9. ARBITRARY-PRECISION ARITHMETIC                                             495

      method is reasonable to program and runs in O(n2 ) time to multiply two
      n-digit integers. On very large integers, Karatsuba’s O(n1.59 ) divide-and-
      conquer algorithm wins. Dan Grayson, author of Mathematica’s arbitrary-
      precision arithmetic, found that the switch-over happened at well under
      one hundred digits. An even faster algorithm for very large integers is
      based on Fourier transforms. See Section 16.11 (page 501).

   • Division – Repeated subtraction takes exponential time, so the easiest rea-
     sonable algorithm to use is the long-division method you hated in school.
     This requires arbitrary-precision multiplication and subtraction as sub-
     routines, as well as trial-and-error, to determine the correct digit at each
     position of the quotient.
      In fact, integer division can be reduced to integer multiplication, although
      in a non-trivial way. So if you are implementing asymptotically fast mul-
      tiplication, you can reuse that eﬀort in long division. See the references
      below for details.

   • Exponentiation – We can evaluate an using n − 1 multiplications, by com-
     puting a×a×. . .×a. However, a much better divide-and-conquer algorithm
     is based on the observation that n = ?n/2 + n/2?. If n is even, then
     an = (an/2 )2 . If n is odd, then an = a(a?n/2? )2 . In either case, we have
     halved the size of our exponent at the cost of at most two multiplications,
     so O(lg n) multiplications suﬃce to compute the ﬁnal value:

                   function power(a, n)
                       if (n = 0) return(1)
                       x = power(a, ?n/2 )
                       if (n is even) then return(x2 )
                            else return(a × x2 )

   High- but not arbitrary-precision arithmetic can be conveniently performed
using the Chinese remainder theorem and modular arithmetic. The Chinese
                                                                            k
remainder theorem states that every integer between 1 and P = i=1 pi is
uniquely determined by its set of residues mod pi , where each pi , pj are relatively
prime integers. Addition, subtraction, and multiplication (but not division) can
be supported using such residue systems, with the advantage that large integers
can be manipulated without complicated data structures.
   Many algorithms on long integers can be directly applied to computations on
polynomials. A particularly?useful algorithm is Horner’s rule for fast polynomial
                                 n
evaluation. When P (x) = i=0 ci · xi is blindly evaluated term by term, O(n2 )
multiplications will be performed. Much better is observing that P (x) = c0 +
x(c1 + x(c2 + x(c3 + . . .))), the evaluation of which uses only a linear number of
operations.
Implementations: Python plus commercial computer algebra systems like
Maple and Mathematica incorporate high-precision arithmetic. This is your
496                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

best option for a quick, non-embedded application if you have access. The rest
of this section focuses on source code available for embedded applications.
    The premier C/C++ library for fast, arbitrary-precision is the GNU Multiple
Precision Arithmetic Library (GMP), which operates on signed integers, rational
numbers, and ﬂoating point numbers. It is widely used and well supported, and
available at http://gmplib.org/.
    The java.math BigInteger class provides arbitrary-precision analogues to
all of Java’s primitive integer operators. BigInteger provides additional oper-
ations for modular arithmetic, GCD calculation, primality testing, prime gen-
eration, bit manipulation, and a few other miscellaneous operations.
    A lower-performance, less well-tested but more personal implementation of
high-precision arithmetic appears in the library from my book Programming
Challenges [SR03]. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716) for details.
    Several general systems for computational number theory are available. Each
of these supports operations of arbitrary-precision integers. Information about
the PARI and NTL number-theoretic libraries can be found in Section 16.8
(page 490).
Notes: Knuth [Knu97b] is the primary reference on algorithms for all basic arithmetic
operations, including implementations of them in the MIX assembly language. Bach
and Shallit [BS96] and Shoup [Sho09] provide more recent treatments of computational
number theory. Brent and Zimmermann [BZ10] present a modern treatment of the
venerable topic of computer arithmetic.
    Expositions on the O(n1.59 )-time divide-and-conquer algorithm for multiplication
[KO63] include [AHU74, Man89]. An FFT-based algorithm multiplies two n-bit num-
bers in O(n lg n lg lg n) time and is due to Schönhage and Strassen [SS71]. Expositions
include [AHU74, Knu97b]. This was ﬁnally improved to O(n lg n) by Harvey and Van
der Hoven [HVDH19, HVDHL16] in 2019. It is remarkable that an asymptotically
optimal algorithm for such a fundamental problem as integer multiplication took so
long to be discovered. The reduction between integer division and multiplication is
presented in [AHU74, Knu97b]. Applications of fast multiplication to other arithmetic
operations are presented by Bernstein [Ber04]
    Good expositions of algorithms for modular arithmetic and the Chinese remainder
theorem include [AHU74, CLRS09]. A good exposition of circuit-level algorithms for
elementary arithmetic algorithms is [CLRS09].
    Euclid’s algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor of two numbers is
perhaps the oldest interesting algorithm. Expositions include [CLRS09, Knu97b].

Related problems: Factoring integers (see page 490), cryptography (see page
697).
16.10. KNAPSACK PROBLEM                                                             497

       $40                                         $40

                  $90                                                        $90

       $50
                                                                             $100

                  $30                                         $30            $50
       $100

                  Input                                      Output

16.10         Knapsack Problem
Input description: A set of items S = {1, . . . , n}, where item i has size si and
value vi . A knapsack capacity C.
Problem
?             description:
                   ?          Find the subset S ? of S that maximizes the value of
  i∈S ? vi , given   i∈S ? si ≤ C; that is, all the items ﬁt in a knapsack of size C.

Discussion: The knapsack problem arises in resource allocation with ﬁnancial
constraints. How do you select what things to buy given a ﬁxed budget? Ev-
erything has a cost and value, so we seek the most value for the given cost. The
knapsack problem should invoke the image of the backpacker who is constrained
by a ﬁxed-size knapsack, and so must ﬁll it with the most useful and portable
items.
   The most common formulation is the 0/1 knapsack problem, where each item
must either be placed entirely in the knapsack or discarded. Objects cannot be
broken up arbitrarily, so it is not fair taking one can of Coke from a six-pack or
opening a can to take just a sip. It is this 0/1 property that makes the knapsack
problem hard, for a simple greedy algorithm ﬁnds the optimal selection when we
are allowed to subdivide objects. We compute the “price per pound” for each
item, and repeatedly take the most expensive item or the biggest part thereof
until the knapsack is full. Unfortunately, this 0/1 constraint is inherent in most
applications.
   Issues that arise in selecting the best algorithm include:

   • Does every item have the same cost, or perhaps the same size? – When all
     items are worth exactly the same, we maximize our total value by taking
     the greatest number of items. Therefore, the optimal solution is to sort the
     items in order of increasing size and insert them into the knapsack in this
     order until no more ﬁt. The problem is similarly solved when all objects
498                                   CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

                          6          7
      4         5                                       7
                                     7              4                         5 6

  Figure 16.1: Integer partition is a special case of the knapsack problem.

      have the same size. Sort by cost, and take the most valuable elements
      ﬁrst. These are the easy cases of knapsack.
  • Do all items have the same “price per pound”? – If so, our problem is
    equivalent to ignoring the price and just trying to minimize the amount
    of empty space left in the knapsack. Unfortunately, even this restricted
    version is NP-complete, so we cannot expect an eﬃcient algorithm that
    always solves the problem. But don’t lose hope, because knapsack proves
    to be an “easy” hard problem, one that can usually be handled with the
    algorithms described below.
      An important special case of a constant “price-per-pound” knapsack is
      the integer partition problem, presented in cartoon form in Figure 16.1.
      Here,? we seek to?partition the elements of S into two sets A and B such
      that a∈A a = b∈B b, or more generally make the diﬀerence as small
      as possible. Integer partition can be thought of as bin packing into two
      equal-sized bins or knapsack with a capacity of half the total weight, so
      all three problems are closely related and NP-complete.
      The constant “price-per-pound” knapsack problem is often called the sub-
      set sum problem, because we seek a subset of items that adds up to a
      speciﬁc target number C; that is, the capacity of our knapsack.
  • Are all the sizes relatively small integers? – When the sizes of the items
    and the knapsack capacity C are all integers, there exists an eﬃcient
    dynamic programming algorithm (presented in Section 10.5 (page 329))
    that ﬁnds the optimal solution in time O(nC) and O(C) space. Whether
    this works for you depends upon how big C is. It is great for C ≤ 1,000,
    but not so great for C ≥ 1,000,000,000.
      The algorithm works as follows: Let S ? be a set of items, and let C[i, S ? ]
      be true if and only if there is a subset of S ? whose size adds up exactly to
      i. Thus, C[i, ∅] is false for all 1 ≤ i ≤ C. One by one we add a new item
      sj to S ? and update the aﬀected values of C[i, S ? ]. Observe that
           C[i, S ? ∪ sj ] = true iﬀ (C[i, S ? ] = true ) or (C[i − sj , S ? ] = true)
      because we either use sj in realizing the sum or we don’t. We identify all
      sums that can be realized by performing n sweeps through all C elements—
      one for each sj , 1 ≤ j ≤ n—and so updating the array. The knapsack
16.10. KNAPSACK PROBLEM                                                           499

     solution is given by the index of the true element of largest realizable size.
     To reconstruct this winning subset, we must also store the name of the
     item number that turned C[i] from false to true for each 1 ≤ i ≤ C and
     then scan backwards through the array.
     This dynamic programming formulation ignores the values of the items.
     To generalize the algorithm, now each element of the array stores the value
     of the best subset to date summing up to i. We update when the sum of
     the cost of C[i − sj , S ? ] plus the cost of sj is better than the previous cost
     of C[i, S ? ∪ sj ].

   • What if I have multiple knapsacks? – When there are multiple knapsacks,
     your problem might be better thought of as a bin-packing problem. Sec-
     tion 20.9 (page 652) discusses bin-packing/cutting-stock algorithms. That
     said, algorithms for optimizing over multiple knapsacks are provided in the
     Implementations section below.

    Exact solutions for large capacity knapsacks can be found using integer pro-
gramming or backtracking. A 0/1 integer variable xi is used
                                                          ?n to denote whether
item i is present?in the optimal subset. We maximize        i=1 xi · vi given the
                   n
constraint that i=1 xi · si ≤ C. Integer programming codes are discussed in
Section 16.6 (page 482).
    Heuristics must be used when exact solutions prove too costly to compute.
The simple greedy heuristic inserts items according to the maximum “price
per pound” rule described previously. Often this heuristic solution is close
to optimal, but it might prove arbitrarily bad depending upon the problem
instance. The “price per pound” rule can also be used to reduce the problem
size in exhaustive search-based algorithms by eliminating “cheap but heavy”
objects from future consideration.
    Another heuristic is based on scaling. Dynamic programming works well if
the knapsack capacity is a reasonably small integer, say ≤ Cs . But what if
we have a problem with capacity C > Cs ? We can scale down the sizes of all
items by a factor of C/Cs , round the size down to the nearest integer, and then
use dynamic programming on the scaled items. Scaling works well in practice,
especially when the range of item sizes is not too large.
Implementations: Martello and Toth’s collection of Fortran implementations
of algorithms for a variety of knapsack problem variants are available at http:
//www.or.deis.unibo.it/kp.html. An electronic copy of the associated book
[MT90a] has also been generously made available.
    David Pisinger maintains a well-organized collection of C-language codes
for knapsack problems and related variants like bin packing and container load-
ing. These are available at http://www.diku.dk/~pisinger/codes.html. The
strongest code is based on the dynamic programming algorithm of [MPT99].
    Algorithm 632 [MT85] of the Collected Algorithms of the ACM is a Fortran
code for the 0/1 knapsack problem, with the twist that it supports multiple
knapsacks. See Section 22.1.4 (page 714).
500                                  CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

Notes: Keller, Pferschy, and Pisinger [KPP04] is the most current reference on the
knapsack problem and variants. Martello and Toth’s book [MT90a] and survey article
[MT87] are standard references on the knapsack problem, including both theoretical
and experimental results. An excellent exposition on integer programming approaches
to knapsack problems appears in [MPT99]. See [MPT00] for a computational study
of algorithms for 0/1 knapsack problems.
     A polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) is an algorithm that approxi-
mates the optimal solution of a problem in time polynomial in both its size and the
approximation factor ?. This very strong condition implies a smooth tradeoﬀ between
running time and approximation quality. Good expositions on polynomial-time ap-
proximation schemes [IK75] for knapsack and subset sum includes [BvG99, CLRS09].
Polynomial-time approximation schemes exist even for the case of multiple knapsacks
[CK05].
     An interesting special variant of the knapsack problem is the 3-sum problem, where
we are given three sets A, B, and C, each with n integers. We seek an a ∈ A, b ∈ B,
and c ∈ C such that a + b = c. The best algorithm known for 3-sum is O(n2 ), and
reductions to 3-sum are often used to suggest that no sub-quadratic algorithm exists
for a given problem [GO95].
     Vector bin packing is a generalization of knapsack where the knapsack has capacity
constraints along d axes (say CPU and memory limits), and each object is deﬁned by
a vector of d corresponding demands. Heuristics have been studied for vector bin
packing in the context of virtual machine placement [PTUW11].
     The ﬁrst algorithm for generalized public key encryption by Merkle and Hellman
[MH78] was based on the hardness of the knapsack problem. See [Sch15] for an expo-
sition.

Related problems: Bin packing (see page 652), integer programming (see
page 482).
16.11. DISCRETE FOURIER TRANSFORM                                           501

                 Input                                   Output

16.11       Discrete Fourier Transform
Input description: A sequence of n real or complex values hi , 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1,
sampled at uniform intervals from a function h.
                                                          ?n−1
Problem description: The discrete Fourier transform Hm = k=0 hk e−2πikm/n
for 0 ≤ m ≤ n − 1.
Discussion: Although computer scientists tend to be fairly ignorant about
Fourier transforms, scientists and engineers eat them for breakfast. Function-
ally, Fourier transforms provide a way to convert samples of a standard time-
series into the frequency domain. This provides a dual representation of the
function, in which certain operations become easier than the original time do-
main. Applications of Fourier transforms include:

   • Filtering – Taking the Fourier transform of a function is equivalent to
     representing it as the sum of sine functions. We can ﬁlter an image to re-
     move noise and other artifacts by dropping some of the sine functions, say
     eliminating undesirable high- and/or low-frequency components. Taking
     an inverse Fourier transform then gets us back into the time domain. For
     example, the sharp spike in the plot above represents the period of the
     single sine function that closely models the input data. The rest is noise.

   • Image compression – A smoothed, ﬁltered image contains less information
     than the original, while retaining a similar appearance. By eliminating
     the coeﬃcients of sine functions that contribute relatively little to the
     image, we reduce the size of the image at little cost in image ﬁdelity.

   • Convolution and deconvolution – Fourier transforms can eﬃciently com-
     pute convolutions of two sequences. A convolution is the pairwise prod-
     uct of elements from two diﬀerent sequences, such as in multiplying two
502                                          CHAPTER 16. NUMERICAL PROBLEMS

       n-variable polynomials f and g or comparing two character strings.
       Implementing such products directly takes O(n2 ), while the fast Fourier
       transform led to a O(n lg n) algorithm.
       Another example comes from image processing. Because a scanner mea-
       sures the intensity of an image patch instead of just a single point, the
       scanned input is always blurred. The original signal can be reconstructed
       by deconvoluting the input signal with a Gaussian point-spread function.

   • Computing the correlation of functions – The correlation function of two
     functions f (t) and g(t) is deﬁned by
                                     ? ∞
                              z(t) =     f (τ )g(t + τ )dτ
                                                   −∞

       and can be easily computed using Fourier transforms. When functions
       f (t) and g(t) are similar in shape but one is shifted relative to the other
       (such as f (t) = sin(t) and g(t) = cos(t)), the value of z(t0 ) will be large
       at this shift oﬀset t0 . As an application, consider the task of detecting
       periodicities in our random-number generator. We can generate a large
       series of random numbers, turn them into a time series (the ith number
       at time i), and compute the correlation function of this series. Any large
       spikes will correspond to potential periodicities.

    The discrete Fourier transform takes as input n complex numbers hk , 0 ≤
k ≤ n − 1, corresponding to equally spaced points in a time series, and outputs
n complex numbers Hk , 0 ≤ k ≤ n − 1, each describing a sine function of given
frequency. The discrete Fourier transform is deﬁned by
               n−1
               ?                             n−1
                                             ?          ?                               ?
                              −2πikm/n                      2πkm                2πkm
       Hm =          hk · e              =         hk cos           − i sin
                                                              n                   n
               k=0                           k=0

and the inverse Fourier transform is deﬁned by
               n−1                   n−1   ?                                                ?
             1?                    1?                        2πkm                2πkm
      hm =         Hk · e2πikm/n =       Hk cos                       + i sin
             n                     n                           n                   n
              k=0                             k=0

which enables us to move easily between h and H.
    Since the output of the discrete Fourier transform consists of n numbers, each
of which is computed using a formula on n numbers, they can be computed in
O(n2 ) time. The fast Fourier transform (FFT) is an algorithm that computes the
discrete Fourier transform in O(n log n). This is arguably the most important
algorithm known, for it opened the door to modern signal processing. Several
diﬀerent algorithms call themselves FFTs, each based on a divide-and-conquer
approach. Essentially, the problem of computing the discrete Fourier transform
on n points is reduced to computing two transforms on n/2 points each, and
then applied recursively.
16.11. DISCRETE FOURIER TRANSFORM                                                       503

   The FFT usually assumes that n is a power of two. If this is not the case, you
are usually better oﬀ padding your data with zeros to create n = 2k elements
rather than hunting for a more general code.
   Many signal-processing systems have strong real-time constraints, so FFTs
are often implemented in hardware, or at least in assembly language tuned to
the particular machine. Keep this in mind if the codes below prove too slow.
Implementations: FFTW is a C subroutine library for computing the discrete
Fourier transform in one or more dimensions, with arbitrary input size, and
supporting both real and complex data. It is the clear choice among freely
available FFT codes. Extensive benchmarking proves that FFTW is indeed
the “Fastest Fourier Transform in the West.” FFTW received the 1999 J. H.
Wilkinson Prize for Numerical Software. See http://www.fftw.org/.
    FFTPACK is a package of Fortran subprograms for the fast Fourier trans-
form of periodic and other symmetric sequences, written by P. Swartzrauber. It
includes complex, real, sine, cosine, and quarter-wave transforms. FFTPACK
resides at http://www.netlib.org/fftpack. The GNU Scientiﬁc Library for
C/C++ provides a re-implementation of FFTPACK. See http://www.gnu.org/
software/gsl/.
Notes: Bracewell [Bra99] and Brigham [Bri88] are excellent introductions to Fourier
transforms and the FFT. See also the exposition in [PFTV07]. Credit for inventing
the fast Fourier transform is usually given to Cooley and Tukey [CT65], but see [Bri88]
for a complete history.
    A cache-oblivious algorithm for the fast Fourier transform is given in [FLPR99].
This paper ﬁrst introduced the notion of cache-oblivious algorithms. The FFTW is
based on this algorithm. See [FJ05] for more on the design of the FFTW. Faster
algorithms are known for the case where we seek only the k largest coeﬃcients of the
transform, when k ? n [HIKP12].
    An interesting divide-and-conquer algorithm for polynomial multiplication [KO63]
does the job in O(n1.59 ) time and is discussed in [AHU74, Man89]. An FFT-based al-
gorithm that multiplies two n-bit numbers in O(n lg n lg lg n) time is due to Schönhage
and Strassen [SS71].
    The quantum Fourier transform provides an exponential speedup over the classical
FFT, working on 2n amplitudes stored in n qubits using only O(n2 ) operations [NC02].
The catch is eﬃciently getting your desired amplitudes into (or out of) the qubits. This
operation is an essential component of Shor’s quantum factoring algorithm [Sho99].
For intuition why, consider a set of sine functions with periods 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, . . . in the
frequency domain. If n is divisible by any of these, then n must have a peak in the
time domain.
    It is an open question of whether complex variables are really fundamental to
fast algorithms for convolution. Fortunately, fast convolution can generally be used
as a black box in applications. Many variants of string matching are based on fast
convolution [Ind98].
    In recent years, wavelets have been proposed to replace Fourier transforms in
ﬁltering. See [BN09] for an introduction to wavelets.

Related problems: Data compression (see page 693), high-precision arith-
metic (see page 493).
