Chapter 17

Combinatorial Problems

We will now consider several algorithmic problems of a purely combinatorial
nature. These include sorting and searching, both among the first non-numerical
problems arising on electronic computers. Sorting can be viewed as identifying
or imposing a total order on the keys, while searching and selection involve
identifying specific keys based on their position in this total order.
    The rest of this section deals with combinatorial objects, such as permuta-
tions, partitions, subsets, calendars, and schedules. We are particularly inter-
ested in algorithms that rank and unrank combinatorial objects—mapping each
distinct object to/from a unique integer. Rank/unrank operations make many
other tasks simple, such as generating random objects (pick a random number
and unrank) or listing all objects in order (iterate from 1 to n and unrank).
    I conclude with the problem of generating graphs. Graph algorithms are
more fully presented in subsequent sections of the catalog.
    Books on general combinatorial algorithms, in this restricted sense, include:

    • Knuth – The standard reference on sorting and searching [Knu98]. New
      material on the generation of permutations, subsets, partitions, and trees
      comprises the first part of his mythical Volume 4 [Knu11].
    • Ruskey [Rus03] – He never officially completed it, but this manuscript is
      a standard reference on generating combinatorial objects. Previews are
      available if you Google Ruskey Combinatorial Generation.
    • Kreher and Stinson [KS99] – This book on combinatorial generation al-
      gorithms, with additional particular focus on algebraic problems such as
      isomorphism and dealing with symmetry.
    • Pemmaraju and Skiena [PS03] – This description of Combinatorica, a
      library of over 400 Mathematica functions for generating combinatorial
      objects and graph theory (see Section 22.1.8), provides a distinctive view
      of how different algorithms can fit together. Its second author is well
      qualified to write a manual on algorithm design.

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   505
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_17

                  Input                                    Output

17.1      Sorting
Input description: A set of n items.
Problem description: Arrange the items in increasing order.
Discussion: Sorting is the most fundamental algorithmic problem in computer
science. Learning the different sorting algorithms is like learning scales for a
musician. Sorting proves to be the first step in solving a host of other algorithm
problems, as discussed in Section 4.2 (page 113). Indeed, “when in doubt, sort”
is one of the first rules of algorithm design.
    Sorting also illustrates most of the standard paradigms of algorithm design.
Programmers are generally familiar with several different sorting algorithms,
which sows confusion as to which should be used for a given application. The
following criteria can help you decide:

   • How many keys will you be sorting? – For small amounts of data (say
     n ≤ 100), it doesn’t really matter which quadratic-time algorithm you
     use. Insertion sort is faster, simpler, and less likely to be buggy than
     bubblesort. Shellsort is closely related to, but much faster than, insertion
     sort, although it requires looking up the right insert sequences in Knuth
     [Knu98].
      But if you have more than one hundred items to sort, it becomes important
      to use an O(n lg n)-time algorithm like heapsort, quicksort, or mergesort.
      Partisans may favor one of these algorithms over the others, but it usually
      doesn’t really matter.
      Once you get past (say) 100,000,000 items, it is important to start thinking
      about external-memory sorting algorithms that minimize disk or network
      access. Both types of algorithm are discussed below.

   • Will there be duplicate keys? – The sorted order is completely defined
     if all items have distinct keys. However, when two items share the same
     key, something else must determine which one comes first. Sometimes this
17.1. SORTING                                                                507

    matters. Ties are often broken by sorting on a secondary key, like the first
    name or initial when the family names collide.
    Ties sometimes get broken by their initial position in the data set. Suppose
    the 5th and 27th items of the initial data set share the same key. This
    means the 5th item must appear before the 27th in the final order. A stable
    sorting algorithm preserves the original ordering in case of ties. Most
    of the quadratic-time sorting algorithms are stable, while many of the
    O(n lg n) algorithms are not. If it is important that your sort be stable,
    it is probably best to explicitly use the initial position as a secondary
    key in your comparison function instead of trusting the stability of your
    implementation.

  • What do you know about your data? – Perhaps you can exploit special
    knowledge about your data to get it sorted faster or more easily. General
    sorting is a fast O(n lg n) operation, so if the time spent sorting really is
    the bottleneck in your application, you are indeed a fortunate person.

       – Has the data already been partially sorted? If so, certain algorithms
         like insertion sort perform better than they otherwise would.
       – Do you know the distribution of the keys? If the keys are randomly
         or uniformly distributed, a bucket or distribution sort makes sense.
         Throw the keys into bins based on their first letter, and recur until
         each bin is small enough to sort by brute force. This is very efficient
         provided the keys are evenly distributed in key space. Note that
         bucket sort would perform very badly sorting names on the member-
         ship roster of the “Smith Society.”
       – Are your keys very long or hard to compare? When sorting long
         text strings, it might pay to use a relatively short prefix (say ten
         characters) of each key for an initial sort, and then resolve ties using
         the full key. This is particularly important in external sorting (see
         below), since you don’t want to waste fast memory on the dead weight
         of irrelevant detail.
         Another idea might be to use radix sort. This always takes time
         linear in the number of characters in the file, instead of O(n lg n)
         times the cost of comparing two keys.
       – Is the range of possible keys very small? If you want to sort a subset
         of (say) n/2 distinct integers, each with a value from 1 to n, the
         fastest algorithm would be to initialize an n-element bit vector, turn
         on the bits corresponding to keys, then scan from left to right and
         report the positions with true bits.

  • Should I worry about disk accesses? – In massive sorting problems, it is
    not possible to keep all data in memory simultaneously. This problem
    is called external sorting, because the data is maintained on an external
    storage device. Traditionally, this meant tape drives, and Knuth [Knu98]

        describes a variety of intricate algorithms for efficiently merging data from
        different tapes. Today, it usually means virtual memory. Any sorting
        algorithm will run using virtual memory, but clumsy ones will spend most
        of their time swapping.
        The simplest approach to external sorting loads the data into a B-tree,
        and then does an in-order traversal of the tree to read the keys off in sorted
        order. The highest performance sorting programs are based on multiway-
        mergesort. Files containing portions of the data are sorted using a fast
        internal sort, and then these sorted runs are merged in stages using 2- or
        k-way merging. Complicated merging patterns and buffer management
        based on the properties of the external storage device can be used to
        optimize performance.

    The best general-purpose internal sorting algorithm is quicksort (see Sec-
tion 4.2 (page 113)), although it requires tuning effort to achieve maximum
performance. Indeed, you are much better off using a library function instead
of coding it yourself. A poorly written quicksort will likely run more slowly
than a poorly written heapsort. If you are determined to implement your own
quicksort, use the following heuristics, which make a big difference in practice:

      • Use randomization – By randomly permuting (see Section 17.4 (page 517))
        the keys before sorting, you can eliminate the potential embarrassment of
        quadratic-time behavior on nearly sorted data.

      • Median of three – For your pivot element, use the median of the first, last,
        and middle elements of the array to increase the likelihood of partitioning
        the array into roughly equal pieces. Experiments suggest using a larger
        sample on big subarrays and a smaller sample on small ones.

   • Leave small subarrays for insertion sort – Terminating the quicksort re-
     cursion and switching to insertion sort makes sense when the subarrays
     get small, say fewer than 20 elements. You should experiment to identify
     the best switch point for your implementation.

      • Do the smaller partition first – You can minimize run-time memory by
        processing the smaller partition before the larger one. Since each succes-
        sive stored call is at most half as large as the previous one, only O(lg n)
        stack space is needed.

   Before you get started, see Bentley’s article on building a faster quicksort
[Ben92b].
Implementations: The best freely available sort program is presumably GNU
sort, part of the GNU core utilities library. See http://www.gnu.org/software/
coreutils/. There are also commercial vendors of high-performance external
sorting programs, including Cosort (www.iri.com), Syncsort (www.syncsort.
com), and Ordinal Technology (www.ordinal.com).
17.1. SORTING                                                                      509

    Modern programming languages provide libraries so you should never need
to implement your own sort routine. The C standard library contains qsort,
a generic implementation of (presumably) quicksort. The C++ Standard Tem-
plate Library (STL) provides both sort and stable sort methods. See Josuttis
[Jos12] and Meyers [Mey01] for more detailed guides to using STL and the C++
standard library. Java Collections (JC), a small library of data structures, is
included in the java.util package of Java SE. In particular, SortedMap and
SortedSet classes are provided.
    High-performance sorting systems distribute the work over many machines.
Map-Reduce systems like Hadoop [Whi12] make it relatively easy to implement
parallel bucketsort, such as the terabyte champion system reported in [O08].
Efficient sorting algorithms for GPUs are considered by Satish et.al [SHG09].
    Numerous websites provide animations of all the basic sorting algorithms,
many quite interesting to watch. Indeed, sorting is the canonical problem for
algorithm animation. Search on Google and YouTube for “sorting animations”
and watch the most popular ones.
Notes: Knuth [Knu98] is the best book that will ever be written on sorting. It
is now almost fifty years old, but remains fascinating reading. One area that has
developed since Knuth is sorting under presortedness measures, surveyed in [ECW92].
Timsort, a popular candidate for the fastest sorting algorithm in practice, exploits
naturally ordered sequences to take O(n log p) time, where p is the number of sorted
runs discovered in the input data [AJNP18].
    Expositions on the basic internal sorting algorithms appear in every algorithms
textbook. Heapsort was first invented by Williams [Wil64]. Quicksort was invented
by Hoare [Hoa62], with careful analysis and implementation by Sedgewick [Sed78].
Von Neumann is credited with having produced the first implementation of mergesort
on the EDVAC in 1945. See Knuth [Knu98] for a full discussion of the history of
sorting, dating back to the days of punch-card tabulating machines.
    The primary competitive forum for high-performance sorting is an annual com-
petition initiated by the late Jim Gray. See http://sortbenchmark.org/ for current
and previous results, which are either inspiring or depressing depending upon how you
look at it. The magnitude of progress is inspiring (the million-record instances of the
original benchmarks are now too small to bother with) but it is depressing (to me) that
systems/memory management issues thoroughly trump the combinatorial/algorithmic
aspects of sorting. Modern attempts to engineer high-performance sort programs in-
clude work on both cache-conscious [LL99] and cache-oblivious [BFV07] sorting.
    Sorting has a well-known Ω(n lg n) lower bound under the algebraic decision tree
model [BO83]. Determining the exact number of comparisons required for sorting n
elements, for small values of n, has generated considerable study. See [Aig88, Raw92]
for expositions and Peczarski [Pec04, Pec07] for the latest results.
    This lower-bound does not hold under different models of computation. Fredman
                                       √
and Willard [FW93] present an O(n lg n) algorithm for sorting under a model of
computation that permits arithmetic operations on keys. Andersson [And05] surveys
algorithms for fast sorting on such non-standard models of computation.

Related problems: Dictionaries (see page 440), searching (see page 510),
topological sorting (see page 546).

                              H                                                            H

              D                                L                           D                               L

      B               F                J               N           B               F               J               N

 A        C       E       G        I       K       M       O   A       C       E       G       I       K       M       O

                              G?
                                                                                       G

                          Input                                                        Output

17.2              Searching
Input description: A set of n keys S, and a query key q.
Problem description: Where is q in S?
Discussion: “Searching” is a word that means different things to different
people. Searching for the global maximum or minimum of a function is the
problem of unconstrained optimization, discussed in Section 16.5 (page 478).
Chess-playing programs select the best move to play through an exhaustive
search of possible candidates using a variation of backtracking (see Section 9.1
(page 281)).
    But here we consider the task of searching for a key in a list, array, or
tree. Dictionary data structures maintain efficient access to sets of keys under
insertion and deletion, and are discussed in Section 15.1 (page 440). Typical
dictionaries include binary search trees and hash tables.
    I treat searching as a problem distinct from dictionaries because simpler and
more efficient solutions can emerge when our primary interest is static searching
without insertion/deletion. These little data structures can yield substantial
performance improvements when properly employed in an innermost loop. Also,
ideas such as binary search and self-organization apply to other problems and
well justify our attention.
    The two basic approaches we consider are sequential search and binary
search. Both are simple, yet have interesting and subtle variations. In se-
quential search, we start from the front of our list/array of keys and compare
each successive item against the search key q until we find a match, or reach the
end. In binary search, we start with a sorted array of keys. To search for q, we
compare it to the middle key Sn/2 . If q is before Sn/2 , it must reside in the top
half of our set; if not, it must reside in the bottom half of our set. By repeating
this process on the correct half, we find q using lg n? comparisons. This is a
17.2. SEARCHING                                                               511

big win over the n/2 comparisons we expect with sequential search. See Section
5.1 (page 148) for more on binary search.
    A sequential search is the simplest algorithm, and likely to be fastest on up
to about twenty elements. Beyond (say) one hundred elements, binary search
will clearly be more efficient than sequential search, easily justifying the cost
of sorting if there will be multiple queries. But other issues come into play in
identifying the proper variant of the algorithm:

   • How much time can you spend programming? – A binary search is a
     notoriously tricky algorithm to program correctly. It took seventeen years
     after its invention until the first correct version of a binary search was
     published! Don’t be afraid to start from an implementation described
     below. Test it completely by writing a driver that searches for every key
     in the set S as well as between the keys.

   • Are certain items accessed more often than other ones? – Certain English
     words (such as “the”) are much more likely to occur than others (such as
     “defenestrate”). We can reduce the number of comparisons in a sequential
     search by putting the most popular words on the top of the list and the
     least popular ones at the bottom. Non-uniform access is usually the rule,
     not the exception. Many real-world distributions are governed by power
     laws. A classic example is word use in English, which is fairly accurately
     modeled by Zipf ’s law. Under Zipf’s law, the ith most frequently accessed
     key is selected with probability (i−1)/i times the probability of the (i−1)st
     most popular key, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
     Knowledge of access frequencies is easy to exploit with sequential search.
     But the issue is more complicated with binary trees. We want popular
     keys close to the root (so we hit them quickly) but not at the expense of
     losing balance and degenerating into sequential search. The answer is to
     employ a dynamic programming algorithm that builds the optimal binary
     search tree. The critical observation is that every possible root node i
     partitions the space of keys into those to the left of i and those to the
     right; each of which should be represented by an optimal binary search
     tree on a smaller subrange of keys. The root of the optimal tree is selected
     to minimize the expected search costs of the resulting partition.

   • Might access frequencies change over time? – Reordering a list or tree
     to exploit a skewed access pattern requires knowing the access pattern in
     advance. For many applications, it can be difficult to obtain this informa-
     tion. Better are self-organizing lists, where the order of the keys changes
     in response to the queries. The best self-organizing scheme is move-to-
     front; that is, we move the most recently searched-for key from its current
     position to the front of the list. Popular keys keep getting boosted to the
     front, while unsearched-for keys drift towards the back of the list. There
     is no need to keep track of the frequency of access; just move the keys
     on demand. Self-organizing lists also exploit locality of reference, since

        accesses to any given key are likely to occur in clusters. A hot key will be
        maintained near the top of the list during its cluster of accesses, even if
        other keys have proven more popular in the past.
        Self-organization can extend the useful size range of sequential search,
        although you should switch to binary search beyond one hundred elements.
        But consider using splay trees, which are self-organizing binary search
        trees that rotate each searched-for node to the root. They offer excellent
        amortized performance guarantees.

  • Is the key close by? – Suppose we know that the target key is to the right
    of position p, and we think it is nearby. A sequential search is fast if we
    are correct, but we will be punished severely should we guess wrong. A
    better idea is to test repeatedly at larger intervals (p + 1, p + 2, p + 4,
    p + 8, p + 16, . . .) to the right until we find a key to the right of our target.
    This defines a window containing the target, so now we can proceed with
    a conventional binary search.
        Such a one-sided binary search finds the target at position p + l using at
        most 2 lg l? comparisons, so it is faster than binary search when l ? n,
        yet it can never be much worse. One-sided binary search is particularly
        useful in unbounded search problems, such as in numerical root finding.

      • Is my data structure sitting on external memory? – Once the number
        of keys grows too large, binary search loses its status as the best search
        technique. Such a search jumps wildly around the set of keys looking
        for midpoints to compare, so each comparison requires reading in a new
        page from external memory. Much better are data structures such as B-
        trees (see Section 15.1 (page 440)) or van Emde Boas trees (see the Notes
        section), which cluster the keys into pages to minimize the number of disk
        accesses per search.

      • Can I guess where the key should be? – In interpolation search, we exploit
        our understanding of the distribution of keys to guess where to look next.
        Interpolation search is probably a more accurate description of how we
        use a telephone book than binary search. Suppose we search for Wash-
        ington, George in a sorted telephone book. We feel safe making our first
        comparison three-fourths of the way down the list, essentially doing two
        comparisons for the price of one.
        Although an interpolation search is an appealing idea, I caution against it
        for three reasons: First, you must work very hard to optimize your search
        algorithm before you can hope for a speedup over binary search. Second,
        even if you do beat a binary search, it is unlikely to be by enough to have
        justified the exercise. Finally, your program will be much less robust and
        efficient when the distribution changes, such as when your application gets
        ported to work on French text instead of English.
17.2. SEARCHING                                                                    513

Implementations: The basic sequential and binary search algorithms are sim-
ple enough that you should consider implementing them yourself. That said, the
C standard library contains bsearch, a generic implementation of (presumably)
binary search. The C++ Standard Template Library (STL) provides find (se-
quential search) and binary search iterators. Java Collections (JC), provides
binarySearch in the java.util package of Java standard edition.
    Many data structure textbooks provide extensive and illustrative implemen-
tations. Sedgewick (https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/code/) [SW11] and
Weiss (http://www.cs.fiu.edu/~weiss/) [Wei11] provide implementations of
splay trees and other search structures in both C++ and Java.
Notes: The Handbook of Data Structures and Applications [MS18] provides up-
to-date surveys on all aspects of dictionary data structures. Other surveys include
Mehlhorn and Tsakalidis [MT90b] and Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [GBY91]. Knuth
[Knu97a] provides a detailed analysis and exposition on all fundamental search al-
gorithms and dictionary data structures, but omits such modern data structures as
red–black and splay trees.
    The next position probed in linear interpolation search on an array of sorted num-
bers is given by
                                    q − S[low − 1]
         next = (low − 1) +                             × (high − low + 1)
                               S[high + 1] − S[low − 1]
where q is the query numerical key and S the sorted numerical array. If the keys
are drawn independently from a uniform distribution, the expected search time is
O(lg lg n) [DJP04, PIA78]. But in practice, they won’t be.
    Non-uniform access patterns can be exploited in binary search trees by structuring
them so that popular keys are located near the root, thus minimizing search time.
Dynamic programming can be used to construct such optimal search trees in O(n lg n)
time [Knu98]. Stout and Warren [SW86] provide a slick algorithm to efficiently trans-
form a binary tree to a minimum height (optimally balanced) tree using rotations.
    The van Emde Boas layout of a binary tree (or sorted array) offers better external
memory performance than conventional binary search, at a cost of greater implemen-
tation complexity. See the survey of Arge et al. [ABF05] for more on this and other
cache-oblivious data structures.
                                                                           √
    Grover’s algorithm permits searching in an unsorted database in O( n) time on
a quantum computer [NC02]. The basic intuition is that quantum computers work on
probabilities, initially uniform among n items in superposition. But a single amplitude
amplification operation can increase the probability of a target element by a factor of
√               √
  n. After O( n) such amplifications, we become highly likely to sample the target
element.

Related problems: Dictionaries (see page 440), sorting (see page 506).

                    Input                                     Output

17.3         Median and Selection
Input description: A set of n numbers or keys, and an integer k.
Problem description: Find the key greater than or equal to exactly k of the
n keys.
Discussion: Median finding is an essential problem in statistics, where it pro-
vides a more robust notion of average than the mean. The mean wealth of
people who have published research papers on sorting is significantly influenced
by the presence of one William Gates [GP79], although his effect on the median
wealth is merely to cancel out one starving graduate student.
   Median finding is a special case of the more general selection problem, which
seeks the kth element in sorted order. Selection arises in several applications:

      • Filtering outlying elements – When dealing with noisy data, it is often
        a good idea to throw out the 10% largest and smallest values. Selection
        can be used to identify the items defining the 10th and 90th percentiles.
        The outliers are then filtered away by comparing each item to the selected
        bounds.

      • Identifying the most promising candidates – A computer chess program
        might quickly assess all possible next moves, and then evaluate the top
        25% more carefully. This is again selection followed by filtering.

      • Deciles and related divisions – A useful way to present income distribution
        in a population charts the salary of the people ranked at regular intervals,
        say exactly at the 10th percentile, 20th percentile, and so on. Computing
        these values is simply selection on the appropriate position ranks.

      • Order statistics – Particularly interesting special cases of selection include
        finding the smallest element (k = 1), the largest element (k = n), and the
        median element (k = n/2).
17.3. MEDIAN AND SELECTION                                                     515

    The mean of n numbers can be computed in linear time by summing the
elements and dividing by n. But finding the median is a more difficult problem.
Algorithms that compute the median can readily be generalized to arbitrary
selection. Issues in median finding and selection include:

   • How fast does it have to be? – The most elementary median-finding algo-
     rithm sorts the items in O(n lg n) time and then returns the item occupying
     the (n/2)nd position. As a plus, you get much more information than just
     the median, enabling selection for any kth element (1 ≤ k ≤ n) in constant
     time after the sort. However, there are faster algorithms if all you want is
     the median.
     In particular, quick-select is an O(n) expected-time algorithm based on
     quicksort. Select a random element from the data set as a pivot, and use
     it to partition the data into sets less than and greater than the pivot. From
     the sizes of these sets, we know the position of the pivot in the total order,
     and hence whether the median lies to the left or right of this point. Now
     we recur on the appropriate subset until it converges on the median. This
     takes (on average) O(lg n) iterations, with the cost of each iteration being
     roughly half that of the previous one. This defines a geometric series that
     converges to a linear-time algorithm, although if you are very unlucky it
     takes Θ(n2 ), the same worst-case time as quicksort.
     More complicated algorithms can find the median in worst-case linear
     time. However, this expected-time algorithm will likely win in practice.

   • What if you only get to see each element once? – Selection and median
     finding become expensive on large datasets because they require several
     passes through external memory. In data-streaming applications, the vol-
     ume of data is often too large to store, making repeated consideration
     (and thus exact median finding) impossible. Much better is computing
     a small summary of the data for future analysis, say approximate deciles
     of frequency
                   moments (where the kth moment of stream x is defined as
     Fk = i xki ).
     One solution to such a problem is random sampling. Flip a coin for each
     value to decide whether to save it, with the probability of heads set low
     enough that you won’t overflow your buffer. Likely the median of your
     samples will be close to that of the underlying data set. Alternatively,
     you can devote some fraction of memory to retaining (say) decile values
     of large blocks, and then combine these decile distributions to yield more
     refined decile bounds.

   • How fast can you find the mode? – Beyond mean and median lies a third
     notion of average. The mode is defined to be the element that occurs with
     highest frequency in the data set. The best way to compute the mode
     sorts the set in O(n log n) time, which creates runs of identical elements.
     By doing a linear sweep from left to right on this sorted set, we can count

      the length of the longest run and hence compute the mode in a total of
      O(n log n) time.
      The mode can also be found in expected linear time using hashing, but no
      such worst-case algorithm is possible. Testing whether there exist two
      identical elements in a set (a problem called element uniqueness) has
      an Ω(n log n) lower bound. Element uniqueness is equivalent to asking
      whether the mode occurs more than once. Possibilities exist for improve-
      ment, at least theoretically, when the mode is large using fast median
      computations.

Implementations: The C++ Standard Template Library (STL) provides a
general selection method (nth element) implemented using the linear expected-
time algorithm. See Josuttis [Jos12], Meyers [Mey01], and Musser [MDS01] for
more detailed guides to using STL and the C++ standard library.
Notes: The linear expected-time algorithm for median and selection is due to Hoare
[Hoa61]. Floyd and Rivest [FR75] provide an algorithm that uses fewer comparisons on
average. Good expositions on linear-time selection include [BvG99, CLRS09, Raw92],
with [Raw92] being particularly enlightening.
     Streaming algorithms have extensive applications to large data sets, and are well
surveyed by Muthukrishnan [Mut05] and Cormode [CH09].
     A sport of considerable theoretical interest is determining exactly how many com-
parisons are sufficient to find the median of n items. The linear-time algorithm of
Blum et al. [BFP+ 72] proves that c · n comparisons suffice, but we want to know what
c is. Dor and Zwick [DZ99] proved that 2.95n comparisons suffice to find the median.
These algorithms attempt to minimize the number of element comparisons but not
the total number of operations, and hence do not lead to faster algorithms in practice.
They also hold the current best lower bound of (2 + ?) comparisons for median finding
[DZ01].
     Tight combinatorial bounds for selection problems are presented in Aigner [Aig88].
An optimal algorithm for computing the mode is given by [DM80].

Related problems: Priority queues (see page 445), sorting (see page 506).
17.4. GENERATING PERMUTATIONS                                                   517

                                                           {1,2,3}

                                              {2,1,3}                  {3,2,1}
         {1,2,3}
                                              {3,1,2}                  {2,3,1}
                                                           {1,3,2}

                  Input                                     Output

17.4      Generating Permutations
Input description: An integer n.
Problem description: Generate (1) all, or (2) a random, or (3) the next
permutation of length n.
Discussion: A permutation describes an arrangement or ordering of items.
Many algorithmic problems seek the best way to order a set of objects, including
traveling salesman (the least-cost order to visit n cities), bandwidth (order the
vertices of a graph on a line so as to minimize the length of the longest edge),
and graph isomorphism (order the vertices of one graph so that it is identical
to another). Any algorithm that solves such a problem exactly must construct
a series of permutations along the way.
    There are n! permutations of n items. This grows so quickly that you can’t
generate all permutations for n > 15, because 15! = 1, 307, 674, 368, 000. Num-
bers like these should cool the ardor of anyone excited by exhaustive search,
and help explain the importance of generating random permutations.
    Fundamental to any permutation-generation algorithm is the notion of order,
the sequence in which the permutations are constructed from first to last. The
most natural generation order is lexicographic, the sequence they would appear if
they were sorted numerically. Lexicographic order for n = 3 is {1, 2, 3}, {1, 3, 2},
{2, 1, 3}, {2, 3, 1}, {3, 1, 2}, and finally {3, 2, 1}. Although lexicographic order
is aesthetically pleasing, there is often no particular advantage to using it. For
example, when searching through a collection of files, it does not matter whether
the filenames are encountered in sorted order, so long as you eventually search
through all of them. Indeed, non-lexicographic orders lead to faster and simpler
permutation generation algorithms.
    There are two different paradigms for constructing permutations: rank-
ing/unranking and incremental change methods. The latter are more efficient,

but ranking and unranking can be applied to solve a much wider class of prob-
lems. The key is to define the functions rank and unrank on all permutations p
and integers n, m, where |p| = n and 0 ≤ m ≤ n! − 1.

      • Rank(p) – What is the position of p = {p1 , . . . , pn } in the given generation
        order? A typical ranking function is recursive. Consider the basis case
        Rank({1}) = 0 with

                    Rank(p) = (p1 − 1) · (|p| − 1)! + Rank(p2 , . . . , p|p| )

        We assume that any permutation p is an arrangement of distinct integers
        1 trough |p|, so getting this right requires relabeling the elements of the
        smaller permutation to reflect the deleted first element. This is why {1, 3}
        magically turns into {1, 2} in the following example:

        Rank({2, 1, 3}) = (2−1)·2!+Rank({1, 2}) = 2+(1−1)·1!+Rank({1}) = 2

      • Unrank(m,n) – Which permutation is in position m of the n! permutations
        of n items? A typical unranking function finds the number of times (n−1)!
        goes into m and proceeds recursively. U nrank(2, 3) tells us that the first
        element of the permutation must be “2”, because (2 − 1) · (3 − 1)! ≤ 2 but
        (3 − 1) · (3 − 1)! > 2. Deleting (2 − 1) · (3 − 1)! from m leaves the smaller
        problem U nrank(0, 2). The ranking of 0 corresponds to the total order.
        The total order on the two remaining elements (since 2 has been used) is
        {1, 3}, so U nrank(2, 3) = {2, 1, 3}.

   What the rank and unrank functions actually do does not matter so long as
they are inverses of each other. In other words, p = U nrank(Rank(p), n) for all
permutations p. You can perform many different tasks once you have ranking
and unranking functions for permutations:

      • Sequencing permutations – To determine the next permutation that occurs
        in order after p, we can Rank(p), add 1, and then U nrank(p). Similarly,
        the permutation right before p in order is Unrank(Rank(p)−1, |p|). Count-
        ing through the integers from 0 to n! − 1 and unranking them is equivalent
        to generating all permutations.

      • Generating random permutations – Selecting a random integer from 0 to
        n! − 1 and then unranking it yields a truly random permutation.

      • Keep track of a set of permutations – Suppose we are generating random
        permutations, but want to act only when we encounter one we have never
        generated before. We can set up a bit vector (see Section 15.5 (page 456))
        with n! bits, and set bit i to 1 if permutation p=Unrank(i,n) has already
        been seen. A similar technique was employed with k-subsets in the Lotto
        application of Section 1.8 (page 22).
17.4. GENERATING PERMUTATIONS                                                  519

    This rank/unrank method is best suited for small values of n, since n! quickly
exceeds the capacity of machine integers. Incremental change methods work
by defining next and previous operations that transform one permutation into
another, typically by swapping two elements. The tricky part is scheduling the
sequence of swaps so that permutations do not repeat until after all n! of them
have been generated. The output picture above gives an ordering of the six
permutations of {1, 2, 3} using a single swap between successive permutations.
    Incremental change algorithms for sequencing permutations are elegant but
tricky, generally so concise that they can be expressed in a dozen-line program.
See the implementation section for pointers to code. Because the incremental
change is only a single swap, these algorithms can be extremely fast—on average,
constant time independent of the size of the permutation! The secret is to
represent permutations using an n-element array to facilitate swaps. In certain
applications, only the change between permutations is important. For example,
in a brute-force program to search for the optimal TSP tour, the cost of the tour
associated with the new permutation will be that of the previous permutation,
with the addition and deletion of four edges.
    Throughout this discussion, we have assumed that the items we are per-
muting are all distinguishable. However, should there be duplicates (meaning
our set is a multiset), you can save considerable time and effort by avoiding
identical permutations. For example, there are only ten distinct permutations
of {1, 1, 2, 2, 2}, instead of 120. To avoid repeats, use backtracking and generate
the permutations in lexicographic order.
    Generating random permutations is an important little problem that people
often stumble across, and often botch up. The right way is to use the following
two-line, linear-time algorithm often called the Fisher-Yates shuffle. We assume
that Random[i, n] generates a random integer between i and n, inclusive:
             for i = 1 to n do a[i] = i;
             for i = 1 to n − 1 do swap[a[i], a[Random[i, n]]];
   That this algorithm generates all permutations uniformly at random is not
obvious. If you think so, convincingly explain why the following algorithm does
not generate permutations uniformly:
             for i = 1 to n do a[i] = i;
             for i = 1 to n − 1 do swap[a[i], a[Random[1, n]]];
    Such subtleties demonstrate why you must be very careful with random gen-
eration algorithms. Indeed, I recommend that you perform reasonably extensive
experiments with any random generator before trusting it. For example, gen-
erate 10,000 random permutations of length 4 and verify that all 24 distinct
permutations occur approximately the same number of times. If you know how
to test for statistical significance, you are in even better shape.
Implementations: The C++ Standard Template Library (STL) provides two
functions (next permutation and prev permutation) for sequencing permuta-
tions in lexicographic order. C++ routines for generating an astonishing variety

of combinatorial objects, including permutations and cyclic permutations, are
available at http://www.jjj.de/fxt/.
    The Combinatorial Object Server (http://combos.org/) developed by Frank
Ruskey of the University of Victoria is a unique resource for generating permu-
tations, subsets, partitions, graphs, and other objects. An interactive interface
enables you to specify which objects you would like returned to you. Check it
out. Implementations in C, Pascal, and Java are available for certain types of
objects.
    Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] is a venerable but still valuable reference on gen-
erating combinatorial objects. They provide efficient Fortran implementations
of algorithms to construct random permutations and to sequence permutations
in minimum-change order. Also included are routines to extract the cycle struc-
ture of a permutation. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716) for details.
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of algorithms
that construct random permutations and sequence permutations in minimum
change and lexicographic orders. It also provides a backtracking routine to con-
struct all distinct permutations of a multiset, and supports various permutation
group operations. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: The best recent reference on permutation generation is Knuth [Knu11].
Sedgewick’s excellent survey on the topic is older [Sed77], but this is not a fast moving
field. Good expositions include [KS99, NW78, Rus03].
     Fast permutation generation methods make only a single swap between successive
permutations. The Johnson–Trotter algorithm [Joh63, Tro62] satisfies an even stronger
condition, namely that the two elements being swapped are always adjacent. Simple
linear-time ranking and unranking functions for permutations are given by Myrvold
and Ruskey [MR01].
     Markov chain generation methods construct random objects through random tran-
sitions, like swaps. Applying Θ(n log n) random swaps to the identity permutation
{1, 2, . . . , n} suffices to construct a random permutation, as per the coupon collector’s
problem analysis of Section 6.2.1 (page 180). Sinclair [Sin12] presents the theory of
Markov chain generation.
     In the days before ready access to computers, books with tables of random permu-
tations [MO63] were used instead of algorithms. The swap-based random permutation
algorithm presented above was first described in this book.

Related problems: Random-number generation (see page 486), generating
subsets (see page 521), generating partitions (see page 524).
17.5. GENERATING SUBSETS                                                         521

                                                              {}
                                                    {3}                {1}

         {1,2,3}                               {1,3}                     {1,2}

                                                 {1,2,3}              {2}
                                                            {2,3}

                  Input                                     Output

17.5      Generating Subsets
Input description: An integer n.
Problem description: Generate (1) all, or (2) a random, or (3) the next subset
of the integers {1, . . . , n}.
Discussion: A subset describes a selection of objects, where the order among
them does not matter. Many important algorithmic problems search for the best
subset of a group of things: vertex cover seeks the smallest subset of vertices
to touch each edge in a graph, knapsack the most profitable subset of items of
bounded total size, and set packing the smallest subset of subsets that together
cover each item exactly once.
    There are 2n distinct subsets of an n-element set, including the empty set
as well as the set itself. This grows exponentially, but at a considerably slower
rate than the n! permutations of n items. Indeed, a brute-force search through
all subsets of 20 elements is easily manageable, because 220 = 1,048,576. But
since 230 = 1,073,741,824, you will hit limits for slightly larger values of n.
    By definition, the relative order among the elements does not distinguish
different subsets. Thus, {1, 2, 5} is the same as {2, 1, 5}. However, it is a very
good idea to maintain your subsets in a sorted or canonical order to speed up
operations such as testing whether or not two subsets are identical.
    As with permutations (see Section 17.4 (page 517)), the key to subset gener-
ation problems is establishing a numerical sequence among all 2n subsets. There
are three primary alternatives:
   • Lexicographic order – This means sorted order, and is often the most nat-
     ural way to generate combinatorial objects. The eight subsets of {1, 2, 3}
     in lexicographic order are {}, {1}, {1, 2}, {1, 2, 3}, {1, 3}, {2}, {2, 3}, and
     {3}. But it is surprisingly difficult to generate subsets in lexicographic
     order. Unless you have a compelling reason to do so, don’t bother.

      • Gray code – A particularly interesting subset sequence is minimum change
        order, wherein adjacent subsets differ by the insertion or deletion of exactly
        one element. Such an ordering, called a Gray code, appears in the output
        picture above.
        Generating subsets in Gray code order can be very fast, because there is
        a nice recursive construction. Construct a Gray code of n − 1 elements
        Gn−1 . Reverse a second copy of Gn−1 and add n to each subset in this
        copy. Then concatenate them together to create Gn . Study the output
        example for clarification.
        Since only one element changes between subsets, exhaustive search algo-
        rithms built on Gray codes can be quite efficient. A set cover program
        would only have to update the change in coverage by the addition or dele-
        tion of one subset. See the implementation section below for Gray code
        subset-generation programs.
      • Binary counting – The simplest approach to subset-generation problems
        is based on the observation that every subset S ? is defined by the items
        of S that are in S ? . We can represent S ? by a binary string of n bits,
        where bit i is 1 iff the ith element of S is in S ? . This defines a bijection
        between the 2n binary strings of length n, and the 2n subsets of n items.
        For n = 3, binary counting generates subsets in the following order: {},
        {3}, {2}, {2,3}, {1}, {1,3}, {1,2}, {1,2,3}.
        This binary representation is the key to solving all subset generation prob-
        lems. To generate all subsets in order, simply count from 0 to 2n − 1. For
        each integer, successively mask off each of the bits and compose a sub-
        set of exactly the items corresponding to 1 bits. To generate the next or
        previous subset, increment or decrement this integer by one. Unranking
        a subset is exactly the masking procedure described above, while ranking
        constructs the binary number with 1’s corresponding to items in S and
        converts it to an integer.
        To generate a random subset, you could try to generate a random integer
        from 0 to 2n − 1 and unrank, although your random number generator
        might round things off in a way certain subsets can never occur. Much
        better is to flip a coin n times, with the ith flip deciding whether to
        include element i in the subset. A coin flip can be robustly simulated by
        generating a random real or large integer and testing whether it is bigger
        or smaller than half its range.

  Generation problems for two closely related problems arise often in practice:

  • K-subsets – Instead of constructing all subsets, we may only
                                                                   be interested
    in the subsets containing exactly k elements. There are nk such subsets,
    which is substantially less than 2n , particularly for small values of k.
        The best way to construct all k-subsets is in lexicographic? order.
                                                                               The
        ranking function is based on the observation that there are n−f
                                                                    k−1   k-subsets
17.5. GENERATING SUBSETS                                                           523

      whose smallest element is f . Using this, we can determine the smallest
      element in the mth k-subset of n items, and then proceed recursively for
      subsequent elements of the subset. See the implementations below for
      details.
   • Strings – Generating all subsets is equivalent to generating all 2n strings of
     true and false. The same basic techniques apply to generate all or random
     strings on alphabets of size α, except there will be αn strings in total.

Implementations: C++ routines for generating an astonishing variety of com-
binatorial objects, including subsets and k-subsets (combinations), are available
in the combinatorics package at http://www.jjj.de/fxt/.
    The Combinatorial Object Server (http://combos.org/) developed by Frank
Ruskey of the University of Victoria is a unique resource for generating permu-
tations, subsets, partitions, graphs, and other objects. An interactive interface
enables you to specify which objects you would like returned to you. Check it
out. Implementations in C, Pascal, and Java are available for certain types of
objects.
    Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] is an excellent reference on generating combi-
natorial objects. They provide efficient Fortran implementations of algorithms
to construct random subsets, and to sequence subsets in Gray code and lexico-
graphic order. They also provide routines to construct random k-subsets and
sequence them in lexicographic order. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716) for details
on these programs.
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of algorithms
to construct random subsets and sequence subsets in Gray code, binary, and
lexicographic order. They also provide routines to construct random k-subsets
and strings, and sequence them lexicographically. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716)
for further information on Combinatorica.
Notes: The best reference on subset generation is Knuth [Knu11]. Good expositions
include [KS99, NW78, Rus03]. Wilf [Wil89] provides an update of [NW78], including
a thorough discussion of modern Gray code generation problems.
    Gray codes were first developed [Gra53] to transmit digital information in a robust
manner over an analog channel. By assigning the code words in Gray code order, the
ith word differs only slightly from the (i + 1)st, so minor fluctuations in analog signal
strength corrupt only a few bits. Gray codes have a particularly nice correspondence to
Hamiltonian cycles on the hypercube. Savage [Sav97] gives an excellent survey of Gray
codes (minimum change orderings) for a large class of combinatorial objects, including
subsets. An interesting new approach to k-subset generation based on rotating bit
strings was developed by Ruskey and Williams [RW09].
    The popular puzzle Spinout® , manufactured by ThinkFun (formerly Binary Arts
Corporation), is solved using ideas from Gray codes.

Related problems: Generating permutations (see page 517), generating par-
titions (see page 524).

 5=

                     Input                                    Output

17.6         Generating Partitions
Input description: An integer n.
Problem description: Generate (1) all, or (2) a random, or (3) the next
integer or set partitions of length n.
Discussion: Two different types of combinatorial objects are denoted by the
word “partition,” namely integer partitions and set partitions. They are quite
different beasts, but it is good to make both a part of your vocabulary:

   • Integer partitions are multisets of non-zero integers that add up exactly
     to n. For example, the seven distinct integer partitions of 5 are {5},
     {4,1}, {3,2}, {3,1,1}, {2,2,1}, {2,1,1,1}, and {1,1,1,1,1}. An interesting
     application I encountered that required generating integer partitions was
     a simulation of nuclear fission. When an atom is smashed, the nucleus is
     broken into a set of smaller clusters. The sum of the particles in the set of
     clusters must equal the original size n of the nucleus. As such, the integer
     partitions of n represent all possible ways to smash an atom.

      • Set partitions divide the elements {1, . . . , n} into non-empty subsets. There
        are 15 distinct set partitions of n = 4: {1234}, {123,4}, {124,3}, {12,34},
        {12,3,4}, {134,2}, {13,24}, {13,2,4}, {14,23}, {1,234}, {1,23,4}, {14,2,3},
        {1,24,3}, {1,2,34}, and {1,2,3,4}. Algorithm problems returning set par-
        titions as results include vertex/edge coloring and connected components.

    Although the number of integer partitions grows exponentially with n, they
do so at a refreshingly slow rate. There are only 627 partitions of n = 20. It
is even possible to enumerate all integer partitions of n = 100, since there are
only 190,569,292 of them.
17.6. GENERATING PARTITIONS                                                            525

     Figure 17.1: The Ferrers diagram of a random partition of n =1,000.

    The easiest way to generate integer partitions constructs them in lexico-
graphically decreasing order. The first partition is {n} itself. The general rule
is to subtract 1 from the smallest part that is > 1 and then collect all the 1’s
so as to match the new smallest part > 1. For example, the partition following
{4, 3, 3, 3, 1, 1, 1, 1} is {4, 3, 3, 2, 2, 2, 1}, because the five 1’s left after 3 − 1 = 2
becomes the smallest part are best packaged as 2,2,1. When the partition is
reduced to all 1’s, we have completed one pass through the partitions.
    This algorithm is sufficiently intricate to program that you should use one of
the implementations below. In any case, test to make sure that you get exactly
627 distinct partitions for n = 20.
    Generating integer partitions uniformly at random is a trickier business than
generating random permutations or subsets. This is because selecting the first
(i.e. largest) element of the partition has a dramatic effect on the number of
possible partitions that can be generated. Observe that there is only one parti-
tion of n whose largest part is 1, namely {1, 1, . . . , 1}. The number of partitions
of n with largest part at most k is given by the recurrence

                               Pn,k = Pn−k,k + Pn,k−1

because any such partition either contains a part of size k or it doesn’t. The
two boundary conditions are Pn,1 = 1 and Px−y,x = Px−y,x−y , for all y ≤ x.
The second condition looks funny but it is correct: note that P3,5 must be equal
to P3,3 , because there are no partitions of 3 whose biggest part is 4 or 5. This
function can be used to select the largest part of your random partition with
the right probability and then, by proceeding recursively, eventually construct
the entire random partition. Implementations are cited below.
    Random partitions tend to have large numbers of fairly small parts, best
visualized by a Ferrers diagram as in Figure 17.1. Each row of the diagram
corresponds to one part of the partition, sorted by size, with the magnitude of
each part represented by that many dots. Such diagrams provide a very good
way to think about integer partitions.

    One application arises in evaluating the publication record of academic re-
searchers. Research papers get cited by other research papers, and larger cita-
tion counts correspond to more important work. A scholar has an H-index of
h if they have written at least h papers each of which has received at least h
citations. The H-index corresponds to size of the central square defined by the
Ferrers diagram of an author’s citations.
    Set partitions can be generated using techniques akin to integer partitions.
Each set partition is encoded as a restricted growth function, a1 , . . . , an , where
a1 = 0 and ai ≤ 1 + max(a1 , . . . , ai−1 ), for i = 2, . . . , n. Each distinct digit
identifies a subset, or block, of the partition, while the growth condition ensures
that the blocks are sorted into a canonical order based on the smallest element in
each block. For example, the restricted growth function 0, 1, 1, 2, 0, 3, 1 defines
the set partition {{1, 5}, {2, 3, 7}, {4}, {6}}.
    Since there is a one-to-one equivalence between set partitions and restricted
growth functions, we can use lexicographic order on the restricted growth func-
tions to order the partitions. Indeed, the fifteen set partitions of {1, 2, 3, 4}
listed above are sequenced according to the lexicographic order of their restricted
growth function (check it out).
    We can use a similar counting strategy to generate random set partitions
as we did with integer partitions. The Stirling numbers of the second kind {nk}
count the number of partitions of {1, . . . , n} with exactly k blocks. They are
computed using the recurrence
                                         −1        n−1
                              {nk} = {nk − 1 } + k{ k }

with the boundary conditions {nn} = {n1 } = 1. The reader is referred to the
sections below for more details.
Implementations: C++ routines for generating an astonishing variety of com-
binatorial objects, including integer partitions and compositions, are available
in the combinatorics package at http://www.jjj.de/fxt/. Kreher and Stinson
[KS99] generate both integer and set partitions in lexicographic order, includ-
ing ranking/unranking functions. These implementations in C are available at
http://www.math.mtu.edu/~kreher/cages/Src.html.
    The Combinatorial Object Server (http://combos.org/) developed by Frank
Ruskey of the University of Victoria is a unique resource for generating permu-
tations, subsets, partitions, graphs, and other objects. An interactive interface
enables you to specify which objects you would like returned to you. Check it
out. Implementations in C, Pascal, and Java are available for certain types of
objects.
    Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] remains a valuable resource on generating combi-
natorial objects. They provide efficient Fortran implementations of algorithms
to construct random and sequential integer partitions, set partitions, composi-
tions, and Young tableaux. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716) for details.
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of algorithms
to construct random and sequential integer partitions, compositions, strings,
17.6. GENERATING PARTITIONS                                                            527

and Young tableaux, as well as to count and manipulate these objects. See
Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: The best reference on algorithms for generating both integer and set partitions
is Knuth [Knu11]. Good expositions include [KS99, NW78, Rus03, PS03]. Andrews
[And98] is the primary reference on integer partitions and related topics, with [AE04]
his more accessible introduction. Mansour [Man12] is a recent book on set partitions.
     Integer and set partitions are both special cases of multiset partitions, or set par-
titions of not necessarily distinct numbers. In particular, the distinct set partitions
on the multiset {1, 1, 1, . . . , 1} correspond exactly to integer partitions. Multiset par-
titions are discussed in Knuth [Knu11].
     The (long) history of combinatorial object generation is detailed by Knuth [Knu11].
Particularly interesting are connections between set partitions and a Japanese incense
burning game, and the naming of all 52 set partitions for n = 5 with distinct chapters
from the oldest novel known, The Tale of Genji.
     The 2015 film The Man Who Knew Infinity, about the life of the great Indian
mathematician Ramanujan, revolved around his amazing formula to approximately
count the number of integer partitions.
     Two related combinatorial objects are Young tableaux and integer compositions,
although they are less likely to emerge in applications. Generation algorithms for both
are presented in [NW78, Rus03, PS03].
     Young tableaux are two-dimensional configurations of integers {1, . . . , n} where the
number of elements in each row is defined by an integer partition of n. Further, the
elements of each row and column are sorted in increasing order, and the rows are left-
justified. This notion of shape captures a wide variety of structures as special cases.
They have many interesting properties, including the existence of a bijection between
pairs of tableaux and permutations.
     Compositions represent the possible assignments of n indistinguishable balls to
k distinguishable boxes. For example, we can place three balls into two boxes as
{3,0}, {2,1}, {1,2}, or {0,3}. Compositions are most easily constructed sequentially
in lexicographic order. To construct them randomly, pick a random (k − 1)-subset of
n + k − 1 items using the algorithm of Section 17.5 (page 521), and count the number
of unselected items between the selected ones. For example, if k = 5 and n = 10, the
(5 − 1) subset {1,3,7,14} of 1, . . . , (n + k − 1) = 14 defines the composition {0,1,3,6,0},
since there are no items to the left of element 1 nor to the right of element 14.

Related problems: Generating permutations (see page 517), generating sub-
sets (see page 521).

               N=4
              connected
              unlabeled

                    Input                                    Output

17.7         Generating Graphs
Input description: Parameters describing the desired graph, including the
number of vertices n, and the number of edges m or edge probability p.
Problem description: Generate (1) all, or (2) a random, or (3) the next graph
satisfying the parameters.
Discussion: Graph generation typically arises when constructing test data
for programs. Perhaps you have two different programs that solve the same
problem, and you want to see which is faster, or make sure that they both
give the same (presumably right) answer. Another application is experimental
graph theory, verifying whether a particular property is true for all graphs. It is
much easier to believe the four-color theorem after you have demonstrated four
colorings for all planar graphs on fifteen vertices.
    Many factors complicate the problem of generating graphs. First, make sure
you know exactly what type of graph you want to generate. Figure 7.2 on
page 198 illustrates several important properties of graphs. For purposes of
generation, the most important questions are:
      • Do I want labeled or unlabeled graphs? – The issue here is whether the
        names of the vertices matter in deciding whether two graphs are the same.
        In generating labeled graphs, we seek to construct all possible labelings of
        all possible graph topologies. When generating unlabeled graphs, we want
        exactly one representative for each topology and ignore labelings. For ex-
        ample, there are only two connected unlabeled graphs on three vertices—a
        triangle and a simple path. However, there are four connected labeled
        graphs on three vertices—one triangle and three 3-vertex paths, each dis-
        tinguished by the name of their central vertex. In general, labeled graphs
        are much easier to generate. However, you are likely to get swamped with
        many isomorphic copies of the same few graphs.
17.7. GENERATING GRAPHS                                                      529

   • Do I want directed or undirected graphs? – Most natural generation al-
     gorithms generate undirected graphs. These can be turned into directed
     graphs by flipping coins to orient the edges. Any graph can be oriented to
     be directed and acyclic (i.e., a DAG) by randomly permuting the vertices
     on a line and aiming each edge from left to right. With all such ideas,
     careful thought must be given to decide whether you are generating all
     graphs uniformly at random, and how much this matters to you.

   You also must define what you mean by random. There are three primary
models of random graphs, all of which generate graphs according to different
probability distributions:

   • Random edge generation – The Erdős–Rényi model is parameterized by
     a given edge probability p. In this model, a coin is flipped for each pair
     of vertices x and y to decide whether to add an edge (x, y). All labeled
     graphs will be generated with equal probability when p = 1/2, although
     smaller values of p can be used to construct sparser random graphs.
   • Random edge selection – The second model is parameterized by the desired
     number of edges m. It selects m distinct edges uniformly at random. One
     way to do this is by drawing random (x, y)-pairs and creating an edge if
     that pair is? not
                      already in the graph. An alternative approach constructs
     the set of n2 possible edges and selects a random m-subset of them, as
     discussed in Section 17.5 (page 521).
   • Preferential attachment – Under a rich-get-richer model, newly created
     edges are more likely to point to high-degree vertices than low-degree ones.
     Consider new links (edges) being added to the graph of webpages. Under
     any realistic web generation model, it is much more likely the next link
     will point to Google than www.algorist.com.1 Selecting the next neighbor
     with probability proportional to its degree yields graphs with power law
     properties encountered in many real networks.

    Which of these options best models your application? Probably none of
them. By definition, random graphs have very little concrete structure. But
graphs are used to model relationships, which are often highly structured. Ex-
periments conducted on random graphs, although interesting and easy to per-
form, often fail to capture the phenomenon that you are looking for.
    An alternative to random graphs is “organic” graphs—graphs that reflect
the relationships among real-world objects. Many raw sources of relationships
are available on the web that can be turned into interesting organic graphs with
a little programming and imagination. Consider the graph defined by a set of
webpages, with any hyperlink between two pages defining an edge. Or, what
about the graph implicit in railroad, subway, or airline networks, with vertices
being stations and edges between two stations connected by direct service?
    Two classes of graphs have particularly interesting generation algorithms:
  1 Please link to us from your homepage to correct this travesty.

      • Trees – Prüfer codes provide a simple way to rank and unrank labeled
        trees and thus solve all the standard generation problems (see Section
        17.4 (page 517)). There are exactly nn−2 labeled trees on n vertices, and
        exactly that many strings of length n − 2 on the alphabet {1, 2, . . . , n}.
        The key to Prüfer’s bijection is the observation that every tree has at least
        two vertices of degree 1. Thus, in any labeled tree the vertex v incident
        on the leaf with lowest label is well defined. We take v to be S1 , the first
        character in the code. We then delete the associated leaf and repeat the
        procedure until only two vertices are left. This defines a unique code S for
        any given labeled tree that can be used to rank the tree. To go from code
        to tree, observe that the lowest-labeled leaf will be the smallest integer
        missing from S, which when paired with S1 determines the first edge of
        the tree. The entire tree follows by induction.
        Algorithms for efficiently generating unlabeled rooted trees are discussed
        in the Implementations section.
      • Fixed degree sequence graphs – The degree sequence of a graph G is an
        integer partition p = (p1 , . . . , pn ), where pi is the degree of the ith highest-
        degree vertex of G. Each edge contributes to the degree of two vertices,
        so p is an integer partition of 2m, where m is the number of edges.
        Not all partitions correspond to degree sequences of graphs. However,
        there is a recursive procedure that constructs a graph with a given degree
        sequence if one exists. If a partition is realizable, the highest-degree ver-
        tex v1 can be connected to the next p1 highest-degree vertices in G, or
        the vertices corresponding to parts p2 , . . . , pp1 +1 . Deleting p1 and decre-
        menting p2 , . . . , pp1 +1 yields a smaller partition to recur on. The partition
        will be realized if we terminate without ever creating negative numbers.
        Since we always connect the highest-degree vertex to other high-degree
        vertices, it is important to reorder the parts of the partition by size after
        each iteration.
        Although this construction is deterministic, a semi-random collection of
        graphs realizing this degree sequence can be generated from G using edge-
        flipping operations. Suppose edges (x, y) and (w, z) are in G, but (x, w)
        and (y, z) are not. Exchanging these pairs of edges creates a different (not
        necessarily connected) graph without changing the degrees of any vertex.

Implementations: The Stanford GraphBase [Knu94] is perhaps most use-
ful as an instance generator for constructing graphs to serve as test data for
other programs. Because of its machine-independent random-number genera-
tors, it provides a way to construct random graphs such that they can be re-
constructed elsewhere, thus making them perfect for experimental comparisons
of algorithms. See Section 22.1.7 (page 715) for additional information.
    Resources for real-world networks include the Network Data Repository
(http://networkrepository.com/) and the Stanford Large Network Dataset
Collection (https://snap.stanford.edu/data/). Check them out.
17.7. GENERATING GRAPHS                                                             531

    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica generators for such graphs as
stars, wheels, complete graphs, random graphs and trees, and graphs with a
given degree sequence. Further, it includes operations to construct more inter-
esting graphs from these, including join, product, and line graph.
    The Combinatorial Object Server (http://combos.org/) developed by Frank
Ruskey of the University of Victoria provides routines for generating both free
and rooted trees.
    The graph isomorphism testing program Nauty (see Section 19.9 (page 610))
includes a suite of programs for generating non-isomorphic graphs, plus special
generators for bipartite graphs, digraphs, and multigraphs. They are available at
http://users.cecs.anu.edu.au/~bdm/nauty/. Brendan McKay also collects
exhaustive catalogs of several families of graphs and trees at http://cs.anu.
edu.au/~bdm/data/. The House of Graphs https://hog.grinvin.org/ is a
carefully curated set of graphs with interesting properties, designed to break
conjectures [BCGM13].
    Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] provide efficient Fortran routines to enumerate
all labeled trees via Prüfer codes and to construct random unlabeled rooted
trees. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716). Kreher and Stinson [KS99] generate la-
beled trees in C, with implementations available at http://www.math.mtu.edu/
~kreher/cages/Src.html.
Notes: Extensive literature exists on generating graphs uniformly at random. Sur-
veys include [Gol93, Tin90]. Fast random graph generation on GPUs is demonstrated
in [NLKB11]. Closely related to the problem of generating classes of graphs is counting
them. Harary and Palmer [HP73] survey results in graphical enumeration.
    Knuth [Knu11] is the best recent reference on generating trees. The bijection
between n − 2 strings and labeled trees is due to Prüfer [Prü18].
    Random graph theory is concerned with the properties of random graphs. Thresh-
old laws in random graph theory define the edge density at which properties such as
connectedness become highly likely to occur. Expositions on random graph theory
include [Bol01, FK15, JLR00].
    The preferential attachment model of graphical evolution has emerged relatively
recently in the study of networks. See [Bar03, Wat04] for introductions to this exciting
field. Methods for generating graphs with prescribed degree sequences are presented
in [BD11, VL05].
    An integer partition is graphic if there exists a simple graph with that degree
sequence. Erdős and Gallai [EG60] proved that a degree sequence is graphic if and
only if the sequence observes the following condition for each integer r < n:
                           
                          r                       ?
                                                  n
                                di ≤ r(r − 1) +           min(r, di )
                          i=1                     i=r+1

Related problems: Generating permutations (see page 517), graph isomor-
phism (see page 610).

                                          5773 Teveth 8 (Hebrew)
 December 21, 2012?                       1434 Safar 7 (Islamic)
    (Gregorian)                           1934 Agrahayana 30 (Indian Civil)
                                          13.0.0.0 (Mayan Long Count)

                  Input                                   Output

17.8      Calendrical Calculations
Input description: A particular calendar date d: month, day, and year.
Problem description: Which day of the week did d fall on according to the
given calendar system?
Discussion: Business applications often need to perform calendrical calcula-
tions. Perhaps we want to display a calendar of a specified month and year.
Maybe we need to compute what day of the week or year some event occurs,
such as figuring out on which date a 180-day futures contract comes due. The
importance of correct calendrical calculations was perhaps best revealed by the
furor over the “Millennium bug”—the year 2000 crisis in legacy programs that
allocated only two digits for storing the year.
    More complicated questions arise in international applications, because dif-
ferent nations and ethnic groups use different calendar systems. Some, like the
Gregorian calendar used in most of the world, are based on the Sun, while oth-
ers, like the Hebrew calendar, are lunar calendars. How would you tell today’s
date according to the Chinese or Islamic calendars?
    Calendrical calculations differ from other problems in this book because
calendars are historical objects, not mathematical ones. The algorithmic issues
here revolve around the rules of the calendrical system and implementing them
correctly, rather than designing efficient computational shortcuts.
    The basic approach underlying calendar systems is to start from a particular
reference date (called the epoch) and count up from there. The particular rules
for wrapping the count into months and years is what distinguishes one system
from another. Implementing a calendar requires two functions: (1) given a date,
return the integer number of days that have elapsed since the epoch, and (2)
given an integer n, return the calendar date exactly n days from epoch. These
are analogous to the ranking and unranking rules for combinatorial objects such
as permutations (see Section 17.4 (page 517)).
    That the solar year is not an integer number of days long is the major source
of complications in calendar systems. To keep a calendar’s dates in sync with
the seasons, leap days must be added at both regular and irregular intervals.
One solar year is 365 days and 5:49:12 hours long, so adding a leap day every
17.8. CALENDRICAL CALCULATIONS                                                     533

four years leaves an extra 10 minutes and 48 seconds unaccounted for every
year.
    The original Julian calendar (from Julius Caesar) ignored these extra min-
utes, which had accumulated to ten days by 1582. Pope Gregory XIII then
proposed the Gregorian calendar used today, by deleting these ten days and
eliminating leap days in years that are multiples of 100 but not 400. Suppos-
edly, riots ensued because the masses feared their lives were being shortened by
ten days. Outside the Catholic church, resistance to change slowed the reforms.
The deletion of days did not occur in England and America until September
1752, and not until 1927 in Turkey.
    The rules for most calendrical systems are sufficiently complicated and point-
less that you should lift code from a reliable place rather than attempt to write
your own. I identify suitable implementations below.
    There are a variety of “impress your friends” algorithms that enable you to
compute in your head on what day of the week a particular date occurred. Such
algorithms often fail to work reliably outside the given century, and certainly
should be avoided for computer implementation.
Implementations: Readily available calendar libraries exist in both C++ and
Java. The Boost time-data library provides a reliable implementation of the
Gregorian calendar in C++. See https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_70_0/
doc/html/date_time.html. The class GregorianCalendar derived from the ab-
stract superclass Calendar in the package java.util implements the Gregorian
calendar in Java. Either of these will likely suffice for most applications.
    Dershowitz and Reingold provide a uniform algorithmic presentation [RD18]
for a variety of different calendar systems, including the Gregorian, ISO, Chi-
nese, Hindu, Islamic, and Hebrew calendars, as well as other calendars of histor-
ical interest. Calendrical is an implementation of these calendars in Common
Lisp, Java, and Mathematica, with routines to convert dates between calendars,
day of the week computations, and the determination of secular and religious
holidays. Calendrical is likely to be the most comprehensive and reliable calen-
drical routines available. See their website at http://calendarists.com.
    C and Java implementations of international calendars of unknown reliability
are readily available at GitHub (https://github.com/). Search for “Gregorian
calendar” to avoid the mass of datebook implementations.
Notes: A comprehensive discussion of calendrical computation algorithms appear in
the papers of Dershowitz and Reingold [DR90, RDC93], which have been superseded
by their book [RD18] that outlines algorithms for no less than twenty-five international
and historical calendars. Three hundred years of calendars representing tabulations
for all dates from 1900 to 2200 appear in [DR02].

Related problems: Arbitrary-precision arithmetic (see page 493), generating
permutations (see page 517).

                     D
           B                   H
                                             1          B      D      G

 A                   F                 $          A                          I    $

                                             2          C      F      H

           C                    I
                     G                           JAN   FEB    MAR     APR   MAY

                    Input                                    Output

17.9         Job Scheduling
Input description: A directed acyclic graph G = (V, E), with vertices repre-
senting jobs, and edge (u, v) implies task u must be done before task v.
Problem description: Which schedule of tasks completes the job using the
minimum amount of time or processors?
Discussion: Devising the best schedule to satisfy a set of constraints is funda-
mental to many applications. Mapping tasks to processors is a critical aspect
of any parallel-processing system. Poor scheduling can leave many machines
sitting idle while one bottleneck task is performed. Assigning people-to-jobs,
meetings-to-rooms, or courses-to-exam periods are all scheduling problems.
    Scheduling problems differ widely in the nature of the constraints that must
be satisfied and the type of schedule desired. Several other catalog problems
have connections to variants of scheduling:

      • Topological sort constructs a schedule consistent with precedence con-
        straints in a DAG. See Section 18.2 (page 546).

      • Bipartite matching assigns jobs to workers with appropriate skills for them.
        See Section 18.6 (page 562).

      • Vertex/edge coloring assigns jobs to time slots such that no two interfering
        jobs are assigned the same slot. See Sections 19.7 and 19.8.

      • Traveling salesman identifies the most efficient delivery route to visit a
        given set of locations. See Section 19.4 (page 594).

      • Eulerian cycle defines the most efficient route for a snowplow or mailman
        to traverse a given set of edges. See Section 18.7 (page 565).
17.9. JOB SCHEDULING                                                          535

Here the focus is on precedence-constrained scheduling problems for directed
acyclic graphs. Suppose you have broken a big job into a number of smaller
tasks. For each task, you know how long it should take to finish. Further, for
each pair of tasks A and B you know whether it is essential that A be completed
before B. The fewer constraints we must enforce, the tighter our schedule can
be. These constraints must define a directed acyclic graph—acyclic because
a cycle in the precedence constraints represents a Catch-22 situation that can
never be resolved.
   Several problems on these task networks are of interest:

   • Critical path – The longest path from the start vertex to the completion
     vertex defines the critical path. This is important to know, for the only
     conceivable way to shorten the minimum possible completion time is to
     reduce the length of a task on each critical path. The critical (longest)
     path in a DAG can be determined in O(n + m) time using dynamic pro-
     gramming.
   • Minimum completion time – What is the fastest we can get this job com-
     pleted while respecting precedence constraints, assuming that we have an
     unlimited number of workers? Were there no precedence constraints, each
     task could be worked on independently by its own worker, and the to-
     tal time would be that of the longest single task. Were there such strict
     precedence constraints that each task must follow the completion of its
     immediate predecessor, the minimum completion time would be obtained
     by summing up the times for each task.
     The minimum completion time for a DAG can be computed in O(n + m)
     time, because it is defined by the critical path. To get such a schedule, con-
     sider the jobs in topological order, and start each job on a new processor
     the moment its latest prerequisite completes.
   • What is the tradeoff between number of workers and completion time? –
     What we really are interested in is how best to complete the schedule
     with our given number of workers. Unfortunately, this and most similar
     problems are NP-complete.

    Real scheduling applications often present constraints that may be difficult
or impossible to model using these techniques, such as keeping Joe and Bob
apart so they won’t kill each other. There are two reasonable ways to deal with
such problems. First, we can ignore such esoteric constraints until the end, and
then modify the schedule to account for them. Alternately, you can formulate
your scheduling problem in all its complexity via linear-integer programming
(see Section 16.6 (page 482)). I recommend first trying something simple to see
how it works before ramping up the complexity.
    Another fundamental scheduling problem takes a set of jobs without prece-
dence constraints and assigns them to identical machines to minimize the total
elapsed time. Consider a print shop with k copying machines and a stack of jobs
to finish today. Such tasks are called job-shop scheduling, and can be modeled

as bin packing (see Section 20.9 (page 652)). Each job is associated with the
time it will take to complete, and each machine is represented by a bin with
space equal to the number of hours in a day.
    More sophisticated variations of job-shop scheduling provide each task with
allowable start and required finishing times. Effective heuristics are known,
based on sorting the tasks by size and finishing time. We refer the reader
to the references for more information. Note that these scheduling problems
become hard only when the tasks cannot be broken up onto multiple machines
or interrupted (preempted) and then rescheduled. You should exploit these
degrees of freedom if your application allows them.
Implementations: JOBSHOP is a collection of C programs for job-shop schedul-
ing created for a computational study by Applegate and Cook [AC91]. They
are available at http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/~bico//jobshop/.
   UniTime (https://www.unitime.org/ is a comprehensive educational schedul-
ing system that supports developing course/exam timetables, and scheduling
students to individual classes. It is distributed under an open source license.
   LEKIN is a flexible job-shop scheduling system designed for educational
use [Pin16]. It supports single machine, parallel machines, flow-shop, flexible
flow-shop, job-shop, and flexible job-shop scheduling, and is available at http:
//www.stern.nyu.edu/om/software/lekin.
   For commercial scheduling applications, ILOG CP has been reflective of
the state-of-the-art for over 20 years [LRSV18]. See https://www.ibm.com/
analytics/cplex-cp-optimizer. A restricted free version is available.
Notes: The literature on scheduling algorithms is vast. Brucker [Bru07] and Pinedo
[Pin16] provide comprehensive overviews of the field. The Handbook of Scheduling
[LA04] provides a collection of surveys on all aspects of scheduling. Real-time schedul-
ing for computing systems is treated by Buttazzo [But11].
    A well-defined taxonomy covers thousands of job-shop scheduling variants, which
classifies each problem α|β|γ according to (α) the machine environment, (β) details
of processing characteristics and constraints, and (γ) the objectives to be minimized.
Surveys of results include [Bru07, CPW98, LLK83, Pin16].
    Gantt charts provide visual representations of job-shop scheduling solutions, where
the x-axis represents time and rows represent distinct machines. The output figure
above illustrates a Gantt chart, where each scheduled job is represented as a horizontal
block identifying its start-time, duration, and server. Project precedence-constrained
scheduling techniques are often called PERT/CPM, for Program Evaluation and Re-
view Technique/Critical Path Method. Gantt charts and PERT/CPM appear in most
textbooks on operations research, including [Pin16].
    Timetabling is a term often used in discussion of classroom and related scheduling
problems. PATAT (for Practice and Theory of Automated Timetabling) is a bi-annual
conference reporting new results in the field. See https://patatconference.org/.

Related problems: Topological sorting (see page 546), matching (see page
562), vertex coloring (see page 604), edge coloring (see page 608), bin packing
(see page 652).
17.10. SATISFIABILITY                                                            537

  (         or            or          )       (         or            or          )
  (         or            or          )       (         or            or          )
  (         or            or          )       (         or            or          )
  (         or            or          )       (         or            or          )

                  Input                                      Output

17.10        Satisfiability
Input description: A set of clauses in conjunctive normal form.

Problem description: Is there a truth assignment to the Boolean variables
such that every clause is simultaneously satisfied?

Discussion: Satisfiability (SAT) arises whenever we seek a configuration or
object that must be consistent with (i.e. satisfy) a set of logical constraints.
A representative application is in verifying that a given hardware or software
system design works correctly on all inputs. Suppose that logical formula S(X)
denotes the specified result on input variables X = x1 , . . . , xn , while a different
formula C(X) denotes the Boolean logic of a circuit for computing S(X). This
circuit is correct unless there exists an X̄ such that S(X̄) ?= C(X̄).
    Satisfiability is the original NP-complete problem. Despite its applications
to constraint satisfaction, logic, and automatic theorem proving, it is most im-
portant theoretically as the root problem from which all other NP-completeness
proofs originate. So much engineering has gone into today’s best SAT solvers
that they represent a reasonable starting point whenever one needs to solve an
NP-complete problem exactly. That said, employing heuristics that give good
but non-optimal solutions is usually the better approach for dealing with NP-
complete problems.
    Issues in satisfiability testing include:

   • Is your formula the “AND of ORs” or the “OR of ANDs”? – In sat-
     isfiability, the constraints are specified as a logical formula. There are
     two primary ways of expressing logical formulas—conjunctive normal form
     (CNF) and disjunctive normal form (DNF). In CNF formulas, we must
     satisfy all clauses (“AND”), where each clause is constructed by or-ing

        literals (terms of the form vi or v¯i , the latter denoting “not vi ”), like

                                  (v1 or v¯2 ) and (v2 or v3 )

        With DNF formulas, it suffices to satisfy any single clause, because they
        will be or-ed together. The formula above can be written in DNF as

                       (v¯1 and v¯2 and v3 ) or (v¯1 and v2 and v¯3 ) or
                       (v¯1 and v2 and v3 ) or (v1 and v¯2 and v3 )

        Solving DNF-satisfiability is trivial, because every DNF formula can be
        satisfied unless all clauses contain both a literal and its complement (nega-
        tion). But CNF-satisfiability is NP-complete. This seems paradoxical, be-
        cause we can use De Morgan’s laws to convert CNF formula into equivalent
        DNF formula, and vice versa. The catch is that an exponential number of
        terms might be required for the translation, so that the translation cannot
        be constructed in polynomial time.
      • How big are your clauses? – k-SAT is a special case of satisfiability, where
        each clause contains at most k literals. The problem of 1-SAT is trivial,
        since we must set true every literal appearing in any clause. The problem
        of 2-SAT is not so trivial, but can still be solved in linear time. This is
        interesting, because certain problems can be modeled as 2-SAT using a
        little cleverness. The good times end once clauses contain three literals
        each (i.e., 3-SAT), for 3-SAT is NP-complete.
      • Does it suffice to satisfy most of the clauses? – If you are determined to
        solve a SAT problem exactly, there is not much you can do except back-
        tracking algorithms like the Davis–Putnam procedure. In the worst case
        2m truth assignments must be tested, but fortunately there are many ways
        to prune the search. Although satisfiability is NP-complete, how hard it
        is in practice depends upon the particular problem instance. Naturally
        defined “random” instances are often surprisingly easy to solve, and in
        fact it is non-trivial to generate instances that are truly hard.
        Still, we might benefit by relaxing the problem so that the goal becomes
        satisfying as many clauses as possible. Optimization techniques such as
        simulated annealing can then be put to work to refine random or heuristic
        solutions. Indeed, any random truth assignment to the variables will sat-
        isfy each k-SAT clause with probability 1 − (1/2)k , so our first attempt is
        likely to satisfy most of the clauses. Finishing off the job is the hard part.
        Finding an assignment that satisfies the maximum number of clauses is
        NP-complete even for non-satisfiable instances.

    When faced with a problem of unknown complexity, proving it NP-complete
can be an important first step. If you think your problem might be hard, skim
through Garey and Johnson [GJ79] looking for your problem. If you don’t find
it, I recommend that you put the book away and try to prove hardness from
17.10. SATISFIABILITY                                                               539

first principles, using the basic problems of 3-SAT, vertex cover, independent
set, integer partition, clique, and Hamiltonian cycle. Chapter 11 focuses on
strategies for proving hardness.
Implementations: Recent years have seen tremendous progress in the per-
formance of satisfiability solvers. An annual SAT competition identifies the
top performing solvers in each of several categories of instances. The source
code for all these solvers and more are available from the competition webpage
(http://www.satcompetition.org/).
   SAT Live! (http://www.satlive.org/) is the most up-to-date source for
papers, programs, and test sets for satisfiability and related logic optimization
problems.
Notes: The most comprehensive overview of satisfiability testing in practice is Kautz,
et al. [KSBD07]. The Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) algorithm is a
backtracking algorithm introduced in 1962 for solving satisfiability problems. Local
search techniques work better on certain classes of problems that are difficult for DPLL
solvers. See [BHvM09, GKSS08, KS07] for surveys of the field of satisfiability testing.
    The first part of the second part of Knuth’s Volume 4 is on satisfiability algorithms,
published independently as a fascicle [Knu15]. He demonstrates a variety of fascinat-
ing applications of satisfiability (including the game of life) and careful treatment of
backtracking-based search procedures for solving them.
    An algorithm for solving 3-SAT in worst-case O∗ (1.4802n ) appears in [DGH+ 02].
Efficient (but non-polynomial) algorithms for NP-complete problems are surveyed in
[Woe03].
    The primary reference on NP-completeness is [GJ79], featuring a list of roughly 400
NP-complete problems. The book remains an extremely useful reference; it is perhaps
the book I reach for most often. Good expositions of Cook’s theorem [Coo71], where
satisfiability is proven hard, include [CLRS09, GJ79, KT06]. The importance of Cook’s
result became clear in Karp’s paper [Kar72], showing the hardness of more than twenty
different combinatorial problems.
    A linear-time algorithm for 2-SAT appears in [APT79]. See [WW95] for an inter-
esting application of 2-SAT to map labeling. The best heuristic known approximates
maximum 2-SAT to within a factor of 1.0741 [FG95].

Related problems: Constrained optimization (see page 478), traveling sales-
man problem (see page 594).
