Chapter 18

Graph Problems:
Polynomial Time

Algorithmic graph problems constitute roughly one third of the material in
this catalog. Indeed, several problems from other sections could have been
formulated equally well in terms of graphs, such as bandwidth minimization and
finite-state automata optimization. Finding the right name of a given graph-
theoretic invariant or problem is one of the primary skills of a good algorist.
Indeed, the catalog will tell you exactly how to proceed, just as soon as you
figure out your particular problem’s name.
    In this section, we will deal with problems that have efficient algorithms
to solve them, with running times that grow polynomially with the size of the
graph. There is often more than one way to model a given application, so it
makes sense to look here before proceeding on to the harder formulations.
    Graphs are often best understood as drawings. Many interesting graph prop-
erties follow from the nature of a type of drawing, such as planar graphs. We
also discuss algorithms for drawing graphs, trees, and planar graphs.
    Many advanced graph algorithms are difficult to program, but good imple-
mentations are available if you know where to look. The best general sources
include LEDA [MN99] and the Boost Graph Library [SLL02]. However, better
special-purpose codes exist for many problems.
    See Atallah [AB17], Thulasiraman [TABN16], and van Leeuwen [vL90a] for
up-to-date surveys on all areas of graph algorithms. Books of interest include:
    • Sedgewick [SW11] – The graph algorithms volume of this algorithms text
      provides a comprehensive but gentle introduction to the field.
    • Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [AMO93] – While purporting to be a book on
      network flows, it covers the gamut of graph algorithms with an emphasis
      on operations research. Strongly recommended.
    • Even [Eve11] – A respected advanced text on graph algorithms, with a
      particularly thorough treatment of planarity-testing algorithms.
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   541
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_18
542             CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

  1             2      8            9       1             2     8             9

  3             4           10              3             4         10

           5                11                        5             11

  6             7     12            13      6             7    12             13

                    Input                                 Output

18.1      Connected Components
Input description: A directed or undirected graph G.
Problem description: Identify the different pieces or components of G, where
vertices x and y are in different components when no path exists from x to y in
G.
Discussion: The connected components of a graph represent in a gross sense
the separate pieces of the graph. Two vertices are in the same component of G
if and only if there exists some path between them.
    Finding connected components is at the heart of many important graph
applications. For example, consider the challenge of identifying natural clusters
among a set of items. We represent each item by a vertex, and add an edge
between each pair of items deemed “similar.” The connected components of
this graph correspond to the different classes of items.
    Testing whether a graph is connected is an essential preprocessing step for
every graph algorithm. Subtle, hard-to-detect bugs often result when an algo-
rithm is run only on one component of a disconnected graph. Connectivity tests
are so quick and easy that you should always verify the integrity of your input
graph, even when you know that it just has to be connected.
    Testing the connectivity of any undirected graph is a job for either depth-
first or breadth-first search. Which one you choose doesn’t really matter. Both
traversals initialize a component-number field for each vertex to 0, and then
start the search for component 1 from vertex v1 . As each vertex is discovered,
the value of this field is set to the current component number. After the initial
traversal ends, the component number is incremented, and the search begins
again from the first vertex whose component-number remains 0. Properly im-
plemented using adjacency lists (as is done in Section 7.7.1 (page 218)) this runs
in O(n + m) time.
18.1. CONNECTED COMPONENTS                                                  543

  Other notions of connectivity also arise in practice:
  • What if my graph is directed? – There are two distinct notions of connected
    components for directed graphs. A directed graph is strongly connected
    if there is a directed path between every pair of vertices.      A directed
    graph is weakly connected if it would be connected when ignoring the
    direction of edges. This distinction can be made clear by considering
    the network of one- and two-way streets in a given city. The network is
    strongly connected if it is possible to drive legally between any two places
    in town. The network is weakly connected when it is possible to legally or
    illegally drive between any pair of positions. The network is disconnected
    if there is no possible way to drive from some a to some b.
    Weakly and strongly connected components define unique partitions of the
    vertices. The output figure above shows a directed graph consisting of two
    weakly connected components, and five strongly connected components
    (also called blocks of G).
    Testing whether a directed graph is weakly connected can be done easily in
    linear time. Simply turn all edges of G into undirected edges and use the
    DFS-based connected components algorithm described previously. Tests
    for strong connectivity are somewhat more complicated. The simplest
    linear-time algorithm performs a depth-first search from any vertex v to
    demonstrate that the entire graph is reachable from v. We then construct
    a transpose graph G? where we reverse all the edges of G. A traversal
    of G? from v suffices to determine whether all vertices of G can reach v.
    Graph G is strongly connected iff all vertices can reach, and are reachable,
    from v.
    All the strongly connected components of G can be extracted in linear time
    using more sophisticated DFS-based algorithms. A generalization of the
    above “two-DFS” approach is deceptively easy to program, but somewhat
    subtle to understand exactly why it works:
      1. Perform a DFS, starting from an arbitrary vertex in G, and labeling
         each vertex in order of its completion (not discovery).
      2. Reverse the direction of each edge in G, yielding G? .
      3. Perform a DFS of G? , starting from the highest numbered vertex in
         G. If this search does not completely traverse G? , perform a new
         search starting from the highest-numbered unvisited vertex.
      4. Each DFS tree created in Step 3 defines a strongly connected com-
         ponent.
    My implementation of this two-pass algorithm appears in Section 7.10.2
    (page 232). In either case, it is probably easier to start from an existing
    implementation than a textbook description.
  • What is the weakest point in my graph/network? – A chain is only as
    strong as its weakest link. Losing one or more internal links causes a
544               CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

        chain to become disconnected. The connectivity of graphs measures the
        strength of a graph—how many edges or vertices must be removed to
        disconnect it. Connectivity is an essential invariant for network design
        and other structural problems.
        Algorithmic connectivity problems are discussed in Section 18.8 (page
        568). In particular, biconnected components are pieces of the graph that
        result from cutting the edges incident on a single vertex. All biconnected
        components can be found in linear time using DFS. See Section 7.9.2 (page
        225) for an implementation of this algorithm. Vertices whose deletion
        disconnects the graph belong to more than one biconnected component,
        whose edges are uniquely partitioned among the components.

      • Is the graph a tree? How can I find a cycle if one exists? – The problem
        of cycle identification often arises, particularly with respect to directed
        graphs. For example, testing if a sequence of conditions can deadlock
        often reduces to cycle detection. If I am waiting for Fred, and Fred is
        waiting for Mary, and Mary is waiting for me, there is a cycle and we are
        all deadlocked.
        For undirected graphs, the analogous problem is tree identification. A
        tree is, by definition, an undirected, connected graph without any cycles.
        Depth-first search can be used to test whether a graph is connected. If
        the graph is connected and has n − 1 edges for n vertices, it is a tree.
        Depth-first search can be used to find cycles in both directed and undi-
        rected graphs. Whenever we encounter a back edge in our DFS—that is,
        an edge to an ancestor vertex in the DFS tree—the back edge and the
        tree together define a directed cycle. Directed graphs without cycles are
        called DAGs (directed acyclic graphs). Topological sorting (see Section
        18.2 (page 546)) is the fundamental operation on DAGs.

Implementations: The graph data structure implementations of Section 15.4
(page 452) all include implementations of BFS/DFS, and hence connectiv-
ity testing to at least some extent. The C++ Boost Graph Library [SLL02]
(http://www.boost.org/libs/graph/doc) provides implementations of con-
nected components and strongly connected components. LEDA (see Section
22.1.1 (page 713)) provides these plus biconnected and triconnected compo-
nents, breadth-first and depth-first search, connected components and strongly
connected components, all in C++.
    With respect to Java, JUNG (http://jung.sourceforge.net/) also pro-
vides biconnected component algorithms, while JGraphT (https://jgrapht.
org/) does strongly connected components.
    My (biased) preference for C language implementations of all basic graph
connectivity algorithms, including strongly connected components and bicon-
nected components, is the library associated with this book. See Section 22.1.9
(page 716) for details.
18.1. CONNECTED COMPONENTS                                                          545

Notes: Depth-first search was first used to find paths out of mazes, and dates back
to the nineteenth century [Luc91, Tar95]. Breadth-first search was first reported to
find the shortest path by Moore in 1957 [Moo59].
    Hopcroft and Tarjan [HT73b, Tar72] established depth-first search as a fundamen-
tal technique for efficient graph algorithms. Expositions on depth-first and breadth-
first search appear in every book discussing graph algorithms, with [CLRS09] perhaps
the most thorough description available.
    The first linear-time algorithm for strongly connected components is due to Tarjan
[Tar72], with expositions including [BvG99, Eve11, Man89]. Another algorithm—
simpler to program and slicker—for finding strongly connected components is due to
Sharir and Kosaraju. Good expositions of this algorithm appear in [AHU83, CLRS09].
Cheriyan and Mehlhorn [CM96] propose improved algorithms for certain problems on
dense graphs, including strongly connected components.
    DFS is hard to parallelize. Parallel algorithms for connected components on Map-
Reduce and other models of computation are presented in [KLM+ 14, SRM14].
    Random graphs exhibit interesting connectivity properties, such that once the
number of edges exceeds a particular (surprisingly small) threshold, the graph is likely
to contain one giant connected component and a small number of tiny components. For
example, a random graph with only n ln 2 = 0.693n edges likely contains a connected
component with n/2 vertices. By analogy, any large social network like Facebook
presumably contains one large component with almost everyone except hermits and
new users. This phenomena drives much of the notation that there are “six degrees of
separation” between any two people in the world. The birth of the large component
is covered in every book on the theory of random graphs, including [Bol01, JLR00].

Related problems: Edge-vertex connectivity (see page 568), shortest path
(see page 554).
546                  CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

          10     4            6       9

                                              6   10   5   8   4   2    9   3   7   1

      5               2           3       7

                      Input                                    Output

18.2           Topological Sorting
Input description: A directed acyclic graph G = (V, E), also known as a
partial order or poset.
Problem description: Find a linear ordering of the vertices of V such that
for each edge (i, j) ∈ E, vertex i is to the left of vertex j.
Discussion: Topological sort arises as a subproblem in most algorithms on
directed acyclic graphs. Topological sorting orders the vertices and edges of a
DAG in a simple and consistent way, and hence plays the same role for DAGs
that depth-first search does for general graphs.
    Topological sort can be used to schedule jobs under precedence constraints.
Suppose we have a set of tasks to do, but certain tasks must be performed before
other ones. These precedence constraints form a directed acyclic graph, and any
topological sort (also known as a linear extension) defines an order to perform
these tasks such that each is done only after all of its constraints are satisfied.
    Three important facts about topological sorting are:
  1. Only DAGs can be topologically sorted, because any directed cycle pro-
     vides an inherent contradiction to a linear order of tasks.
  2. Every DAG can be topologically sorted, so there always is at least one
     schedule for any reasonable set of precedence constraints among jobs.
  3. DAGs can usually be topologically sorted in many different ways, espe-
     cially when there are few constraints. Consider n unconstrained jobs. All
     of the n! permutations of these jobs constitute valid topological orderings.
   The conceptually simplest linear-time algorithm for topological sorting per-
forms a depth-first search of the DAG to identify the complete set of source
vertices, meaning vertices of in-degree zero. At least one such source must exist
18.2. TOPOLOGICAL SORTING                                                      547

in any DAG. Source vertices can appear at the front of any schedule without vi-
olating any constraints. Deleting all the outgoing edges of these source vertices
will create new source vertices, which can then sit comfortably to the immedi-
ate right of the first set. We repeat until all vertices are accounted for. With
a modest amount of care using the right data structures (adjacency lists and
queues), this runs in O(n + m) time.
    An alternate algorithm makes use of the observation that ordering the ver-
tices in terms of decreasing DFS finishing time yields a linear extension. An
implementation of this algorithm with an argument for correctness is given in
Section 7.10.1 (page 231).
    Two special considerations with respect to topological sorting are:
   • What if I need all the linear extensions, instead of just one of them? –
     Sometimes we need to construct all linear extensions of a DAG (say) to
     identify the best schedule according to a secondary criteria that satisfies all
     precedence constraints. Beware, because the number of linear extensions
     typically grows exponentially in the size of the DAG. Even the problem
     of counting the number of linear extensions is NP-hard.
     Algorithms for listing all linear extensions in a DAG are based on back-
     tracking. They build all possible orderings from left to right, where each
     one of the in-degree zero vertices is a candidate for the next vertex. The
     outgoing edges from the selected vertex are deleted before moving on. An
     optimal algorithm for listing (or counting) linear extensions is discussed
     below.
     Algorithms to construct random linear extensions start from an arbitrary
     linear extension. We then repeatedly sample pairs of vertices. These
     are exchanged if the resulting permutation remains a topological order-
     ing. This results in a uniformly selected linear extension if given enough
     random samples. See the Notes section for details.
   • What if your graph is not acyclic? – When a set of constraints contains
     inherent contradictions, the natural problem becomes removing the small-
     est set of items that eliminates all inconsistencies. The sets of offending
     jobs (vertices) or constraints (edges) whose deletion leaves a DAG are
     known as a feedback vertex set or feedback arc set, respectively. They are
     discussed in Section 19.11 (page 618). Unfortunately, both problems are
     NP-complete.
     Because the DFS-based topological sorting algorithm gets stuck as soon
     as it identifies a vertex on a directed cycle, we can delete the offending
     edge or vertex and continue. This quick-and-dirty heuristic will eventually
     leave a DAG, but might delete more things than necessary. Section 12.4.2
     (page 397) describes an approximation algorithm for this problem.

Implementations: Essentially all the graph data structure implementations
of Section 15.4 (page 452) include implementations of topological sort. This in-
cludes the Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/graph/
548              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

doc) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) for C++. For Java, check out
JGraphT (https://jgrapht.org/).
   The Combinatorial Object Server (http://combos.org/) provides C lan-
guage programs to generate linear extensions in both lexicographic and Gray
code orders, as well as count them. An interactive interface is also provided.
   My (biased) preference for C language implementations of all basic graph al-
gorithms, including topological sorting, is the library associated with this book.
See Section 22.1.9 (page 716) for details.
Notes: Good expositions on topological sorting include [CLRS09, Man89]. No prov-
ably I/O-efficient algorithm for topological sorting of graphs in external memory is
known, but Ajwani [ACLZ11] reports his experience engineering a topological sort
for massive graphs. Brightwell and Winkler [BW91] prove that it is #P-complete to
count the number of linear extensions of a partial order, even for posets of height two
[DP18]. The complexity class #P includes NP, so any #P-complete problem must be
NP-hard.
    Pruesse and Ruskey [PR86] give an algorithm that generates linear extensions of a
DAG in constant amortized time. Further, each extension differs from its predecessor
by either one or two adjacent transpositions. This algorithm can be used to count
the number of linear extensions e(G) of an n-vertex DAG G in O(n2 + e(G)). The
reverse search technique of Avis and Fukuda [AF96] can also be employed to list linear
extensions. A backtracking program to generate all linear extensions is described in
[KS74].
    Huber [Hub06] gives an algorithm to sample linear extensions uniformly at random
from an arbitrary partial order in expected O(n3 lg n) time, improving the result of
[BD99].

Related problems: Sorting (see page 506), feedback edge/vertex set (see page
618).
18.3. MINIMUM SPANNING TREE                                                   549

                  Input                                    Output

18.3      Minimum Spanning Tree
Input description: A graph G = (V, E) with weighted edges.
Problem description: Find a subset of edges E ? ⊂ E that define a tree of
minimum weight on V .
Discussion: The minimum spanning tree (MST) of a graph defines the cheapest
subset of edges that connects the graph in a single component. Telephone
companies are interested in minimum spanning trees, because the MST of a set
of locations defines the wiring scheme that connects the sites using as little wire
as possible. MST is the mother of all network design problems.
    Minimum spanning trees prove important for several reasons:
   • They can be computed quickly and easily, and create a sparse subgraph
     that reflects a lot about the original graph.
   • They provide a way to identify clusters in sets of points. Deleting all
     long edges from a minimum spanning tree leaves connected components
     that define natural clusters in the data set. For example, deleting the two
     red edges from the output figure above leaves three natural clusters.
   • They can be used to give approximate solutions to hard problems such as
     Steiner tree and traveling salesman.
   • As an educational tool, MST algorithms provide graphic evidence that
     greedy algorithms sometimes produce provably optimal solutions.
    Three classical algorithms efficiently construct minimum spanning trees. De-
tailed implementations of two of them (Prim’s and Kruskal’s) are given with
correctness arguments in Section 8.1 (page 244). The third somehow manages
to be less well known despite being invented first and (arguably) being both
easier to implement and more efficient. The contenders are:
550               CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

      • Kruskal’s algorithm – Every vertex starts as a separate tree. These trees
        are merged together by repeatedly adding the lowest cost edge that does
        not create a cycle.

                Kruskal(G)
                   Sort the edges in order of increasing weight
                   count = 0
                   while (count < n − 1) do
                        get next edge (v, w)
                        if (component (v) ?= component(w))
                             add to T
                             component(v) = component(w)
                             count++

        The “component(x)?” test can be efficiently implemented using the union–
        find data structure (Section 15.5 (page 456)) to yield an O(m lg m) algo-
        rithm.

      • Prim’s algorithm – Starts from an arbitrary vertex v to “grow” a tree,
        repeatedly finding the lowest-cost edge that links some new vertex into
        this tree. During execution, we label each vertex as either in the tree, in
        the fringe (meaning there exists an edge from a tree vertex), or unseen
        (meaning the vertex is still more than one edge away from the tree).

                Prim(G)
                    Select an arbitrary vertex to start
                    While (there are fringe vertices)
                        select minimum-weight edge between tree and fringe
                        add the selected edge and vertex to the tree
                        update the cost to all affected fringe vertices

        This creates a spanning tree for any connected graph, since no cycle can
        be introduced by adding edges between tree and fringe vertices. That
        this results in a tree of minimum weight can be proven by contradiction.
        Prim’s algorithm can be implemented in O(n2 ) time using simple data
        structures.

  • Boruvka’s algorithm – This rests on the observation that the lowest-weight
    edge incident on every vertex must appear in the minimum spanning tree.
    The union of these edges will result in a spanning forest with at most n/2
    trees. Now select an edge (x, y) of lowest weight for each of tree T , such
    that x ∈ T and y ?∈ T . All of these edges must again appear in a minimum
    spanning tree, and so again results in a spanning forest with at most half
    as many trees as before:
18.3. MINIMUM SPANNING TREE                                                551

         Boruvka(G)
            Initialize spanning forest F to n single-vertex trees
                 While (F has more than one tree)
                      for each T in F , find the smallest edge from T to G − T
                      add all selected edges to F , thus merging pairs of trees

     The number of trees are at least halved in each round, so we get the MST
     after at most lg n iterations, each of which takes linear time. This gives
     an O(m log n) algorithm without using any fancy data structures.

   MST is only one of several spanning tree problems that arise in practice.
The following questions will help you sort your way through them:

   • Are all edges of your graph of identical weight? – Every spanning tree on
     n points contains exactly n − 1 edges. Thus, if your graph is unweighted,
     any spanning tree must be a minimum spanning tree. Either breadth-first
     or depth-first search can be used to find a rooted spanning tree in linear
     time. DFS trees tend to be long and thin, while BFS trees better reflect
     the distance structure of the graph.

   • Should I use Prim’s or Kruskal’s algorithm? – As implemented in Section
     8.1 (page 244), Prim’s algorithm runs in O(n2 ), while Kruskal’s algorithm
     takes O(m log m) time. Prim’s algorithm is thus faster on dense graphs,
     while Kruskal’s is faster on sparse graphs. That said, Prim’s algorithm
     can be implemented in O(m + n lg n) time using more advanced data
     structures, so a Prim’s implementation using pairing heaps would be the
     fastest practical choice for both sparse and dense graphs.

   • What if my input consists of points in the plane, instead of a graph? –
     Geometric instances, comprising n points in d-dimensions, can be solved
     by constructing the complete distance graph in O(n2 ) and then finding the
     MST of this complete graph. But for points in two dimensions it proves
     more efficient to solve the geometric version of the problem directly. First
     construct the Delaunay triangulation of the points (see Sections 20.3 and
     20.4), which gives a graph with O(n) edges containing all the edges of the
     minimum spanning tree of the point set. Running Kruskal’s algorithm on
     this sparse graph finishes the job in O(n lg n) time.

   • How can I find a spanning tree that avoids vertices of high degree? –
     Another common goal of spanning tree problems is to minimize the max-
     imum degree, typically to minimize the fan out in an interconnection net-
     work. Unfortunately, finding a spanning tree of maximum degree 2 is NP-
     complete, because this is identical to the Hamiltonian path problem. But
     efficient algorithms are known that can construct spanning trees whose
     maximum degree is at most one more than required, which should suffice
     in practice. See the references below.
552              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

Implementations: All the graph data structure implementations of Section
15.4 (page 452) include implementations of Prim’s and/or Kruskal’s algorithms.
This includes the Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/
graph) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) for C++. JGraphT (https:
//jgrapht.org/) has an extensive graph algorithm library in Java, including
Boruvka, Kruskal, and Prims, plus other variants.
    Timing experiments on minimum spanning tree algorithms produce con-
tradicting results, suggesting the stakes are really too low to matter. Pas-
cal implementations of Prim’s, Kruskal’s, and the Cheriton–Tarjan algorithm
are provided in [MS91], along with extensive empirical analysis proving that
Prim’s algorithm with the appropriate priority queue is fastest on most graphs.
Kruskal’s algorithm proved the fastest of four different MST algorithms in the
Stanford GraphBase (see Section 22.1.7 (page 715)).
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of Kruskal’s
MST algorithm and a combinatorial method to efficiently count the number of
spanning trees of a graph. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
    My (biased) preference for C language implementations of all basic graph
algorithms, including minimum spanning trees, is the library associated with
this book. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716) for details.
Notes: The minimum spanning tree problem dates back to Boruvka’s algorithm in
1926, well before Prim’s [Pri57] and Kruskal’s [Kru56] algorithms. Prim’s algorithm
was then rediscovered by Dijkstra [Dij59]. See [GH85] for more on the interesting
history of MST algorithms. Wu and Chao [WC04] have written a monograph on
minimum spanning tree and related problems.
    The fastest implementations of Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithms use Fibonacci
heaps [FT87]. However, pairing heaps have been proposed to realize the same bounds
with less overhead. Experiments with pairing heaps are reported in [SV87]. Efficient
parallel algorithms for models like Map-Reduce are presented by Andoni [ANOY14].
    A simple combination of Boruvka’s algorithm with Prim’s algorithm yields an
O(m lg lg n) algorithm. Run Borukva’s algorithm for lg lg n iterations, yielding a forest
of at most n/ lg n trees. Now create a graph G? with one vertex representing each tree
in this forest, with the weight of the edge between trees Ti and Tj set to the lightest
edge (x, y), where x ∈ Ti and y ∈ Tj . The MST of G? coupled with the edges selected
by Boruvka’s algorithm yields the MST of G. Prim’s algorithm (implemented with
Fibonacci heaps) will take O(m) time on this n/ lg n vertex, m edge graph.
    The best theoretical bounds on finding minimum spanning trees tell a complicated
story. Karger, Klein, and Tarjan [KKT95] give a linear-time randomized algorithm
for MSTs, based again on Borukva’s algorithm. Chazelle [Cha00] give a deterministic
O(nα(m, n)) algorithm, where α(m, n) is the inverse Ackerman function. Pettie and
Ramachandran [PR02] give a provably optimal algorithm whose exact running time is
(paradoxically) unknown, but lies between Ω(n + m) and O(nα(m, n)).
    A spanner S(G) of a given graph G is a subgraph that offers an effective compromise
between two competing network objectives. To be precise, S(G) must have total weight
close to the MST of G while guaranteeing that the shortest path between vertices x
and y in S(G) approaches the shortest path in the full graph G. The monograph
of Narasimhan and Smid [NS07] provides a complete, up-to-date survey on spanner
networks.
18.3. MINIMUM SPANNING TREE                                                        553

    The O(n log n) algorithm for Euclidean MSTs is due to Shamos, and discussed in
computational geometry texts such as [dBvKOS08, PS85].
    Fürer and Raghavachari [FR94] give an algorithm that constructs a spanning tree
whose maximum degree is almost minimized—indeed is at most one more than the
lowest-degree spanning tree. The situation is analogous to Vizing’s theorem for edge
coloring, which also gives an approximation algorithm with an additive factor of one. A
recent generalization [SL07] gives a polynomial-time algorithm for finding a spanning
tree of maximum degree ≤ k + 1 whose cost is no more than that of the optimal
minimum spanning tree of maximum degree ≤ k.
    Minimum spanning tree algorithms have an interpretation in terms of matroids,
which are systems of subsets closed under inclusion. The maximum weighted indepen-
dent set in matroids can be found using a greedy algorithm. The connection between
greedy algorithms and matroids was established by Edmonds [Edm71]. Expositions
on the theory of matroids include [GM12, Law11, PS98].
    Dynamic graph algorithms seek to maintain a graph invariant (such as the MST)
efficiently under edge insertion or deletion operations. Holm et al. [HdlT01] gives an
efficient, deterministic algorithm to maintain MSTs (and several other invariants) in
amortized polylogarithmic time per update.
    Algorithms for generating spanning trees in order from minimum to maximum
weight are presented in [Gab77]. The complete set of spanning trees of an un-
weighted graph can be generated in constant amortized time. See Ruskey [Rus03]
for an overview of algorithms to generate, rank, and unrank spanning trees.

Related problems: Steiner tree (see page 614), traveling salesman (see page
594).
554            CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

                 Input                                    Output

18.4      Shortest Path
Input description: An edge-weighted graph G, with vertices s and t.

Problem description: Find the shortest path from s to t in G.

Discussion: The problem of finding shortest paths in a graph has many appli-
cations, some quite surprising:

   • Shortest paths often arise in transportation or communications problems,
     such as finding the best route to drive between Chicago and Phoenix, or
     the fastest way to direct packets across a network.

   • Segmentation is the task of partitioning a digitized image into regions
     containing distinct objects. Region boundaries can be thought of as paths
     over the image that avoid cutting through object pixels as much as possi-
     ble. This grid of pixels can be modeled as a graph, with the cost of an edge
     reflecting the color transitions between neighboring pixels. The shortest
     path in such a weighted graph defines a promising potential boundary
     between two regions.

   • Recall the dialing for documents war story of Section 8.4 (page 264),
     where we sought to use some notion of grammatical constraints to iden-
     tify the right word for each slot in a sentence from a set of possibili-
     ties. Such tasks are common in natural language processing and speech
     recognition systems. We construct a graph whose vertices correspond to
     these possible word interpretations, with edges between neighboring word-
     interpretations. If we set the weight of each edge to reflect the likelihood
     of transition, the shortest path across this graph defines the best interpre-
     tation of the sentence.
18.4. SHORTEST PATH                                                           555

   • In an informative drawing of a graph, the “center” of the graph should
     appear near the center of the page. A good definition of the graph center
     is the vertex that minimizes the maximum distance to any other vertex
     in the graph. Identifying this center point requires knowing the shortest
     path distance between all pairs of vertices.
    The primary algorithm for finding shortest paths is Dijkstra’s algorithm,
which efficiently computes the shortest path from a given starting vertex x to
all n − 1 other vertices. In each iteration, it identifies a new vertex v for which
the shortest path from x to v is known. We maintain a set of vertices S to
which we know the shortest path from x, and grow this set by one new vertex
in each iteration. In each iteration, we identify the edge (u, v) where u ∈ S and
v ∈ V − S such that

                  dist(x, v) = min (dist(x, u) + weight(u, v))
                               u∈S

This edge (u, v) gets added to a shortest path tree, whose root is x and describes
all the shortest paths from x.
    An O(n2 ) implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm appears in Section 8.3.1
(page 258). Faster times can be achieved using more complicated data struc-
tures, as described below. If we just need to know the shortest path from x to
y, terminate the algorithm as soon as y enters S.
    Dijkstra’s algorithm is the right choice to compute single-source shortest
path on positively weighted graphs. However, special circumstances sometimes
dictate different choices:

   • Is your graph weighted or unweighted? – If your graph is unweighted, a
     simple breadth-first search starting from the source vertex will find the
     shortest path to all other vertices in linear time. Only when edges have
     different weights will you need more sophisticated algorithms.
   • Does your graph have negative cost weights? – Dijkstra’s algorithm as-
     sumes that all edges have positive cost. For graphs with edges of negative
     weight, you must use the more general (but less efficient) Bellman–Ford
     algorithm. Graphs with negative cost cycles are an even bigger problem.
     The shortest x to y path in such a graph is not defined, because we can
     repeatedly detour from x to the negative cost cycle, making the total cost
     arbitrarily small.
     Note that adding a fixed amount of weight to make each edge positive does
     not solve the problem. Dijkstra’s algorithm will then favor paths using a
     small number of edges, even if those were not the shortest weighted paths
     in the original graph.
   • Is your input a set of geometric obstacles, instead of a graph? – Many
     applications seek the shortest path between two points in a geometric
     setting, such as an obstacle-filled room. The most straightforward solution
     is to convert your problem into a graph of distances to feed to Dijkstra’s
556               CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

        algorithm. Vertices correspond to the boundary vertices of the obstacles,
        with edges defined between pairs of vertices that “see” each other.
        There are more efficient geometric algorithms that compute the shortest
        path directly from the arrangement of obstacles. See Section 20.14 (page
        667) on motion planning for pointers to such algorithms.
      • Is your graph acyclic—that is, a DAG? – Shortest paths in directed acyclic
        graphs can be found in linear time. Perform a topological sort to order the
        vertices such that all edges go from left to right, starting from source s.
        The distance from s to itself, dist(s, s), clearly equals 0. We now process
        the vertices from left to right. Observe that

                        dist(s, j) = min (dist(s, i) + weight(i, j))
                                     (i,j)∈E

        since we already know the shortest path dist(s, i) for all vertices i to the
        left of j. Indeed, most dynamic programming problems can be formulated
        as shortest paths on specific DAGs. This same algorithm (replacing min
        with max) also suffices to find the longest path in a DAG, which proves
        useful in applications like scheduling (see Section 17.9 (page 534)).
  • Do you need the shortest path between all pairs of points? – The naive
    approach to calculate the all-pairs shortest path matrix D (where Dij is
    the distance from i to j) is to run Dijkstra n times, once with each vertex
    as the source. The Floyd-Warshall algorithm is a slick O(n3 ) dynamic
    programming algorithm for all-pairs shortest path, which is faster and
    easier to program than Dijkstra. It works with negative cost edges (but
    not cycles), and is presented with an implementation in Section 8.3.2 (page
    261). Let M denote the edge weight matrix, where Mij = ∞ if there is
    no edge (i, j):

                     D0 = M
                     for k = 1 to n do
                          for i = 1 to n do
                               for j = 1 to n do
                                      k          k−1    k−1    k−1
                                    Dij = min(Dij    , Dik  + Dkj  )
                                 n
                     Return D
                                                                  k
        The key to understanding Floyd’s algorithm is that Dij       denotes “the
        length of the shortest path from i to j that goes through vertices 1, . . . , k
        as possible intermediate vertices.” Note that O(n2 ) space suffices, since
        we need only keep Dk and Dk−1 around at time k.
      • How do I find the shortest cycle in a graph? – One application of all-
        pairs shortest path is to find the shortest cycle in a graph, called its girth.
        Floyd’s algorithm can be used to compute dii for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, which is the
        length of the shortest way to get from vertex i to i—in other words, the
        shortest cycle through i.
18.4. SHORTEST PATH                                                                557

      This might be what you want. But the shortest cycle through x is likely
      to go from x to y back to x, using the same edge twice. A simple cycle is
      one that visits no edge or vertex twice. To find the shortest simple cycle,
      we compute the lengths of the shortest paths from i to all other vertices,
      and then explicitly check whether there is an acceptable edge from each
      vertex back to i.
      The problem of finding the longest cycle in a graph includes Hamiltonian
      cycle as a special case (see Section 19.5), so it is NP-complete.
   The all-pairs shortest path matrix can be used to compute several useful
invariants related to the center of graph G. The eccentricity of vertex v is the
shortest-path distance to the farthest vertex from v. From the eccentricity come
other graph invariants. The radius of a graph is the smallest eccentricity of any
vertex, while the center is the set of vertices whose eccentricity is the radius.
The diameter of a graph is the maximum eccentricity of any vertex.
Implementations: The highest performance shortest path codes are due to
Andrew Goldberg and his collaborators, at http://www.avglab.com/andrew/
soft.html. In particular, MLB is a C++ short path implementation for non-
negative, integer-weighted edges. See [Gol01] for details of the algorithm and
its implementation. Its running time is typically only four or five times that
of a breadth-first search, and it is capable of handling graphs with millions of
vertices. High-performance C implementations of both Dijkstra and Bellman–
Ford are also available.
    All the C++ and Java graph libraries discussed in Section 15.4 (page 452)
include at least an implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm. The C++ Boost
Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/graph) has a particu-
larly broad collection, including Bellman–Ford’s and Johnson’s all-pairs shortest-
path algorithm. LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) provides good im-
plementations in C++ for all of the shortest-path algorithms we have dis-
cussed, including Dijkstra, Bellman–Ford, and Floyd’s algorithms. JGraphT
(https://jgrapht.org) provides both Dijkstra and Bellman–Ford in Java.
    Shortest-path algorithms was the subject of the 9th DIMACS Implementa-
tion Challenge, held in October 2006. Implementations of efficient algorithms
for finding shortest paths were discussed. The papers, instances, and implemen-
tations are available at http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/programs/challenge/.
Notes: Good expositions on Dijkstra’s algorithm [Dij59], the Bellman–Ford al-
gorithm [Bel58, FF62], and Floyd’s all-pairs-shortest-path algorithm [Flo62] include
[CLRS09]. Nice surveys on shortest path algorithms include [MAR+ 17, Zwi01]. Geo-
metric shortest-path algorithms are surveyed by Mitchell [PN18].
    The fastest algorithm known for single-source shortest-path is Dijkstra’s algorithm
with Fibonacci heaps, running in O(m + n log n) time [FT87]. Experimental studies
of shortest-path algorithms include [DF79, DGKK79]. However, these experiments
were done before Fibonacci heaps were developed. See [CGR99] for a more recent
study. Heuristics can be used to enhance the performance of Dijkstra’s algorithm in
practice. Holzer, et al. [HSWW05] provide a careful experimental study of how four
such heuristics interact together.
558              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

    Online services like Google Maps quickly find at least an approximate shortest path
between two points in enormous road networks. This problem differs somewhat from
the shortest-path problems here in that (1) preprocessing costs can be amortized over
many point-to-point queries, (2) the backbone of high-speed, long-distance highways
can reduce the path problem to identifying the best place to get on and off this
backbone, and (3) approximate or heuristic solutions suffice in practice.
    The A∗ -algorithm performs a best-first search for the shortest path coupled with
a lower-bound analysis to establish when the best path we have seen is indeed the
shortest-path in the graph. Goldberg, Kaplan, and Werneck [GKW06] describe an
implementation of A∗ capable of answering point-to-point queries in one millisecond on
national-scale road networks after two hours of preprocessing. Heuristics for speeding
up shortest path algorithms are analyzed in [AFGW10].
    Many applications demand multiple short alternative paths, in addition to the op-
timal path. This motivates the problem of finding the k shortest paths. Variants exist
depending upon whether the paths must be simple, or can contain cycles. Eppstein
[Epp98] generates an implicit representation of these paths in O(m + n log n + k) time,
from which each path can be reconstructed in O(n) time. Hershberger et al. [HMS03]
presents a new algorithm and experimental results.
    Fast algorithms for computing the girth are known for both general [IR78] and
planar graphs [Dji00].

Related problems: Network flow (see page 571), motion planning (see page
667).
18.5. TRANSITIVE CLOSURE AND REDUCTION                                          559

  1        2      3       4      5      6     1      2      3       4      5      6

                      Input                                  Output

18.5           Transitive Closure and Reduction
Input description: A directed graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: For transitive closure, construct a graph G? with edge
(i, j) ∈ E ? iff there is a directed path from i to j in G. For transitive reduction,
construct a graph G? with the smallest number of edges such that a directed
path from i to j exists in G? iff there is a directed path from i to j in G.
Discussion: Transitive closure can be thought of as establishing a data struc-
ture to efficiently solve reachability queries: “Can I get to y from x?” After
constructing a transitive closure matrix M , such queries can be answered in
constant time by reporting matrix entry M [x, y].
    Transitive closure arises in propagating the consequences of modified at-
tributes of a graph G. Consider the graph underlying a spreadsheet model,
whose vertices are cells with an edge from cell i to cell j iff the result of cell j
depends on cell i. When a given cell is modified, the values of all cells reach-
able from it must also be updated. The identity of these cells is revealed by the
transitive closure of G. Many database problems reduce to computing transitive
closures, for analogous reasons.
    There are three basic algorithms for computing transitive closure:

      • The simple algorithm performs a breadth-first or depth-first search from
        each vertex, and keeps track of all vertices encountered. Doing n such
        traversals gives an O(n(n + m)) algorithm, which degenerates to cubic
        time when the graph is dense. This algorithm is easily implemented, runs
        well on sparse graphs, and is likely the right answer for your application.
      • Warshall’s algorithm constructs the transitive closure in O(n3 ) time, using
        a slick approach identical to Floyd’s all-pairs shortest-path algorithm of
        Section 18.4 (page 554). If we are not interested in the length of the
560                CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

        resulting paths, we can reduce storage by retaining only one bit per matrix
                               k
        element. Thus, Dij       = true iff j is reachable from i using only vertices
        1, . . . , k as intermediates.
      • Matrix multiplication can also be used to solve transitive closure. Let
        M 1 be the adjacency matrix of graph G. The non-zero matrix entries of
        ? = M × M identify all length-2 paths in G. Observe
           2
        M                                                              that M 2 [i, j] =
           x M [i, x] · M [x, j], so path (i, x, j) contributes to M [i, j]. Thus, the
                                                                    2

        union ∪ni M i yields the transitive closure T . Furthermore, this union can
        be computed using only O(lg n) matrix operations using the fast exponen-
        tiation algorithm in Section 16.9 (page 493).
        This will be faster for large enough n if using Strassen’s fast matrix multi-
        plication algorithm, although I for one wouldn’t bother trying. Transitive
        closure is provably as hard as matrix multiplication, so there is little hope
        for a significantly faster algorithm.
    The running time for all three of these methods can be substantially im-
proved on many graphs. Recall that a strongly connected component is a set of
vertices for which all pairs are mutually reachable. For example, any directed
cycle defines a strongly connected subgraph. All the vertices in any strongly
connected component must reach exactly the same subset of G. Thus, we can
reduce our problem to finding the transitive closure on a graph of strongly-
connected components, that generally has fewer edges and vertices than G.
The strongly connected components of G can be computed in linear time (see
Section 18.1 (page 542)).
    Transitive reduction (also known as minimum equivalent digraph) is the in-
verse operation to transitive closure, namely reducing the number of edges while
maintaining identical reachability properties. The transitive closure of G is
identical to the transitive closure of the transitive reduction of G. Transitive
reduction is space minimization, by eliminating redundant edges from G that
do not affect reachability. It also arises in graph drawing, where it is important
to eliminate as many implied edges as possible to reduce visual clutter.
    Although the transitive closure of G is uniquely defined, a graph may have
many different transitive reductions, including G itself. We seek the smallest
such reduction, but there are multiple formulations of the problem:
   • A quick-and-dirty, linear-time transitive reduction algorithm identifies the
     strongly connected components of G, replaces each by a simple directed
     cycle, and then adds the edges bridging the different components. Al-
     though this does not always yield the smallest possible reduction, it is
     likely to be pretty close on many graphs.
        One catch with this heuristic is that it might add edges to the transitive
        reduction of G that are not in G. Depending on your application, this
        may or may not be a problem.
   • If we are restricted to only using edges from G in our transitive reduction,
     we must abandon hope of finding the minimum possible reduction. To
18.5. TRANSITIVE CLOSURE AND REDUCTION                                              561

      see why, consider a directed graph consisting of one strongly connected
      component, where every vertex can reach every other vertex. The smallest
      possible transitive reduction here will be a simple directed cycle, consisting
      of exactly n edges. But this is possible if and only if G is Hamiltonian,
      thus proving that finding the smallest such closure is NP-complete.
      A heuristic for edge-preserving transitive reduction successively considers
      each edge, deleting it if its removal does not change the transitive closure.
      Implementing this efficiently means minimizing the time spent on reacha-
      bility tests. Observe that directed edge (i, j) can be eliminated whenever
      there is another path from i to j avoiding this edge.
   • The minimum size reduction using arbitrary pairs of vertices as edges can
     be found in O(n3 ) time. See the references below for details. However,
     the quick-and-dirty heuristic described above will likely suffice for most
     applications, being both faster and easier to program.

Implementations: The Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.
org/libs/graph) implementations of transitive closure and reduction are par-
ticularly well engineered. LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) also provides
implementations of both transitive closure and reduction in C++ [MN99]. The
extensive graph algorithm library of JGraphT (https://jgrapht.org/) con-
tains Java implementations of both algorithms.
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of transitive
closure and reduction, as well as the display of partial orders requiring transitive
reduction. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: Van Leeuwen [vL90a] provides an excellent survey on transitive closure and
reduction. The equivalence between matrix multiplication and transitive closure was
proven by Fischer and Meyer [FM71], with expositions including [AHU74].
    There is a surprising amount of more recent activity on transitive closure, much of it
captured in Nuutila [Nuu95]. Penner and Prasanna [PP06] improved the performance
of Warshall’s algorithm [War62] by roughly a factor of two through a cache-friendly
implementation.
    The equivalence between transitive closure and reduction was established in [AGU72].
Empirical studies of transitive closure algorithms include [Nuu95, PP06, SD75]. Sparse
transitive reductions often contain long paths. Transitive closure spanners seek small
reductions of diameter at most k [BGJ+ 12].
    Estimating the size of the transitive closure is important in database query opti-
mization. A linear-time algorithm for estimating the size of the closure is given by
Cohen [Coh94].

Related problems: Connected components (see page 542), shortest path (see
page 554).
562               CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

                    Input                                  Output

18.6        Matching
Input description: A (weighted) graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: Find the largest set of edges E ? from E such that every
vertex in V is incident to at most one edge of E ? .
Discussion: Suppose you manage a team of workers, each capable of performing
a distinct subset of the tasks needed to complete a job. Who should get assigned
to do what? Construct a graph with vertices representing each worker and each
task, with edges linking each worker to the tasks they can perform. Each worker
is to be assigned one task. The desired assignment is the largest possible set of
edges where no employee or job is repeated—that is, a matching.
    Matching is a very powerful piece of algorithmic magic, so powerful that it is
quite surprising that optimal matchings can be found efficiently, in polynomial
time. Applications arise often once you know to look for them.
    Marrying off a set of boys to a set of girls such that each couple is happy is
another example of a bipartite matching problem. Here the graph contains an
edge between any compatible boy and girl. For a synthetic biology application
[MPC+ 06], we needed to shuffle the characters in a string S so as to maximize
the number of characters that move. For example, aaabc can be rearranged
to bcaaa so that only the central a stays fixed. This is yet another bipartite
matching problem, where the boys represent the multiset of alphabet symbols
and the girls are the positions in the string (1 to |S|). Edges link symbols to all
the string positions that originally contained a different symbol.
    This basic matching framework can be enhanced in several ways, while re-
maining essentially the same assignment problem:

      • Is your graph bipartite? – Many matching problems involve bipartite
        graphs, as in the classic assignment problem of boys to girls. But modern
18.6. MATCHING                                                               563

     marriages represent a matching on a more general, non-bipartite graph.
     Efficient algorithms exist for matching on general graphs, although faster
     and simpler methods work for bipartite graphs.
   • What if employees can be given multiple jobs? – Natural generalizations of
     matching include assigning workers more than one task to do, or (equiv-
     alently) seeking multiple workers for a given job. Such desires can be
     modeled by replicating an employee vertex by as many times as we want
     her to be matched. Indeed, we employed this trick (using multiple occur-
     rences of the same letters) in the string shuffle example above.
   • Is your graph weighted or unweighted? – The matching applications dis-
     cussed so far are based on unweighted graphs. We have sought a maxi-
     mum cardinality matching—ideally a perfect matching where every vertex
     is matched to another in the matching.
     But other applications augment each edge with a weight, perhaps reflect-
     ing the suitability of a particular employee for a given task, or how much
     person x likes person y. The problem now becomes constructing a max-
     imum weight matching—that is, finding the set of independent edges of
     maximum total cost.

    Efficient algorithms for constructing matchings work by finding augmenting
paths in graphs, which start and end with unmatched edges. An augmenting
path P in graph G for a given (partial) matching M is a path of edges that alter-
nate (out-of-M , in-M , . . . , out-of-M ). We can always enlarge the matching by
one edge given such an augmenting path, by replacing the even-numbered edges
of P from M with the odd-numbered edges of P . Berge’s theorem states that a
matching is maximum iff it does not contain any augmenting path. Therefore,
we can construct maximum-cardinality matchings by searching for augmenting
paths, and stop when none exist.
    General graphs prove trickier to match than bipartite ones, because it is
possible to have augmenting paths involving odd-length cycles, where the first
and last vertices are the same. Such cycles (or blossoms) are impossible in
bipartite graphs, which by definition do not contain odd-length cycles.
    The standard algorithms for bipartite matching are based on network flow,
using a simple transformation to convert a bipartite graph into an equivalent
flow graph. Indeed, an implementation of this is given in Section 8.5 (page 267).
    Be warned that different approaches are needed to solve weighted matching
problems, most notably the matrix-oriented “Hungarian algorithm.”
Implementations: High-performance codes for both weighted and unweighted
bipartite matching have been developed by Andrew Goldberg and his collabo-
rators. CSA is a weighted bipartite matching code in C based on cost-scaling
network flow, developed by Goldberg and Kennedy [GK95]. BIM is a faster
unweighted bipartite matching code based on augmenting path methods, devel-
oped by Cherkassky, et al. [CGM+ 98]. Both are available for non-commercial
use from http://www.avglab.com/andrew/soft.html.
564              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

    The First DIMACS Implementation Challenge [JM93] focused on network
flows and matching. Several instance generators and implementations for maxi-
mum weight and maximum cardinality matching were collected, and can be ob-
tained from http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/archive/Challenges/. These in-
clude a maximum-cardinality matching solver that implements Gabow’s O(n3 )
algorithm and a maximum-weighted matching solver, both in C by Edward
Rothberg. This is slower but more general than his unweighted solver.
    LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) provides efficient implementations in
C++ for both maximum-cardinality and maximum-weighted matching, on both
bipartite and general graphs. Blossom IV [CR99] is an efficient code in C for
minimum-weight perfect matching available at http://www.math.uwaterloo.
ca/~bico//software.html. An O(mnα(m, n)) implementation of maximum-
cardinality matching in general graphs (http://www.cs.arizona.edu/~kece/
Research/software.html) is due to Kececioglu and Pecqueur [KP98].
    The Stanford GraphBase (see Section 22.1.7 (page 715)) contains an im-
plementation of the Hungarian algorithm for bipartite matching. To provide
readily visualized weighted bipartite graphs, Knuth uses a digitized version of
the Mona Lisa and seeks row/column disjoint pixels of maximum brightness.
Matching is also used to construct amusing “domino portraits.”
Notes: Lovász and Plummer [LP09] is the definitive reference on matching theory and
algorithms. Survey articles on matching algorithms include [Gal86]. Good expositions
on network flow algorithms for bipartite matching include [CLRS09, Eve11, Man89],
and those on the Hungarian method include [Law11, PS98]. The best algorithm for
maximum bipartite matching, due to Hopcroft and Karp [HK73], repeatedly finds the
                                                                            √
shortest augmenting paths instead of using network flow, and runs in O( nm). The
Hungarian algorithm runs in O(n(m + n log n)) time.
    Edmond’s algorithm [Edm65] for maximum-cardinality matching is of great his-
torical interest, for provoking questions on what problems can be solved in polynomial
time. Expositions on Edmond’s algorithm include [Law11, PS98, Tar83]. The best
                                                   √
algorithm known for general matching runs in O( nm) [MV80].
    Consider a matching of boys to girls containing edges (B1 , G1 ) and (B2 , G2 ), where
B1 and G2 prefer each other to their own spouses. In real life, these two would run off
with each other, breaking the marriages. A marriage without any such couples is said
to be stable. The theory of stable matching is presented in [GI89]. It is a surprising
fact that no matter how the boys and girls rate each other, there is always at least
one stable marriage. Further, such a marriage can be found in O(n2 ) time [GS62].
An important application of stable marriage occurs in the annual matching of medical
residents to hospitals.
    Online matching problems arise when edge selection must take place without full
information about the graph. Such problems arise in Internet advertising, and are
ably surveyed in [M+ 13].
    The maximum matching is equal in size to the minimum vertex cover in bipartite
graphs. This implies that both the minimum vertex cover problem and maximum
independent set problems can be solved in polynomial time on bipartite graphs.

Related problems: Network flow (see page 571). vertex cover (see page 591).
18.7. EULERIAN CYCLE/CHINESE POSTMAN                                          565

                  Input                                    Output

18.7      Eulerian Cycle/Chinese Postman
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: Find the shortest tour visiting every edge of G.
Discussion: Suppose you are charged with designing the daily routes for
garbage trucks, snow plows, or postal workers. Every road in the city must
be completely traversed at least once in all these applications, to ensure that
all deliveries or pickups can be made. For efficiency, you seek to minimize total
drive time, or (equivalently) the total distance or number of edges traversed.
    Alternatively, consider a human-factors validation of telephone menu sys-
tems. Each “Press 4 for more information” option is properly interpreted as
a directed edge between two vertices in a graph. Our tester seeks the most
efficient way to walk over this graph and visit every link in the system at least
once.
    Both tasks are variants of the Eulerian cycle problem, best characterized by
the puzzle that asks children to draw a given figure completely without repeating
any edges, or lifting their pencil off the paper. They seek a path or cycle through
a graph that visits each edge exactly once.
    Well-known conditions exist for determining whether a graph contains an
Eulerian cycle:

   • An undirected graph contains an Eulerian cycle iff it is connected, and
     each vertex is of even degree.

   • A directed graph contains an Eulerian cycle iff it is strongly connected,
     and each vertex has the same in-degree as out-degree.

   For Eulerian paths, which cover all edges but do not return to the starting
vertex, the degree conditions are weakened. An undirected connected graph
566             CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

contains an Eulerian path iff all but two vertices are of even degree. These will
serve as the start and end points of any path. Finally, a directed connected
graph contains an Eulerian path from x to y iff all vertices have the same in-
degree as out-degree, except that x has in-degree one less and y one more than
their out-degrees, respectively.
    These characterizations of Eulerian graphs make it is easy to test whether
such a path/cycle exists: verify that the graph is connected using DFS or BFS,
and then count the number of odd-degree vertices. The cycle can also be explic-
itly constructed in linear time by Hierholzer’s algorithm. Use DFS to find an
arbitrary cycle in the graph. Delete this cycle and repeat, until the entire set of
edges has been partitioned into a set of edge-disjoint cycles. Because deleting a
cycle reduces the degree of each vertex by an even number, the remaining graph
will continue to satisfy the Eulerian degree-bound conditions. These cycles must
have common vertices (because the graph is connected), and so can be spliced
together in a “figure eight” at any shared vertex. By splicing all extracted cycles
together, we get a single circuit containing all of the edges.
    An Eulerian cycle, if one exists, solves the motivating snowplow problem,
since any tour that visits every edge only once must have minimum length.
However, it is unlikely that your road network will satisfy the Eulerian degree
conditions. Instead, we need to solve the more general Chinese postman problem,
which minimizes the length of a cycle that traverses every edge at least once.
This minimum cycle will never visit any edge more than twice, so good tours
exist for any road network.
    The optimal postman tour can be constructed by adding the appropriate
edges to the graph G to make it Eulerian. Adding a path between two odd-
degree vertices in G makes both of them even-degree, moving G closer to be-
coming an Eulerian graph.
    Finding the best set of shortest paths to add to G reduces to identifying a
minimum-weight perfect matching in a special graph G? . For undirected graphs,
the vertices of G? correspond to the odd-degree vertices of G, with the weight of
edge (i, j) defined by the length of the shortest path from i to j in G. For directed
graphs, the vertices of G? correspond to the degree-imbalanced vertices from G.
All edges in G? go from out-degree deficient vertices to in-degree deficient ones.
Thus, bipartite matching algorithms suffice when G is directed. An optimal
cycle can be extracted in linear time, once the graph is Eulerian.

Implementations: Several graph libraries provide implementations of Eu-
lerian cycles, but Chinese postman implementations are rarer. I recommend
the implementation of directed Chinese postman by Thimbleby [Thi03]. This
Java implementation is available at http://www.harold.thimbleby.net/cpp/
index.html. JGraphT (https://jgrapht.org) provides an implementation of
Hierholzer’s algorithm in Java.
    GOBLIN (http://goblin2.sourceforge.net/) is an extensive C++ li-
brary dealing with all of the standard graph optimization problems, including
Chinese postman for both directed and undirected graphs. LEDA (see Section
22.1.1 (page 713)) provides all the tools for an efficient implementation: Eulerian
18.7. EULERIAN CYCLE/CHINESE POSTMAN                                                   567

cycles, matching, and shortest path in both bipartite and general graphs.
   Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of Eulerian
cycles and de Bruijn sequences. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: The history of graph theory began in 1736, when Euler first solved the seven
bridges of Königsberg problem. Königsberg (now Kaliningrad) is a city on the banks
of the Pregel river. In Euler’s day there were seven bridges linking the banks and two
islands, which can be modeled as a multigraph with seven edges and four vertices.
Euler sought a way to walk over each of the bridges exactly once and return home—
that is, an Eulerian cycle. Euler proved that such a tour is impossible, since all four
of the vertices had odd degrees. The bridges were destroyed in World War II. See
[BLW76] for a translation of Euler’s original paper and a history of the problem.
    Corberán and Laporte [CL13] and Toth and Vigo [TV14] are recent books on
vehicle and arc routing problems, including the Chinese postman. Expositions on
linear-time algorithms for constructing Eulerian cycles [Ebe88] include [Eve11, Man89].
Fleury’s algorithm [Luc91] is a direct and elegant approach to constructing Eulerian
cycles. Start walking from any vertex, and erase any edge that has been traversed.
The only criterion in picking the next edge is that we avoid using a bridge (an edge
whose deletion disconnects the graph), until no other alternative remains.
    The Euler’s tour technique is an important paradigm in parallel graph algorithms.
Many parallel graph algorithms start by finding a spanning tree and then rooting the
tree, where the rooting is done using the Euler tour technique. See parallel algorithms
texts (e.g., [J9́2]) for an exposition, and [CB04] for experience in practice. Efficient
algorithms exist to count the number of Eulerian cycles in a graph [HP73].
    The problem of finding the shortest tour traversing all edges in a graph was intro-
duced by Kwan [Kwa62], hence the name Chinese postman. The bipartite matching
algorithm for solving Chinese postman is due to Edmonds and Johnson [EJ73]. It
works for both directed and undirected graphs, although the problem is NP-complete
for mixed graphs [Pap76a]. Mixed graphs contain both directed and undirected edges.
Expositions on the Chinese postman algorithm include [Law11].
    A de Bruijn sequence S of span k on an alphabet Σ of size α is a circular string of
length αk containing all strings of length k as substrings of S, each exactly once. For
example, for k = 3 and Σ = {0, 1}, the circular string 00011101 contains the following
substrings in order: 000, 001, 011, 111, 110, 101, 010, 100. De Bruijn sequences can be
thought of as “safe cracker” sequences, describing the shortest sequence of dial turns
with α positions sufficient to try out all combinations of length n.
    De Bruijn sequences can be constructed by building a directed graph whose vertices
represent all αn−1 strings of length n − 1, with an edge (u, v) iff u = s1 s2 . . . sn−1 and
v = s2 . . . sn−1 sn . Any Eulerian cycle on this graph describes a de Bruijn sequence.
Expositions on de Bruijn sequences and their construction include [Eve11, PS03].
    A cute algorithm for optimizing embroidery patterns based on Eulerian cycles is
presented in [AHK+ 08].

Related problems: Matching (see page 562), Hamiltonian cycle (see page
598).
568             CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

                                                           X

                  Input                                    Output

18.8      Edge and Vertex Connectivity
Input description: A graph G. Optionally, a pair of vertices s and t.
Problem description: What is the smallest subset of vertices (or edges) whose
deletion will disconnect G, or that will separate s from t?
Discussion: Graph connectivity arises in problems related to network reliabil-
ity. In the context of communication networks, the vertex connectivity is the
smallest number of switching stations that a terrorist must destroy in order to
separate the network—that is, prevent two undamaged stations from talking to
each other. The edge connectivity is the smallest number of wires that need
to be cut to accomplish the same objective. Either one well-placed bomb or
snipping the right pair of cables suffices to disconnect the above network.
    The edge (vertex) connectivity of a graph G is the smallest number of edge
(vertex) deletions sufficient to disconnect G. There is a close relationship be-
tween these two quantities. The vertex connectivity is always less than or equal
to the edge connectivity, because deleting one vertex from each edge in a cut
set disconnects the graph. But smaller vertex subsets may be possible. The
minimum vertex degree is an upper bound for both edge and vertex connectiv-
ity, because deleting all its neighbors (or cutting the edges to all its neighbors)
disconnects a single-vertex component from the rest of the graph.
    Several connectivity problems prove to be of interest:
   • Is the graph already disconnected? – The simplest connectivity problem is
     testing whether the graph is in fact connected. A depth-first or breadth-
     first search suffices to identify all connected components in linear time,
     as discussed in Section 18.1 (page 542). For directed graphs, the issue is
     whether the graph is strongly connected, meaning there is a directed path
     between every pair of vertices. In a weakly connected graph, there may
     exist paths to nodes from which there is no way to return.
   • Is there a weak link in my graph? – We say that G is biconnected if there
     is no single vertex whose deletion will disconnect G. Such a weak point is
     called an articulation vertex. A bridge is the analogous concept for edges,
     meaning a single edge whose deletion disconnects G.
18.8. EDGE AND VERTEX CONNECTIVITY                                                569

      The simplest algorithm to identify articulation vertices (or bridges) tries
      deleting vertices (or edges) one by one, and then uses DFS or BFS to
      test whether the resulting graph is still connected. More sophisticated
      linear-time algorithms exist for both problems, based on depth-first search.
      Indeed, a full implementation is given in Section 7.9.2 (page 225).

   • What if I want to split the graph into equal-sized pieces? – Often we
     seek a small cut that breaks the graph into roughly equal-sized pieces.
     For example, suppose we want to split a big computer program into two
     maintainable units. We can construct a graph whose vertices represent
     subroutines. Edges can be added between any two subroutines that in-
     teract, namely where one calls the other. We now seek to partition the
     subroutines into roughly equal-sized sets with few pairs of interacting rou-
     tines span the divide.
      This is the graph partition problem, discussed in Section 19.6 (page 601).
      Although the problem is NP-complete, reasonable heuristics exist.

   • Are arbitrary cuts OK, or must I separate a given pair of vertices? –
     There are two flavors of the general connectivity problem. One asks for
     the smallest cut-set for the entire graph, the other for the smallest set
     to separate s from t. Any algorithm for (s − t) connectivity can be used
     n − 1 times to give an algorithm for general connectivity, since vertex v1
     must end up in a different component from at least one of the other n − 1
     vertices after deleting any cut set.

    Edge and vertex connectivity can both be found using network-flow tech-
niques, which interpret a weighted graph as a network of pipes where each edge
has a maximum capacity. We seek to maximize the flow between two given
vertices of the graph. The maximum flow between vi and vj in G is exactly
the weight of the smallest set of edges to disconnect vi from vj . Thus, the edge
connectivity can be found by maximizing the flow between v1 and each of the
n − 1 other vertices in an unweighted graph G.
    Vertex connectivity is characterized by Menger’s theorem, which states that
a graph is k-connected iff every pair of vertices is joined by at least k vertex-
disjoint paths. Network flow can again be used to perform this calculation,
because a flow of k between a pair of vertices implies k edge-disjoint paths.
    To exploit Menger’s theorem, we construct a graph G? such that any set of
edge-disjoint paths in G? corresponds to vertex-disjoint paths in G. This is done
by replacing each vertex vi of G with two vertices vi,1 and vi,2 , adding an edge
(vi,1 , vi,2 ) between them in G? . We also replacing every edge (x, y) ∈ G by the
edges (x0 , y1 ) and (x1 , y0 ) in G? . Thus, two edge-disjoint paths in G? correspond
to each vertex-disjoint path in G. As such, the maximum flow in G? gives twice
the vertex connectivity of G.
Implementations: MINCUTLIB is a collection of high-performance codes for
several different cut algorithms, including both flow and contraction-based meth-
ods. They were implemented by Chekuri et al. as part of an excellent ex-
570              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

perimental study of these algorithms and the heuristics needed to make them
run fast [CGK+ 97]. The codes are available for non-commercial use at http:
//www.avglab.com/andrew/soft.html.
    Most of the graph data structure libraries of Section 18.1 (page 542) include
routines for connectivity and biconnectivity testing. The C++ Boost Graph
Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/graph/doc) is distinguished by
also including an implementation of edge connectivity testing.
    GOBLIN (http://goblin2.sourceforge.net/) is an extensive C++ li-
brary dealing with all of the standard graph optimization problems, including
both edge and vertex connectivity. LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) con-
tains extensive support for both low-level connectivity testing (both biconnected
and triconnected components) and edge connectivity/minimum cut in C++.
Notes: Good expositions on the network-flow approach to edge and vertex connec-
tivity include [Eve11, PS03], and the book by Nagamouch and Ibaraki [NI08]. The
correctness of these algorithms is based on Menger’s theorem [Men27] that connec-
tivity is determined by the number of edge/vertex disjoint paths separating a pair
of vertices. The maximum-flow, minimum-cut theorem is due to Ford and Fulkerson
[FF62].
    The theoretically fastest algorithms for minimum-cut/edge connectivity are based
on graph contraction, not network flows. Contracting an edge (x, y) in a graph G
merges the two incident vertices into one, removing self-loops but leaving multiedges.
Any sequence of such contractions can raise (but not lower) the minimum cut in G,
and leaves the cut unchanged if no edge of the cut is contracted. Karger gave a beau-
tiful randomized algorithm for minimum cut, observing that the minimum cut is left
unchanged with non-trivial probability over the course of any random series of dele-
tions. See Motwani and Raghavan [MR95] for an excellent treatment of randomized
algorithms, including a presentation of Karger’s algorithm.
    The fastest version of Karger’s algorithm runs in (m lg3 n) expected time [Kar00].
Slightly faster deterministic algorithms are known [HRW17]. See [CGK+ 97, HNSS18]
for experimental comparisons of algorithms for finding minimum cuts.
    Minimum-cut methods have found many applications in computer vision, includ-
ing image segmentation. Boykov and Kolmogorov [BK04] report on an experimental
evaluation of minimum-cut algorithms in this context.
    A non-flow-based algorithm for edge k-connectivity in O(kn2 ) is due to Matula
[Mat87]. Faster k-connectivity algorithms are known for certain small values of k. All
3-connected components of a graph can be generated in linear time [HT73a], while
O(n2 ) suffices to test 4-connectivity [KR91].

Related problems: Connected components (see page 542), network flow (see
page 571), graph partition (see page 601).
18.9. NETWORK FLOW                                                          571

   S                               T        S                               T

                 Input                                       Output

18.9      Network Flow
Input description: A directed graph G, where each edge e = (i, j) has a
capacity ce . A source node s and sink node t.

Problem description: What is the maximum flow you can route from s to t
while respecting the capacity constraint of each edge?

Discussion: Applications of network flow go far beyond plumbing. Finding
the most cost-effective way to ship goods between a set of factories and a set of
stores defines a network-flow problem, as do many resource-allocation problems
in communications networks.
    But the real power of network flow is that many linear programming prob-
lems arising in practice can be modeled by network-flow, including several graph
problems that have been discussed in this book: bipartite matching, shortest
path, and edge/vertex connectivity. Network-flow algorithms can solve these
problems much faster than general-purpose linear programming methods.
    The key to exploiting this power is recognizing that your problem can be
modeled as network flow. This requires experience and study. My recommen-
dation is that you first construct a linear programming model for your problem
and then compare it with linear programs for the two primary classes of network
flow problems: maximum flow and minimum-cost flow:

   • Maximum flow – Here we seek the heaviest possible flow from s to t, given
     the edge capacity constraints of G. Let xij be a variable accounting for
     the flow from vertex i through directed edge (i, j). The flow through this
     edge is constrained by its capacity cij , so

                            0 ≤ xij ≤ cij for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n
572               CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

        Furthermore, an equal flow comes in as goes out at each non-source or
        non-sink vertex, so
                           n
                           ?             n
                                         ?
                                 xji −         xij = 0 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n
                           j=1           j=1

        We
        ?n seek the assignment that maximizes the flow into sink t, namely
         i=1 xit .

      • Minimum cost flow – Here we have an extra parameter for each edge (i, j),
        namely the cost (dij ) of sending one unit of flow from i to j. We also have
        a targeted flow volume f we want to send from s to t at minimum total
        cost. Hence, we seek the assignment that minimizes
                                          n ?
                                          ? n
                                                    dij · xij
                                          i=1 j=1

        subject to the edge and vertex capacity
                                       ?n       constraints of maximum flow, plus
        the additional restriction that i=1 xit = f .

      Special considerations include:

      • What if I have multiple sources and/or sinks? – No problem. We can
        modify the network by adding a vertex to serve as a super-source that
        feeds all the sources, and a super-sink that drains all the sinks.
      • What if all arc capacities are identical, either 0 or 1? – Faster algorithms
        exist for 0/1 network flows. See the Notes section for details.
      • What if all my edge costs are identical? – Use the simpler and faster
        algorithms for solving maximum flow as opposed to minimum-cost flow.
        Maximum flow without edge costs arises in many applications, including
        edge/vertex connectivity and bipartite matching.
      • What if I have multiple types of material moving through the network? –
        Every message sent through a telecommunications network has a specific
        source and destination. Each destination needs to receive exactly those
        calls sent to it, not an equal amount of communication from arbitrary
        places. This can be modeled as a multicommodity flow problem, where
        each call defines a different commodity and we seek to satisfy all demands
        without exceeding the total capacity of any edge.
        Linear programming will suffice for multicommodity flow if fractional
        flows are permitted. Unfortunately, integral multicommodity flow is NP-
        complete, even for only two commodities.

   Network flow algorithms can be complicated, and significant engineering is
required to optimize performance. Excellent codes are available and described
below. The two primary classes of algorithms are:
18.9. NETWORK FLOW                                                               573

   • Augmenting path methods – These algorithms repeatedly find a path of
     positive capacity from source to sink and add it to the flow. It can be
     shown that the flow through a network is optimal if and only if it contains
     no augmenting path. Since each augmentation adds something to the flow,
     we eventually reach the maximum. Network-flow algorithms differ in how
     they select the augmenting path. If we are not careful, each augmenting
     path might add only a little bit to the total flow, and so the algorithm
     might take a long time to converge.
   • Preflow-push methods – These algorithms push flows from one vertex to
     another, initially ignoring the constraint that in-flow must equal out-flow
     at each vertex. Preflow-push methods prove faster than augmenting-path
     methods, essentially because multiple paths can be augmented simultane-
     ously. These algorithms are the method of choice and are implemented in
     the best codes described below.

Implementations: High-performance codes for both maximum flow and mini-
mum cost flow were developed by Andrew Goldberg and his collaborators. The
codes HIPR and PRF [CG94] are provided for maximum flow, with the proviso
that HIPR is recommended in most cases. For minimum-cost flow, the code of
choice is CS [Gol97]. Both are written in C and available for non-commercial
use from http://www.avglab.com/andrew/soft.html.
    The C++ Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/
graph) and Java JGraphT (https://jgrapht.org) both provide implemen-
tations of several network flow algorithms.
    The First DIMACS Implementation Challenge on Network Flows and Match-
ing [JM93] collected several implementations and generators for network flow,
which are accessible from http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/Challenges. These
include: (1) a preflow-push network flow implementation in C by Edward Roth-
berg, and (2) an implementation of eleven network flow variants in C, including
the older Dinic and Karzanov algorithms by Anderson and Setubal.
Notes: Excellent books on network flows and its applications include [AMO93,
Wil19], with Goldberg and Tarjan [GT14] a short but nice expository survey. The fun-
damental maximum-flow, minimum-cut theorem is due to Ford and Fulkerson [FF62].
Expositions on the hardness of multicommodity flow [Ita78] include [Eve11].
    Conventional wisdom has long held that network flow should be computable in
O(nm) time, finally achieved by Orlin [Orl13]. See [AMO93] for a history of algorithms
for the problem. Empirical studies of flow algorithms include [GKK74, Gol97].
    Information flows through a network can be modeled as multicommodity flows,
with the observation that replicating information at internal nodes can eliminate the
need for distinct source-to-sink paths when multiple sinks are interested in the same
information. The field of network coding [YLCZ05] uses such ideas to achieve infor-
mation flows at the theoretical limits of the max-flow, min-cut theorem.

Related problems: Linear programming (see page 482), matching (see page
562), connectivity (see page 568).
574               CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

                    Input                                  Output

18.10         Drawing Graphs Nicely
Input description: A graph G.
Problem description: Draw a graph G to accurately reflect its structure.
Discussion: Graph drawing is a natural problem, yet it is inherently ill-defined.
What exactly is a nice drawing? We seek the visualization of a graph that best
shows off its structure, so the viewer can understand it. Simultaneously, we
want this drawing to look aesthetically pleasing.
   Unfortunately, these are “soft” criteria for which it is impossible to design
an optimization algorithm. Indeed, there may be many different drawings of
a given graph, each of which is most appropriate in a certain context. Three
different drawings of the Petersen graph are presented on page 610. Check them
out. Which is the “right” one?
   Several “hard” criteria can help assess the quality of a drawing:

      • Crossings – We seek a drawing with as few pairs of crossing edges as
        possible, because they are distracting.

      • Area – We seek a drawing that uses as little paper as possible relative to
        the shortest edge length, because it avoids cramping parts of the graph.

      • Edge length – We seek a drawing that avoids long edges, because they tend
        to obscure other features of the drawing.

      • Angular resolution – We seek a drawing that avoids small angles between
        two edges incident on a given vertex, because the resulting lines tend to
        partially or fully overlap.
18.10. DRAWING GRAPHS NICELY                                                    575

   • Aspect ratio – We seek a drawing whose aspect ratio (width/height) reflects
     the desired output medium (typically a computer screen at 4/3) as closely
     as possible, because that is the way we will ultimately view it.

Unfortunately, these goals are mutually contradictory, and the problem of find-
ing the best drawing under any non-empty subset of them is presumably NP-
complete.
    Two final warnings before getting down to business. For graphs without
any inherent symmetries or structure, it is likely that no really nice drawing
exists. This is especially true for graphs with more than ten to fifteen vertices.
The sheer amount of ink needed to draw any large, dense graph will overwhelm
even a massive display. A drawing of the complete graph on 100 vertices (K100 )
contains approximately 5,000 edges. On a 1,000 × 1,000 pixel display, this works
out to 200 pixels per edge. What can you hope to see, except a black blob in
the center of the screen?
    Once all this is understood, it must be admitted that graph-drawing algo-
rithms can be quite effective and fun to play with. To help choose the right
approach, ask yourself the following questions:

   • Must the edges be straight, or can I have curves and/or bends? – Straight-
     line drawing algorithms are relatively simple, but have their limitations.
     Orthogonal polyline drawings seem to work best to visualize complicated
     graphs such as circuit designs. Orthogonal means that all lines must be
     drawn either horizontal or vertical, with no intermediate slopes. Polyline
     means that each graph edge is represented by a chain of straight-line
     segments, connected by vertices or bends.

   • Is there a natural, application-specific drawing? – If your graph represents
     a network of cities and roads, you are unlikely to find a better drawing
     than placing the vertices in the same position as the cities on a map. This
     basic principle holds for many different applications.

   • Is your graph either planar or a tree? – If so, use one of the special planar
     graph or tree-drawing algorithms discussed in Sections 18.11 and 18.12.

   • Is your graph directed? – Edge direction has a significant impact on the
     nature of the desired drawing. When drawing directed acyclic graphs
     (DAGs), it is best that all edges flow in a logical direction—either left–
     right or top–down.

   • How fast must your algorithm be? – Your graph drawing algorithm must
     be very fast if it will be used for interactive update and display. You will be
     limited to using incremental algorithms, which change the vertex positions
     only in the immediate neighborhood of any edited vertex. If instead you
     are printing a pretty picture for extended study, you can afford more time
     for optimization.
576              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

      • Does your graph contain symmetries? – The output drawing above is
        attractive because the graph contains symmetries—namely a five-way ro-
        tational symmetry. The inherent symmetries in a graph can be identified
        by computing its automorphisms, or self-isomorphisms. Graph isomor-
        phism codes (see Section 19.9 (page 610)) can be readily used to find all
        automorphisms.

    For a quick-and-dirty drawing, I recommend simply spacing the vertices
evenly on a circle, and then drawing the edges as straight lines between ver-
tices. Such drawings are easy to program and fast to construct. They have the
substantial advantage that no two edges will obscure each other, since no three
vertices will be collinear. Such artifacts are hard to avoid once you allow internal
vertices into your drawing. An unexpected pleasure with circular drawings is
the symmetry they sometimes reveal, because vertices appear in the order they
were inserted into the graph. Simulated annealing can be used to permute the
circular vertex order to minimize crossings or edge length, and thus significantly
improve the drawing.
    A good, general purpose graph-drawing heuristic models the graph as a sys-
tem of springs and then uses energy minimization to space the vertices. Let
adjacent vertices attract each other with a force proportional to (say) the loga-
rithm of their separation, while all non-adjacent vertices repel each other with a
force proportional to their separation distance. These weights provide incentive
for all edges to be short, while spreading the vertices apart. The behavior of
such a system can be approximated by determining the force acting on each
vertex at a particular time and then moving each vertex a small amount in
the appropriate direction. After several iterations, the system will stabilize on
a reasonable drawing. The input and output figures above demonstrate the
effectiveness of the spring embedding on a particular small graph.
    If you need a polyline graph-drawing algorithm, my recommendation is that
you study the systems presented below or described in [JM12] to decide whether
one of them can do the job. You will have to do a significant amount of work
before you can hope to develop a better algorithm.
    Drawing your graph opens another can of worms, namely where to place the
edge/vertex labels. We seek to place labels very close to the edges or vertices
they identify, and yet to position them such that they do not overlap each other
or other important graph features. Optimizing label placement can be shown to
be an NP-complete problem, but heuristics related to bin packing (see Section
20.9 (page 652)) can be effectively used.
Implementations: GraphViz (http://www.graphviz.org) is a popular and
well-supported graph-drawing program developed by Stephen North. It repre-
sents edges as spline curves and can construct useful drawings of quite large
and complicated graphs. It has sufficed for all of my professional graph-drawing
needs over the years.
   All of the graph data structure libraries of Section 15.4 (page 452) devote
some effort to visualizing graphs. The Boost Graph Library and JGraphT both
18.10. DRAWING GRAPHS NICELY                                                       577

output graphs in GraphViz’s Dot format, instead of reinventing the wheel.
    VivaGraph (https://github.com/anvaka/VivaGraphJS) and Sigma (http:
//sigmajs.org/) are popular JavaScript packages for interactive display of
graphs in browsers.
    Graph drawing is a problem where very good commercial products exist,
including those from Tom Sawyer Software (www.tomsawyer.com) and yFiles
(www.yworks.com). Pajek [DNMB18] is a package particularly designed for
drawing social networks, and available at http://mrvar.fdv.uni-lj.si/pajek/.
All of these have free trial or non-commercial use downloads.
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of several graph-
drawing algorithms, including circular, spring, and ranked embeddings. See
Section 22.1.8 (page 716) for further information on Combinatorica.
Notes: There exists a significant community of researchers in graph drawing, whose
annual conference (Graph Drawing and Network Visualization) has run for over 25
years. See more at http://www.graphdrawing.org/. Perusing a volume of the pro-
ceedings will provide a good view of the state-of-the-art and of what kinds of ideas
people are thinking about. The Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization [Tam13]
is the most comprehensive review of the field.
    Two excellent books on graph-drawing algorithms are Battista et al. [BETT99]
and Kaufmann and Wagner [KW01]. A third book by Jünger and Mutzel [JM12] is
organized around systems instead of algorithms, but provides technical details about
the drawing methods each system employs. Map-labeling heuristics are described in
[BDY06, WW95].
    Graph embeddings encode the structural information associated with each vertex
as a short vector, providing useful features for machine learning models. Such a two-
or three-dimensional embedding can be interpreted as vertex positions for a drawing,
although d = 128 is more typical for machine learning. Our own DeepWalk [PARS14]
is a very popular approach for constructing graph embeddings. See [CPARS18] for a
survey of this field. t-SNE [MH08] is a widely used method to project higher dimen-
sional point sets (like these embeddings) down to two dimensions for visualization.
Implementations of t-SNE are available at https://lvdmaaten.github.io/tsne/.
    It is trivial to space n points evenly along the boundary of a circle. However, the
problem is considerably more difficult on the surface of a sphere. See Hardin, Sloane,
and Smith [HSS07] for extensive tables of such spherical codes for n ≤ 130.

Related problems: Drawing trees (see page 578), planarity testing (see page
581).
578                           CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

                          2                 15                                                  1

                  3                                   14

          4                                                 13                   2                            3

      5                                                         12
                                                                         4                5          6             7

              6

                      7                          10
                                                                     8       9       10    11       12   13   14   15
                              8         9

                                  Input                                                   Output

18.11                     Drawing Trees
Input description: A tree T , which is a graph without any cycles.
Problem description: Create a nice drawing of the tree T .
Discussion: Many applications require drawing pictures of trees. Tree dia-
grams are often used to display the hierarchical structure of file system directo-
ries. My attempts to Google “tree drawing software” revealed special-purpose
applications for visualizing family trees, syntax trees (sentence diagrams), and
evolutionary phylogenetic trees all in the top twenty links.
    Different aesthetics are associated with each application, making it difficult
to generalize. That said, the primary issue in tree drawing is whether you are
drawing free or rooted trees:

   • Rooted trees define a hierarchical order, emanating from a single source
     node identified as the root. Any drawing should reflect this hierarchical
     structure, plus any additional application-dependent constraints on the
     order in which children should appear. For example, family trees are
     rooted, with sibling nodes typically drawn from left to right in the order
     of birth.

   • Free trees do not encode any structure beyond their connection topology.
     There is no root associated with the minimum spanning tree of a graph,
     so a hierarchical drawing will be misleading. Such free trees might well
     inherit their drawing from that of the full underlying graph, such as the
     map of the cities whose distances define the minimum spanning tree.

   Trees are always planar graphs, and hence can and should be drawn so no
two edges cross. Any of the planar drawing algorithms discussed in Section
18.12 (page 581) could be used to do so. But such algorithms are overkill,
18.11. DRAWING TREES                                                          579

because there are much simpler ways of constructing planar drawings of trees.
The spring-embedding heuristics of Section 18.10 (page 574) work well on free
trees, but might be too slow for interactive applications.
    The most natural tree-drawing algorithms assume rooted trees. However,
they can be used equally well with free trees, after selecting one vertex to serve
as the root of the drawing. This faux-root can be selected arbitrarily, or, even
better, by using a center vertex of the tree. A center vertex minimizes the
maximum distance to other vertices. This tree center can be identified in linear
time, by repeatedly trimming all the leaves until only the center remains.
    Your two primary options for drawing rooted trees are ranked and radial
embeddings:

   • Ranked embeddings – Place the root in the top center of your page, and
     then partition the page into the root-degree number of top–down strips.
     Deleting the root creates a set of subtrees, each of which is assigned to
     its own strip. Draw each subtree recursively, by placing its new root (the
     vertex adjacent to the old root) in the center of its strip a fixed distance
     down from the top, with a line from old root to new root. The output
     figure above is a nice ranked embedding of a balanced binary tree.
     Such ranked embeddings are particularly effective to represent a hierarchy—
     be it a family tree, data structure, or corporate ladder. The top–down
     distance illustrates how far each node is from the root. Unfortunately,
     such repeated subdivision eventually produces very narrow strips, where
     many vertices get crammed into a small region of the page. Try to adjust
     the width of each strip to reflect the total number of nodes it will contain,
     and don’t be afraid of expanding into a neighboring region’s turf after
     their shorter subtrees have been completed.
   • Radial embeddings – Free trees are better drawn using a radial embedding,
     where the center of the tree is placed in the center of the drawing. The
     space around this center vertex is divided into angular sectors for each
     subtree. Although the same problem of cramping will eventually occur,
     radial embeddings make better use of space than ranked embeddings and
     appear considerably more natural for free trees.

Implementations: GraphViz (http://www.graphviz.org) is a popular and
well-supported graph-drawing program developed by Stephen North. It repre-
sents edges as spline curves and can construct useful drawings of quite large
and complicated graphs. It has sufficed for all of my professional graph-drawing
needs over the years. But all of the tools discussed in Section 18.10 will do
something intelligent with trees.
    Very good commercial products exist for graph/tree, including those from
Tom Sawyer Software (www.tomsawyer.com) and yFiles (www.yworks.com). Tree-
diagram oriented products include Lucid (https://www.lucidchart.com) and
Visme (https://www.visme.co/tree-diagram-maker/. All of these have free
trial or non-commercial use downloads.
580              CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

   Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of several tree-
drawing algorithms, including radial and rooted embeddings. See Section 22.1.8
(page 716) for further information on Combinatorica.
Notes: All books and surveys on graph drawing include discussions of tree-drawing
algorithms. The Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization [Tam13] is the most
comprehensive review of the field. Two excellent books on graph drawing algorithms
are Battista et al. [BETT99] and Kaufmann and Wagner [KW01]. A third book by
Jünger and Mutzel [JM12] is organized around systems instead of algorithms, but
provides technical detail about the drawing methods each system employs.
    A comprehensive resource of tree visualization is https://treevis.net/, with
an associated survey paper [Sch11]. Treemaps are a popular method for displaying
hierarchical data where nodes are represented by rectangles, and the subtrees are
nested within their parent [JS91].
    Heuristics for tree layout have been studied by several researchers, with Buchheim,
et al. [BJL06] reflective of the state of the art. Under certain aesthetic criteria, the
problem is NP-complete [SR83].
    Certain tree layout algorithms arise from non-drawing applications. The van Emde
Boas layout of a binary tree offers better external memory performance than conven-
tional binary search, at a cost of greater complexity. See the survey of Arge et al.
[ABF05] for more on this and other cache-oblivious data structures.

Related problems: Drawing graphs (see page 574), planar drawings (see page
581).
18.12. PLANARITY DETECTION AND EMBEDDING                                     581

                                                                              5

      1                          3
                                            3                2      4

          5                 4

                 Input                                    Output

18.12         Planarity Detection and Embedding
Input description: A graph G.
Problem description: Can G be drawn in the plane such that no two edges
cross? If so, produce such a drawing.
Discussion: Planar drawings (or embeddings) make clear the structure of a
given graph by eliminating crossing edges, which can be confused as additional
vertices. Graphs defined by road networks or printed circuit board layouts are
inherently planar, because they are completely defined by surface structures.
Other common graphs are planar by happenstance, like trees.
    Planar graphs have nice properties that can be exploited to yield faster al-
gorithms for many problems. The most important fact to know is that every
planar graph is sparse. Euler’s formula shows that |E| ≤ 3|V | − 6 for every non-
trivial planar graph G = (V, E). This means that every planar graph contains
a linear number of edges, and further that every planar graph contains a vertex
of degree ≤ 5. Every subgraph of a planar graph is planar, so there must always
be a sequence of low-degree vertices to delete from G, finally reducing it to the
empty graph.
    To gain a better appreciation of the subtleties of planar drawings, I encour-
age the reader to construct a planar (non-crossing) embedding for the graph
K5 − e, shown on the input figure above. Don’t peek. Then construct such an
embedding where all the edges are straight. Finally, add the missing edge to
the graph and try to do the same for K5 itself.
    The study of planarity has motivated much of the development of graph
theory. It must be confessed, however, that the need for planarity testing arises
relatively infrequently in applications. Most graph-drawing systems do not ex-
plicitly seek planar embeddings. “Planarity Detection” proved to be among
the least frequently hit pages of my Algorithm Repository (www.algorist.com)
582             CHAPTER 18. GRAPH PROBLEMS: POLYNOMIAL TIME

[Ski99]. That said, it is still very useful to know how to deal with planar graphs
when you encounter them.
    It pays to distinguish the problem of planarity testing (does my graph have a
planar drawing?) from constructing planar embeddings (create such a drawing),
although both can be done in linear time. Many efficient algorithms on planar
graphs make no use of the drawing, but instead exploit the low-degree deletion
sequence described above.
    Algorithms for planarity testing begin by embedding an arbitrary cycle from
the graph in the plane and then considering additional paths in G, connecting
vertices on this cycle. Whenever two such paths cross, one must be drawn
outside the cycle and one inside. When three such paths mutually cross, there
is no way to resolve the problem, so the graph cannot be planar. Linear-time
algorithms for planarity detection are based on depth-first search. But they are
sufficiently complicated that you are wise to seek an existing implementation.
    Such path-crossing algorithms can be used to construct a planar embedding
by inserting the paths into the drawing one by one. Unfortunately, because they
work in an incremental manner, nothing prevents them from inserting many
vertices and edges into a small area of the drawing. Such cramping is a major
problem, because it leads to ugly drawings that are hard to understand. Better
algorithms have been devised that construct planar-grid embeddings, where each
vertex lies on a (2n − 4) × (n − 2) grid. Thus, no region can get too cramped
and no edge can get too long. Still, the resulting drawings tend not to look as
natural as one might wish.
    For non-planar graphs, what is often sought is a drawing that minimizes the
number of crossings. Unfortunately, computing the crossing number of a graph
is NP-complete. Indeed, finding the crossing number for planar graphs with just
one additional edge is NP-complete [CM13]. A useful heuristic extracts a large
planar subgraph of G, embeds this subgraph, and then inserts the remaining
edges one by one to minimize the number of crossings. This won’t do much
for dense graphs, which are doomed to have many crossings, but it does work
well for graphs that are almost planar, such as road networks with overpasses
or printed circuit boards with multiple layers. Large planar subgraphs can be
found by modifying planarity-testing algorithms so they delete troublemaking
edges when encountered.
Implementations: LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) includes linear-time
algorithms for both planarity testing and constructing straight-line planar-grid
embeddings. Their planarity tester returns an obstructing Kuratowski subgraph
(see the Notes section) for any graph deemed non-planar, yielding concrete proof
of its non-planarity.
    The Open Graph Drawing Framework (http://www.ogdf.net), presented
in [CGJ+ 13], is a C++ graph-drawing framework that includes several planarity
testing/embedding algorithms, including the PQ-tree algorithm of [CNAO85].
The C++ Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/graph)
also contains algorithms for planarity detection and embedding.
    PIGALE (http://pigale.sourceforge.net/) is a C++ graph editor and
18.12. PLANARITY DETECTION AND EMBEDDING                                           583

algorithm library focusing on planar graphs. It contains a variety of algorithms
for constructing planar drawings as well as efficient algorithms to test planarity
and identify an obstructing subgraph (K3,3 or K5 ), if one exists.
    Greedy randomized adaptive search procedure (GRASP) heuristics to find
the largest planar subgraph have been implemented by Ribeiro and Resende
[RR99] as Algorithm 797 of the Collected Algorithms of the ACM (see Section
22.1.5 (page 715)).
Notes: Kuratowski [Kur30] gave the first characterization of planar graphs, namely
that they do not contain a subgraph homeomorphic to K3,3 or K5 . Thus, if you are
still working on the exercise to embed K5 , now is an appropriate time to give it up.
Fáry’s theorem [F4́8] states that every planar graph can be drawn in such a way that
each edge is straight.
     Hopcroft and Tarjan [HT74] gave the first linear-time algorithm for drawing graphs.
Booth and Lueker [BL76] developed an alternate planarity-testing algorithm based
on PQ-trees. Simplified planarity-testing algorithms include [MM96, SH99]. Efficient
2n×n planar grid embeddings were first developed by [dFPP90]. The book by Nishizeki
and Rahman [NR04] provides a good overview of the spectrum of planar drawing
algorithms. Recent surveys on planarity detection include [Pat13, Tam13].
     Outerplanar graphs are those that can be drawn such that all vertices lie on the
outer face of the drawing. These graphs can be characterized as having no subgraph
homeomorphic to K2,3 , and can be recognized and embedded in linear time.
     Generalizations of planarity revolve around embedding graphs in more complicated
surfaces than the plane. I encourage the reader to show that both K3,3 and K5 can
be embedded without crossings on a bagel or donut. See [GT01] for an introduction
to topological graph theory.

Related problems: Graph drawing (see page 574), drawing trees (see page
578).
