Chapter 19

Graph Problems: NP-Hard

A cynical view of graph algorithms is that “everything we want to do is hard.”
Indeed, all problems in this section are provably NP-complete with the exception
of graph isomorphism—whose complexity status remains an open question. The
theory of NP-completeness demonstrates that either all NP-complete problems
have polynomial-time algorithms, or none of them do. The former prospect
is suﬃciently unlikely that NP-completeness suﬃces to say that no eﬃcient
algorithm exists to solve the given problem.
    Still, do not abandon hope if your problem resides in this chapter. I provide
a recommended attack for every problem, be it combinatorial search, heuristics,
approximation algorithms, or algorithms for restricted instances. Hard problems
require a diﬀerent methodology to work with than polynomial-time problems,
but with care can usually be dealt with successfully.
    The following books will help you deal with NP-complete problems:

    • Garey and Johnson [GJ79] – This is the classic reference on the theory of
      NP-completeness. Most notably, it contains a concise catalog of over 400
      NP-complete problems, with associated references and comments. Browse
      through this catalog if you suspect your problem might be hard. This is
      the book in my algorithms library that I reach for most often.
    • Crescenzi and Kann [CK97] – This website (www.nada.kth.se/~viggo/
      problemlist/) serves as the “Garey and Johnson” for approximation al-
      gorithms.
    • Williamson and Shmoys [WS11] – The most comprehensive textbook on
      the theory and design of approximation algorithms.
    • Vazirani [Vaz04] – A complete treatment of the theory of approximation
      algorithms by a highly regarded researcher in the ﬁeld.
    • Gonzalez [Gon18] – This handbook contains current surveys on a variety of
      techniques for dealing with hard problems, both applied and theoretical.

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   585
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_19
586                         CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                   Input                                   Output

19.1        Clique
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: What is the largest subset S of vertices such that all
pairs are connected, that is, for all x, y ∈ S, (x, y) ∈ E?
Discussion: In high school, everybody complained about the “clique”—a group
of friends who all hung around together and seemed to dominate everything
social. Consider a graph representing the school’s social network. Vertices
correspond to people, with edges between pairs of people who are friends. Thus,
the high school clique deﬁnes a (complete subgraph) clique in this friendship
graph.
    Identifying “clusters” of related objects often reduces to ﬁnding large cliques
in graphs. An interesting example arose in a program the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) developed to detect organized tax fraud. A popular scam submits
large numbers of phony tax returns in the hopes of getting undeserved refunds.
But generating large numbers of diﬀerent phony tax returns is hard work. The
IRS constructs graphs with vertices corresponding to submitted tax forms and
edges between any two forms that appear suspiciously similar. Any large clique
in this graph points to fraud.
    Since every single edge in a graph represents a clique of two vertices, the
challenge lies not in ﬁnding a clique, but in ﬁnding a large clique. And it is
indeed a challenge, for ﬁnding a maximum clique is NP-complete. To make
matters worse, it is provably hard to approximate even to within a factor of
n1−? . Theoretically, clique is about as hard as a problem in this book can get.
So what can we hope to do about it?

      • Will a maximal clique suﬃce? – A clique is maximal if it cannot be
        enlarged by adding any additional vertex. A given maximal clique might
19.1. CLIQUE                                                                    587

      in fact be the largest possible clique, but it probably won’t be, and could
      well be much smaller. To ﬁnd a hopefully large, maximal clique, sort the
      vertices from highest degree to lowest degree, put the ﬁrst vertex in the
      clique, and then test if subsequent vertices are adjacent to all the clique
      vertices added thus far. If so, add it to enlarge the clique; if not, continue
      down the list. By using a bit vector to mark which vertices are currently
      in the clique, this can be done in O(n + m) time. An alternative approach
      might incorporate some randomness into the vertex ordering, and accept
      the largest maximal clique you ﬁnd after a number of trials.
   • What if I will settle for a large, dense subgraph? – Insisting on cliques
     to deﬁne clusters in a graph can be risky, because a single missing edge
     will eliminate a vertex from consideration. Instead, we should seek large
     dense subgraphs—subsets of vertices that contain large numbers of edges
     between them. Cliques are, by deﬁnition, the densest subgraphs possible.
      The largest set of vertices whose induced subgraph has vertex degree ≥ k
      can be found with a simple linear-time algorithm. Delete all the vertices
      whose degree is less than k. This may reduce the degree of other vertices
      below k, so they will also have to be deleted. Repeating this process until
      all remaining vertices have degree ≥ k constructs the largest high-degree
      subgraph. This algorithm can be implemented in O(n + m) time by using
      adjacency lists and the constant-width priority queue of Section 15.2 (page
      445).
   • What if the graph is planar? – Planar graphs cannot have cliques of a
     size larger than four, or else they cease to be planar. Since each edge
     deﬁnes a clique of size 2, the only interesting cases are cliques of three and
     four vertices. Eﬃcient algorithms to ﬁnd such small cliques consider the
     vertices from lowest to highest degree. Every planar graph must contain a
     vertex v of degree at most 5 (see Section 18.12 (page 581)), which has only
     a constant-sized neighborhood to check exhaustively for the largest clique
     containing v. We then delete this vertex to leave a smaller planar graph,
     which contains a diﬀerent low-degree vertex. Repeat this check-and-delete
     process until the graph is empty.
    If you really need to ﬁnd the largest clique in a graph, an exhaustive search
via backtracking provides the only real solution. We search through all k-subsets
of the vertices, pruning a subset as soon as it contains a vertex that is not
adjacent to all the rest. A simple upper bound on the size of the maximum
clique in G is the highest vertex degree plus 1. A better upper bound comes
from sorting the vertices in order of decreasing degree. Let j be the largest index
such that degree of vertex vj is at least j − 1. The largest clique in the graph
contains no more than j vertices, since no vertex of degree less than (j − 1) can
appear in a clique of size j. To speed our search, ﬁrst delete all such low degree
vertices from G.
    Heuristics for ﬁnding large cliques based on randomized techniques, such as
simulated annealing, are likely to work reasonably well.
588                          CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

Implementations: Cliquer is a set of C routines for ﬁnding cliques in arbi-
trary weighted graphs by Patric Östergard. It uses an exact branch-and-bound
algorithm, and is available at http://users.tkk.fi/~pat/cliquer.html.
    Programs for ﬁnding cliques and independent sets were sought for the Sec-
ond DIMACS Implementation Challenge [JT96]. Programs and data from
the challenge can be obtained from http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/archive/
Challenges/. dfmax.c implements a simple-minded branch-and-bound algo-
rithm similar to [CP90]. dmclique.c uses a “semi-exhaustive greedy” scheme
for ﬁnding large independent sets from [JAMS91].
    Kreher and Stinson [KS99] provide branch-and-bound programs in C for
ﬁnding the maximum clique using a variety of lower-bounds, available at http:
//www.math.mtu.edu/~kreher/cages/Src.html.
    GOBLIN (http://goblin2.sourceforge.net/) employs branch-and-bound
algorithms to ﬁnd large cliques. They claim to work with graphs as large as 150
to 200 vertices.
Notes: Bomze, et al. [BBPP99] and Wu, et al. [WH15] give comprehensive surveys
on the problem of ﬁnding maximum cliques. Particularly interesting is the work from
the operations research community on branch-and-bound algorithms for ﬁnding cliques
eﬀectively. More recent experimental results are reported in [JS01].
    The proof that clique is NP-complete is due to Karp [Kar72]. His reduction (given
in Section 11.3.3 (page 366)) established clique, vertex cover, and independent set
as very closely related problems, so heuristics and programs that solve one of them
eﬀectively should also produce reasonable solutions for the other two.
    The densest subgraph problem seeks the subset of vertices whose induced subgraph
has the highest average vertex degree. A clique of k vertices is clearly the densest
possible subgraph of its size, but larger, less complete subgraphs may achieve higher
average degree. This problem is NP-complete, but simple heuristics based on re-
peatedly deleting the lowest-degree vertex achieve reasonable approximation ratios
[AITT00]. See [GKT05] for an interesting application of densest subgraph, namely
detecting link spam on the web.
    That clique cannot be approximated to within a factor of n1/2−? unless P = N P
(and n1−? under weaker assumptions) was shown by [Has82]. Picking any single vertex
as a clique gives an n-factor approximation to max clique. These hardness results show
that no polynomial-time approximation algorithm can do much better than this trivial
heuristic.

Related problems: Independent set (see page 589), vertex cover (see page
591).
19.2. INDEPENDENT SET                                                        589

                  Input                                   Output

19.2      Independent Set
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: What is the largest subset S of vertices of V such that
there is no edge (x, y) ∈ E where x ∈ S and y ∈ S?
Discussion: The need to ﬁnd large independent sets arises in facility disper-
sion problems, where we seek a set of mutually separated locations. To ensure
that no two locations of our new “McAlgorithm” franchise service are so close
as to compete with each other, we can create a graph where the vertices repre-
sent possible locations, and add edges between any two locations deemed close
enough to interfere. The maximum independent set on this graph deﬁnes the
largest set of franchise locations we can sell without cannibalizing sales.
    Independent sets (also known as stable sets) avoid conﬂicts between elements,
and hence often arise in coding theory and scheduling problems. For instance,
we can deﬁne a graph whose vertices represent the set of possible code words,
and add edges between any two code words suﬃciently similar to be confused
due to noise. The maximum independent set of this graph deﬁnes the highest
capacity code for the given communication channel.
    Independent set is closely related to two other NP-complete problems:

   • Clique – A clique is a subset of pairwise connected vertices, while an
     independent set is a subset of pairwise non-connected vertices. The com-
     plement of G = (V, E) is a graph G? = (V, E ? ) where (i, j) ∈ E ? iﬀ (i, j)
     is not in E. The complement replaces each edge by a non-edge and vice
     versa. The maximum independent set in G is exactly the maximum clique
     in G? , so the two problems are algorithmically identical. The algorithms
     and implementations in Section 19.1 (page 586) can thus be used to ﬁnd
     the independent set of G? .
590                           CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

      • Vertex coloring – The vertex coloring of a graph G = (V, E) is a partition
        of V into a k sets (colors), where no two vertices of the same color can
        have an edge between them. Each color class deﬁnes an independent set.
        Many independent set applications are really coloring problems.
        Indeed, one heuristic to ﬁnd a large independent set is to use any vertex
        coloring algorithm/heuristic, and take the largest color class. One conse-
        quence of this observation is that all graphs with small chromatic numbers
        (such as planar and bipartite graphs) must have large independent sets.

    The simplest reasonable heuristic is to ﬁnd the lowest-degree vertex, add
it to the independent set, and then delete it and all vertices adjacent to it.
Repeating this process until the graph is empty gives a maximal independent
set, in that it can’t be made larger by just adding vertices. Using randomization
or perhaps some degree of exhaustive search might result in somewhat larger
independent sets.
    The independent set problem is in some sense dual to graph matching. The
former asks for a large set of vertices with no edge in common, while the latter
asks for a large set of edges with no vertex in common. This suggests trying to
rephrase your problem as an eﬃciently computable matching problem instead
of maximum independent set, which is NP-complete.
    The maximum independent set of a tree can be found in linear time by (1)
stripping oﬀ the leaf nodes, (2) adding them to the independent set, (3) deleting
all adjacent nodes, and then (4) repeating the ﬁrst step on the resulting trees
until it is empty.
Implementations: Any program for computing the maximum clique in a graph
can ﬁnd maximum independent sets by just complementing the input graph.
Therefore, I refer the reader to the clique-ﬁnding programs of Section 19.1 (page
586).
    GOBLIN (http://goblin2.sourceforge.net/) implements a branch-and-
bound algorithm for ﬁnding independent sets (called stable sets in the manual).
    Greedy randomized adaptive search (GRASP) heuristics for independent
set have been implemented by Resende, et al. [RFS98] as Algorithm 787 of the
Collected Algorithms of the ACM (see Section 22.1.5 (page 715)).
Notes: That independent set is NP-complete was shown by Karp [Kar72]. It remains
NP-complete for planar cubic graphs [GJ79]. Independent set can be solved eﬃciently
for bipartite graphs [Law11]. This is not trivial—indeed the larger of the “part” of a
bipartite graph is not necessarily its maximum independent set.
    Finding maximal independent sets is a challenging problem in parallel and dis-
tributed models of computation, because concurrent additions might well have edges
between them. See [BFS12, Gha16] for representative results.

Related problems: Clique (see page 586), vertex coloring (see page 604),
vertex cover (see page 591).
19.3. VERTEX COVER                                                                 591

                   Input                                      Output

19.3       Vertex Cover
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: What is the smallest subset C ⊆ V such that every
edge (x, y) ∈ E contains at least one vertex of C?
Discussion: Vertex cover is a special case of the more general set cover problem,
which takes as input an arbitrary collection of subsets S = (S1 , . . . , Sn ) over the
universal set U = {1, . . . , m}. We seek the smallest cover C of subsets from
S whose union is U . Set cover often arises in applications associated with
buying things sold in ﬁxed lots or assortments. See Section 21.1 (page 678) for
a discussion of set cover.
    To turn vertex cover into a set cover problem, let universal set U represent
the set E of edges from G, and deﬁne Si to be the set of edges incident on vertex
i. Selecting subset Si in the set cover problem is equivalent to selecting vertex
i in the vertex cover problem. A set of vertices deﬁnes a vertex cover in graph
G iﬀ the corresponding subsets of edges deﬁne a set cover in this particular
instance. Vertex cover instances are simpler than general set cover, because
each edge can appear in only two diﬀerent subsets. Vertex cover is a relative
lightweight among NP-complete problems, and can be solved more eﬀectively
than general set cover.
    Vertex cover and independent set are very closely related problems. Since
every edge in E is (by deﬁnition) incident on a vertex in any cover S, there
cannot be an edge whose endpoints are both in in V − S. Thus, V − S must
be an independent set. Since minimizing S is the same as maximizing V − S,
the problems are equivalent, and any independent set solver can be applied to
vertex cover as well. Having two ways of looking at your problem can be helpful,
since one may appear easier in a given context.
    The simplest heuristic for vertex cover selects the vertex with highest degree,
592                          CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

adds it to the cover, deletes all adjacent edges, and then repeats until the graph
is empty. With the right data structures, this can be done in linear time, and
“usually” produces a decent cover. But in the worst case this cover might be lg n
times larger than the optimal cover, on particularly challenging input graphs.
    Fortunately, we can always ﬁnd a vertex cover whose size is at most twice as
large as optimal. Find a maximal matching M in the graph—a set of edges that
share no vertex in common, and that cannot be enlarged by adding edges. Such
a maximal matching can be constructed incrementally, by picking an arbitrary
edge e = (x, y) in the graph, deleting the two vertices x and y, and repeating
until the graph is out of edges.
    Taking both of the vertices for each edge in this maximal matching gives us
a vertex cover. Why is this a cover? Because every edge gets deleted when it is
a neighbor to a cover vertex. Why must this cover be at most twice as large as
the minimum cover? Because any vertex cover must contain at least one of the
two vertices in each matching edge, just to cover the edges of M .
    This heuristic can be tweaked to perform somewhat better in practice, if not
in theory. We can select the matching edges so as to “kill oﬀ” as many other
edges as possible. By starting from the smallest maximal matching we can ﬁnd,
we will minimize the number of pairs of vertices in the vertex cover. Also, some
of the vertices from M may not be needed for the cover because all of their
incident edges were covered using other matching vertices. We can identify and
delete these redundant vertices by making a second pass through our cover.
    The vertex cover problem seeks to cover all edges using few vertices. Two
other important problems have similar-sounding objectives:

   • Cover all vertices using few vertices – The dominating set problem seeks
     the smallest set of vertices D such that every vertex in V − D is adjacent
     to at least one vertex in the dominating set D. Every vertex cover of
     a connected graph is also a dominating set, but dominating sets can be
     much smaller. Any single vertex represents the minimum dominating set
     of complete graph Kn , while n − 1 vertices are needed for a vertex cover.
     Dominating sets tend to arise in communications problems, because they
     represent the hubs or broadcast centers suﬃcient to communicate with all
     sites/users.
      Dominating set problems can also be expressed as instances of set cover
      (see Section 21.1 (page 678)). Each vertex vi deﬁnes the subset consisting
      of all vertices it is adjacent to, plus itself. The greedy set cover heuristic
      running on this instance yields a Θ(lg n) approximation to the optimal
      dominating set.

   • Cover all vertices using few edges – The edge cover problem seeks the
     smallest set of edges such that each vertex is included in one of the edges.
     Edge cover can be solved eﬃciently by ﬁnding a maximum cardinality
     matching (see Section 18.6 (page 562)), and then selecting arbitrary edges
     to account for the unmatched vertices. It is curious that the dual problems
19.3. VERTEX COVER                                                                 593

      of edge cover and vertex cover have such diﬀerent fates: one NP-complete
      and the other polynomial.

Implementations: Any program for computing the maximum clique in a graph
can be applied to vertex cover by complementing the input graph and selecting
the vertices that do not appear in the clique. Therefore, I encourage the reader
to check out the clique-ﬁnding programs of Section 19.1 (page 586).
    JGraphT (https://jgrapht.org) is a Java graph library that contains
greedy and 2-approximate heuristics for vertex cover.
Notes: Karp [Kar72] ﬁrst proved that vertex-cover is NP-complete. A diverse set
of heuristics yield 2-approximation algorithms for vertex cover, including randomized
rounding. Good expositions on these 2-approximation algorithms include [CLRS09,
Pas97, Vaz04, WS11]. The example that the greedy algorithm can be as bad as lg n
times optimal is due to [Joh74] and presented in [PS98]. Experimental studies of vertex
cover heuristics include [ACL12, GMPV06, GW97, RHG07].
    Whether there exists a better than 2-factor approximation for vertex cover has
long been one of the major open problems in approximation algorithms. Knot and
Regev [KR08] prove no (2 − ?)-approximation exists for vertex cover, assuming the
unique games conjecture. Dinur and Safra [DS05] proved there does not exist a better
than 1.36-factor approximation algorithm, assuming P ?= N P .
    The primary reference on dominating sets is the monograph of Haynes et al.
[HHS98]. Heuristics for the connected dominating set problem are presented in [GK98].
Dominating set cannot be approximated to better than the Ω(lg n) factor [CK97] of
set cover.

Related problems: Independent set (see page 589), set cover (see page 678).
594                            CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                    Input                                     Output

19.4         Traveling Salesman Problem
Input description: A weighted graph G.
Problem description: Find the cycle of minimum cost, visiting each vertex
of G exactly once.
Discussion: The traveling salesman problem (TSP) is the most notorious NP-
complete problem. This is a function of its general usefulness, and the ease with
which it can be explained to the public at large. Imagine a salesperson planning
a car trip to visit a set of cities. What is the shortest route that will visit all of
them and return home, thus minimizing his or her total driving?
    The traveling salesman problem arises in many transportation and routing
problems. Optimizing tool paths for manufacturing equipment is a TSP. For
example, consider a robot arm assigned to solder all the connections on a printed
circuit board. The shortest tour that visits each solder point exactly once deﬁnes
the most eﬃcient route for the robot.
    Several issues arise in solving TSPs:

      • Is the graph unweighted? – If the graph is unweighted, or is a complete
        graph where all the edges have one of two possible cost values (long or
        short), this problem reduces to ﬁnding a Hamiltonian cycle. See Section
        19.5 (page 598) for a discussion.

      • Does your input satisfy the triangle inequality? – Our sense of how proper
        distance measures behave is captured by the triangle inequality, which
        states that d(i, j) ≤ d(i, k) + d(k, j) for all vertices i, j, k ∈ V . Geomet-
        ric distances always satisfy the triangle inequality, because the shortest
        distance between two points is as the crow ﬂies. Commercial air fares do
        not satisfy the triangle inequality, which is why it is so hard to ﬁnd the
19.4. TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM                                            595

     cheapest airfare between two points. TSP heuristics work much better on
     sensible graphs that do obey the triangle inequality.

   • Are you given n points as input or a weighted graph? – Geometric in-
     stances are often easier to work with than a graph representation, because
     all the pairs of points deﬁne a complete graph. Thus, there is never an
     issue of ﬁnding a feasible tour. We can also save space by computing these
     distances on demand, thus eliminating the need to store an n × n distance
     matrix. Geometric instances inherently satisfy the triangle inequality, so
     we can exploit performance guarantees from certain heuristics. Finally, we
     can take advantage of geometric data structures like kd-trees to quickly
     identify close unvisited sites.

   • Can you visit a vertex more than once? – The restriction that the tour
     not revisit any vertex is irrelevant in many applications. In air travel,
     the cheapest way to visit all cities might repeatedly visit an airport hub.
     Note that this issue never arises when the input observes the triangle
     inequality.
     TSP with repeated vertices is easily solved by using any conventional TSP
     code on a new cost matrix D, where D(i, j) is the shortest path distance
     from i to j. This matrix satisﬁes the triangle inequality, and can be
     constructed by solving an all-pairs shortest path (see Section 18.4 (page
     554)).

   • Is your distance function symmetric? – A distance function is asymmetric
     when there exists x, y such that d(x, y) ?= d(y, x). The asymmetric trav-
     eling salesman problem (ATSP) is much harder to solve in practice than
     symmetric (STSP) instances, so try to avoid such pathological distance
     functions. Be aware that there is a reduction converting ATSP instances
     to symmetric instances containing twice as many vertices [GP07]. This
     can be useful, because symmetric solvers are so much better.

   • How important is it to ﬁnd the optimal tour? – Heuristic solutions will
     suﬃce for most applications. There are two diﬀerent approaches if you
     insist on solving your TSP to optimality, however. Cutting plane methods
     model the problem as an integer program, then solve the linear program-
     ming relaxation of it. Additional constraints designed to force integrality
     are then added if the optimal solution is not at an integer point. Branch-
     and-bound algorithms perform a combinatorial search while maintaining
     careful upper and lower bounds on the cost of a tour. In the hands of
     professionals, problems with thousands of vertices can be solved. Maybe
     you can too, if you use the best solver available.

   Almost any ﬂavor of TSP is going to be NP-complete, so the right way to
proceed is with heuristics. These typically come within a few percent of the
optimal solution, which is close enough for engineering work. Literally dozens
of heuristics have been proposed for TSP, so the situation can be confusing.
596                            CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

Empirical results in the literature are sometimes contradictory. However, we
recommend choosing from among the following heuristics:

      • Minimum spanning trees – Start by ﬁnding the minimum spanning tree
        of the sites, and then do a depth-ﬁrst search of the resulting tree. In
        the course of DFS, we walk over each of the n − 1 edges exactly twice:
        once going down to discover a new vertex, and once going up when we
        backtrack. Now deﬁne a tour by ordering the vertices based on when they
        were discovered. The resulting tour is at most twice the length of the
        optimal TSP tour, if the graph obeys the triangle inequality. In practice,
        it is usually better, typically 15% to 20% over optimal. The running time
        of computing the minimum spanning tree for points in the plane is only
        O(n lg n) (see Section 18.3 (page 549)).
      • Incremental insertion methods – A diﬀerent class of heuristics starts from
        a single vertex, and then inserts new points into this partial tour one at a
        time until the tour is complete. The version of this heuristic that seems
        to work best is furthest point insertion: of all remaining points, insert the
        point v into a partial tour T such that
                                    |T |
                               max min(d(v, vi ) + d(v, vi+1 ))
                               v∈V i=1

        The “min” ensures that we insert the vertex in the position that adds the
        smallest amount of distance to the tour, while the “max” ensures that
        we pick the worst such vertex ﬁrst. This seems to work well because it
        “roughs out” a partial tour ﬁrst before ﬁlling in details. Such tours are
        typically only 5% to 10% longer than optimal.
   • K-optimal tours – More powerful are the Kernighan–Lin or k-opt heuris-
     tics. The method applies local reﬁnements to an initially arbitrary tour
     in the hopes of improving it. In particular, we delete a subset of k edges
     from the tour so that the k remaining subchains can be rewired to form a
     new, hopefully improved, tour. A tour is k-optimal when no subset of k
     edges can be deleted and rewired to reduce the cost. Two-opting a tour is
     a fast and eﬀective way to improve any other heuristic. Experiments sug-
     gest that 3-optimal tours are usually within a few percent of optimal cost.
     For k > 3, the computation time increases considerably faster than the
     solution quality. Simulated annealing provides an alternate mechanism to
     employ edge ﬂips to improve heuristic tours.

Implementations: Concorde is a program for the symmetric traveling sales-
man problem and related network optimization problems, written in ANSI C.
This record-setting program by Applegate, Bixby, Chvatal, and Cook [ABCC07]
has obtained the optimal solutions to at least 106 of TSPLIB’s 110 instances;
the largest of which has 85,900 cities. Concorde is available for academic re-
search use from http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp. It is the clear choice
19.4. TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM                                                  597

among available TSP codes. Their website features very interesting material on
the history and applications of TSP.
    Lodi and Punnen [LP07] put together an excellent survey of available soft-
ware for solving TSP. Current links to all programs mentioned are maintained
at http://or.deis.unibo.it/research_pages/tspsoft.html.
    TSPLIB [Rei91] provides the standard collection of hard instances of TSPs
that arise in practice. The best-supported version of TSPLIB is available from
https://www.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/groups/comopt/software/TSPLIB95/.
Notes: The book by Applegate et al. [ABCC07] documents the techniques they
used in their record-setting TSP solvers, as well as the theory and history behind the
problem. Cook also wrote a popular book on TSP [Coo11]. Gutin and Punnen [GP07]
now oﬀer the best reference on all aspects and variations of the traveling salesman
problem, displacing an older but beloved book by Lawler et al. [LLKS85].
    Experimental results on heuristic methods for solving large TSPs include [Ben92a,
Rei94, WCL+ 14]. Typically, it is possible to get within a few percent of optimal with
such methods.
    The Christoﬁdes heuristic [Chr76] is an improvement over the minimum spanning
tree heuristic and guarantees a tour whose cost is at most 3/2 times optimal on Eu-
clidean graphs. It runs in O(n3 ), where the bottleneck is the time it takes to ﬁnd a
minimum-weight perfect matching (see Section 18.6 (page 562)). An exciting recent
result yields a constant-factor approximation for the more general case of asymmetric
TSP [STV17]. The minimum spanning tree heuristic is due to [RSL77].
    Polynomial-time approximation schemes for Euclidean TSP have been developed
by Arora [Aro98] and Mitchell [Mit99], which oﬀer 1 + ? factor approximations in
polynomial time for any ? > 0. They are of great theoretical interest, although any
practical consequences remain to be determined.
    The history of progress on optimal TSP solutions is inspiring. In 1954, Dantzig,
Fulkerson, and Johnson solved a symmetric TSP instance of 42 US cities [DFJ54]. In
1980, Padberg and Hong solved an instance on 318 vertices [PH80]. Applegate et al.
[ABCC07] have solved problems that are almost 300 times larger than this. Some
of this increase is due to improved hardware, but most is due to better algorithms.
The rate of growth demonstrates that exact solutions to NP-complete problems can
be obtained for surprisingly large instances if the stakes are high enough.
    For sets of n points in convex position in the plane, the minimum TSP tour is
described by its convex hull (see Section 20.2 (page 626)), which can be computed in
O(n lg n) time. Other easy special cases of TSP are known.

Related problems: Hamiltonian cycle (see page 598), minimum spanning tree
(see page 549), convex hull (see page 626).
598                           CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                    Input                                    Output

19.5         Hamiltonian Cycle
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: Find a tour of the vertices using only edges from G,
such that each vertex is visited exactly once.
Discussion: Hamiltonian cycle or path in a graph G is a special case of the
traveling salesman problem on a graph G? —where each edge in G has distance
1 in G? and non-edge vertex pairs are separated by a greater distance. Such a
weighted graph has a TSP tour of cost n in G? iﬀ G is Hamiltonian.
    Hamiltonian cycles are fundamental structures in graph theory, and a useful
way to model a diverse set of phenomena. Sections 17.4–17.6 detail algorithms
for generating combinatorial objects like permutations, subsets, and partitions.
Minimum change orders (aka Gray codes) are the most eﬃcient way of construct-
ing such objects, and can naturally be thought of as deﬁning a Hamiltonian cycle
on the appropriate graph.
    Closely related is the problem of ﬁnding the longest path or cycle in a graph.
In precedence-constrained scheduling problems, where directed edge (x, y) im-
plies job x must be completed before job y, the longest path deﬁnes the critical
path that determines the shortest possible time to complete all the jobs. In
signal analysis of circuits, the length of the longest path/cycle deﬁnes the time
it takes the circuit to settle into a stable state after a perturbation.
    The problems of ﬁnding longest cycles and paths are both NP-complete,
even on very restrictive classes of unweighted graphs. There are several possible
lines of attack, however:
      • Is there a serious penalty for visiting vertices more than once? – Refor-
        mulating the Hamiltonian cycle problem as minimizing the total number
        of vertices visited on a complete tour turns it into an optimization prob-
        lem, instead of an existential one. This allows possibilities for heuristics
19.5. HAMILTONIAN CYCLE                                                      599

     and approximation algorithms. Finding a spanning tree of the graph and
     doing a depth-ﬁrst search, as discussed in Section 19.4 (page 594), yields a
     tour with at most 2n vertices. Using repeated random trials or simulated
     annealing might bring the size of this down considerably.

   • Am I seeking the longest path in a directed acyclic graph (DAG)? – The
     problem of ﬁnding the longest path in a DAG can be solved in linear time
     using dynamic programming. Conveniently, the algorithm for ﬁnding the
     shortest path in a DAG presented in Section 18.4 (page 554) does the job
     if we replace min with max. DAGs are the most interesting case of the
     longest-path problem for which eﬃcient algorithms exist.

   • Is my graph dense? – Suﬃciently dense graphs always contain Hamiltonian
     cycles. Further, the cycles implied by such suﬃciency conditions can be
     eﬃciently constructed. In particular, any graph where all vertices have
     degree at least n/2 must be Hamiltonian. Stronger suﬃcient conditions
     also hold, as discussed in the Notes section.

   • Are you visiting all the vertices or all the edges? – Verify that you really
     have a vertex-tour problem and not an edge-tour problem. With a little
     cleverness, it is sometimes possible to reformulate a Hamiltonian cycle
     problem in terms of Eulerian cycles, which instead visits every edge in
     a graph. Perhaps the most famous such instance is the problem of con-
     structing de Bruijn sequences, discussed in Section 18.7 (page 565). The
     win here is that fast algorithms exist for ﬁnding Eulerian cycles and many
     related variants, while the Hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.

    If you really must know whether your graph is Hamiltonian, backtracking
with pruning is your only possible solution. First check whether your graph
is biconnected (see Section 18.8 (page 568)). If not, the graph has an artic-
ulation vertex whose deletion will disconnect the graph, and hence cannot be
Hamiltonian.
Implementations: The reduction described above (weight 1 for an edge and
2 for a non-edge) turns Hamiltonian cycle into a symmetric TSP problem that
obeys the triangle inequality. I therefore refer the reader to the TSP solvers
discussed in Section 19.4 (page 594). Foremost among them is Concorde, a
program for the symmetric traveling salesman problem and related network
optimization problems, written in ANSI C. Concorde is available for academic
research use from http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/concorde. It is the
clear choice among available TSP codes.
    An eﬀective program for solving Hamiltonian cycle problems resulted from
the masters thesis of Vandegriend [Van98]. Both the code and the thesis are
available from https://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~joe/Theses/vandegriend.
html.
    Lodi and Punnen [LP07] put together an excellent survey of available TSP
software, including the special case of Hamiltonian cycle. Links to the programs
600                          CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

are maintained at http://or.deis.unibo.it/research_pages/tspsoft.html.
Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] provide an eﬃcient routine to enumerate all Hamil-
tonian cycles of a graph by backtracking. See Section 22.1.9 (page 716).
    The football program of the Stanford GraphBase (see Section 22.1.7 (page
715)) uses a stratiﬁed greedy algorithm to solve the asymmetric longest-path
problem. The goal is to derive a chain of football scores to establish the superi-
ority of one football team over another. After all, if Virginia beat Illinois by 30
points, and Illinois beat Stony Brook by 14 points, then by transitivity Virginia
would beat Stony Brook by 44 points if they played, right? We seek the longest
simple path in a graph, where the weight of edge (x, y) denotes the number of
points by which x beat y.
Notes: Hamiltonian cycles ﬁrst arose in Euler’s study of the knight’s tour problem,
although they were popularized by Hamilton’s “Around the World” game in 1839.
See [ABCC07, Coo11, GP07, LLKS85] for comprehensive references on the traveling
salesman problem, including discussions on Hamiltonian cycle.
    Finding long paths in graphs is very diﬃcult. Although fast algorithms exist to
ﬁnd paths of length Θ(log n) in Hamiltonian graphs [KMR97], it is hard to ﬁnd even
a polynomial-factor approximation [BHK04]. Most good texts in graph theory review
suﬃciency conditions for graphs to be Hamiltonian. My favorite is West [Wes00].
    Techniques for solving optimization problems in the laboratory using biological
processes have attracted considerable attention. In the original application of these
“biocomputing” techniques, Adleman [Adl94] solved a seven-vertex instance of the
directed Hamiltonian path problem. Unfortunately, this approach requires an expo-
nential number of molecules, and Avogadro’s number implies that such experiments
are inconceivable for graphs beyond n ≈ 70.

Related problems: Eulerian cycle (see page 565), traveling salesman (see page
594).
19.6. GRAPH PARTITION                                                         601

                  Input                                    Output

19.6      Graph Partition
Input description: A (weighted) graph G = (V, E) and integers k and m.

Problem description: Partition the vertices into m roughly equal-sized sub-
sets such that the total cost of edges spanning the subsets is at most k.

Discussion: Graph partitioning arises in many divide-and-conquer algorithms,
which gain their eﬃciency by breaking problems into equal-sized pieces whose
respective solutions can be combined into a single whole. Minimizing the edges
cut in this partition usually simpliﬁes the task of merging.
    Graph partition also arises when clustering vertices into logical components.
If edges link “similar” pairs of objects, the clusters remaining after partition
should reﬂect coherent groupings. Large graphs are often partitioned into
reasonable-sized pieces to improve data locality, or make less cluttered drawings.
    Finally, graph partition is a critical step in many parallel algorithms. Con-
sider the ﬁnite element method, which is used to compute the physical properties
(such as stress and heat transfer) of geometric models. Parallelizing such calcu-
lations requires partitioning the models into equal-sized pieces whose interface
is small. This is a graph-partitioning problem, since the topology of geometric
models are usually represented by graphs.
    Several diﬀerent ﬂavors of graph partitioning arise, depending on the desired
objective function:

   • Minimum cut set – The smallest set of edges to cut so as to disconnect
     a graph can be eﬃciently found using network ﬂow or randomized algo-
     rithms. See Section 18.8 (page 568) for more on connectivity algorithms.
     This smallest cutset might split oﬀ only a single vertex, leaving the result-
     ing partition very unbalanced in size.
602                           CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

      Figure 19.1: The maximum cut of a bipartite graph cuts all the edges.

      • Graph partition – A better partition criterion seeks a small cut that par-
        titions the vertices into roughly equal-sized pieces. Unfortunately, this
        version is NP-complete. Fortunately, heuristics work well in practice.
        Certain types of graphs always have small separators that partition the
        vertices into balanced pieces. Every tree contains at least one vertex v
        whose deletion (or equivalently, the deletion of all edges adjacent to v)
        partitions it so that no component contains more than half of the original
        n vertices. These components are not necessarily connected: consider the
        separating vertex of a star-shaped tree. Such a separating vertex can be
        found in linear time using depth ﬁrst-search.
                                           √
        Each planar graph has a set of O( n) vertices whose deletion leaves no
        component with more than 2n/3 vertices. Such separators provide a useful
        way to decompose geometric models, which are often deﬁned by planar
        graphs.

      • Maximum cut – Given an electronic circuit speciﬁed by a graph, the max-
        imum cut deﬁnes the largest amount of data communication that can
        simultaneously occur in the circuit. The highest speed communications
        channel should thus span the vertex partition deﬁned by the maximum
        cut, as shown above. Finding this maximum cut is NP-complete [Kar72],
        however heuristics similar to those of graph partitioning work well.

    The basic approach for dealing with graph partitioning or maximum cut
problems constructs an initial partition of the vertices (either randomly or ac-
cording to some problem-speciﬁc strategy), and then sweeps through each vertex
v, determining whether the cut improves if we move v over to the other side
of the partition. The decision whether to move v can be made in time propor-
tional to its degree, by identifying which side contains more of v’s neighbors.
Of course, the best side for v may change after its neighbors jump, so multiple
19.6. GRAPH PARTITION                                                            603

iterations are needed before the process converges on a local optimum. Even so,
such a local optimum might be arbitrarily far away from the global maximum
cut if we are unlucky.
    There are many variations of this basic procedure, by changing the order we
test the vertices in or moving clusters of vertices simultaneously. Using some
form of randomization, particularly simulated annealing, is almost certain to be
a good idea. When more than two components are desired, this partitioning
heuristic can be applied recursively.
    Spectral partitioning methods use sophisticated linear algebra techniques to
obtain a good partitioning. The eigenvectors associated with the smallest non-
zero eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix of graph G provide excellent features
to partition it into highly connected pieces. Spectral methods tend to do a good
job of identifying the general shape of a partition, but the results can be cleaned
up using local optimization.
Implementations: A very popular code for graph partitioning is METIS
(http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/views/metis), which has successfully
partitioned graphs with over 1,000,000 vertices. Available versions include one
variant designed to run on parallel machines and another suitable for partition-
ing hypergraphs.
    Scotch (http://www.labri.fr/perso/pelegrin/scotch/) is another well-
respected code to consider. Chaco is a widely used graph partitioning code
designed to partition graphs for parallel computing applications. It employs sev-
eral diﬀerent partitioning algorithms, including both Kernighan–Lin and spec-
tral methods. Chaco is available at https://cfwebprod.sandia.gov/cfdocs/
CompResearch/templates/insert/softwre.cfm?sw=36.
    The Tenth DIMACS Challenge (https://www.cc.gatech.edu/dimacs10/)
revolved around the related problems of graph partitioning and graph clustering.
Results of the competition are reported in [BMSW13].
Notes: Recent surveys of graph partitioning algorithms include [BS13, BMS+ 16].
The fundamental local improvement heuristics for graph partitioning are the Kernighan–
Lin [KL70] and Fiduccia–Mattheyses [FM82] methods. Spectral methods for graph
partitioning are discussed in [Chu97, PSL90]. Empirical results on graph partitioning
heuristics include [BG95, LR93].
    The planar separator theorem and an eﬃcient algorithm for ﬁnding such a sepa-
rator are due to Lipton and Tarjan [LT79, LT80]. For experiences in implementing
planar separator algorithms, see [ADGM07, HPS+ 05].
    Any random vertex partition will expect to cut half of the edges in the graph, be-
cause the probability that the two vertices deﬁning an edge end up on diﬀerent sides
of the partition is 1/2. Goemans and Williamson [GW95] gave an 0.878-factor approx-
imation algorithm for maximum cut, based on semi-deﬁnite programming techniques.
Tighter analysis of this algorithm was followed by Karloﬀ [Kar96].

Related problems: Edge/vertex connectivity (see page 568), network ﬂow
(see page 571).
604                            CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                    Input                                    Output

19.7         Vertex Coloring
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: Color the vertices of V using the minimum number of
colors such that for all (i, j) ∈ E, vertices i and j have diﬀerent colors.
Discussion: Vertex coloring arises in scheduling and clustering applications.
Register allocation in compiler optimization is the canonical application of col-
oring. Each variable in a given program fragment has a range of times during
which its value must be kept intact: in particular, after it is initialized and be-
fore its ﬁnal use. Any two variables whose life spans intersect cannot be placed
in the same register. Construct a graph where each vertex corresponds to a
variable, with an edge between any two vertices whose variable life spans inter-
sect. If we color the vertices of this graph, we ensure that no variables assigned
the same color will clash. Thus, they all can be assigned to the same register.
    Of course, conﬂicts will never occur if each vertex is colored using a distinct
color. But computers have a limited number of registers, so we seek a coloring
using the fewest colors. The smallest number of colors suﬃcient to vertex color
a graph is called its chromatic number.
    Several special cases of interest arise in practice:

      • Can I color the graph using only two colors? – An important special case
        is testing whether a graph is bipartite, meaning it can be colored using just
        two diﬀerent colors. Bipartite graphs arise naturally in such applications
        as mapping workers to possible jobs. Fast, simple algorithms exist for
        problems such as matching (see Section 18.6 (page 562)) when restricted
        to bipartite graphs.
19.7. VERTEX COLORING                                                           605

      It is easy to test whether a graph G is bipartite. Color the ﬁrst vertex blue,
      and then do a depth-ﬁrst search of the graph. Whenever we discover a
      new, uncolored vertex, we must color it opposite of its parent because using
      the same color would cause a clash. If we ever ﬁnd an edge (x, y) where
      both x and y have been colored identically, then G cannot be bipartite.
      Otherwise, the ﬁnal coloring will be a two-coloring, constructed in O(n +
      m) time. An implementation of this algorithm is given in Section 7.7.2
      (page 219).
   • Is the graph planar, or are all vertices of low degree? – The famous four-
     color theorem states that every planar graph can be vertex colored using at
     most four distinct colors. Eﬃcient algorithms to four-color planar graphs
     are known, although it is NP-complete to decide whether a given planar
     graph is three-colorable.
      But there is a very simple algorithm that will vertex color any planar
      graph using at most six colors. Every planar graph contains a vertex of
      degree at most ﬁve. Delete this vertex v, and recursively color the rest of
      the graph. Because v has at most ﬁve neighbors, it can always be colored
      using one of the six colors that does not appear as a neighbor. This works
      because deleting a vertex from a planar graph leaves a planar graph, so it
      must also have a low-degree vertex to delete. The same idea can be used
      to color any graph of maximum degree Δ using at most Δ + 1 colors, in
      O(nΔ) time.
   • Is this an edge-coloring problem? – Certain vertex coloring problems can
     be modeled as edge coloring, where we seek to color the edges of a graph
     G such that edges get diﬀerent colors if they share a vertex in common.
     The payoﬀ is that there is an eﬃcient algorithm that always returns a
     near-optimal edge coloring. Algorithms for edge coloring are the focus of
     Section 19.8 (page 608).
    Computing the chromatic number of a graph is NP-complete. If you need
an exact solution you must resort to backtracking, which can be surprisingly
eﬀective in coloring certain random graphs. It remains hard to compute a good
approximation to the optimal coloring, so expect no guarantees.
    Incremental methods prove to be the heuristic of choice for vertex coloring.
As in the previously mentioned algorithm for planar graphs, vertices are colored
sequentially, with the colors chosen in response to colors already assigned in the
vertex’s neighborhood. These methods vary in how the next vertex is selected
and how it is assigned a color. Experience suggests inserting the vertices in
non-increasing order of degree, because high-degree vertices have more color
constraints and so are most likely to require an additional color if inserted late.
Brèlaz’s heuristic [Brè79] dynamically selects the uncolored vertex of highest
color degree (i.e., adjacent to the most diﬀerent colors), and colors it with the
lowest-numbered unused color.
    Incremental methods can be further improved by using color interchange.
Taking a properly colored graph and exchanging two of the colors (say, painting
606                            CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

the red vertices blue and the blue vertices red) leaves a proper vertex coloring.
Now suppose we take a properly colored graph and delete all but the red and blue
vertices. We can repaint one or more of the resulting connected components,
again leaving a proper coloring. After such a recoloring, some vertex v previously
adjacent to both red and blue vertices might now be only adjacent to blue
vertices, thus freeing v to be colored red.
    Color interchange is a win in terms of producing better colorings, at a cost of
increased time and implementation complexity. Implementations are described
below. Simulated annealing algorithms that incorporate color interchange to
move from state to state can be even more eﬀective.

Implementations: Graph coloring has been blessed with two useful web re-
sources. Culberson’s graph coloring page, http://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/
~joe/Coloring/, provides an extensive bibliography and programs to gener-
ate and solve hard graph coloring instances. Michael Trick’s page, https:
//mat.tepper.cmu.edu/COLOR/color.html, provides a nice overview of graph-
coloring applications, an annotated bibliography, and a collection of over seventy
graph-coloring instances arising in applications such as register allocation and
printed circuit board testing. Both include a C language implementation of the
DSATUR coloring algorithm.
    Programs for the closely related problems of ﬁnding cliques and vertex col-
oring graphs were sought for at the Second DIMACS Implementation Challenge
[JT96], held in October 1993. Programs and data from the challenge are acces-
sible from http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/Challenges.
    The C++ Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/
graph) and Java JGraphT (https://jgrapht.org) both provide implemen-
tations of several vertex coloring heuristics. GOBLIN (goblin2.sourceforge.net)
implements a branch-and-bound algorithm for vertex coloring.
    Nijenhuis and Wilf [NW78] provide an eﬃcient Fortran implementation of
chromatic polynomials and vertex coloring by backtracking. See Section 22.1.9
(page 716). Combinatorica [PS03] provides Mathematica implementations of
bipartite graph testing, heuristic colorings, chromatic polynomials, and vertex
coloring by backtracking. See Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: Recent survey articles on graph coloring include [GHHP13, MT10]. An old
but excellent source on vertex coloring heuristics is Syslo et al. [SDK83], which includes
experimental results. Classical heuristics for vertex coloring include [Brè79, MMI72,
Tur88]. See [GH06, HDD03] for more results.
    Wilf [Wil84] proved that backtracking to test whether a random graph has chro-
matic number k runs in constant time, dependent on k but independent of n. This
is less impressive than it seems, because only a vanishingly small fraction of such
graphs are indeed k-colorable. A number of provably eﬃcient (but still exponential)
algorithms for vertex coloring are known. See [Woe03] for a survey.
    Paschos [Pas03] reviews what is known about provably good approximation algo-
rithms for vertex coloring. On one hand, it is provably hard to approximate within
a polynomial factor [BGS95]. On the other hand, heuristics oﬀer some non-trivial
guarantees in terms of various parameters, such as Wigderson’s [Wig83] factor of
19.7. VERTEX COLORING                                                             607

n1−1/(χ(G)−1) approximation algorithm, where χ(G) is the chromatic number of G.
    Brook’s theorem states that the chromatic number χ(G) ≤ Δ(G) + 1, where Δ(G)
is the maximum degree of a vertex of G. Equality holds only for odd-length cycles
(which have chromatic number 3) and complete graphs.
    The four-color problem is the most famous problem in the history of graph theory,
ﬁrst posed in 1852 and ﬁnally settled in 1976 by Appel and Haken using a proof involv-
ing extensive computation. Every planar graph can be ﬁve-colored using a variation
of the color interchange heuristic. Despite the four-color theorem, it is NP-complete
to test whether a particular planar graph requires four colors or if three suﬃce. See
[SK86] for an exposition on the history of the four-color problem and the proof. An
eﬃcient algorithm to four-color a graph is presented in [RSST96], which more recently
has been formally veriﬁed [Gon08].

Related problems: Independent set (see page 589), edge coloring (see page
608).
608                         CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                  Input                                    Output

19.8      Edge Coloring
Input description: A graph G = (V, E).
Problem description: What is the smallest set of colors needed to color the
edges of G such that no two edges of the same color share a common vertex?
Discussion: Edge coloring arises in scheduling applications, typically associ-
ated with minimizing the number of non-interfering rounds needed to complete
a given set of tasks. For example, consider a situation where we must schedule a
set of two-person interviews, where each interview takes one hour. The meetings
could all be scheduled at distinct times to avoid possible conﬂicts, but it is less
wasteful to hold non-conﬂicting events simultaneously. We construct a graph G
whose vertices are people, and whose edges represent the pairs of people who
must meet. An edge coloring of G deﬁnes the schedule, with the color classes
representing the diﬀerent time periods in the schedule, so that all meetings of
the same color happen simultaneously.
    The National Football League solves such an edge-coloring problem to make
up its schedule each season. The pairs of teams who must play each other are
determined by the records of the previous season. Assigning these pairs to weeks
of the season is an edge-coloring problem, complicated by secondary constraints
like spacing out rematches and ensuring there is a good game every Monday
night.
    The minimum number of colors needed to edge color a graph is called its
edge-chromatic number or sometimes chromatic index. Even-length cycles can
be edge-colored with two colors, while odd-length cycles have an edge-chromatic
number of 3.
    Edge coloring has a better (if less famous) theorem associated with it than
vertex coloring. Vizing’s theorem states that any graph with a maximum vertex
degree of Δ can be edge colored using at most Δ + 1 colors. To put this in
19.8. EDGE COLORING                                                                 609

perspective, note that any edge coloring must have at least Δ colors, because
all the edges incident on any vertex must be distinct colors. This is a very tight
bound.
    The proof of Vizing’s theorem is constructive, meaning it can be turned into
an O(nmΔ) algorithm to ﬁnd an edge-coloring with Δ + 1 colors. Deciding
whether we can get away using one less color than this is NP-complete, so it
hardly seems worth the eﬀort to try. An implementation of Vizing’s theorem is
described below.
    Edge-coloring on graph G can be converted to the problem of ﬁnding a vertex
coloring on the line graph L(G), which has a vertex of L(G) for each edge of G
and an edge of L(G) iﬀ the two edges of G share a common vertex. Line graphs
can be constructed in time linear to their size, and then any vertex-coloring
code can be employed to color them. That said, it would be disappointing to
go the vertex coloring route. Vizing’s theorem is our reward for for discovering
that we in fact have an edge-coloring problem.
Implementations: The C++ Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.
boost.org/libs/graph) has an implementation of Misra and Gries’ construc-
tive proof of Vizing’s theorem, which runs in O(nm) time. GOBLIN (http:
//goblin2.sourceforge.net/) implements a branch-and-bound algorithm for
edge coloring.
    See Section 19.7 (page 604) for a larger collection of vertex-coloring codes
and heuristics, which can be applied to the line graph of your target graph.
Notes: Stiebitz et al. [SSTF12] is a recent book on edge coloring. Graph-theoretic
results on edge coloring are surveyed in [FW77, GT94]. Vizing [Viz64] and Gupta
[Gup66] independently proved that any graph can be edge colored using at most Δ + 1
colors. Misra and Gries give a simple constructive proof of this result [MG92]. Despite
these tight bounds, it is NP-complete to compute the edge-chromatic number [Hol81].
Bipartite graphs can be edge-colored in polynomial time [Sch98].
    Whitney, in introducing line graphs [Whi32], showed that any two connected
graphs with isomorphic line graphs are isomorphic, with the exception of K3 and
K1,3 . It is an interesting exercise to show that the line graph of an Eulerian graph is
both Eulerian and Hamiltonian, while the line graph of a Hamiltonian graph is always
Hamiltonian.

Related problems: Vertex coloring (see page 604), scheduling (see page 534).
610                                            CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

      1                    2                                                    1A

          4            5
                                                                     3G                      2B

3             7                6               A
                                                               8I                                  4C
                                                                                  5E
                               E           G               B
                  9                    F           H

          8            10                                      10F                                7D
                                       J           I

                                   D                   C                  6H            9J

                               Input                                           Output

19.9                  Graph Isomorphism
Input description: Two graphs, G and H.
Problem description: Find a mapping f from the vertices of G to the vertices
of H such that G and H are identical, that is, (x, y) is an edge of G iﬀ (f (x), f (y))
is an edge of H.
Discussion: Isomorphism is the problem of testing whether two graphs are
really the same. Suppose we are given a collection of graphs, and must perform
an expensive operation on each of them. If we can identify which of the graphs
are duplicates, we can discard the copies to avoid redundant work.
    Many pattern recognition problems can be mapped to graph or subgraph
isomorphism. For example, the structure of chemical compounds are naturally
described by labeled graphs, with each atom represented by a vertex. Identifying
all molecules in a structure database containing a particular functional group is
an instance of subgraph isomorphism testing.
    What exactly is meant when we say that two graphs are the same? Two
labeled graphs G = (Vg , Eg ) and H = (Vh , Eh ) are identical when (x, y) ∈ Eg
iﬀ (x, y) ∈ Eh . In identical graphs, vi in G corresponds to vi in H. The more
challenging isomorphism problem seeks to ﬁnd a mapping from the vertices of
G to H such that they are identical. The problem of ﬁnding this mapping is
sometimes called graph matching.
    Identifying symmetries is another important application of graph isomor-
phism. A mapping of a graph to itself is called an automorphism, and the
collection of automorphisms (the automorphism group) provides a great deal of
information about symmetries in the graph. For example, the complete graph
Kn has n! automorphisms (because any mapping will do), while an arbitrary
random graph is likely to only have one, because G is always identical to itself.
19.9. GRAPH ISOMORPHISM                                                      611

  Several variations of graph isomorphism arise in practice:
  • Is graph G contained in graph H? – Instead of testing equality, we are
    often interested in knowing whether a small pattern graph G is a subgraph
    of H. Such problems as clique, independent set, and Hamiltonian cycle
    are important special cases of subgraph isomorphism.
    There are two distinct graph-theoretic notions of “contained in.” Subgraph
    isomorphism asks whether there is a subset of edges and vertices of H that
    is isomorphic to a smaller graph G. Induced subgraph isomorphism asks
    whether there is a subset of vertices of H whose deletion leaves a subgraph
    isomorphic to a smaller graph G. For induced subgraph isomorphism, (1)
    all edges of G must be present in H, and (2) no non-edges of G can
    be present in H. Clique happens to be an instance of both subgraph
    isomorphism problems, while Hamiltonian cycle is only an example of
    vanilla subgraph isomorphism.
    Be aware of this distinction in your application. Subgraph isomorphism
    problems tend to be much harder than graph isomorphism, while induced
    subgraph problems tend to be even harder than subgraph isomorphism.
    Some ﬂavor of backtracking is your only viable approach.
  • Are your graphs labeled or unlabeled? – In many applications, vertices or
    edges of the graphs are labeled with attributes that must be respected when
    determining isomorphisms. For example, when comparing two bipartite
    graphs, each with “worker” and “job” vertices, any mapping that equated
    a job with a worker would make no sense.
    Labels and related constraints can be factored into any backtracking al-
    gorithm. Further, such constraints can signiﬁcantly speed up the search,
    by creating opportunities for pruning whenever two vertex labels do not
    match up.
  • Are you testing whether two trees are isomorphic? – Faster algorithms
    exist for special cases of graph isomorphism, including trees and planar
    graphs. Tree isomorphism is a problem that often arises in language pat-
    tern matching and parsing applications. A parse tree describes the struc-
    ture of a text, so two parse trees T1 and T2 will be isomorphic when the
    underlying pair of texts have the same structure.
    Eﬃcient algorithms for tree isomorphism work inward toward the center,
    starting from the leaves of both trees. Each vertex in T1 is assigned a
    label representing the set of vertices in T2 that might possibly be mapped
    to it, based on the constraints of labels and vertex degrees. For example,
    all the leaves in T1 are potentially equivalent to all leaves of T2 . Working
    inward, we can partition the next level vertices in T1 into classes based on
    how many leafs with matching labels they are adjacent to. Any mismatch
    means T1 ?= T2 , while completing the process partitions the vertices into
    equivalence classes deﬁning all isomorphisms. See the references below for
    more details.
612                           CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

      • How many graphs do you have? – Many data mining applications search
        for all instances of a particular pattern graph in a big database of graphs,
        like the chemical structure mapping application described above. Such
        databases typically contain a large number of relatively small graphs. This
        puts an onus on indexing the graph database by small substructures (say
        ﬁve to ten vertices each), and doing expensive isomorphism tests only
        against those containing the same substructures as the query graph.
    No polynomial-time algorithm is known for graph isomorphism, but neither
is it known to be NP-complete. Along with integer factorization (see Section
16.8 (page 490)), it is one of the few important algorithmic problems whose
rough computational complexity is still not known. The conventional wisdom
is that isomorphism lies somewhere between P and NP-complete, assuming P
?= NP.
    Although no worst-case polynomial-time algorithm is known, testing iso-
 morphism is usually not very hard in practice. The basic algorithm backtracks
through all of the n! possible relabelings of the vertices of H with the names of
vertices of G, and then tests whether the graphs are identical. Of course, we
prune the search at a given preﬁx as soon as we detect any mismatch between
edges whose vertices are both in the preﬁx.
    But the real key to eﬃcient isomorphism testing is preprocessing the vertices
into “equivalence classes,” partitioning them into sets such that two vertices
in diﬀerent sets cannot possibly be mapped to each other. The vertices in
each equivalence class must share the same value of every invariant that is
independent of labeling. Possibilities include:
   • Vertex degree – Two vertices of diﬀerent degrees can never be identical, or
     mapped to each other. This simple partition can be a big win, but won’t
     do much for regular (equal degree) graphs.
   • Shortest path distance – The all-pairs shortest path matrix (see Section
     18.4 (page 554)) deﬁnes a multiset of n − 1 distances representing the
     distances between v and each of the other vertices. Two vertices belong
     in the same equivalence class only if deﬁning identical distance multisets.
   • Counting length-k paths – Taking the kth power of the adjacency matrix of
     G yields a matrix Gk [i, j] that counts the number of (non-simple) length-
     k paths from i to j. For each vertex v and each k, this matrix deﬁnes
     a multiset of path-counts, which can be used for partitioning as with
     distances above.
    By using these invariants, you should be able to partition the vertices of most
graphs into a large number of small equivalence classes. Finishing the job oﬀ
with backtracking will then be short work. Each vertex gets assigned the name of
its equivalence class as a label, so we can treat it as a labeled matching problem.
It is harder to detect isomorphisms between highly symmetric graphs than with
random graphs, because of the reduced eﬀectiveness of these equivalence-class
partitioning heuristics.
19.9. GRAPH ISOMORPHISM                                                            613

Implementations: The best isomorphism testing program is nauty (No AU-
Tomorphisms, Yes?)—a set of very eﬃcient C language procedures for determin-
ing the automorphism group of a vertex-colored graph. Nauty also produces a
canonical labeling of the graph, to assist in isomorphism testing. It can test
most graphs with fewer than a hundred vertices in well under a second. Nauty
is available at http://pallini.di.uniroma1.it/. The theory behind nauty
and an aﬃliate program Traces are described in [McK81, MP14].
    Valiente [Val02] has made available the implementations of graph/subgraph
isomorphism algorithms for both trees and graphs in his book. These C++
implementations run on top of LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)), and are
available at http://www.lsi.upc.edu/~valiente/algorithm/.
    Kreher and Stinson [KS99] compute isomorphisms of graphs in addition
to more general group-theoretic operations. These implementations in C are
available at http://www.math.mtu.edu/~kreher/cages/Src.html.
Notes: Graph isomorphism is an important problem in computational complexity
theory because of its rare open complexity status. The feel-good algorithm story
of 2015 was Lazlo Babai’s announcement of a quasi-polynomial (subexponential but
super-polynomial) time algorithm for graph isomorphism after a 40-year quest [Bab16].
    Monographs on isomorphism detection include [Hof82, KST93]. Valiente [Val02]
focuses on algorithms for tree and subgraph isomorphism. Kreher and Stinson [KS99]
take a more group-theoretic approach to isomorphism testing. Graph mining systems
and algorithms are surveyed in [CH06]. See [FSV01] for performance comparisons
between diﬀerent graph and subgraph isomorphism algorithms.
    Polynomial-time algorithms are known for planar graph isomorphism [HW74] and
for graphs where the maximum vertex degree is bounded by a constant [Luk80]. The
all-pairs shortest path heuristic is due to [SD76], although there exist non-isomorphic
graphs that realize the exact same set of distances [BH90]. A linear-time tree isomor-
phism algorithm for both labeled and unlabeled trees is presented in [AHU74].
    A problem is said to be isomorphism-complete if it is provably as hard as isomor-
phism. Bipartite graph isomorphism testing is isomorphism-complete, because any
graph can be made bipartite by replacing each edge by two edges connected with a
new vertex. The original graphs are isomorphic iﬀ the transformed graphs are.

Related problems: Shortest path (see page 554), string matching (see page
685).
614                            CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                    Input                                    Output

19.10          Steiner Tree
Input description: A graph G = (V, E) and speciﬁed subset of vertices T ⊆ V .
Or set of geometric points T .
Problem description: Find the smallest tree connecting the vertices of T .
Discussion: Steiner trees arise in network design problems, because the mini-
mum Steiner tree describes how to connect a given set of sites using the smallest
amount of wire. Analogous problems occur when designing networks of water
pipes, heating ducts, or communication devices. Typical Steiner tree problems
in electronic circuit design require connecting a set of sites to (say) ground under
constraints such as material cost and signal propagation delay.
    The Steiner tree problem is distinguished from the minimum spanning tree
problem in graphs (see Section 18.3 (page 549)) when T ?= V , so we must select
which intermediate connection points to use to minimize the cost of the tree.
In geometric Steiner tree, the hard part of the problem is deﬁning the positions
of the new points we add to shorten the connections. Issues in Steiner tree
construction include:

      • How many points must you connect? – The Steiner tree of just a pair of
        vertices is the shortest path between them (see Section 18.4 (page 554)).
        The Steiner tree of all n vertices, when T = V , reduces to ﬁnding the
        minimum spanning tree (MST) of G. The general minimum Steiner tree
        problem is NP-hard despite these special cases, and remains so under a
        broad range of restrictions.
      • Is the input a set of geometric points? – The geometric version of Steiner
        tree works on a set of points as input, typically in the plane, and seeks the
        lowest weight tree connecting the points. The set of possible intermediate
        points is not given as part of the input but must be deduced from the set
19.10. STEINER TREE                                                             615

      of points. These Steiner points must satisfy several geometric properties,
      which can be used to reduce the set of candidates down to a ﬁnite number.
      For example, every Steiner point will have a degree of exactly 3 in a
      minimum Steiner tree, and the angles formed between any two of these
      edges must be exactly 120 degrees.

   • Are there constraints on the edges we deﬁne? – In many wiring problems,
     all the edges are restricted to being either horizontal or vertical. This
     geometric version is called the rectilinear Steiner problem. A diﬀerent set
     of angular and degree conditions apply for rectilinear Steiner trees than for
     Euclidean trees. In particular, all angles must be multiples of 90 degrees,
     and each vertex has degree at most 4.

   • Do I really need an optimal tree? – Certain Steiner tree applications justify
     investing large amounts of computation to ﬁnd the best possible Steiner
     tree. Perhaps our circuit design will be replicated millions of times, or the
     trenches to hold our pipes cost thousands of dollars per meter to dig. We
     should then use an exhaustive search technique such as backtracking or
     branch-and-bound to design the optimal tree.
      There are many opportunities for pruning search based on geometric and
      graph-theoretic constraints. But Steiner tree remains a hard problem.
      I recommend experimenting with the implementations described below
      before attempting your own.

   • What is the meaning of the Steiner vertices? – A very special type of
     Steiner tree arises in classiﬁcation and evolution. Phylogenic trees illus-
     trate the relative similarity between diﬀerent objects or species. Each
     object represents (typically) a leaf/terminal vertex of the tree, with inter-
     mediate vertices representing branching points between classes of objects.
     For example, an evolutionary tree might have leaf nodes of human, dog,
     snake, and lizard, and internal nodes corresponding to taxa (animal, mam-
     mal, reptile). A tree rooted at animal with dog and human classiﬁed under
     mammal implies that humans are closer to dogs than to snakes.
      Many phylogenic tree construction algorithms have been developed that
      diﬀer in what data they attempt to model, and their desired optimiza-
      tion criterion. Each combination of reconstruction algorithm and distance
      measure is likely to give a diﬀerent tree, so identifying the “right” method
      for any given application is somewhat a question of faith. A reasonable
      procedure is to acquire a standard package of implementations, discussed
      below, and then see what happens to your data under all of them.

    Fortunately, there is a good, eﬃcient heuristic for ﬁnding Steiner trees that
works well on all versions of the problem. Construct a graph modeling your
input, setting the weight of edge (i, j) equal to the distance from point i to point
j. The minimum spanning tree of this graph is guaranteed a good approximation
for both Euclidean and rectilinear Steiner trees.
616                         CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

    The worst case for the minimum spanning tree approximation of the Eu-
clidean Steiner tree is three points forming an equilateral triangle. Any span-
ning tree will contain two of the sides (for a length of 2), whereas the minimum
Steiner tree
           √ will connect the √ three points using an interior point, for a total
length of 3. This ratio of 3/2 ≈ 0.866 is always achieved, and the minimum
spanning tree is usually within a few percent of the optimal Steiner tree in prac-
tice. For rectilinear Steiner trees, the optimal/minimum spanning tree ratio is
always ≥ 2/3 ≈ 0.667.
    For geometric instances, any suboptimal tree can be reﬁned by inserting a
Steiner point whenever the edges incident on a vertex form an angle of less than
120 degrees. Inserting these points and locally readjusting the tree edges can
move the solution a little closer towards the optimum. Similar optimizations
are possible for rectilinear spanning trees.
    Note that we are only interested here in the subtree connecting the terminal
vertices. We can trim the minimum spanning tree to retain only the tree edges
that lie on the (unique) path between a pair of terminal nodes. The complete
set of these can be found in O(n) time by deleting any leaf that is not a terminal
node, and then recurring.
    An alternative heuristic for graphs is based on ﬁnding shortest paths. Start
with a tree consisting of the shortest path between two terminals. For each
remaining terminal t, ﬁnd the shortest path to a vertex in the tree and add this
path to connect t. The quality of this heuristic depends upon the insertion order
of the terminals, but something simple and fairly eﬀective is likely to result.

Implementations: GeoSteiner is a package for solving both Euclidean and
rectilinear Steiner tree problems in the plane by Warme et al. [JWWZ18]. It
also solves the related problem of minimum spanning trees in hypergraphs,
and claims to have solved problems as large as 10,000 points to optimality. It
is available from http://www.geosteiner.com/. This is almost certainly the
best code for geometric Steiner tree instances.
    Steiner tree algorithms were the subject of the 11th DIMACS Implementa-
tion Challenge, held in December 2014. Implementations of eﬃcient algorithms
for ﬁnding shortest paths were discussed. The papers, instances, and implemen-
tations are available at http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/programs/challenge/.
    FLUTE (http://home.eng.iastate.edu/~cnchu/flute.html) computes
rectilinear Steiner trees, emphasizing speed. It contains a user-deﬁned pa-
rameter to control the tradeoﬀ between solution quality and run time. GOB-
LIN (http://goblin2.sourceforge.net/) includes both heuristics and search
methods for ﬁnding Steiner trees in graphs.
    The programs PHYLIP (http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/
phylip.html) and PAUP (https://paup.phylosolutions.com/) are widely
used packages for inferring phylogenic trees. Both contain more than twenty
diﬀerent algorithms for constructing phylogenic trees from data. Although many
of them are designed to work with molecular sequence data, several general
methods accept arbitrary distance matrices as input.
19.10. STEINER TREE                                                                  617

Notes: Monographs on the Steiner tree problem include Hwang, Richards, and Win-
ter [HRW92] and Prömel and Steger [PS02]. Du et al. [DSR00] is a collection of
surveys on all aspects of Steiner trees. Empirical results on Steiner tree heuristics
include [BC19, SFG82, Vos92].
    The Euclidean Steiner problem dates back to Fermat, who asked how to ﬁnd a point
p in the plane minimizing the sum of the distances to three given points. This was
solved by Torricelli before 1640. Steiner was apparently one of several mathematicians
who worked on the general problem for n points, and was mistakenly credited with
originating the problem. An interesting, more detailed history appears in [HRW92].
    Gilbert and Pollak [GP68] ﬁrst conjectured that the ratio of the√length of the
minimum Steiner tree over the minimum spanning tree is always ≥ 3/2 ≈ 0.866.
After twenty years of active research, the Gilbert–Pollak ratio was ﬁnally proven by
Du and Hwang [DH92]. The Euclidean minimum spanning tree for n points in the
plane can be constructed in O(n lg n) time [PS85].
    Arora [Aro98] gave a polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) for Steiner
trees in k-dimensional Euclidean space. A 1.55-factor approximation for Steiner trees
on graphs is due to Robins and Zelikovsky [RZ05].
    The hardness of Steiner tree for Euclidean and rectilinear metrics was established in
[GGJ77, GJ77]. Euclidean Steiner tree is not known to be in NP, because of numerical
issues in exactly representing the positions of Steiner points.
    Analogies can be drawn between minimum Steiner trees and minimum energy
conﬁgurations in certain physical systems. The case that such analog systems—
including the behavior of soap ﬁlms over wire frames—“solve” the Steiner tree problem
is discussed in [DKR10]. Slime molds are also pretty good at building Steiner trees
[LSZ+ 15].

Related problems: Minimum spanning tree (see page 549), shortest path (see
page 554).
618                         CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

                 Input                                    Output

19.11       Feedback Edge/Vertex Set
Input description: A (directed) graph G = (V, E).

Problem description: What is the smallest set of edges E ? or vertices V ?
whose deletion leaves an acyclic graph?

Discussion: Feedback set problems arise because many things are easier to do
on directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) than general digraphs. Consider the problem
of scheduling jobs with precedence constraints, stating that job A must come
before job B. When all constraints are consistent, the resulting graph is a DAG,
and topological sort (see Section 18.2 (page 546)) can order the jobs/vertices to
respect them. But no such schedule can exist when there are cyclic constraints,
such as A before B, B before C, and C before A.
    The feedback set identiﬁes a small number of constraints that can be dropped
to permit a valid schedule. In the feedback edge (or arc) set problem, we drop
individual precedence constraints. In the feedback vertex set problem, we drop
entire jobs and all constraints associated with them.
    Similar considerations are involved in eliminating race conditions from elec-
tronic circuits. This explains why the problem is called “feedback” set. It is
also more sensibly known as the maximum acyclic subgraph problem.
    One ﬁnal application has to do with ranking tournaments. Suppose we want
to order the skills of players at some two-player game, such as chess or tennis.
We can construct a directed graph with an arc from x to y whenever x beats
y in a game. The higher-ranked player should usually beat the lower-ranked
player, although upsets do occur. A natural rank ordering is the topological
sort resulting after deleting the minimum set of feedback edges (upsets) from
the graph.
    Issues in feedback set problems include:
19.11. FEEDBACK EDGE/VERTEX SET                                             619

   • Do any constraints have to be dropped? – No changes are needed if the
     graph is already a DAG, which can be determined via topological sort.
     One approach to ﬁnding a feedback set modiﬁes the topological sorting
     algorithm to delete whatever edge or vertex is causing the trouble when-
     ever a contradiction is found. Feedback edge set and feedback vertex set
     are both NP-complete on directed graphs, so heuristic solutions might be
     much larger than optimal.
   • How can I ﬁnd a good feedback edge set? – An eﬀective linear-time heuristic
     constructs a vertex ordering and then deletes any arc going in the wrong
     direction. At least half the arcs must go either left–to–right or right–to–
     left for any vertex order, so take the smaller partition as your feedback
     set.
     But what is the right vertex order to start with? A good heuristic is to
     sort the vertices in terms of edge imbalance, namely in-degree minus out-
     degree. An incremental insertion approach starts by picking an arbitrary
     vertex v. Any vertex x deﬁned by an in-going edge (x, v) will be placed to
     the left of v. Any x deﬁned by out-going edge (v, x) will analogously be
     placed to the right of v. We can now recur on the left and right subsets
     to complete the vertex order.
   • How can I ﬁnd a good feedback vertex set? – The heuristics above yield
     vertex orders deﬁning (hopefully) few back edges. We seek a small set of
     vertices that together cover these backedges. This is exactly the vertex
     cover problem, heuristics for which are discussed in Section 19.3 (page
     591).
   • How do I break all cycles in an undirected graph? – The problem of ﬁnding
     feedback sets in undirected graphs is quite diﬀerent from digraphs. Trees
     are undirected graphs without cycles, and every tree on n vertices contains
     exactly n−1 edges. Thus, the smallest feedback edge set of any undirected
     graph G is |E| − (n − c), where c is the number of connected components
     of G. The back edges encountered during a depth-ﬁrst search of G qualify
     as a minimum feedback edge set.
     The feedback vertex set problem remains NP-complete for undirected
     graphs, however. A reasonable heuristic uses breadth-ﬁrst search to iden-
     tify the shortest cycle in G. Delete one of the vertices in this cycle from
     G, or all of them if you want a guarantee, and repeat by ﬁnding the
     shortest remaining cycle. This ﬁnd-and-delete procedure is employed un-
     til the graph is acyclic. The optimal feedback vertex set must contain at
     least one vertex from each of these vertex-disjoint cycles, so the average
     deleted-cycle length determines just how good our approximation is.
   It may pay to reﬁne any of these heuristic solutions using randomization
or simulated annealing. To move between states, we can modify the vertex
permutation by swapping pairs in order or insert/delete vertices to/from the
candidate feedback set.
620                           CHAPTER 19. GRAPH PROBLEMS: NP-HARD

Implementations: Greedy randomized adaptive search procedure (GRASP)
heuristics for both feedback vertex and feedback edge set problems have been
implemented by Festa, et al. [FPR01] as Algorithm 815 of the Collected Algo-
rithms of the ACM (see Section 22.1.5 (page 715)).
    An exact solver for feedback vertex set https://github.com/wata-orz/fvs
by Iwata and Imanishi [Iwa16] won ﬁrst place in the Parameterized Algo-
rithms and Computational Experiments Challenge (https://pacechallenge.
wordpress.com/track-b-feedback-vertex-set/).
    GOBLIN (http://goblin2.sourceforge.net) includes an approximation
heuristic for minimum feedback arc set.
    The econ order program of the Stanford GraphBase (see Section 22.1.7 (page
715)) permutes the rows and columns of a matrix so as to minimize the sum of
the numbers below the main diagonal. Using an adjacency matrix as the input
and deleting all edges below the main diagonal leaves an acyclic graph.
Notes: See [FPR99] for a survey on the feedback set problem. Expositions of the
proof that feedback minimization is hard [Kar72] include [AHU74, Eve11]. Both feed-
back vertex and edge set remain hard even if no vertex has in-degree or out-degree
greater than two [GJ79].
    Bafna, et al. [BBF99] gives a 2-factor approximation for feedback vertex set in
undirected graphs. Feedback edge sets in directed graphs can be approximated to
within a factor of O(log n log log n) [ENSS98]. Heuristics for ranking tournaments are
discussed in [LMM+ 18]. Experiments with heuristics are reported in [Koe05].
    Fixed-parameter tractable algorithms are polynomial in the input size n and ex-
ponential in the solution size k, say O(k!n). Such an algorithm would be linear so long
as k is a constant. Feedback vertex set can be solved with such an algorithm [CCL15].
The book by Downey and Fellows [DF12] oﬀers the best overview of ﬁxed-parameter
complexity.
    I will confess that I use a feedback edge set approach to grading semester projects
in my enormous graduate data science course, where I can’t grade all the papers.
Teaching assistants and students can generally be trusted to make a binary judgment
as to whether paper x is better or worse than paper y. After getting a large number
of such judgment pairs, I use a feedback edge set algorithm to remove the smallest
number of conﬂicting judgments, then order the papers using topological sort to assign
grades.
    An interesting application of feedback arc set to economics is presented in [Knu94].
For each pair A, B of sectors of the economy, we are given how much money ﬂows
from A to B. We seek to order the sectors to determine which sectors are primarily
producers to other sectors, and which deliver primarily to consumers.

Related problems: Bandwidth reduction (see page 470), topological sorting
(see page 546), scheduling (see page 534).
