Chapter 20

Computational Geometry

Computational geometry is the algorithmic study of geometric problems. Its
emergence coincided with application areas such as computer graphics, computer-
aided design/manufacturing, and scientiﬁc computing, all of which need geomet-
ric computing.
    Good books on computational geometry include:

    • de Berg, et al. [dBvKOS08] – The “three Mark’s” book is the best general
      introduction to the theory of computational geometry and its fundamental
      algorithms.

    • O’Rourke [O’R01] – This is the best practical introduction to compu-
      tational geometry. The emphasis is on careful and correct implementa-
      tion of geometric algorithms. C and Java code are available from https:
      //cs.smith.edu/~orourke/books/compgeom.html.

    • Preparata and Shamos [PS85] – Although somewhat out of date, this book
      remains a good general introduction to computational geometry, stressing
      algorithms for convex hulls, Voronoi diagrams, and intersection detection.
    • Goodman, O’Rourke, and Toth [TOG18] – This recent collection of survey
      articles provides a detailed overview of what is known in almost every
      subﬁeld of discrete and computational geometry.

    The leading conference in computational geometry is the ACM Symposium
on Computational Geometry, held annually in late May or early June. There
is a growing body of implementations of geometric algorithms. We point out
speciﬁc implementations where applicable in the catalog, but the reader should
deﬁnitely be aware of CGAL (Computational Geometry Algorithms Library)—a
comprehensive library of geometric algorithms in C++ produced as a result of a
joint European project. Anyone with a serious interest in geometric computing
should check it out at http://www.cgal.org/.

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   621
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_20
622                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                    Input                                   Output

20.1        Robust Geometric Primitives
Input description: A point p and line segment l, or two segments l1 , l2 .
Problem description: Does p lie on, over, or under l? Does l1 intersect l2 ?
Discussion: Implementing basic geometric primitives is a task fraught with
peril. Even simple things like returning the intersection point of two lines are
more complicated than you may think. What should be returned when two
lines are parallel, meaning they don’t intersect at all? What if the lines are
identical, so the intersection “point” is the entire line? What if one of the
lines is horizontal, so that in the course of solving equations for the intersection
point you will divide by zero? What if the two lines are almost parallel, so
that the intersection point is so far from the origin that it causes arithmetic
overﬂows? These issues become even more complicated for intersecting line
segments, because additional cases arise that must be watched for and treated
separately.
    If you are new to implementing geometric algorithms, I suggest that you
see O’Rourke’s Computational Geometry in C [O’R01] for practical advice and
complete implementations of basic geometric algorithms and data structures. It
will help you avoid many headaches if you follow in his footsteps.
    There are two diﬀerent issues at work here: geometric degeneracy and numer-
ical stability. Degeneracy refers to annoying special cases that must be treated
in substantially diﬀerent ways, such as when two lines intersect at more or less
than a single point. There are three approaches to dealing with degeneracy:

      • Ignore it – Make an operating assumption that your program will work
        correctly only when no three points are collinear, no three lines meet at a
        point, no intersections happen at the endpoints of line segments, and so
        on. This is probably the most common approach, and what I recommend
20.1. ROBUST GEOMETRIC PRIMITIVES                                            623

     for short-term projects where you can live with frequent crashes. The
     drawback is that interesting data often comes from points sampled on a
     grid, which tends to be highly degenerate.

   • Fake it – Randomly or symbolically perturb your data so that it becomes
     non-degenerate. By moving each of your points a small amount in a
     random direction, you can break many of the existing degeneracies in the
     data, hopefully without creating too many new problems. This probably
     should be the ﬁrst thing to try once you determine that your program is
     crashing too often. A problem with random perturbation is that it can
     change the shape of your data in subtle ways, which may be intolerable for
     your application. There also exist techniques to “symbolically” perturb
     your data to remove degeneracies in a consistent manner, but these require
     serious study to apply correctly.

   • Deal with it – Geometric applications can be made more robust by writing
     special code to handle each special case that arises. This can work well if
     done with care from the beginning, but not so well if kludges are added
     whenever the system crashes. Expect to expend signiﬁcant eﬀort if you
     are determined to do it right.

   Geometric computations often involve ﬂoating-point arithmetic, which leads
to problems with overﬂows and numerical precision. There are three basic ap-
proaches to the issue of numerical stability:

   • Integer arithmetic – By forcing all points of interest to lie on a ﬁxed-
     size integer grid, you can perform exact comparisons to test whether any
     two points are equal or two line segments intersect. The cost is that the
     intersection point of two lines may not be exactly representable as a grid
     point. This is likely to be the simplest and best method, if you can get
     away with it.

   • Double-precision reals – By using double-precision ﬂoating point numbers,
     you can reduce the occurrence of numerical errors. Your best bet might
     be to keep all data as single-precision reals, and then use double precision
     for intermediate computations.

   • Arbitrary precision arithmetic – This is certain to be correct, but also
     to be slow. Careful analysis can minimize the need for high-precision
     arithmetic and thus the performance penalty. Still, you should expect
     high-precision arithmetic to be several orders of magnitude slower than
     standard ﬂoating-point arithmetic.

   The best technique to produce robust geometric software is to build your
applications around a small set of geometric primitives that handle as much of
the low-level geometry as possible. These primitives include:
624                            CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      • Area of a triangle – The area A(t) of a triangle t = (a, b, c) is indeed
        half the base times the height, but computing the length of the base and
        altitude is messy work with trigonometric functions. Much better is to
        use the determinant formula for twice the area:

                                     
                        ax   ay   1 
                       
           2 · A(t) =  bx   by   1  = ax by − ay bx + ay cx − ax cy + bx cy − cx by
                        cx   cy   1 

        This formula generalizes to compute d! times the volume of a simplex in d
        dimensions. Thus, 3! = 6 times the volume of a tetrahedron t = (a, b, c, d)
        in three dimensions is
                                                         
                                           a x ay az 1 
                                                         
                                           bx b y bz 1 
                                          
                               6 · A(t) =                
                                                          
                                           c x cy cz 1 
                                           d x dy dz 1 

        These formulae give signed volumes and hence can be negative, so take
        the absolute value ﬁrst. See Section 16.4 (page 475) for how to compute
        determinants.
        The conceptually simplest way to compute the area of a polygon (or poly-
        hedron) is to triangulate it and then sum up the area of each triangle.
        Implementations of a slicker algorithm that avoids triangulation are pre-
        sented in [O’R01, SR03].

  • Above–below–on test – Does a given point c lie above, below, or on a given
    line l? A clean way to deal with this is to represent l as a directed line
    that passes through point a before point b, and ask whether c lies to the
    left or right of the directed line l.
        This primitive can be implemented using the sign of the triangle area as
        computed above. If the area of t(a, b, c) > 0, then c lies to the left of
        ab. If the area of t(a, b, c) = 0, then c lies on ab. Finally, if the area of
        t(a, b, c) < 0, then c lies to the right of ab. This generalizes naturally to
        three dimensions, where the sign of the area denotes whether d lies above
        or below the oriented plane (a, b, c).

      • Line segment intersection – This above–below primitive can also be used
        to test whether a line intersects a line segment. It does iﬀ one endpoint
        of the segment is to the left of the line and the other is to the right.
        Segment–segment intersection is similar, and I refer you to implementa-
        tions described below. The question of whether two segments intersect if
        they only share an endpoint is representative of the problems with degen-
        eracy.
20.1. ROBUST GEOMETRIC PRIMITIVES                                                   625

   • In-circle test – Does point d lie inside or outside the circle deﬁned by
     points a, b, and c in the plane? This primitive occurs in all Delaunay
     triangulation algorithms, and can be used as a robust way to do distance
     comparisons. Assuming that a, b, c are labeled in counterclockwise order
     around the circle, compute the determinant
                                                                         
                                                ax   ay   a2x + a2y   1 
                                               
                                                b    by   b2x + b2y   1 
                       incircle(a, b, c, d) =  x
                                                cx   cy   c2x + c2y   1 
                                                dx   dy   d2x + d2y   1 
      In-circle will return 0 if all four points are cocircular, a positive value if d
      is inside the circle, and negative value if d is outside.
   Check out the implementations below before you build your own.
Implementations: CGAL (www.cgal.org) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1
(page 713)) both provide very complete sets of geometric primitives for pla-
nar geometry written in C++. LEDA is easier to learn and to work with, but
CGAL is more comprehensive and freely available. Check them out if you are
starting a signiﬁcant geometric application, before you try to write your own.
    O’Rourke [O’R01] provides implementations in C of most of the primi-
tives discussed in this section. See http://cs.smith.edu/~jorourke/books/
CompGeom/CompGeom.html. These primitives were implemented primarily for
exposition rather than production use, but they should be reliable and appro-
priate for modest applications.
    The Core Library (see http://cs.nyu.edu/exact/) provides an API, which
supports the Exact Geometric Computation (EGC) approach to numerically
robust algorithms. With small changes, any C/C++ program can use it to
readily support three levels of accuracy: machine-precision, arbitrary-precision,
and guaranteed.
    Shewchuk’s [She97] robust implementation of basic geometric primitives in
C++ is available at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~quake/robust.html.
Notes: O’Rourke [O’R01] provides an implementation-oriented introduction to com-
putational geometry that stresses robust geometric primitives. It is recommended
reading. LEDA [MN99] provides another excellent role model.
    Yap [SY18] gives an excellent survey on techniques for achieving robust geometric
computation, including an available book draft [MY07]. Kettner, et al. [KMP+ 04]
provides graphic evidence of the troubles that can arise when employing real arithmetic
in geometric algorithms for convex hull. Controlled perturbation [MOS11] is a more
recent approach for robust computation. Shewchuk [She97] and Fortune and van Wyk
[FvW93] present careful studies on the costs of using arbitrary-precision arithmetic for
geometric computation. By being careful about when to use it, reasonable eﬃciency
can be maintained while achieving complete robustness.

Related problems: Intersection detection (see page 648), maintaining ar-
rangements (see page 671).
626                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                    Input                                    Output

20.2         Convex Hull
Input description: A set S of n points in d-dimensional space.
Problem description: Find the smallest convex polygon (or polyhedron) con-
taining all the points of S.
Discussion: Convex hull is the most important elementary problem in com-
putational geometry, just as sorting is the most important elementary problem
in combinatorial algorithms. It arises because constructing the hull captures a
rough idea of the shape or extent of a data set.
    Convex hull serves as a preprocessing step to many geometric algorithms. For
example, consider the problem of ﬁnding the diameter of a set of points, meaning
the pair of points that lie a maximum distance apart. The diameter must be
between two points on the convex hull. The O(n lg n) algorithm for computing
diameter ﬁrst constructs the convex hull, and then for each hull vertex ﬁnds
which other hull vertex lies farthest from it. The “rotating-calipers” method
can be used to move eﬃciently from one-diametrically opposed hull vertex pair
to the next by always proceeding in a clockwise fashion around the hull.
    There are almost as many convex hull algorithms as sorting algorithms.
Answer the following questions to help choose between them:

      • How many dimensions are you working with? – Convex hulls are fast to
        compute in two and even three dimensions. But certain assumptions valid
        in lower dimensions break down as the dimensionality increases. For exam-
        ple, any n-vertex polygon in two dimensions has exactly n edges. However,
        the relationship between the numbers of faces and vertices becomes more
        complicated even in three dimensions. A cube has eight vertices and six
        faces, while an octahedron has eight faces and six vertices. This has impli-
        cations for the data structures that represent hulls—are you just looking
20.2. CONVEX HULL                                                              627

    for the hull points or do you need the deﬁning polyhedron? Be aware of
    these complications of high-dimensional spaces if your problem takes you
    there.
    Simple O(n log n) convex-hull algorithms are available for the important
    special cases of two and three dimensions, but in higher dimensions things
    get more complicated. Gift-wrapping is the basic approach to construct
    higher-dimensional convex hulls. Observe that a three-dimensional con-
    vex polyhedron is composed of two-dimensional faces, or facets, that are
    connected by one-dimensional lines or edges. Each edge joins exactly two
    facets together. Gift-wrapping starts by ﬁnding an initial facet associ-
    ated with the lowest vertex, and then conducting a breadth-ﬁrst search
    from this facet to discover new, additional facets. Each edge e deﬁning
    the boundary of a facet must be shared with another facet. By iterating
    through all n points, we can identify which point deﬁnes the next facet
    with e. We “wrap” the points one facet at a time, like bending wrapping
    paper around an edge until it hits the ﬁrst point.
    The key to eﬃciency is making sure that each edge is explored only once.
    Implemented properly in d dimensions, gift-wrapping takes O(nφd−1 +
    φd−2 lg φd−2 ), where φd−1 is the number of facets and φd−2 is the number
    of edges in the convex hull. This can be as bad as O(nd/2+1 ) when the
    convex hull is very complex. Use one of the codes described below rather
    than roll your own.

  • Is your data given as vertices or half-spaces? – The problem of ﬁnding
    the intersection of a set of n half-spaces in d dimensions (each containing
    the origin) is dual to that of computing convex hulls of n points in d
    dimensions. Thus, the same basic algorithm suﬃces for both problems.
    The necessary duality transformation is discussed in Section 20.15 (page
    671). The problem of half-plane intersection diﬀers from convex hull when
    no interior point is given, because infeasible instances arise where the
    intersection of the half-planes is empty.

  • How many points are likely to be on the hull? – If your point set was
    generated “randomly,” it is likely that most points lie within the interior
    of the hull. Planar convex-hull programs can be made more eﬃcient in
    practice using the observation that the left-most, right-most, top-most,
    and bottom-most points must all be on the convex hull. This usually
    gives a set of either three or four distinct hull points, deﬁning a triangle or
    quadrilateral. Any point inside this region cannot be on the convex hull,
    and so can be discarded in a linear sweep through the points. Ideally,
    only a few points will then remain to run through the full convex-hull
    algorithm.
    This trick can also be applied beyond two dimensions, although it loses
    eﬀectiveness as the dimension increases.
628                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      • How do I ﬁnd the shape of my point set? – Although convex hulls provide
        a gross measure of shape, any details associated with the concavities are
        lost. The convex hull of the “m” from the example input would be indis-
        tinguishable from the convex hull of “w.” Alpha-shapes are a more general
        structure that can be parameterized so as to retain arbitrarily large con-
        cavities. Implementations and references on alpha-shapes are included
        below.

    The Graham scan is the most popular convex-hull algorithm in the plane.
It starts with one point p known to be on the convex hull, say the point with
the lowest x-coordinate, and then sorts the rest of the points in angular order
around p. Starting from a partial hull consisting of p and the point with the
smallest angle, we proceed counterclockwise adding points. If the angle formed
by the new point and the last hull edge is less than 180 degrees, we insert this
new point to the hull. If the angle formed by the new point and the last “hull”
edge is greater than 180 degrees, then a chain of vertices starting from the last
hull edge must be deleted to maintain convexity. The total time is O(n lg n),
because the bottleneck is the cost of sorting the points around p.
    This Graham scan procedure can also be used to construct a non-self-
intersecting (or simple) polygon passing through all the points. Sort the points
around v, but instead of testing angles, connect the points in angular order.
This gives a polygon without self-intersection, although it typically has many
ugly skinny protrusions.
    The gift-wrapping algorithm becomes especially simple in two dimensions,
since each “facet” becomes an edge, each “edge” becomes a vertex of the poly-
gon, and the “breadth-ﬁrst search” simply walks around the hull in a clockwise
or counterclockwise order. The two-dimensional gift-wrapping (or Jarvis march)
algorithm runs in O(nh) time, where h is the number of vertices on the convex
hull. I recommend sticking with Graham scan unless you know in advance that
there are only a few vertices on the hull.
Implementations: The CGAL library (www.cgal.org) oﬀers C++ implemen-
tations of an extensive variety of convex-hull algorithms for two, three, and
arbitrary numbers of dimensions. Alternate C++ implementations of planar
convex hulls include LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)).
    Qhull [BDH97] is a popular low-dimensional, convex-hull code, optimized
for two to about eight dimensions. It is written in C and can also construct
Delaunay triangulations, Voronoi vertices, furthest-site Voronoi vertices, and
half-space intersections. Qhull has been widely used in scientiﬁc applications
and has a well-maintained homepage at http://www.qhull.org/.
    O’Rourke [O’R01] provides a robust implementation of the Graham scan
in two dimensions and an O(n2 ) implementation of an incremental algorithm
for convex hulls in three dimensions. C and Java implementations are both
available. See Section 22.1.9 (page 717).
    Ken Clarkson’s higher-dimensional convex-hull code Hull also does alpha-
shapes, and is available at http://www.netlib.org/voronoi/hull.html.
20.2. CONVEX HULL                                                                  629

   Diﬀerent codes are needed for enumerating the vertices of intersecting half-
spaces in higher dimensions. Avis’ lrs (http://cgm.cs.mcgill.ca/~avis/C/
lrs.html) is an arithmetically robust ANSI C implementation of the Avis–
Fukuda reverse search algorithm for vertex enumeration/convex-hull problems.
Since the polyhedron is implicitly traversed but not explicitly stored in memory,
even problems with very large output sizes can sometimes be solved.
Notes: Planar convex hull plays the same role in computational geometry that sort-
ing does in algorithm design. Like sorting, convex hull is a fundamental problem
where many diﬀerent algorithmic approaches lead to interesting or optimal algorithms.
Quickhull and mergehull are examples of hull algorithms inspired by sorting algorithms
[PS85]. A simple construction involving points on a parabola presented in Section
11.2.4 (page 360) reduces sorting to convex hull, so the information-theoretic lower
bound for sorting implies that planar convex hull requires Ω(n lg n) time to compute.
A stronger lower bound is established in [Yao81].
    Good expositions of the Graham scan algorithm [Gra72] and the Jarvis march
[Jar73] include [dBvKOS08, CLRS09, O’R01, PS85]. The optimal planar convex-hull
algorithm [KS86] takes O(n lg h) time, where h is the number of hull vertices, and cap-
tures the best performance of both Graham scan and gift wrapping. Planar convex
hull can be eﬃciently computed in-place, meaning without requiring additional mem-
ory in [BIK+ 04]. Seidel [Sei18] provides an excellent survey of convex hull algorithms
and variants, particularly for higher dimensions.
    Topology is the study of shape. Edelsbrunner and Harar [EH10] provide an in-
troduction to computational topology. Alpha-hulls, presented in [EKS83], provide a
useful notion of the shape of a point set. A generalization to three dimensions, with
an implementation, is presented in [EM94].
    Reverse-search algorithms for constructing convex hulls are eﬀective in higher di-
mensions [AF96]. Through a clever lifting-map construction [ES86], the problem of
building Voronoi diagrams in d-dimensions can be reduced to constructing convex hulls
in (d + 1)-dimensions. See Section 20.4 (page 634) for more details.
    Dynamic algorithms for convex-hull maintenance are data structures that permit
inserting and deleting arbitrary points while always representing the current convex
hull. Jacob and Brodal [JB19] reduced the cost of such operations to logarithmic
amortized time.

Related problems: Sorting (see page 506), Voronoi diagrams (see page 634).
630                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                    Input                                   Output

20.3        Triangulation
Input description: A set of points, a polygon, or a polyhedron.
Problem description: Partition the interior of the point set or polyhedron
into triangles.
Discussion: A good ﬁrst step in working with complicated geometric objects
is to break them into simple geometric objects. This makes triangulation a fun-
damental problem in computational geometry, because the simplest geometric
objects are triangles in two dimensions. Classical applications of triangulation
include ﬁnite element analysis and computer graphics.
    One interesting application of triangulation is surface interpolation. Suppose
that we have sampled the height of a mountain at a number of (x, y, z) points.
How can we estimate the height z  at any point q = (x , y  ) in the plane?
We can project the sampled points on the plane, and then triangulate them.
This triangulation partitions the plane into triangles, so we can estimate height
by interpolating between the heights (z-coordinates) of the three points of the
triangle that contain q. Furthermore, this triangulation and the associated
height values deﬁne a mountain surface suitable for graphics rendering.
    A triangulation in the plane is constructed by adding non-intersecting chords
between the vertices until no more such chords can be added. Speciﬁc issues
arising in triangulation include:

      • Are you triangulating a point set or a polygon? – Often we are given a set
        of points to triangulate, as in the surface interpolation problem discussed
        above. This requires ﬁrst constructing the convex hull of the point set and
        then carving up the interior into triangles.
        The simplest such O(n lg n) algorithm ﬁrst sorts the points by x-coordinate.
        It then inserts them from left to right as per the convex-hull algorithm
20.3. TRIANGULATION                                                         631

    of page 111, building the triangulation by adding a chord to each point
    newly cut oﬀ from the hull.
  • Does the shape of the triangles in your triangulation matter? – There
    are usually many diﬀerent ways to partition your input into triangles.
    Consider a set of n points in convex position in the plane. The simplest
    way to triangulate them would be to add fan-shaped diagonals from the
    ﬁrst point to all n − 1 other points. But this has the tendency to create
    skinny triangles.
    Many applications seek to avoid skinny triangles, or equivalently, mini-
    mize small angles in the triangulation. The Delaunay triangulation of a
    point set maximizes the minimum angle over all possible triangulations.
    This isn’t exactly what we are looking for, but it is pretty close, and the
    Delaunay triangulation has enough other interesting properties to make
    it the quality triangulation of choice. Further, it can be constructed in
    O(n lg n) time, using implementations described below.
  • How can I improve the shape of a given triangulation? – Each internal
    edge of any triangulation is shared between two triangles. The four vertices
    deﬁning these two triangles form either (a) a convex quadrilateral, or (b)
    a triangle with a triangular bite taken out of it. The beauty of the convex
    case is that exchanging the internal edge with a chord linking the other
    two vertices yields a diﬀerent triangulation.
    This gives us a local “edge-ﬂip” operation for changing and possibly im-
    proving a given triangulation. Indeed, a Delaunay triangulation can be
    constructed from any initial triangulation by removing skinny triangles
    until no locally improving exchange remains.
  • What dimension are we working in? – Three-dimensional problems are
    usually harder than two-dimensional problems. The three-dimensional
    generalization of triangulation involves partitioning the space into four-
    vertex tetrahedra by adding non-intersecting faces. One important dif-
    ﬁculty is that there is no way to tetrahedralize the interior of certain
    polyhedra without adding extra vertices. Furthermore, it is NP-complete
    to decide whether such a tetrahedralization exists, so we should not feel
    afraid to add extra vertices to simplify our problem.
  • What constraints does the input have? – When we are triangulating a
    polygon or polyhedra, we can only add chords that do not intersect any of
    the boundary facets. In general, we may have a set of additional obstacles
    or constraints that cannot be intersected by inserted chords. The best such
    triangulation is the constrained Delaunay triangulation. Implementations
    are described below.
  • Are you allowed to add extra points, or move input vertices? – When the
    shape of the triangles does matter, it might pay to strategically add a
    small number of extra “Steiner” points to the data set to facilitate the
632                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      construction of a triangulation (say) with no small angles. As discussed
      above, you must add Steiner points to triangulate certain polyhedra.

    To triangulate a convex polygon in linear time, just pick an arbitrary starting
vertex v and insert chords from v to each other vertex in the polygon to form a
fan. Only because the polygon is convex can we be conﬁdent that no boundary
edges of the polygon will be intersected by these chords. The simplest algorithm
for general polygon triangulation tests each of the O(n2 ) possible chords, and
only inserts those that do not intersect a boundary edge or previously inserted
chord. There are practical algorithms that run in O(n lg n) time and theoret-
ically interesting algorithms that run in linear time. See the Implementations
and Notes sections for details.
Implementations: Triangle, by Jonathan Shewchuk, is an award-winning C
language code that generates Delaunay triangulations, constrained Delaunay
triangulations (forced to have certain edges), and quality-conforming Delaunay
triangulations (which avoid small angles by inserting extra points). It has been
widely used for ﬁnite element analysis and is fast and robust. Triangle is the
ﬁrst thing I would try if I needed a two-dimensional triangulation code. It is
available at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~quake/triangle.html.
    Fortune’s Sweep2 is a widely used two-dimensional code for Voronoi diagrams
and Delaunay triangulations, written in C. This code may be simpler to work
with, if all you need is the Delaunay triangulation of points in the plane. It
is based on Fortune’s sweep line algorithm [For87] for Voronoi diagrams and is
available from Netlib (see Section 22.1.4 (page 714)) at https://www.netlib.
org/voronoi/.
    TetGen (http://wias-berlin.de/software/tetgen/) appears to be the
software of choice to tetrahedralize three-dimensional polyhedra [Si15]. Both the
CGAL (www.cgal.org) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) libraries oﬀer
C++ implementations of an extensive variety of triangulation algorithms for two
and three dimensions, including both constrained and furthest site Delaunay
triangulations.
    Higher-dimensional Delaunay triangulations are a special case of higher-
dimensional convex hulls. Qhull [BDH97] is a popular low-dimensional con-
vex hull code, for two to about eight dimensions. It is written in C and can
also construct Delaunay triangulations, Voronoi vertices, furthest-site Voronoi
vertices, and half-space intersections. Qhull has been widely used in scientiﬁc
applications and has a well-maintained homepage at http://www.qhull.org/.
Another choice is Ken Clarkson’s higher-dimensional convex-hull code, Hull,
available at https://www.netlib.org/voronoi/hull.html.
Notes: Chazelle [Cha91] gave a linear-time algorithm for triangulating a simple
polygon, which was an important theoretical result because triangulation served as the
bottleneck for many other geometrical algorithms. Chazelle’s algorithm is suﬃciently
hopeless to implement that it qualiﬁes more as an existence proof, but a simpler
randomized algorithm is known [AGR01]. The ﬁrst O(n lg n) algorithm for polygon
triangulation was given by [GJPT78]. An O(n lg lg n) algorithm by Tarjan and van
20.3. TRIANGULATION                                                               633

Wyk [TW88] followed before Chazelle’s result. Bern et al. [BSA18] gives a survey on
polygon and point-set triangulation.
    Books on Delaunay triangulations and quality mesh generation include [AKL13,
SDC16]. The International Meshing Roundtable is an annual conference for people
interested in mesh and grid generation. Excellent surveys on mesh generation include
[Ber02, Ede06].
    Linear-time algorithms for triangulating monotone polygons have been long known
[GJPT78], and are the basis of algorithms for triangulating simple polygons. A polygon
is monotone when there exists a direction d such that any line with slope d intersects
the polygon in at most two points.
    A well-studied class of optimal triangulations seeks to minimize the total length
of the chords used. The computational complexity of constructing this minimum
weight triangulation was resolved when Rote [MR06] proved it NP-complete. Interest
has thus shifted to provably good approximation algorithms [RW18]. The minimum
weight triangulation of a convex polygon can be found in O(n3 ) time using dynamic
programming.

Related problems: Voronoi diagrams (see page 634), polygon partitioning
(see page 658).
634                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                    Input                                    Output

20.4         Voronoi Diagrams
Input description: A set S of points p1 , . . . , pn .
Problem description: Decompose space into regions such that all points in
the region around pi are closer to pi than to any other point in S.
Discussion: Voronoi diagrams represent the region of inﬂuence around each
of a given set of sites S. If these sites represent the locations of McDonald’s
restaurants, the Voronoi diagram V (S) partitions space into cells around each
restaurant. For each person living in a particular cell, the deﬁning McDonald’s
represents the closest place to get a Big Mac.
    Voronoi diagrams have a surprising variety of applications:
      • Nearest-neighbor search – Finding the nearest neighbor of query point q
        from a ﬁxed set of points S is simply a matter of determining which cell
        in V (S) contains q. See Section 20.5 (page 637) for more details.
      • Facility location – Suppose McDonald’s wants to open another restaurant.
        To minimize interference with existing McDonald’s, it should be located as
        far away from the closest restaurant as possible. This location is always at
        a vertex of the Voronoi diagram, and hence can be found in a linear-time
        search through the Voronoi vertices.
      • Largest empty circle – Suppose you seek a large, contiguous, undeveloped
        piece of land on which to build a factory. The same condition used to
        select McDonald’s locations is appropriate for other undesirable facilities,
        namely that they get located as far as possible from any relevant sites of
        interest. A Voronoi vertex deﬁnes the center of the largest empty circle
        among the points.
      • Path planning – If the sites of S are the centers of obstacles we seek to
        avoid, the edges of the Voronoi diagram V (S) deﬁne the possible channels
20.4. VORONOI DIAGRAMS                                                                635

      that maximize the distance to the obstacles. The “safest” path among the
      obstacles will thus stick to the edges of the Voronoi diagram.
   • Quality triangulations – When triangulating a set of points, we often seek
     nice, fat triangles that avoid small angles and skinny triangles. The Delau-
     nay triangulation maximizes the minimum angle over all triangulations,
     and can be constructed as the dual of the Voronoi diagram. See Section
     20.3 (page 630) for details.
    Each edge of a Voronoi diagram is a segment of the perpendicular bisector
of the line segment formed by the two points in S, because this is the line that
partitions the plane between the points. The conceptually simplest method to
build a Voronoi diagram is by randomized incremental construction. To add a
new site p to the diagram, locate the cell that contains it and add perpendicular
bisectors separating p from all sites deﬁning impacted regions. If the sites are
inserted in random order, it is likely that only a few regions will be impacted
on each insertion.
    However, the method of choice is Fortune’s sweep line algorithm, especially
since robust implementations of it are readily available. The algorithm works
by projecting the set of sites in the plane into a set of cones in three dimensions,
such that the Voronoi diagram is deﬁned by projecting the cones back onto the
plane. Advantages of Fortune’s algorithm include that (a) it runs in optimal
Θ(n log n) time, (b) it is reasonable to implement, and (c) we need not store the
entire diagram as we sweep over it.
    There is an interesting relationship between convex hulls in d + 1 dimen-
sions and Delaunay triangulations (or equivalently Voronoi diagrams) in d-
dimensions. After projecting each site in E d to E d+1 ,
                                                                        d
                                                                        
                   (x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ) −→ (x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ,         x2i )
                                                                        i=1

then taking the convex hull of this (d + 1)-dimensional point set, and ﬁnally
projecting back into d dimensions, we obtain the Delaunay triangulation. De-
tails are given in the Notes section, but this provides the best way to con-
struct Voronoi diagrams in higher dimensions. Programs that compute higher-
dimensional convex hulls are presented in Section 20.2 (page 626).
    Several important variations of standard Voronoi diagrams arise in practice:

   • Non-Euclidean distance metrics – Recall that Voronoi diagrams decom-
     pose space into regions of inﬂuence around each given site. We have as-
     sumed that Euclidean distance measures inﬂuence, but this is not always
     appropriate. The time it takes to drive to McDonald’s depends upon
     where the major roads are. Eﬃcient algorithms are known for construct-
     ing Voronoi diagrams under a variety of diﬀerent metrics.
   • Power diagrams – These structures decompose space into regions of inﬂu-
     ence around the sites, where the sites are no longer constrained to have all
636                           CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

        the same power. Imagine a map of radio stations broadcasting at a given
        frequency. The region of inﬂuence around a station depends both on the
        power of its transmitter and the position/power of its neighbors.
      • Kth-order and furthest-site diagrams – The idea of decomposing space into
        regions sharing some property can be taken beyond closest-point Voronoi
        diagrams. All points within a single cell of the kth-order Voronoi diagram
        share the same set of k nearest neighbors in S. In furthest-site diagrams,
        any point within a particular region shares the same furthest point in S.
        Point location (see Section 20.7 (page 644)) on these structures permits
        fast retrieval of the appropriate points.

Implementations: Fortune’s Sweep2 is a widely used two-dimensional code for
Voronoi diagrams and Delaunay triangulations, written in C. This code is simple
to work with if all you need is the Voronoi diagram. It is based on Fortune’s
sweep line algorithm [For87] for Voronoi diagrams and is available from Netlib
(see Section 22.1.4 (page 714)) at https://www.netlib.org/voronoi/.
    Both the CGAL (www.cgal.org) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713))
libraries oﬀer C++ implementations of a variety of Voronoi diagram and De-
launay triangulation algorithms in two and three dimensions.
    Higher-dimensional and furthest-site Voronoi diagrams can be constructed
as a special case of higher-dimensional convex hulls. Qhull [BDH97] is a popu-
lar low-dimensional convex-hull code, useful for two to about eight dimensions.
It is written in C and can also construct Delaunay triangulations, Voronoi ver-
tices, furthest-site Voronoi vertices, and half-space intersections. Qhull has been
widely used in scientiﬁc applications and has a well-maintained homepage at
http://www.qhull.org/. Another choice is Ken Clarkson’s convex-hull code,
Hull, available at https://www.netlib.org/voronoi/hull.html.
Notes: Voronoi diagrams were studied by Dirichlet in 1850 and are sometimes re-
ferred to as Dirichlet tessellations. They are named after G. Voronoi, who discussed
them in a 1908 paper. In mathematics, concepts get named after the last person to
discover them.
    Two books [AKL13, OBSC00] oﬀer a complete treatment of Voronoi diagrams and
their applications. Fortune [For18] provides an excellent survey on Voronoi diagrams
and associated variants such as power diagrams. The ﬁrst O(n lg n) algorithm for
constructing Voronoi diagrams was based on divide and conquer and is due to Shamos
and Hoey [SH75]. Good expositions of both Fortune’s sweeping algorithm [For87] and
the relationship between Delaunay triangulations and (d + 1)-dimensional convex hulls
[ES86] include [dBvKOS08, O’R01].
    In a kth-order Voronoi diagram, we partition the plane such that each point in a
region is closest to the same set of k sites. Using the algorithm of [ES86], the complete
set of kth-order Voronoi diagrams can be constructed in O(n3 ) time. By performing a
point location on this structure, the k nearest neighbors of a query point can be found
in O(k + lg n). Expositions on kth-order Voronoi diagrams include [O’R01, PS85].

Related problems: Nearest-neighbor search (see page 637), point location
(see page 644), triangulation (see page 630).
20.5. NEAREST-NEIGHBOR SEARCH                                                637

                   q                                        q

                  Input                                   Output

20.5      Nearest-Neighbor Search
Input description: A set S of n points in d dimensions, and query point q.
Problem description: Which point in S is closest to q?
Discussion: The need to quickly ﬁnd the nearest neighbor of a query point
arises in many geometric applications. The classic example involves designing
a system to dispatch emergency vehicles to the scene of a ﬁre. As soon as the
dispatcher learns the location of the ﬁre, he or she uses a map to identify the
ﬁrehouse closest to this point so as to minimize transportation delays. This
situation occurs in any application mapping customers to service providers.
     A nearest-neighbor search is also important in classiﬁcation. Suppose we
are given a collection of numerical data about people (say age, height, weight,
years of education, and income level) each of whom has been labeled as either
Democrat or Republican. We seek a classiﬁer to predict which way a new voter
is likely to vote. Every person in our data set can be represented by a party-
labeled point in d-dimensional space. A simple voter classiﬁer can be built by
assigning the new point the same party aﬃliation as its nearest neighbor.
     Such nearest-neighbor classiﬁers are widely used, often in high-dimensional
spaces. The vector-quantization method of image compression partitions an
image into 8 × 8 pixel regions. This method uses a predetermined library of
several thousand 8 × 8 pixel tiles and replaces each image region by the most
similar library tile. The most similar tile is the point in 64-dimensional space
that is closest to the image region in question. Compression is achieved by
reporting the 12-bit identiﬁer of the closest library tile instead of the full 64
pixels, at the cost of some minor loss of image ﬁdelity.
     Issues arising in nearest-neighbor search include:
   • How many points are you searching? – When your data set contains only
     a small number of points (say n ≤ 100), or if only a few queries are
638                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

        ever destined to be performed, the simple approach is best. Compare
        the query point q against each of the n data points. Only when fast
        queries are needed on large numbers of points does it pay to consider
        more sophisticated methods.
  • How many dimensions are you working in? – Nearest-neighbor search
    gets progressively harder as the dimensionality increases. The kd-tree
    data structure, presented in Section 15.6 (page 460), does a very good job
    in moderate-dimensional spaces. But by twenty dimensions, kd-tree search
    degenerates to almost a linear search through the data points. Searches
    in high-dimensional spaces become hard because a sphere of radius r,
    representing all the points with distance ≤ r from the center, progressively
    ﬁlls up less volume relative to a cube as the dimensionality increases. Thus,
    any data structure based on partitioning points into enclosing volumes
    becomes progressively less eﬀective. Balltrees are a data structure based
    on spheres, which works better in higher dimensions.
        In two dimensions, Voronoi diagrams (see Section 20.4 (page 634)) pro-
        vide an eﬃcient data structure for nearest-neighbor queries. The Voronoi
        diagram of a point set decomposes the plane into regions such that the
        cell containing data point p consists of all points that are closer to p than
        to any other point in S. Finding the nearest neighbor of query point q re-
        duces to identifying which Voronoi diagram cell contains q, and reporting
        the data point associated with it. Although Voronoi diagrams can be built
        in higher dimensions, their size rapidly grows to the point of unusability.

      • Do you really need the exact nearest neighbor? – Finding the absolute
        nearest neighbor of a point in a very high-dimensional space is hard work.
        Indeed, you probably won’t do better than a linear (brute force) search.
        But there are algorithms/heuristics that can give you a reasonably close
        neighbor of your query point fairly quickly.
        One important technique is dimension reduction. Projections exist that
        map any set of n points in d-dimensions into a d = O(lg n/2 )-dimensional
        space such that distance to the nearest neighbor in the low-dimensional
        space is within (1+) times that of the actual nearest neighbor. Projecting
        the points onto d random hyperplanes will reliably do the trick.
        Another idea is adding randomness when you search your data structure.
        A kd-tree can be eﬃciently searched for the cell containing the query
        point q—a cell whose boundary points are good candidates to be close
        neighbors. Now suppose we search for a point q  , which is a small random
        perturbation of q. It should land in a diﬀerent but nearby cell, one of
        whose boundary points might prove to be an even closer neighbor of q.
        Repeating such random queries gives us a way to productively use exactly
        as much computing time as we are willing to spend to improve the answer.
  • Is your data set static or dynamic? – Will there be occasional insertions
    or deletions of new data points in your application? If these are very
20.5. NEAREST-NEIGHBOR SEARCH                                                      639

      rare events, it might pay to rebuild your data structure from scratch each
      time. But if they are frequent, select a version of the kd-tree that supports
      insertions and deletions.

    The nearest-neighbor graph on a set S of n points links each vertex to its
nearest neighbor. This graph is a subgraph of the Delaunay triangulation, and so
can be computed in O(n log n). This is quite a bargain, since it takes Θ(n log n)
time just to discover the closest pair of points in S.
    As a lower bound, the closest-pair problem in one dimension reduces to
sorting. We only need to check the minimum gap between n − 1 adjacent pairs
after sorting, because the closest pair corresponds to two numbers that lie next
to each other. The limiting case occurs when the closest pair lie zero distance
apart, meaning that the elements are not unique.
Implementations: ANN is a C++ library for both exact and approximate
nearest-neighbor searching in arbitrarily high dimensions. It performs well for
searches over hundreds of thousands of points in up to about twenty dimensions.
It supports all lp distance norms, including Euclidean and Manhattan distance,
and is available at http://www.cs.umd.edu/~mount/ANN/. It is the ﬁrst code
I would turn to for nearest-neighbor search.
    Annoy (Approximate Nearest Neighbors Oh Yeah) is a C++ library with
Python bindings created by Spotify, and made available at https://github.
com/spotify/annoy. It is based on random projection trees, and designed to
support parallel processes sharing the same data. My students swear by the
sklearn.neighbors.BallTree implementation for nearest-neighbor search in
Python.
    Samet’s spatial index demos (http://donar.umiacs.umd.edu/quadtree/)
provide a series of Java applets illustrating many variants of kd-trees, in asso-
ciation with [Sam06]. KDTREE 2 contains C++ and Fortran 95 implementa-
tions of kd-trees for eﬃcient nearest-neighbor search in many dimensions. See
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0408067.
    Section 20.4 (page 634) gives a complete collection of Voronoi diagram im-
plementations. In particular, CGAL (www.cgal.org) and LEDA (see Section
22.1.1 (page 713)) provide Voronoi diagrams in C++, plus planar point location
to make eﬀective use of them for nearest-neighbor search.
Notes: Approximate nearest-neighbor search in high dimensions has been a very
active area of research for the past twenty years, with recent results providing a gen-
eral framework for a broad class of distance metrics [ANN+ 18]. Andoni and Indyk
[AI08, AIR18] ably survey recent results in approximate nearest-neighbor search in
high dimensions based on locality sensitive hashing and random projection methods.
Both theoretical and empirical results [BM01, ML14, WSSJ14] indicate that these
methods preserve distances quite nicely.
    The theoretical guarantees underlying Arya and Mount’s approximate nearest-
neighbor code ANN [AM93, AMN+ 98] are somewhat diﬀerent. A sparse weighted
graph structure is built from the data set, and the nearest neighbor is found by start-
ing at a random point and greedily walking towards the query point in the graph.
The closest point found over several random trials is declared the winner. Similar
640                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

data structures hold promise for other problems in high-dimensional spaces. Nearest-
neighbor search was a subject of the Fifth DIMACS challenge, as reported in [GJM02].
    Samet [Sam06] is the best reference on kd-trees and other spatial data structures.
All major (and many minor) variants are developed in substantial detail. A shorter
survey [Sam05] is also available. The technique of using random perturbations of the
query point is due to [Pan06].
    Good expositions on ﬁnding the closest pair of points in the plane [BS76] include
[CLRS09, Man89]. These algorithms use a divide-and-conquer approach instead of
just selecting from the Delaunay triangulation.

Related problems: Kd-trees (see page 460), Voronoi diagrams (see page 634),
range search (see page 641).
20.6. RANGE SEARCH                                                            641

                 Input                                    Output

20.6      Range Search
Input description: A set S of n points in d dimensions, and a query region
Q.
Problem description: Which points in S lie within Q?
Discussion: Range search problems arise in database and geographic informa-
tion system (GIS) applications. Data objects with d numerical ﬁelds, say people
described by their height, weight, and income, can be modeled as points in d-
dimensional space. A range query asks for all points (or the number of points) in
a given region of space. For example, asking for all people with income between
$0 and $20,000, height between 6 and 7 feet, and weight between 50 and 150
lbs., deﬁnes a box containing people whose wallet and body are both thin.
    The diﬃculty of range search depends on several factors:
   • How many range queries will you perform? – The simplest approach to
     range search tests each of the n points against the query polygon Q. This
     works just ﬁne when the number of queries are small. Algorithms to test
     whether a point is within a given polygon are presented in Section 20.7
     (page 644).
   • What is the shape of your query polygon? – The easiest regions to query
     against are axis-parallel rectangles, because the inside–outside test reduces
     to testing whether each coordinate lies within a prescribed range. The
     output ﬁgure above illustrates such an orthogonal range query.
     When querying against a non-convex polygon, it pays to partition the
     polygon into convex pieces or (even better) triangles, and then query the
     point set against each piece. This works because it is fast to test whether
     a point lies inside a convex polygon. Algorithms for such convex decom-
     positions are discussed in Section 20.11 (page 658).
642                            CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      • How many dimensions? – A general approach to range queries builds a
        kd-tree on the point set, as discussed in Section 15.6 (page 460). A depth-
        ﬁrst traversal of the kd-tree is performed for the query, with each tree node
        expanded only if its associated rectangle intersects the query region. The
        entire tree might get traversed for suﬃciently large or misaligned query
        regions, but kd-trees generally lead to an eﬃcient solution. Algorithms
        with better worst-case performance are known in two dimensions, but kd-
        trees should work just ﬁne in the plane. In higher dimensions, they provide
        the only viable solution to the problem.
      • Is your point set static, or might there be insertions/deletions? – A clever
        practical approach to range search and many other geometric searching
        problems is based on Delaunay triangulations. Delaunay triangulation
        edges connect each point p to nearby points, including its nearest neighbor.
        To perform a range query, we start by using planar point location (see
        Section 20.7 (page 644)) to quickly identify a triangle within the region of
        interest. We then do a depth-ﬁrst search around a vertex of this triangle,
        pruning the search whenever it visits a point too distant to have interesting
        undiscovered neighbors. This should be eﬃcient, because the total number
        of points visited should be roughly proportional to the number within the
        query region.
        One nice thing about this approach is that it is relatively easy to employ
        “edge-ﬂip” operations to ﬁx up a Delaunay triangulation following a point
        insertion or deletion. See Section 20.3 (page 630) for more details.
      • Can I just count the number of points in a region, or must I identify
        them? – It often suﬃces to count the number of points in a region instead
        of actually returning them. Harkening back to our introductory example,
        we may want to know whether there are more thin/poor people or rich/fat
        ones. The need to ﬁnd the densest or emptiest region in space often arises,
        and this can be solved using counting range queries.
        A nice data structure for eﬃciently answering such aggregate range queries
        is based on the dominance ordering of the point set. A point x is said to
        dominate point y if y lies both below and to the left of x. Let D(p)
        be a function that counts the number of points in S that are dominated
        by p. The number of points m in the orthogonal rectangle deﬁned by
        xmin ≤ x ≤ xmax and ymin ≤ y ≤ ymax is given by:
             m = D(xmax , ymax ) − D(xmax , ymin ) − D(xmin , ymax ) + D(xmin , ymin )

         The last additive term corrects for the points for the lower left-hand
        corner that have been subtracted away twice.
        We can partition the space into n2 rectangles by drawing a horizontal and
        vertical line through each of the n points. The set of dominated points
        will be identical for each point within any rectangle, so the dominance
        count of the lower left-hand corner of each rectangle can be precomputed,
        stored, and reported for any query point within it. Range queries reduce
20.6. RANGE SEARCH                                                              643

      to binary search and thus take O(lg n) time. This data structure takes
      quadratic space, which is expensive, but the same idea can be adapted to
      kd-trees to create a more space-eﬃcient search structure.

Implementations: Both CGAL (www.cgal.org) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1
(page 713)) use a dynamic Delaunay triangulation data structure to support
circular, triangular, and orthogonal range queries. Both libraries also provide
implementations of range tree data structures, which support orthogonal range
queries in O(k + lg2 n) time where n is the complexity of the subdivision and k
is the number of points in the rectangular region.
    ANN is a C++ library for both exact and approximate nearest-neighbor
searching in arbitrarily high dimensions. It performs well for searches over
hundreds of thousands of points in up to about twenty dimensions. It supports
ﬁxed-radius, nearest-neighbor queries over all lp distance norms, which can be
used to approximate circular and orthogonal range queries under the l2 and l1
norms, respectively. ANN is available at https://www.cs.umd.edu/~mount/
ANN/.
    Annoy (Approximate Nearest Neighbors Oh Yeah) is a C++ library with
Python bindings created by Spotify, and made available at https://github.
com/spotify/annoy. It is based on random projection trees, and designed to
support parallel processes sharing the same data. Nearest-neighbor search is
closely connected to circular range search, since the largest empty circle around
a point deﬁnes its nearest neighbor.
Notes: Good expositions on data structures with worst-case O(lg n + k) performance
for orthogonal-range searching [Wil85] and kd-trees include [dBvKOS08, PS85]. The
worst-case performance of kd-trees can be very bad: [LW77] describes an instance
                                √
in two dimensions requiring O( n) time to report that a rectangle is empty. Faster
range search and counting structures are available under the word RAM model [CLP11,
CW16]. Sun and Blelloch [SB19] present experimental results for both sequential and
parallel algorithms for range search.
    The problem becomes considerably more diﬃcult for non-orthogonal range queries,
where the query region is not an axis-aligned rectangle. For half-plane intersection
queries, O(lg n) time and linear space suﬃce [CGL85]. For range searching with sim-
plex query regions (such as a triangle in the plane), lower bounds preclude eﬃcient
worst-case data structures. See Agrawal [Aga18] for a survey and discussion.

Related problems: Kd-trees (see page 460), point location (see page 644).
644                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                        q?

                    Input                                   Output

20.7        Point Location
Input description: A decomposition of the plane into polygonal regions, and
a query point q.
Problem description: Which region contains the query point q?
Discussion: Point location is often needed as an ingredient to solve larger geo-
metric problems. In a typical police dispatch system, the city will be partitioned
into diﬀerent precincts or districts. Given a map of such regions and a query
point (the crime scene), the system must identify which region contains the
point. This is exactly the problem of planar point location. Variations include:

      • Is the query point inside or outside of polygon P ? – The simplest version
        of point location involves only two regions, inside-P and outside-P , and
        asks which contains a given query point. For polygons with many narrow
        spirals, this can be surprisingly diﬃcult to tell by inspection. The secret
        to doing it both by eye or machine is to draw a ray starting from the
        query point and ending beyond the furthest extent of the polygon. Count
        the number of times the ray crosses an edge of P . The query point will
        lie within the polygon iﬀ this number is odd. Whether to count the ray
        passing through a vertex instead of an edge is evident from context, be-
        cause we care about how many times we cross the boundary of P . Testing
        each of the n edges for intersection against the query ray takes O(n) time.
        Faster algorithms for convex polygons are based on binary search, and
        take O(lg n) time.

      • How many queries will be performed? – We could perform this inside-
        polygon test separately on each region in a given planar subdivision, but
        this will be wasteful if many such queries will be performed. It is much
20.7. POINT LOCATION                                                          645

    better to construct a grid-like or tree-like data structure on top of our sub-
    division to get us near the correct region quickly. Such search structures
    are discussed in more detail below.

  • How complicated are the regions of your subdivision? – More sophisticated
    inside–outside tests are required when the regions of your subdivision are
    not convex polygons. But by triangulating all polygonal regions ﬁrst,
    each inside–outside test reduces to testing whether a point is in a triangle.
    Such tests can be made particularly fast and simple, at the minor cost
    of recording the region name associated with each triangle. An added
    beneﬁt is that the smaller your regions are, the better grid-like or tree-like
    superstructures are likely to perform. Care should be taken to avoid long
    skinny triangles, as discussed in Section 20.3 (page 630).

  • How regularly sized and spaced are your regions? – When all resulting
    triangles are roughly the same size and shape, the simplest point location
    method imposes a regularly spaced k × k grid of horizontal and vertical
    lines over the entire subdivision. For each of the k 2 rectangular regions,
    we maintain a list of all the regions that are at least partially contained
    within the rectangle. Performing a point location query in such a grid ﬁle
    involves a binary search or hash table lookup to identify which rectangle
    contains query point q, and then searching each region in the associated
    list to identify the right one.
    Such grid ﬁles can perform very well, provided that each triangular re-
    gion overlaps relatively few rectangles (thus minimizing storage space)
    and each rectangle overlaps only a few triangles (thus minimizing search
    time). How well it performs depends on the regularity of your subdivision.
    Some ﬂexibility can be achieved by spacing the horizontal lines irregularly,
    depending upon where the regions actually lie. The slab method, discussed
    below, is a variation on this idea that guarantees eﬃcient point location
    at the cost of quadratic space.

  • How many dimensions will you be working in? – In three or more dimen-
    sions, some ﬂavor of kd-tree will almost certainly be the point location
    method of choice. They may even be the right answer for planar subdivi-
    sions that are too irregular for grid ﬁles.
    Kd-trees, described in Section 15.6 (page 460), decompose space into a
    hierarchy of rectangular boxes. At each node in the tree, the current box
    is split into a small number of smaller boxes: typically 2, 4, or 2d for
    dimension d. Each leaf box is labeled with the small set of regions at least
    partially contained in the box. The point location search starts at the
    root of the tree and traverses down through the child whose box contains
    the query point q. When the search hits a leaf, we test all relevant regions
    to see which one contains q. As with grid ﬁles, we hope that each leaf
    contains a small number of regions, and that each region does not cut
    across too many leaf cells.
646                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      • Am I close to the right cell? – Walking is a simple point–location technique
        that might even work well beyond two dimensions. Start from an arbitrary
        point p in an arbitrary cell, hopefully near to the query point q. Construct
        the ray from p to q, and identify which face of the cell this hits (a so-
        called ray-shooting query). Such queries take constant time in triangulated
        arrangements.
        Proceeding to the neighboring cell through this face gets us one step closer
        to the target. The expected path length will be O(n1/d ) for suﬃciently
        regular d-dimensional arrangements, although linear in the worst case.

    The simplest algorithm that guarantees O(lg n) worst-case access is the slab
method, which draws horizontal lines through each vertex, thus deﬁning n + 1
“slabs” between the lines. The horizontal slab containing query point q can be
found by doing a binary search on the y-coordinate of q. The region containing
q within the right slab can be identiﬁed by doing a second binary search on
the edges that cross the slab. The catch is that a binary search tree must be
maintained for each slab, for a worst-case of O(n2 ) space. A more space-eﬃcient
approach based on building a hierarchy of triangulations over the regions also
achieves O(lg n) search, and is discussed in the Notes section.
    Point location methods that are eﬃcient in the worst case tend to require
a lot of memory, or are complicated to implement. I identify implementations
of such methods below, which are worth experimenting with. But I generally
recommend kd-trees for point location applications.
Implementations: Both CGAL (www.cgal.org) and LEDA (see Section 22.1.1
(page 713)) provide excellent support for maintaining planar subdivisions in
C++. CGAL favors a jump-and-walk strategy, although a worst-case logarith-
mic search is also provided. LEDA implements O(lg n) expected-time point
location, using partially persistent search trees.
    ANN is a C++ library for both exact and approximate nearest-neighbor
searching in arbitrarily high dimensions. It can be used to quickly identify a
nearby cell boundary point to begin walking from. Check it out at https:
//www.cs.umd.edu/~mount/ANN/.
    Arrange is a package for maintaining arrangements of polygons in either
the plane or on the sphere. Polygons may be degenerate, and hence represent
arrangements of lines. A randomized incremental construction algorithm is
used, and eﬃcient point location on the arrangement is supported. Arrange is
written in C by Michael Goldwasser and is available from http://euler.slu.
edu/~goldwasser/publications/.
    Routines (in C) to test whether a point lies in a simple polygon have been
provided by [O’R01, SR03].
Notes: Snoeyink [Sno18] gives an excellent survey of the state of the art in point
location, both theoretical and practical. Thorough treatments of deterministic planar-
point location data structures are provided by [dBvKOS08, PS85].
    Tamassia and Vismara [TV01] use planar point location as a case study of geo-
metric algorithm engineering, in Java. An experimental study of algorithms for planar
20.7. POINT LOCATION                                                                 647

point location is described in [EKA84]. The winner was a bucketing technique akin to
the grid ﬁle. Performance of the CGAL point location implementation is reported in
[HH09, HKH12].
    Kirkpatrick’s elegant triangle reﬁnement method [Kir83] builds a hierarchy of tri-
angulations above the actual planar subdivision, such that each triangle on a given
level intersects only a constant number of triangles on the following level. Each trian-
gulation is a fraction of the size of the subsequent one, so the total space is linear by
summing up a geometric series. Furthermore, the height of the hierarchy is O(lg n),
ensuring fast query times. An alternative algorithm realizing the same time bounds is
[EGS86]. The slab method described above is due to [DL76] and is presented in [PS85].
Expositions on the inside-outside test for simple polygons include [O’R01, PS85, SR03].
    More recently, there has been interest in dynamic data structures for point lo-
cation, which support fast incremental updates of the planar subdivision (such as
insertions and deletions of edges and vertices) as well as fast point location. Chiang
and Tamassia’s [CT92] survey is an appropriate place to begin, with updated refer-
ences in [Sno18]. The best current methods approach logarithmic search and update
times [CN18].

Related problems: Kd-trees (see page 460), Voronoi diagrams (see page 634),
nearest-neighbor search (see page 637).
648                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                  Input                                     Output

20.8      Intersection Detection
Input description: A set S of lines and line segments l1 , . . . , ln , or a pair of
polygons or polyhedra P1 and P2 .
Problem description: Which pairs of line segments intersect each other?
What is the intersection of P1 and P2 ?
Discussion: Intersection detection is a fundamental geometric primitive with
many applications. Picture the virtual-reality simulation of an architectural
model for a building. Any illusion of reality vanishes the instant the virtual
person walks through a virtual wall. To enforce such physical constraints, any
such intersection between polyhedral models must be immediately detected, and
the operator notiﬁed or constrained.
   Another application arises in design rule checking for integrated circuit lay-
out. A minor design defect resulting in two crossing metal strips could short out
the chip. But such errors can be detected before fabrication, using programs
that ﬁnd all intersections between line segments.
   Issues arising in intersection detection include:

   • Do you want to compute the intersection or just report it? – We distinguish
     between intersection detection and computing the actual intersection. Just
     detecting that an intersection exists can be a substantially easier problem,
     and often suﬃces. For the virtual reality application, it might not matter
     exactly where we hit the wall—just the fact that we hit it.

   • Are you intersecting lines or line segments? – The big diﬀerence here
     is that any two lines with diﬀerent slopes will intersect at exactly one
     point. All the points of intersections can thus be found in O(n2 ) time,
     by comparing each pair of lines. Constructing the arrangement of the
20.8. INTERSECTION DETECTION                                                 649

    lines provides more information than just the intersection points, and is
    discussed in Section 20.15 (page 671).
    Finding all the intersections between n line segments proves considerably
    more challenging. Even the basic primitive of testing whether two line
    segments intersect is not as trivial, as discussed in Section 20.1 (page
    622). We can explicitly test each line segment pair, and thus ﬁnd all
    intersections in O(n2 ) time. But faster algorithms exist when there are
    only a few intersection points.

  • How many intersection points do you expect? – In integrated circuit
    design-rule checking, we expect the set of line segments to have few if
    any intersections. What we seek is an algorithm whose running time is
    output sensitive, taking time proportional to the number of intersection
    points.
    Such output-sensitive algorithms exist for line segment intersection. The
    fastest algorithm takes O(n lg n + k) time, where k is the number of inter-
    sections. These algorithms are based on the planar sweep line approach.

  • Can you see point x from point y? – Visibility queries ask whether vertex
    x has an unobstructed view of vertex y in a room full of obstacles. This can
    be phrased as a line-segment intersection problem: Does the line segment
    from x to y intersect any obstacle? Such visibility problems arise in robot
    motion planning (see Section 20.14) and in hidden-surface elimination for
    computer graphics.

  • Are the intersecting objects convex? – Better intersection algorithms exist
    when the line segments form the boundaries of polygons. The critical
    issue is whether the polygons are convex. Intersecting a convex n-gon
    with a convex m-gon can be done in O(n + m) time, using the sweep line
    algorithm discussed below. This is possible because the intersection of
    two convex polygons always forms a convex polygon with at most n + m
    vertices.
    However, non-convex polygons are not so well behaved. Consider the
    intersection of two “combs” generalizing the Picasso-like frontispiece to
    this section. As shown, the intersection of non-convex polygons may be
    disconnected and have quadratic size in the worst case.
    Intersecting polyhedra is more complicated than polygons, because two
    polyhedra can intersect even when no edges do. Consider the example of
    a needle piercing the interior of a face. In general, however, similar issues
    arise for both polygons and polyhedra.

  • Do the objects move? – In the walk-through application just described,
    the room and the objects in it do not change between one scene and the
    next. But the person moves, and so we must do repeated analysis of the
    same ﬁxed geometry.
650                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      One common technique is to approximate the objects in a scene by simpler
      objects that enclose them, such as boxes. Whenever two enclosing boxes
      intersect, then the underlying objects might intersect, and so further work
      is necessary to decide the issue. But it is much more eﬃcient to test
      whether simple boxes intersect than more complicated objects, so we win
      when collisions are rare. Many variations on this theme are possible,
      but this idea leads to large performance improvements for complicated
      environments.

    Planar sweep algorithms can be used to eﬃciently compute the intersections
among a set of line segments, or the intersection/union of two polygons. These
algorithms keep track of interesting changes as we sweep a vertical line from left
to right over the data. At its left-most position, the line intersects nothing, but
we encounter a series of events as it moves to the right:

   • Insertion – The left-most point of a line segment may be encountered,
     which now becomes available to intersect some other line segment.
   • Deletion – The right-most point of a line segment is encountered, which
     means that we have completely swept over the segment. It can thus be
     safely deleted, and removed from any further consideration.
   • Intersection – If we maintain the active line segments that intersect the
     sweep line as sorted from top to bottom, the next intersection always
     occurs between neighboring line segments. Following this intersection,
     these two line segments swap their relative order.

    Keeping track of what is going on requires two data structures. The future
is maintained by an event queue: a priority queue ordered by the x-coordinate
of all possible future events of interest: insertion, deletion, and intersection.
See Section 15.2 (page 445) for priority queue implementations. The present
is represented by the horizon—an ordered list of line segments intersecting the
current position of the sweep line. The horizon can be maintained using any
dictionary data structure, such as a balanced tree.
    To compute the intersection or union of polygons, we modify the processing
of the three basic event types. This sweep line algorithm becomes quite simple
for pairs of convex polygons, because (1) at most four polygon edges intersect
the sweep line, so no horizon data structure is needed, and (2) no event-queue
sorting is needed, because we can start from the left-most vertex of each polygon
and proceed to the right following the polygonal ordering. The details are more
complex for general polygon intersection, but the sweep line approach described
above still gets the job done.
Implementations: Both LEDA (see Section 22.1.1 (page 713)) and CGAL
(www.cgal.org) oﬀer extensive support for line segment and polygonal inter-
section. In particular, they provide a C++ implementation of the Bentley–
Ottmann sweep line algorithm [BO79], ﬁnding all k intersection points between
n line segments in the plane in O((n + k) lg n) time.
20.8. INTERSECTION DETECTION                                                       651

    O’Rourke [O’R01] provides a robust program in C to compute the intersec-
tion of two convex polygons. See Section 22.1.9 (page 717).
    Finding the mutual intersection of a collection of half-spaces is a special
case of the convex hull problem. Qhull [BDH97] is convex hull code of choice for
general dimensions. Qhull has been widely used in scientiﬁc applications and
has a well-maintained homepage at https://www.qhull.org/.
Notes: Mount [Mou18] is an excellent survey of algorithms for computing intersec-
tions of geometric objects such as line segments, polygons, and polyhedra. Books with
chapters discussing such problems include [dBvKOS08, CLRS09, PS85]. Preparata
and Shamos [PS85] provide a good exposition on the special case of ﬁnding intersec-
tions and unions of axis-oriented rectangles—a problem that arises often in integrated
circuit design.
     An optimal O(n lg n + k) algorithm for computing line segment intersections is due
to Chazelle and Edelsbrunner [CE92]. Simpler, randomized algorithms achieving the
same time bound are presented by Mulmuley [Mul94].
     Lin et al. [LMK18] survey techniques and software for collision detection. Weller
[Wel13] provides a book-length treatment of recent data structures, emphasizing col-
lision detection for haptic feedback. Deformable models, whose shapes change over
time, represent another challenge for collision detection [BEB12]. Identifying road
junctions from GPS or image data is an interesting intersection detection problem,
detailed in [FK10].

Related problems: Maintaining arrangements (see page 671), motion plan-
ning (see page 667).
652                        CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      A        B
                           C                            H
                                   D                                    C

                                                                A
          E
                     F                                   E
                                                 D                  F

                               H                        B           G
          G

                   Input                                 Output

20.9          Bin Packing
Input description: A set of n items with sizes d1 , . . . , dn . A set of m bins
with capacities c1 , . . . , cm .
Problem description: Store all the items using the fewest number of bins.
Discussion: Bin packing arises in many packaging and manufacturing prob-
lems. Suppose that you are manufacturing widgets cut from sheet metal or
pants cut from cloth. To minimize cost and waste, we seek to lay out the parts
to use as few ﬁxed-size metal sheets or bolts of cloth as possible. Placing each
part on a given sheet, in the best location, is a bin-packing variant called the
cutting stock problem. After our widgets have been successfully manufactured,
we face another bin-packing problem—how best to ﬁt the boxes onto trucks so
as to minimize the number of vehicles needed to ship everything.
    Even the most elementary-sounding bin-packing problems are NP-complete;
see the discussion of integer partition in Section 16.10 (page 497). Thus, we
are doomed to think in terms of heuristics, instead of worst-case optimal algo-
rithms. Fortunately, relatively simple heuristics tend to work well on most bin-
packing problems. Further, many applications have peculiar, problem-speciﬁc
constraints that would frustrate sophisticated algorithms for bin packing. The
following factors will aﬀect the choice of heuristic:

   • What are the shapes and sizes of the objects? – The character of a bin-
     packing problem depends greatly on the shapes of the objects to be packed.
     Solving a standard jigsaw puzzle has a much diﬀerent ﬂavor than pack-
     ing squares into a rectangular box. In one-dimensional bin packing, each
     object’s size is given simply as an integer. This is equivalent to packing
     boxes of equal width into a chimney of that width, and makes it a special
     case of the knapsack problem of Section 16.10 (page 497).
20.9. BIN PACKING                                                             653

     When all the boxes are of identical size and shape, repeatedly ﬁlling each
     row gives a reasonable, but not necessarily optimal, packing. Consider
     trying to ﬁll a 3 × 3 square with 2 × 1 bricks. You can only pack three
     bricks using one orientation, while four bricks ﬁt using two.

   • Are there constraints on the orientation and placement of objects? – Many
     shipping boxes are labeled “this side up” (imposing an orientation on the
     box) or “do not stack” (requiring them to sit on top of any box pile).
     Respecting these constraints restricts our ﬂexibility in packing, and hence
     increases the number of trucks needed to send out certain shipments. Most
     shippers solve this problem by ignoring the labels. Indeed, your task will
     be simpler if you don’t have to worry about the consequences of them.

   • Is the problem on-line or oﬀ-line? – Do we know the complete set of
     objects to pack at the beginning of the job (an oﬀ-line problem)? Or will
     we get them one at a time and greedily deal with them as they arrive (an
     on-line problem)? This diﬀerence is important, because we can do a better
     job packing when we can take a global view and plan ahead. For example,
     we can arrange the objects in an order that will facilitate eﬃcient packing,
     perhaps by sorting them from biggest to smallest.

    The standard oﬀ-line heuristics for bin packing order the objects by size or
shape and then insert them into bins. Typical insertion rules are (1) select the
ﬁrst or left-most bin the object ﬁts in, (2) select the bin with the most room,
(3) select the bin that provides the tightest ﬁt, or (4) select a random bin.
    Analytical and empirical results suggest that ﬁrst-ﬁt decreasing is the best
heuristic. Sort the objects in decreasing order of size, so that the biggest object
is ﬁrst and the smallest last. Insert each object one by one into the ﬁrst bin
that has room for it. If no bin has room, we must start another bin. In the
case of one-dimensional bin packing, this can never require more than 22% more
bins than necessary, and usually does much better. First-ﬁt decreasing has an
intuitive appeal to it, for we pack the bulky objects ﬁrst and hope that little
objects can ﬁll up the remaining cracks.
    First-ﬁt decreasing is easily implemented in O(n lg n + bn) time, where b ≤
min(n, m) is the number of bins actually used. Simply do a linear sweep through
the bins to check for space on each insertion. A faster O(n lg n) implementation
is possible by using a binary tree to keep track of the space remaining in each
bin.
    We can ﬁddle with the insertion order in such a scheme to deal with problem-
speciﬁc constraints. For example, it is reasonable to take “do not stack” boxes
last (perhaps after artiﬁcially lowering the height of the bins to leave some room
up top to work with) and to place ﬁxed-orientation boxes at the beginning (so
we can use the extra ﬂexibility later to stick boxes on top).
    Packing boxes is much easier than packing arbitrary geometric shapes, enough
so that one general technique packs each part into its own box, and then packs
the boxes. Finding an enclosing rectangle for a polygonal part is easy; just ﬁnd
654                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

the upper, lower, left, and right tangents in a given orientation. Finding the ori-
entation that minimizes the area (or volume) of such a box is more diﬃcult, but
can be done in both two and three dimensions [O’R85]. See the Implementations
section for a fast approximation to minimum enclosing box.
    In the case of non-convex parts, considerable useful space can be wasted in
the holes created by placing each part in a box. One solution is to ﬁnd the
maximum empty rectangle within each boxed part and use this to contain other
parts if it is suﬃciently large. More advanced solutions are discussed below.
Implementations: BPPLIB (http://or.dei.unibo.it/library/bpplib) is
an extensive collection of bin-packing resources, including codes, sample prob-
lems, and references [DIM18]. This should be your ﬁrst stop if you are interested
in bin packing or cutting stock problems.
    Martello and Toth’s collection of Fortran implementations of algorithms for
a variety of knapsack problem variants are available at http://www.or.deis.
unibo.it/kp.html. An electronic copy of [MT90a] has also been generously
made available. David Pisinger maintains a well-organized collection of C-
language codes for knapsack problems and related variants like bin packing and
container loading. These are available at http://www.diku.dk/~pisinger/
codes.html.
    A ﬁrst step towards packing arbitrary shapes packs each in its own mini-
mum volume box. For a code to ﬁnd an approximation to the optimal pack-
ing, see https://sarielhp.org/research/papers/00/diameter/diam_prog.
html. This algorithm runs in near-linear time [BH01].
Notes: See [CJCG+ 13, CKPT17, DIM16, WHS07] for surveys of the extensive lit-
erature on bin packing and the cutting stock problem. Keller, Pferschy, and Psinger
[KPP04] is a solid reference on the knapsack problem and variants. Experimental
results on bin-packing heuristics include [BJLM83, MT87].
    Eﬃcient algorithms are known for ﬁnding the largest empty rectangle in a polygon
[DMR97] and point set [CDL86].
    Sphere packing is an important and well-studied special case of bin packing,
with applications to error-correcting codes. Particularly notorious was the “Kepler
conjecture”—the problem of establishing the densest packing of unit spheres in three
dimensions. This conjecture was ﬁnally settled by Hales and Ferguson in 1998; see
[Szp03] for an exposition. Conway and Sloane [CS93] is the best reference on sphere
packing and related problems.
    Milenkovic has worked extensively on two-dimensional bin-packing problems for
the apparel industry, minimizing the amount of material needed to manufacture pants
and other clothing. Reports of this work include [DM97, Mil97].

Related problems: Knapsack problem (see page 497), set packing (see page
682).
20.10. MEDIAL-AXIS TRANSFORM                                                  655

                  Input                                   Output

20.10       Medial-Axis Transform
Input description: A polygon or polyhedron P .
Problem description: Find the skeleton of P , the set of points that have
more than one closest point on the boundary of P
Discussion: The medial-axis transformation is useful in thinning a polygon,
or equivalently ﬁnding its skeleton. The goal is to extract a simple, robust
representation of the shape of the polygon. The thinned versions of letters like
‘A’ and ‘B’ capture the essence of their shape, and are largely unaﬀected by
changing the thickness of strokes, or adding font-dependent ﬂourishes such as
serifs. The skeleton also represents the center of the given shape, a property
that leads to other applications, like shape reconstruction and motion planning.
    The medial-axis transformation of a polygon is always a tree, making it fairly
easy to use dynamic programming to measure the “edit distance” between the
skeleton of a known model and the skeleton of an unknown object. Whenever
the two skeletons are similar enough, we can classify the unknown object as an
instance of our model. This technique has proven useful in computer vision and
in optical character recognition. The skeleton of a polygon with holes (like the
letters A and B) is not a tree but an embedded planar graph, yet it remains
fairly easy to work with.
    There are two distinct approaches to computing medial-axis transforms, de-
pending upon whether your input is a geometric point set or a pixel image:

   • Geometric data – Recall that the Voronoi diagram of a point set S (see
     Section 20.4 (page 634)) decomposes the plane into regions around each
     point si ∈ S such that all points within the region around si are closer
     to si than to any other site in S. Similarly, the Voronoi diagram of a
     set of line segments L decomposes the plane into regions around each line
656                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      segment li ∈ L such that all points within the region around li are closer
      to li than to any other site in L.
      Polygons are deﬁned by line segments, such that each segment li shares
      a vertex with neighboring segment li+1 . The medial-axis transform of a
      polygon P is simply the portion of the line-segment Voronoi diagram that
      lies within P . Any line-segment Voronoi diagram code thus suﬃces to do
      polygon thinning.
      The straight skeleton is a structure related to the medial-axis transform
      of a polygon, except that the bisectors are equidistant to the supporting
      lines of its deﬁning edges. The straight skeleton, medial-axis transform,
      and Voronoi diagram are all identical for convex polygons. But in general,
      skeleton bisectors may not be located in the center of the polygon. The
      straight skeleton is quite similar to a proper medial-axis transform, but
      is easier to compute. In particular, all edges in a straight skeleton are
      polygonal. See the Notes section for references with more details on how
      to compute it.

   • Image data – Digitized images can be interpreted as points sitting at the
     lattice points on an integer grid. Thus, we could extract a polygonal
     description from boundaries in an image and feed it to the geometric
     algorithms just described. However, the internal vertices of the skeleton
     will most likely not lie at grid/pixel points. Geometric approaches to
     image processing problems often ﬂounder, because images are pixel based
     and not continuous.
      A direct pixel-based approach for constructing a skeleton implements the
      “brush ﬁre” view of thinning. Imagine a ﬁre burning along all edges of the
      polygon, racing inward at a constant speed. The skeleton is marked by all
      points where two or more ﬁres meet. The resulting algorithm traverses all
      the boundary pixels of the object, identiﬁes those vertices as being in the
      skeleton, deletes the rest of the boundary, and repeats. This algorithm
      terminates when all pixels are extreme, leaving an object only one or two
      pixels thick. When implemented properly, this takes time linear in the
      number of pixels in the image.
      Algorithms that explicitly manipulate pixels tend to be easy to implement,
      because they avoid complicated data structures. However, the geometry
      doesn’t work out exactly right in such pixel-based approaches. For exam-
      ple, the skeleton of a polygon is no longer always a tree, or even necessarily
      connected. Further, the points in the skeleton will be close to but not quite
      equidistant to two boundary edges. Because you are trying to do contin-
      uous geometry in a discrete world, there is no way to solve the problem
      completely. You just have to live with it.

Implementations: CGAL (www.cgal.org) includes a package for computing
the straight skeleton of a polygon P . Associated with it are routines for con-
20.10. MEDIAL-AXIS TRANSFORM                                                         657

structing oﬀset contours deﬁning the polygonal regions within P whose points
are at least distance d from the boundary.
    VRONI [Hel01] is a robust and eﬃcient program for computing Voronoi di-
agrams of line segments, points, and arcs in the plane. It can readily compute
medial-axis transforms of polygons, because it can construct Voronoi diagrams
of arbitrary line segments. VRONI has been tested on thousands of synthetic
and real-world data sets, some with over a million vertices. For more informa-
tion, see http://www.cosy.sbg.ac.at/~held/projects/vroni/vroni.html.
Other programs for constructing Voronoi diagrams are discussed in Section 20.4
(page 634).
    Programs that reconstruct or interpolate point clouds often are based on
medial-axis transforms. Cocone (http://www.cse.ohio-state.edu/~tamaldey/
cocone.html) constructs an approximate medial-axis transform of the polyhe-
dral surface it interpolates from points in E 3 . See [Dey06] for the theory behind
Cocone. Powercrust [ACK01a, ACK01b] constructs a discrete approximation to
the medial-axis transform, and then reconstructs the surface from this trans-
form. When the point samples are suﬃciently dense, the algorithm is guaranteed
to produce a geometrically and topologically correct approximation to the sur-
face. It is available at https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~amenta/powercrust.
html.
Notes: The book by Siddiqi and Pizer [SP08] oﬀers a comprehensive treatment
of medial representations and algorithms. Surveys of thinning approaches in im-
age processing and computer graphics, include [LLS92, Ogn93, SBdB16, TDS+ 16].
The medial-axis transformation was introduced for shape similarity studies in biology
[Blu67]. Computational topology is an emerging ﬁeld for the formal analysis of shape:
see the book by Edelsbrunner and Harer [EH10]. Good expositions on the medial-axis
transform include [dBvKOS08, O’R01, Pav82].
    The medial-axis of a polygon can be computed in O(n lg n) time for arbitrary
n-gons [Lee82], although linear-time algorithms exist for convex polygons [AGSS89].
An O(n lg n) algorithm for constructing medial-axis transforms in curved regions was
given by Kirkpatrick [Kir79].
    Straight skeletons were introduced in [AAAG95], with a subquadratic algorithm
due to [EE99]. See [LD03] for an interesting application of straight skeletons to deﬁning
the roof structures in virtual building models. The input and output ﬁgures above
were inspired by [dMPF09].

Related problems: Voronoi diagrams (see page 634), Minkowski sum (see
page 674).
658                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                  Input                                    Output

20.11       Polygon Partitioning
Input description: A polygon or polyhedron P .
Problem description: Partition P into a small number of simple (typically
convex) pieces.
Discussion: Partitioning is an important pre-processing step for many geo-
metric algorithms, because geometric problems tend to be simpler on convex
objects than on non-convex ones. It is often easier to work with a number of
convex pieces than with a single non-convex polygon.
    Carving a nation into states or counties or districts is a classical problem in
polygon partitioning. Typically we seek to balance the population or area of
each region, but shape also matters. Gerrymandering is the ﬁne art of drawing
districts for the electoral advantage of your particular political party, districts
that often assume very complicated shapes to ensure they include all the “right”
voters. To prevent the most egregious violations, the law demands that districts
be as compact as possible, ideally nicely shaped into convex regions.
    Several ﬂavors of polygon partitioning arise, depending upon the particular
application:

   • Should all the pieces be triangles? – Triangulation is the mother of all poly-
     gon partitioning problems, where we partition the interior of the polygon
     completely into triangles. Triangles are convex and have only three sides,
     making them the most elementary possible polygon.
      Every triangulation of an n-vertex polygon contains exactly n − 2 trian-
      gles. Thus, triangulation cannot be the answer if we seek a small number
      of convex pieces. A “nice” triangulation is judged by the shape of the
      triangles, not the count. See Section 20.3 (page 630) for an introduction
      to triangulation.
20.11. POLYGON PARTITIONING                                                 659

   • Do I want to cover or partition my polygon? – Partitioning a polygon
     means completely dividing the interior into non-overlapping pieces. Cov-
     ering a polygon means that our decomposition is permitted to contain
     mutually overlapping pieces. Both prove useful in diﬀerent situations.
     When decomposing a complicated query polygon for a range search (Sec-
     tion 20.6 (page 641)), we seek a partitioning, so that each point we locate
     occurs in exactly one piece. But when decomposing a polygon for graphics
     rendering, a covering suﬃces, since there is no diﬃculty with painting a
     given region twice—provided we use the same color on all regions. We
     will concentrate here on partitioning, since it is simpler to do right, and
     any application needing a covering will accept a partitioning. The only
     drawback is that partitions can be larger than coverings.

   • Am I allowed to add extra vertices? – A ﬁnal issue is whether we are
     allowed to add Steiner vertices to the polygon, either by splitting edges
     or adding interior points. Otherwise, we are restricted to adding chords
     between two existing vertices. But adding well-placed vertices may en-
     able us to reduce the number of pieces, at the cost of more complicated
     algorithms and perhaps messier results.

    The Hertel–Mehlhorn heuristic for convex decomposition using diagonals is
simple and eﬃcient. It starts from an arbitrary triangulation of the polygon, and
then deletes any chord that leaves only convex pieces. A chord deletion results
in a non-convex piece only when it creates an internal angle that is greater than
180 degrees. The decision of whether such an angle will result can be made
locally from the chords and edges surrounding the deleted chord, in constant
time. The result always contains at most four times the minimum number of
convex pieces.
    I recommend using this heuristic unless it is critical for you to absolutely
minimize the number of pieces. By experimenting with diﬀerent triangulations
and various deletion orders, you may be able to obtain somewhat better decom-
positions.
    Dynamic programming can be employed to ﬁnd the absolute minimum num-
ber of diagonals used in a polygon decomposition into convex regions. The
simplest implementation, which maintains the number of pieces for all O(n2 )
subpolygons split by a chord, runs in O(n4 ). Faster algorithms use fancier data
structures, running in O(n + r2 min(r2 , n)) time, where r is the number of re-
ﬂex vertices. An O(n3 ) algorithm that further reduces the number of pieces by
adding interior vertices is cited below, although it is complex and presumably
diﬃcult to implement.
    An alternate decomposition problem partitions polygons into monotone pieces.
The vertices of a y-monotone polygon can be divided into two chains such that
any horizontal line intersects either chain at most once.

Implementations: Many triangulation codes start by ﬁnding a trapezoidal or
monotone decomposition of polygons. Further, a triangulation is a simple form
660                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

of convex decomposition. Check out the codes in Section 20.3 (page 630) as a
starting point.
    CGAL (www.cgal.org) contains a polygon-partitioning library that includes
(1) the Hertel–Mehlhorn heuristic for partitioning a polygon into convex pieces,
(2) ﬁnding an optimal convex partitioning using the O(n4 ) dynamic program-
ming algorithm, and (3) an O(n log n) sweep-line heuristic for partitioning into
monotone polygons.
    A triangulation code of particular relevance here is GEOMPACK—a suite
of Fortran 77 and C++ codes for two- and three-dimensional triangulation and
convex decomposition problems, available at http://people.math.sc.edu/
Burkardt/cpp_src/geompack/geompack.html. In particular, it does both De-
launay triangulation and convex decompositions of polygonal and polyhedral
regions, as well as arbitrary-dimensional Delaunay triangulations.
Notes: Survey articles on polygon partitioning include [Kei00, OST18]. Keil and Sack
[KS85] give an excellent overview of what is known about partitioning and covering
polygons. Expositions on the Hertel–Mehlhorn heuristic [HM83] include [O’R01]. The
O(n + r2 min(r2 , n)) dynamic programming algorithm for minimum convex decompo-
sition using diagonals is due to Keil and Snoeyink [KS02]. The O(r3 + n) algorithm
minimizing the number of convex pieces with Steiner points appears in [CD85]. Amato
et al. [GALL13, LA06] provide an eﬃcient heuristic for decomposing polygons with
holes into “almost convex” polygons in O(nr) time, with later work generalizing this
to polyhedra.
     Art gallery problems are an interesting topic related to polygon covering, where
we seek to position the minimum number of guards in a given polygon such that
every point in the interior of the polygon is watched by at least one guard. This
corresponds to covering the polygon with a minimum number of star-shaped polygons.
O’Rourke [O’R87] is a beautiful book that presents the art gallery problem and its
many variations. Although sadly out of print, it is available at http://cs.smith.edu/
~jorourke/books/ArtGalleryTheorems. The art gallery problem is not obviously in
NP because of its dependence on non-integer arithmetic, but hard under an appropriate
model of computation [AAM18]. Recent computational results on constructing optimal
guard sets are reported in [KBFS12].

Related problems: Triangulation (see page 630), set cover (see page 678).
20.12. SIMPLIFYING POLYGONS                                                  661

                 Input                                    Output

20.12       Simplifying Polygons
Input description: A polygon or polyhedron p, with n vertices.
Problem description: Find a polygon or polyhedron p containing only n
vertices, such that the shape of p is as close as possible to p.
Discussion: Polygon simpliﬁcation has two primary applications. The ﬁrst
involves cleaning up a noisy representation of a shape, perhaps obtained by
scanning a picture of an object. Simplifying the boundary can remove the noise,
and reconstruct the original object. The second involves data compression,
where we seek to reduce detail on a large and complicated object: yet leave it
looking essentially the same. This can be a big win in computer graphics, where
the smaller model might be signiﬁcantly faster to render.
   Several issues arise in shape simpliﬁcation:

   • Do you want the convex hull? – The simplest simpliﬁcation is the convex
     hull of the object’s vertices. The convex hull (see Section 20.2 (page 626))
     removes all internal concavities from the polygon. If you are simplifying
     a robot model for motion planning, this is almost certainly a good thing.
     But using the convex hull would be disastrous in an OCR system, because
     the concavities of characters provide most of the interesting features. An
     “X” would be identical to an “I”, since both hulls are boxes. Also, taking
     the convex hull of a convex polygon can do nothing to simplify it further.

   • Am I allowed to insert points, or just delete them? – The typical goal of
     simpliﬁcation is to represent the object as well as possible using a given
     number of vertices. The simplest approaches do local modiﬁcations to
     the boundary in order to reduce the vertex count. For example, if three
     consecutive vertices form a small-area triangle or deﬁne an extremely large
     angle, the center vertex can be deleted and replaced with an edge without
     severely distorting the polygon.
662                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

        Methods that only delete vertices quickly melt shapes into unrecognizabil-
        ity, however. More robust heuristics move vertices around to cover up the
        gaps that are created by deletions. Such “split-and-merge” heuristics can
        do a decent job, although nothing is guaranteed. Better results are likely
        by using the Douglas–Peucker algorithm, described below.
      • Must the resulting polygon be intersection-free? – A serious drawback of
        incremental procedures is that they fail to ensure simple polygons, mean-
        ing they are without self-intersections. Such “simpliﬁed” polygons may
        have ugly artifacts that cause problems for subsequent routines. If sim-
        plicity is important, explicitly test all the line segments of your polygon
        for pairwise intersections, as discussed in Section 20.8 (page 648).
        An approach to polygon simpliﬁcation that guarantees a simple approx-
        imation involves computing minimum-link paths. The link distance of
        a path between points s and t is the number of straight segments on the
        path. An as-the-crow-ﬂies path has a link distance of one, while in general
        the link distance is one more than the number of turns on the path. The
        link distance between points s and t in a scene with obstacles is deﬁned
        by the minimum-link distance over all paths from s to t.
        This link distance approach “fattens” the boundary of the polygon by
        some acceptable error window  (see Section 20.16 (page 674)) in order
        to construct a channel around the polygon. The minimum-link cycle in
        this channel represents the simplest polygon that never deviates from the
        original boundary by more than . An easy-to-compute approximation
        to link distance reduces it to breadth-ﬁrst search, by placing a discrete
        set of possible turn points within the channel and connecting each pair of
        mutually visible points by an edge.
   • Are you given an image to clean up, instead of a polygon to simplify? –
     The conventional approach to remove noise from a digital image is to take
     the Fourier transform of the image, ﬁlter out the high-frequency elements,
     and then take the inverse transform to recreate the image. See Section
     16.11 (page 501) for details on the fast Fourier transform.
    The Douglas–Peucker algorithm for shape simpliﬁcation starts with a sim-
ple approximation and then reﬁnes it, instead of starting with a complicated
polygon and trying to simplify it. Start by selecting two vertices v1 and v2 of
polygon P , and propose the degenerate polygon v1 , v2 , v1 as a simple approxi-
mation P  . Now scan through each of the vertices of P , and select the one that
is farthest from the corresponding edge of the polygon P  . Inserting this vertex
adds the triangle to P  to minimize the maximum deviation from P . Points
can be inserted until satisfactory results are achieved. This takes O(kn) time
to insert k points when |P | = n.
    Simpliﬁcation becomes considerably more diﬃcult in three dimensions. In-
deed, it is NP-complete to ﬁnd the minimum-size surface separating two polyhe-
dra. Higher-dimensional analogies of the planar algorithms discussed here can
be used to heuristically simplify polyhedra. See the Notes section.
20.12. SIMPLIFYING POLYGONS                                                     663

Implementations: The Douglas–Peucker algorithm is readily implemented.
For a C implementation with eﬃcient worst-case performance [HS94], see https:
//www.codeproject.com/Articles/1711/A-C-implementation-of-Douglas-
Peucker-Line-Approxi.
    QSlim is a quadric-based simpliﬁcation algorithm that can produce high-
quality approximations of triangulated surfaces quite rapidly. It is available at
http://mgarland.org/software/qslim.html.
    Yet another approach to polygonal simpliﬁcation is based on simplifying and
expanding the medial-axis transform of the polygon. The medial-axis trans-
form (see Section 20.10 (page 655)) produces a skeleton of the polygon, which
can be trimmed before inverting the transform to yield a simpler polygon. Co-
cone (http://www.cse.ohio-state.edu/~tamaldey/cocone.html) constructs
an approximate medial-axis transform of the polyhedral surface it interpolates
from points in E 3 . See [Dey06] for the theory behind Cocone. Powercrust
[ACK01a, ACK01b] constructs a discrete approximation to the medial-axis
transform, and then reconstructs the surface from this transform. When the
point samples are suﬃciently dense, the algorithm is guaranteed to produce
a geometrically and topologically correct approximation to the surface. It is
available at https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~amenta/powercrust.html.
    CGAL (www.cgal.org) provides support for polyline simpliﬁcation, as well
as the most extreme polygon/polyhedral reduction, ﬁnding the smallest enclos-
ing circle/sphere.
Notes: The Douglas–Peucker incremental reﬁnement algorithm [DP73] is the basis for
most shape simpliﬁcation schemes, with faster implementations due to [HS94, HS98].
Generalizations include nested polygonal subdivisions [DDS09, XWW11] and area-
preserving simpliﬁcation [BMRS16]. The link distance approach to polygon simpliﬁ-
cation is presented in [GHMS93]. Shape simpliﬁcation problems become considerably
more complex in three dimensions. Even ﬁnding the minimum-vertex convex poly-
hedron lying between two nested convex polyhedra is NP-complete [DJ92], although
approximation algorithms are known [MS95b].
    Heckbert and Garland [HG97] survey algorithms for shape simpliﬁcation. Shape
simpliﬁcation using medial-axis transformations (see Section 20.10) are presented in
[TH03].
    Testing whether a polygon is simple can be performed in linear time, at least in
theory, as a consequence of Chazelle’s linear-time triangulation algorithm [Cha91].

Related problems: Thinning (see page 655), convex hull (see page 626).
664                        CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                        A
                      ? B                                       = B
                        C

                  Input                                    Output

20.13       Shape Similarity
Input description: Two polygonal shapes, P1 and P2 .
Problem description: How similar are P1 and P2 ?
Discussion: Shape similarity is a problem that underlies much of pattern recog-
nition. Consider a system for optical character recognition (OCR). We are given
a library of shape models representing letters, and unknown shapes obtained by
scanning a page. We seek to identify the unknown shapes by matching each of
them to the most similar shape model.
    Shape similarity is an inherently ill-deﬁned problem, because what “similar”
means is application dependent. Thus, no single algorithmic approach can solve
all shape matching problems. Whatever method you select, expect to spend a
large chunk of time tweaking it to achieve maximum performance.
    Among your possible approaches are:

   • Hamming distance – Suppose that your two polygons have been prop-
     erly registered, meaning overlaid one on top of the other. The Ham-
     ming distance measures the area of symmetric diﬀerence between the two
     polygons—in other words, the area lying within one polygon but not both
     of them. When two polygons are identical and properly aligned, the Ham-
     ming distance is zero. If the polygons diﬀer only in a little noise at the
     boundary, then the Hamming distance of properly aligned polygons will
     be small.
      Computing the area of the symmetric diﬀerence reduces to ﬁnding the
      intersection or union of two polygons (discussed in Section 20.8 (page 648))
      and then computing areas (discussed in Section 20.1). But the diﬃcult
      problem is ﬁnding the right alignment of the two polygons. This overlay
      problem is simpliﬁed in applications such as OCR, because the characters
20.13. SHAPE SIMILARITY                                                    665

    are inherently aligned within lines on the page and are not free to rotate.
    Eﬃcient algorithms to optimize the overlap of convex polygons without
    rotation are cited below. Simple but reasonably eﬀective heuristics are
    based on identifying reference landmarks on each polygon (such as the
    centroid, bounding box, or extremal vertices) and then matching a subset
    of these landmarks to deﬁne the alignment.
    Hamming distance is particularly simple and eﬃcient to compute on bit-
    mapped images, since after alignment all we do is sum the diﬀerences
    of the corresponding pixels. Although Hamming distance makes sense
    conceptually and can be simple to implement, it captures only a crude
    notion of shape and is likely to be ineﬀective in many applications.
  • Hausdorﬀ distance – An alternative similarity measure (post-registration)
    is Hausdorﬀ distance, which identiﬁes the point on P1 that is the maximum
    distance from P2 and returns this distance. The Hausdorﬀ distance is not
    symmetrical, for the tip of a long but thin protrusion from P1 can imply a
    large Hausdorﬀ distance P1 to P2 , even though every point on P2 is close
    to some point on P1 . A fattening of the entire boundary of one of the
    models (as is liable to happen with boundary noise) by a small amount
    may substantially increase the Hamming distance yet have little eﬀect on
    the Hausdorﬀ distance.
    Which is better, Hamming or Hausdorﬀ? It depends upon your applica-
    tion. As with Hamming distance, computing the right alignment between
    the polygons can be diﬃcult and time-consuming.

  • Comparing Skeletons – A more powerful approach to shape similarity uses
    thinning (see Section 20.10 (page 655)) to extract a tree-like skeleton for
    each object. This skeleton captures many aspects of the original shape.
    The problem now reduces to comparing the shape of two such skeletons,
    using such features as the topology of the tree and the lengths/slopes of
    the edges. This comparison can be modeled as some form of subgraph
    isomorphism (see Section 19.9 (page 610)), with edges allowed to match
    whenever their lengths and slopes are suﬃciently similar.
  • Machine learning techniques – A ﬁnal approach for pattern recognition
    problems uses machine learning-based techniques such as logistic regres-
    sion, support vector machines, or deep neural networks. The progress here
    has been staggering in recent years in applications like face recognition,
    which works reliably despite diﬀerences in pose, orientation, and lighting
    between template and target images. Such problems feel much harder
    than the rigid shape similarity discussed earlier in this section.
    Machine learning proves successful when you have a lot of data to train
    on and no problem-speciﬁc ideas of what to do with it. Typically, you
    ﬁrst identify a set of easily computed features of the shape, such as area,
    number of sides, and number of holes—although deep learning methods
    eliminate the need to do such feature engineering. A black-box program
666                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      then takes your training data and produces a classiﬁcation function, which
      accepts as input your feature vector and returns a measure of what the
      shape is, or how close it is to a particular shape.
      How good are the resulting classiﬁers? It depends upon the application.
      Machine learning methods usually take a fair amount of tweaking and
      tuning to realize their full potential. One problem is interpretability. If you
      don’t know how or why black-box classiﬁers are making their decisions, you
      can’t know when they will fail. An interesting case was a system built for
      the military to distinguish between images of cars and tanks. It performed
      very well on test images but disastrously in the ﬁeld. Eventually, someone
      realized that the car images had been ﬁlmed on a sunnier day than the
      tanks, and the program was classifying solely on the presence of clouds in
      the background of the image!

Implementations: The computational geometry library CGAL (https://
www.cgal.org/) contains a variety of routines associated with shape detec-
tion and matching, including Hausdorﬀ distance computations. An alternate
distance metric between polygons can be based on its angle-turning function
[ACH+ 91]. An implementation in C of this turning function metric by Eugene
K. Ressler is provided at www.algorist.com.
    Several excellent support vector machine classiﬁers are available. These in-
clude Python’s scikit-learn (https://scikit-learn.org/, SV M light (http:
//svmlight.joachims.org/) and the widely used and well-supported LIBSVM
(https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/).
Notes: Veltkamp [Vel01] is an excellent survey on shape matching from a computa-
tional geometry perspective. See also the survey by Alt and Guibas [AG00]. General
books on pattern classiﬁcation algorithms include [Che15, DHS00, JD88]. A recent
survey of geometric approaches to face recognition is presented in [SBW17]. Goodfel-
low [GBC16] is the primary reference on deep learning.
    The optimal alignment of n and m-vertex convex polygons subject to translation
(but not rotation) can be computed in O((n + m) log(n + m)) time [dBDK+ 98]. An
approximation of the optimal overlap under translation and rotation is due to Ahn, et
al. [ACP+ 07].
    A linear-time algorithm for computing the Hausdorﬀ distance between two convex
polygons is given in Atallah [Ata83], with algorithms for the general case reported in
[HK90].

Related problems: Graph isomorphism (see page 610), thinning (see page
655).
20.14. MOTION PLANNING                                                       667

       S                                         S

                               T                                         T

                 Input                                    Output

20.14       Motion Planning
Input description: A polygonal-shaped robot starting at position s in a room
containing polygonal obstacles, and a goal position t.
Problem description: Find the shortest route taking s to t without intersect-
ing any obstacles.
Discussion: That motion planning is a complex problem is obvious to anyone
who has tried to move a large piece of furniture into a small apartment. Plotting
paths for mobile robots is the canonical motion-planning application. It also
arises in systems for molecular docking. Many drugs are small molecules that
act by binding to a given target model. Identifying which binding sites are
accessible to a candidate drug is clearly an instance of motion planning.
     Finally, motion planning provides a tool for computer animation and virtual
reality. Given the set of object models and where they appear in scenes s1 and
s2 , a motion planning algorithm can construct a short sequence of intermediate
motions to transform s1 to s2 . These motions can ﬁll in the intermediate scenes
between s1 and s2 , with such scene interpolation greatly reducing the workload
on the animator.
     Many factors govern the complexity of motion-planning problems:
   • Is your robot a point? – For point robots, motion planning reduces to
     ﬁnding the shortest path from s to t around the obstacles. This problem
     is known as geometric shortest path. The most readily implementable
     approach constructs the visibility graph of the polygonal obstacles, plus
     the points s and t. This visibility graph contains a node for each obstacle
     vertex, and an edge between two obstacle vertices iﬀ they “see” each other
     without being blocked by some obstacle edge.
                                                                      
     This visibility graph can be constructed by testing each of the n2 vertex-
     pair edge candidates for intersection against each of the n obstacle edges,
668                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

        although faster algorithms are known. Assign each edge of this visibility
        graph with weight equal to its length. Then the shortest path from s to
        t can be found using Dijkstra’s shortest-path algorithm (see Section 18.4
        (page 554)) in time bounded by what is required to construct the visibility
        graph.

  • What motions can your robot perform? – Motion planning becomes con-
    siderably more diﬃcult when the robot becomes a polygon instead of a
    point. Now all of the corridors that we use must be wide enough to permit
    the robot to pass through.
        The algorithmic complexity depends upon the number of degrees of free-
        dom that the robot can use to move. Is it free to rotate as well as to
        translate? Does the robot have links that are free to bend or to rotate
        independently, as in an arm with a hand? Each degree of freedom cor-
        responds to a dimension in the search space of possible conﬁgurations.
        Additional freedom makes it more likely that a short path exists from
        start to goal, although it also makes it harder to ﬁnd this path.

  • Can you simplify the shape of your robot? – Motion planning algorithms
    tend to be complex and time-consuming. Anything you can do to simplify
    your environment is a win. In particular, consider replacing your robot
    in an enclosing disk. Any start-to-goal path for this disk deﬁnes such a
    path for the robot inside of it. Furthermore, since any orientation of a
    disk is equivalent to any other orientation, rotation provides no help in
    ﬁnding a path. All movements can thus be limited to the simpler case of
    translation.

  • Are motions limited to translation only? – When rotation is not allowed,
    the expanded obstacles approach can be used to reduce the problem of
    polygonal motion planning to the previously resolved case of a point robot.
    Pick a reference point on the robot, and replace each obstacle by its
    Minkowski sum with the robot polygon (see Section 20.16 (page 674)).
    This creates a larger, fatter obstacle, deﬁned by the shadow traced as
    the robot walks a loop around the object while maintaining contact with
    it. Finding a path from the initial reference position to the goal amidst
    these fattened obstacles deﬁnes a legal path for the polygonal robot in the
    original environment.

      • Are the obstacles known in advance? – We have assumed that the robot
        starts out with a map of its environment. But this can’t be true (say) in
        applications where the obstacles move. There are two strategies for solving
        motion planning problems without a map. The ﬁrst approach explores
        the environment, building a map of what has been seen, and then uses
        this map to plan a path to the goal. A simpler strategy proceeds like a
        sightless man with a compass. Walk in the direction towards the goal until
        progress is blocked by an obstacle, and then trace out a path along the
20.14. MOTION PLANNING                                                            669

      obstacle until the robot is again free to proceed directly towards the goal.
      Unfortunately, this will fail in environments of suﬃcient complexity.

    The most practical approach to general motion planning involves randomly
sampling the conﬁguration space of the robot. The conﬁguration space deﬁnes
the set of legal positions for the robot, using one dimension for each degree of
freedom. A planar robot capable of translation and rotation has three degrees
of freedom, namely the x- and y-coordinates of a reference point on the robot
and the angle θ relative to this point. Certain points in this space represent
legal positions, while others intersect obstacles.
    Construct a set of legal conﬁguration-space points by random sampling.
For each pair of points p1 and p2 , decide whether there exists a direct, non-
intersecting path between them. This deﬁnes a graph with vertices for each
legal point and edges for each traversable pair. Motion planning now reduces to
ﬁnding a direct path from the initial/ﬁnal positions to one or more vertices in
the graph, and then solving a shortest-path problem from initial to ﬁnal points.
    There are many ways to enhance this basic technique, such as adding addi-
tional vertices to regions of particular interest. Building a road map provides a
nice, clean approach to solve problems that would otherwise get very messy.
Implementations: State-of-the-art sampling-based motion planning algorithms
are available from the Open Motion Planning Library (https://ompl.kavrakilab.
org/) with hooks to integrate collision checking and visualization. This should
presumably be your ﬁrst stop in any robot or other motion planning project.
OMPL is described in [ŞMK12].
    The Motion Planning Toolkit (MPK) is a C++ library and toolkit for de-
veloping single- and multi-robot motion planners. It includes SBL, a fast single-
query probabilistic roadmap path planner, and is available at http://robotics.
stanford.edu/~mitul/mpk/.
    The computational geometry library CGAL (www.cgal.org) contains many
algorithms related to motion planning including visibility graph construction
and Minkowski sums. O’Rourke [O’R01] gives a toy implementation of an al-
gorithm to plot motion for a two-jointed robot arm in the plane. See Section
22.1.9 (page 717).
Notes: Latombe’s book [Lat91] describes practical approaches to motion planning,
including the random sampling method described above. Two other worthy books on
motion planning are freely available: by LaValle [LaV06] (http://planning.cs.uiuc.
edu/) and Laumond [Lau98] (https://www.laas.fr/~jpl/book.html) respectively.
    Motion planning was originally studied by Schwartz and Sharir as the “piano
mover’s problem.” Their solution constructs the complete free space of robot positions
that do not intersect obstacles, and then ﬁnds the shortest path within the proper
connected component. These free space descriptions are very complicated, involving
arrangements of higher-degree algebraic surfaces. The fundamental papers on the
piano mover’s problem appear in [HSS87], with more recent surveys including [KF11,
MLL16, PČY+ 16, HSS18].
    The best general result for this free-space approach to motion planning is due
to Canny [Can87], who showed that any problem with d degrees of freedom can be
670                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

solved in O(nd lg n), although faster algorithms exist for special cases of the general
motion planning problem. The expanded obstacle approach to motion planning is
due to Lozano-Perez and Wesley [LPW79]. The heuristic, sightless man’s approach to
motion planning discussed above has been studied by Lumelski [LS87].
    The time complexity of algorithms based on the free-space approach to motion
planning depends intimately on the combinatorial complexity of the arrangement of
surfaces deﬁning the free space. Algorithms for maintaining arrangements are pre-
sented in Section 20.15 (page 671). Davenport–Schinzel sequences often arise in the
analysis of such arrangements. Sharir and Agarwal [SA95] provide a comprehensive
treatment of Davenport–Schinzel sequences and their relevance to motion planning.
    The visibility graph of n line segments with E pairs of visible vertices can be
constructed in O(n lg n + E) time [GM91, PV96], which is optimal. Hershberger and
Suri [HS99] have an O(n lg n) algorithm for ﬁnding shortest paths for point-robots
with polygonal obstacles. Chew [Che85] provides an O(n2 lg n) for ﬁnding shortest
paths for a disk-robot in such a scene.

Related problems: Shortest path (see page 554), Minkowski sum (see page
674).
20.15. MAINTAINING LINE ARRANGEMENTS                                         671

                   Input                                  Output

20.15        Maintaining Line Arrangements
Input description: A set of lines l1 , . . . , ln .
Problem description: What is the decomposition of the plane deﬁned by
l1 , . . . , l n ?
Discussion: A fundamental problem in computational geometry is explicitly
constructing the regions formed by the intersections of a set of n lines. Many
problems reduce to constructing and analyzing such an arrangement of a speciﬁc
set of lines. Examples include:

   • Degeneracy testing – Given a set of n lines in the plane, do any three
     lines pass through the same point? Brute-force testing of all triples takes
     O(n3 ) time. Instead, we can construct the arrangement of the lines and
     walk over each vertex to explicitly count its degree, all in quadratic time.

   • Satisfying the maximum number of linear constraints – Suppose that we
     are given a set of n linear constraints, each of the form y ≤ ai x + bi .
     Which point in the plane satisﬁes the largest number of them? Construct
     the arrangement of the lines. All points in any region or cell of this
     arrangement will satisfy exactly the same set of constraints, so we only
     need to test one point per cell to ﬁnd the global maximum.

    Thinking of geometric problems in terms of features in an arrangement can
be very useful in formulating algorithms. Unfortunately, it must be admitted
that arrangements are not as popular in practice as might be supposed. Pri-
marily, this is because of the depth of understanding necessary to apply them
correctly. The computational geometry library CGAL provides a general and
robust implementation that justiﬁes the eﬀort to ﬁgure this out. Issues arising
in arrangements include:
672                          CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

      • What is the right way to construct a line arrangement? – Algorithms for
        constructing arrangements are incremental. Begin with an arrangement
        of one or two lines. Subsequent lines get inserted into the arrangement
        one at a time, yielding larger and larger arrangements. To insert a new
        line, we start from the left-most cell containing the line and walk over the
        arrangement to the right. We move from cell to neighboring cell, splitting
        each into two pieces using the new line.
      • How big will your arrangement be? – A geometric fact called the zone
        theorem implies that the kth line inserted cuts through k cells of the
        arrangement, and further that O(k) total edges form the boundary of
        these cells. This means that we can scan through each edge of every cell
        we encounter on our insertion walk, conﬁdent that only linear total work
        will be performed inserting the line into the arrangement. The total time
        to insert all n lines in constructing the full arrangement is thus O(n2 ).
      • What do you want to do with your arrangement? – Given an arrangement
        and a query point q, we often want to identify which cell of the arrange-
        ment contains q. This is the problem of point location, discussed in Section
        20.7 (page 644). Given an arrangement of lines or line segments, we are
        often interested in computing all points of intersection of the lines. The
        problem of intersection detection is discussed in Section 20.8 (page 648).
      • Does your input consist of points instead of lines? – Although lines and
        points seem to be diﬀerent geometric objects, appearances can be mis-
        leading. Through the magic of duality transformations, we can turn line
        L into point p and vice versa:

                                L : y = 2ax − b ↔ p : (a, b)

        Duality is important because we can now apply line arrangements to point
        problems, often with surprising results.
        For example, suppose we are given a set of n points, and we want to know
        whether any three of them all lie on the same line. This sounds similar to
        the degeneracy testing problem discussed above. But in fact it is exactly
        the same, only with the role of points and lines exchanged. We can dualize
        our points into lines as above, construct the arrangement, and then search
        for a vertex with three lines passing through it. The dual of this vertex
        deﬁnes the line on which the three initial vertices lie.

    It often becomes useful to traverse each face of an existing arrangement ex-
actly once. Such traversals are called sweep line algorithms, and are discussed
in some detail in Section 20.8 (page 648). The basic procedure sorts the inter-
section points by x-coordinate and then walks from left to right while keeping
track of all we have seen.
Implementations: CGAL (www.cgal.org) provides a generic and robust pack-
age for arrangements of curves (not just lines) in the plane. This should be the
20.15. MAINTAINING LINE ARRANGEMENTS                                                 673

starting point for any serious project using arrangements. A recent book by
Fogel et al. [FHW12] on CGAL arrangements provides the best starting point.
    A robust code for constructing and topologically sweeping an arrangement in
C++ is provided at https://www.cs.tufts.edu/research/geometry/other/
sweep/. An extension of topological sweep to deal with the visibility complex of
a collection of pairwise disjoint convex planar sets has been provided in CGAL.
    Arrange is a package for maintaining arrangements of polygons in either
the plane or on the sphere. Polygons may be degenerate, and hence represent
arrangements of lines. A randomized incremental construction algorithm is
used, and eﬃcient point location on the arrangement is supported. Arrange is
written in C by Michael Goldwasser and is available from http://euler.slu.
edu/~goldwasser/publications/.
Notes: Edelsbrunner [Ede87] provides a comprehensive treatment of the combinato-
rial theory of arrangements, plus algorithms on arrangements with applications. It is
an essential reference for anyone seriously interested in the subject. Recent surveys of
combinatorial and algorithmic results include [AS00, HS18]. Good expositions on con-
structing arrangements include [dBvKOS08, O’R01]. Implementation issues related to
arrangements as implemented in CGAL are discussed in [FWH04, HH00].
     Arrangements generalize naturally beyond two dimensions. Instead of lines, the
space decomposition is deﬁned by planes (or beyond three dimensions, hyperplanes).
The zone theorem states that any arrangement of n d-dimensional hyperplanes has to-
tal complexity O(nd ), and any single hyperplane intersects cells of complexity O(nd−1 ).
This provides the justiﬁcation for incremental construction algorithms for arrange-
ments. Walking around the boundary of each cell to ﬁnd the next cell that the hy-
perplane intersects takes time proportional to the number of cells created by inserting
the hyperplane.
     The history of the zone theorem has become somewhat muddled, because the
original proofs were later found to be wrong in higher dimensions. See [ESS93] for
a discussion and a correct proof. The theory of Davenport–Schinzel sequences is
intimately tied into the study of arrangements, which is presented in [SA95].
     The naive algorithm for sweeping an arrangement of lines sorts the n2 inter-
section points by x-coordinate and hence requires O(n2 lg n) time. The topological
sweep [EG89, EG91] eliminates the need to sort, and so traverses the arrangement
in quadratic time. This algorithm is readily implementable and can be applied to
speed up many sweep-line algorithms. See [RSS02] for a robust implementation with
experimental results.

Related problems: Intersection detection (see page 648), point location (see
page 644).
674                        CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

                 Input                                    Output

20.16       Minkowski Sum
Input description: Point sets or polygons A and B, containing n and m
vertices respectively.
Problem description: What is the convolution of A and B, that is, the
Minkowski sum A + B = {x + y | x ∈ A, y ∈ B}?
Discussion: Minkowski sums are useful geometric operations that fatten up
objects in appropriate ways. For example, a popular approach to motion plan-
ning for polygonal robots in a room with polygonal obstacles (see Section 20.14
(page 667)) fattens each obstacle by taking the Minkowski sum of them with
the shape of the robot. This reduces the problem to the more easily solved
case of point robots. Another application is in shape simpliﬁcation (see Section
20.12 (page 661)). Here we fatten the boundary of an object to create a channel
around it, and then let the minimum link path lying within this channel deﬁne
the simpliﬁed shape. Finally, convolving an irregular object with a small circle
will smooth out the boundary by eliminating minor nicks and cuts.
    The deﬁnition of a Minkowski sum assumes that the polygons A and B have
been positioned on a coordinate system:

                         A + B = {x + y | x ∈ A, y ∈ B}

where x + y is the vector sum of two points. Thinking of this in terms of
translation, the Minkowski sum is the union of all translations of A by a point
deﬁned within B. Issues arising in computing Minkowski sums include:

   • Are your objects rasterized images or explicit polygons? – The deﬁnition of
     Minkowski summation suggests a simple algorithm if A and B are raster-
     ized images. Initialize a suﬃciently large matrix of pixels by determining
     the size of the convolution of the bounding boxes of A and B. For each pair
20.16. MINKOWSKI SUM                                                          675

     of points in A and B, sum up their coordinates and darken the appropri-
     ate pixel. These algorithms get more complicated if an explicit polygonal
     representation of the Minkowski sum is needed.

   • Do you want to fatten your object by a ﬁxed amount? – The most common
     fattening operation expands a model M by a given tolerance t, known as
     oﬀsetting. As shown in the ﬁgures above, this is accomplished by comput-
     ing the Minkowski sum of M with a disk of radius t. The basic algorithms
     still work, although the oﬀset is not a polygon. Its boundary is instead
     composed of circular arcs and line segments.

   • Are your objects convex? – The complexity of computing Minkowski sums
     depends in a serious way on the shape of the polygons. When both A
     and B are convex, the Minkowski sum can be found in O(n + m) time
     by tracing the boundary of one polygon with another. If one of them is
     non-convex, the size of the sum (the number of vertices or edges) can be
     as large as Θ(nm). Even worse is when both A and B are not convex,
     where the size can be as large as Θ(n2 m2 ). Minkowski sums of non-convex
     polygons are often ugly in a majestic sort of way, with holes created or
     destroyed in surprising fashion.

    A straightforward approach to computing the Minkowski sum is based on
triangulation and union. First triangulate both polygons, and then compute the
Minkowski sum of each triangle of A against every triangle of B. The sum of
a triangle against another triangle is an easy-to-compute special case of convex
polygons, discussed below. The union of these O(nm) convex polygons will be
A + B. Algorithms for computing the union of polygons are based on plane
sweep, as discussed in Section 20.8 (page 648).
    Computing the Minkowski sum of two convex polygons is easier than the
general case, because the sum will always be convex. For convex polygons
it is easiest to slide A along the boundary of B and compute the sum edge
by edge. Partitioning each polygon into a small number of convex pieces (see
Section 20.11 (page 658)), and then unioning the Minkowski sum for each pair of
pieces, will usually prove more eﬃcient than working with two fully triangulated
polygons.
Implementations: The CGAL (www.cgal.org) Minkowski sum package pro-
vides an eﬃcient and robust code to ﬁnd the Minkowski sums of two arbitrary
polygons, as well as compute both exact and approximate oﬀsets.
   An implementation for computing the Minkowski sums of two convex poly-
hedra in three dimensions is described in [FH06] and available at https://www.
cs.tau.ac.il/~efif/CD/.
Notes: Good expositions on algorithms for Minkowski sums include [dBvKOS08,
O’R01]. The fastest algorithms for various cases of Minkowski sums include [KOS91,
Sha87].
    The practical eﬃciency of Minkowski sum in the general case depends upon how
the polygons are decomposed into convex pieces. The optimal solution is not neces-
676                         CHAPTER 20. COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY

sarily the partition with the fewest number of convex pieces. Agarwal et al. [AFH02]
provide a thorough study of decomposition methods for Minkowski sum. Baram et al.
[BFH+ 18] show how to speed up Minkowski sums of polygons with holes through an
observation that suﬃciently small holes do not aﬀect the shape of the sum.
    The combinatorial complexity of the Minkowski sum of two convex polyhedra in
three dimensions is completely resolved in [FHW07]. An implementation of Minkowski
sum for such polyhedra is described in [FH06].

Related problems: Thinning (see page 655), motion planning (see page 667),
simplifying polygons (see page 661).
