Chapter 21

Set and String Problems

Sets and strings both represent collections of objects—the diﬀerence is whether
order matters. Sets are groups of symbols whose order is assumed to carry
no signiﬁcance, while strings are deﬁned by the sequence or arrangement of
symbols.
   The assumption of a ﬁxed order makes it possible to solve string problems
much more eﬃciently than set problems, through techniques such as dynamic
programming and advanced data structures like suﬃx trees. The interest in and
importance of large-scale string processing algorithms have been increasing due
to bioinformatics, social media, and other text-processing applications. Good
books on string algorithms include:

    • Gusﬁeld [Gus97] – To my taste, this remains the best introduction to string
      algorithms. It contains a thorough discussion on suﬃx trees, with clear
      and innovative formulations of classical exact string matching algorithms.

    • Crochemore, Hancart, and Lecroq [CHL07] – A comprehensive treatment
      of string algorithms, written by a true leader in the ﬁeld. Translated from
      the French, but clear and accessible.

    • Navarro and Raﬃnot [NR07] – A concise but practical and implementation-
      oriented treatment of pattern-matching algorithms, with particularly thor-
      ough treatment of bit-parallel approaches.

    • Crochemore and Rytter [CR03] – A survey of specialized topics in string
      algorithmics emphasizing theory.

    Theoreticians working in string algorithmics sometimes refer to their ﬁeld
as stringology. The annual Combinatorial Pattern Matching (CPM) conference
is the primary venue devoted to both practical and theoretical aspects of string
algorithmics and related areas.

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   677
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_21
678                          CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

                  Input                                     Output

21.1      Set Cover
Input description: A collection of subsets S = {S1 , . . . , Sm } of the universal
set U = {1, . . . , n}.
Problem description: What is the smallest subset T of S whose union equals
the universal set, that is,
                              |T |
                            ∪i=1 Ti = U ?

Discussion: Set cover arises when you try to eﬃciently acquire items that
have been packaged in a ﬁxed set of lots. You seek a collection with at least one
representative of each item type, while buying as few lots as possible. Finding
a set cover is easy, because you can always buy one of every possible lot. But
identifying a small set cover lets you do the same job for less money. Set
cover provides a natural formulation of the Lotto ticket optimization problem
discussed in Section 1.8 (page 22). There we seek to buy the smallest number
of tickets needed to cover all of a given set of combinations.
     Boolean logic minimization is another interesting application of set cover.
We are given a speciﬁc Boolean function on k variables, which speciﬁes the
output of 0 or 1 for all 2k possible input vectors. We seek the simplest circuit
that exactly implements this function. One approach is to ﬁnd a disjunctive
normal form (DNF) formula on the variables and their complements, such as
x1 x̄2 + x̄1 x̄2 . We could build one “and” term for each 1 in the input vector, and
then “or” them all together. But we can save by factoring out common subsets
of variables. Given a set of feasible “and” terms, each of which covers a subset
of the vectors we need, we seek to “or” together the smallest number of terms
that realize the function. This is exactly the set cover problem.
     There are several types of set cover problems you should be aware of:
21.1. SET COVER                                                                   679

   • Are you allowed to cover elements more than once? – The distinction here
     is between set cover and set packing, which will be discussed in Section 21.2
     (page 682). If you can, take advantage of the freedom to cover elements
     multiple times because it usually results in a smaller covering.

   • Are your sets derived from the edges or vertices of a graph? – Set cover
     is a very general problem, and includes several useful graph problems as
     special cases. Suppose instead that you seek the smallest set of edges in
     a graph that will cover each vertex exactly once. You are really looking
     for a perfect matching in the graph (see Section 18.6 (page 562)). Now
     suppose instead that you seek the smallest set of vertices that cover each
     edge at least once. This is the vertex cover problem, discussed in Section
     19.3 (page 591).
     It is instructive to see how to model vertex cover as an instance of set
     cover. Let the universal set U correspond to the set of edges {e1 , . . . , em }.
     Construct n subsets, with Si consisting of the edges incident on vertex vi .
     Although vertex cover is a special case of set cover, you should take advan-
     tage of the superior heuristics that exist for the more restricted problem.

   • Do your subsets contain only two elements each? – You are in luck if all
     of your subsets have at most two elements each. This special case can be
     solved eﬃciently to optimality because it reduces to ﬁnding a maximum
     matching in a graph. Unfortunately, the problem becomes NP-complete
     as soon as your subsets have three elements each.

   • Do you want to cover elements with sets, or sets with elements? – In
     the hitting set problem, we seek a small number of items that together
     represent each subset in a given population. Hitting set is illustrated in
     Figure 21.1. The input is identical to set cover, but instead we seek the
     smallest subset of elements T ⊂ U such that each subset Si contains at
     least one element of T . Thus, Si ∩ T = ∅ for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Suppose we
     seek a small Congress containing at least one representative of each de-
     mographic group. Individuals have multiple identities and thus represent
     several groups at one time: I am simultaneously male, Jewish, left-handed,
     and a baby boomer. If each group is deﬁned by a speciﬁed subset of peo-
     ple, the minimum hitting set gives the smallest possible politically correct
     Congress.
     Hitting set is dual to set cover, meaning that it is exactly the same problem
     in disguise. Replace each element of U by a set of the names of the subsets
     that contain it. Now S and U have exchanged roles, for we seek a set of
     subsets from U to cover all the elements of S. This is exactly set cover, so
     we can use any set cover code to solve hitting set problems after performing
     this simple translation. See Figure 21.1 for an example.

    Set cover is at least as hard as vertex cover, so it is also NP-complete. In
fact, it is somewhat harder. Approximation algorithms do no worse than twice
680                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

                    A                                      1
              1           2                         A             B
        B                  C                    2                      3
                                                    C          4 D
              3           4
                   D

Figure 21.1: A hitting set instance optimally solved by selecting elements 1 and
3, or 2 and 3 (on left). This dual set cover instance of this problem is optimally
solved by selecting subsets 1 and 3, or 2 and 3 (on right).

optimal for vertex cover, but the best approximation algorithm for set cover is
Θ(lg n) times optimal.
    Greedy is the most natural and eﬀective heuristic for set cover. Begin by
selecting the largest subset for the cover, and then delete all its elements from
the universal set. We add the subset containing the largest number of remaining
uncovered elements repeatedly until all are covered. This heuristic always gives
a set cover using at most ln n times as many sets as optimal. In practice it
usually does a lot better.
    The simplest implementation of the greedy heuristic sweeps through the
entire input instance of m subsets for each greedy step. However, by using such
data structures as linked lists and a bounded-height priority queue (see Section
15.2 (page 445)), the greedy heuristic can be implemented in O(S) time, where
S = ∪m i=1 |Si | is the size of the input representation.
    It pays to check whether there exist elements that occur in only a few
subsets—ideally just one. If so, we should select the biggest subset contain-
ing such an element at the very beginning. We must eventually take such a
subset, and this will carry along additional elements we might otherwise pay
extra to cover if we wait.
    Simulated annealing techniques on top of such greedy heuristics is likely to
produce somewhat better set covers. Backtracking can be used to guarantee
you an optimal solution, but it is often not worth the computational expense.
    An often more powerful approach rests on the integer linear programming
(ILP) formulation of set cover. Let the 0/1 integer variable si denote whether
subset Si is selected for a given cover. Each universal set element x ∈ U deﬁnes
a constraint based on all subsets Si that contain x, namely:
                                        
                                            si ≥ 1
                                   x∈Si

This ensures that x will be covered by at least one selected subset. The minimum
21.1. SET COVER                                                                        681

                                                               
set cover satisﬁes all of these constraints while minimizing i si . This integer
program can be easily generalized to weighted set cover (allowing non-uniform
costs for diﬀerent subsets. Relaxing this to a linear program (allowing 0 ≤ si ≤ 1
instead of constricting each variable to be either 0 or 1) permits eﬃcient and
eﬀective heuristics using rounding techniques.
Implementations: Both the greedy heuristic and the integer linear program-
ming formulation above are suﬃciently simple in their respective worlds that
one has to implement them from scratch.
   Pascal implementations of an exhaustive search algorithm for set packing,
as well as heuristics for set cover, appear in [SDK83]. See Section 22.1.9 (page
717).
   SYMPHONY is a mixed-integer linear programming solver that includes
a set partitioning solver. It is available at https://github.com/coin-or/
SYMPHONY.
Notes: An old but classic survey article on set cover is [BP76], with more recent
approximation and complexity analysis surveyed in [Pas97]. See [CFT99, CFT00] for
extensive computational studies of integer programming-based set cover heuristics and
exact algorithms. An excellent exposition on algorithms and reduction rules for set
cover is presented in [SDK83].
    Good expositions of the greedy heuristic for set cover include [CLRS09, Hoc96].
An example demonstrating that the greedy heuristic for set cover can be as bad as
lg n is presented in [Joh74, PS98]. This is not a defect of the heuristic. Indeed, it
is provably hard to approximate set cover to within an approximation factor better
than (1 − o(1)) ln n [Fei98]. Better results are possible for restricted set cover problems
arising from geometric instances, like ﬁnding the smallest number of points to stab a
given set of circles [AP14, MR10].
    Knuth’s volume 4A [Knu11] contains a fascinating discussion of Boolean logic
optimization reminiscent of set cover.

Related problems: Matching (see page 562), vertex cover (see page 591), set
packing (see page 682).
682                          CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

                  Input                                    Output

21.2      Set Packing
Input description: A set of subsets S = {S1 , . . . , Sm } of the universal set
U = {1, . . . , n}.

Problem description: Select a small collection of mutually disjoint subsets
from S whose union is the universal set.

Discussion: Set packing problems arise in applications where we have strong
constraints on what is an allowable partition. The key feature of packing prob-
lems (as opposed to covering problems) is that no elements can be covered by
more than one selected subset.
    Some ﬂavor of this is captured by the independent set problem in graphs,
discussed in Section 19.2 (page 589). There we seek a large subset of vertices
from graph G such that each edge is adjacent to at most one of the selected
vertices. To model this as set packing, let the universal set consist of all edges
of G, and subset Si consist of all edges incident on vertex vi . Finally, deﬁne an
additional singleton set for each edge. Any set packing deﬁnes a set of vertices
with no edge in common—in other words, an independent set. The singleton
sets are used to pick up any edges not covered by the selected vertices.
    Scheduling airline ﬂight crews is another application of set packing. Each
airplane in the ﬂeet needs to have a crew assigned to it, consisting of a pilot,
copilot, and navigator. There are constraints on the composition of possible
crews, based on their training to ﬂy diﬀerent types of aircraft, personality con-
ﬂicts, and work schedules. Given all possible crew and plane combinations, each
represented by a subset of items, we need an assignment such that each plane
and each person is in exactly one chosen combination. After all, the same per-
son cannot be on two diﬀerent planes simultaneously, and every plane needs a
crew. We need a perfect packing given the subset constraints.
21.2. SET PACKING                                                            683

    We use set packing here to represent several diﬀerent problems on sets, all
of which are NP-complete:

   • Must every element appear in exactly one selected subset? – In the exact
     cover problem, we seek a collection of subsets such that each element is
     covered exactly once. The airplane scheduling problem above has the
     ﬂavor of exact covering, since every plane and crew has to be employed.
     Unfortunately, exact cover puts us in the same situation as the Hamilto-
     nian cycle on graphs. If we really must cover all the elements exactly once,
     and this existential problem is NP-complete, then all we can do is expo-
     nential search. The cost will be prohibitive unless we happen to stumble
     upon a solution quickly.

   • Does each element have its own singleton set? – Things will be far better
     if we can be content with a partial solution, say by including each element
     of U as a singleton subset of S. Thus, we can expand any set packing into
     an exact cover by mopping up the unpacked elements of U with singleton
     sets. Now our problem is reduced to ﬁnding a minimum-cardinality set
     packing, which can be attacked via heuristics.

   • What is the penalty for covering elements twice? – In set cover (see Section
     21.1 (page 678)), there is no penalty for elements existing in many selected
     subsets. But in exact cover, any such violation is forbidden. For many
     applications, the truth lies somewhere in between. Such problems can be
     approached by charging the greedy heuristic more to select a subset that
     contains previously covered elements.

    The right heuristics for set packing are greedy, and similar to those of set
cover (see Section 21.1 (page 678)). If we seek a packing with few sets, then
we repeatedly select the largest remaining subset, delete all subsets from S
that clash with it, and repeat. As usual, augmenting this approach with some
exhaustive search or randomization (in the form of simulated annealing) is likely
to yield better packings at the cost of additional computation.
    A more powerful approach rests on an integer programming formulation akin
to that of set cover. Let the integer 0/1 variable si denote whether subset Si is
selected for a given cover. Each universal set element x ∈ U deﬁnes a constraint
based on all subsets Si that contain x, namely:
                                    
                                        si = 1
                                   x∈Si

This ensuresthat x is covered by exactly one selected subset. Minimizing or
maximizing i si while respecting these constraints enables us to modulate the
desired number of sets in the cover.
Implementations: Since set cover is a more popular and more tractable prob-
lem than set packing, it might be easier to ﬁnd an appropriate implementation
684                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

to solve the cover problem. Such implementations discussed in Section 21.1
(page 678) should be readily modiﬁable to support certain packing constraints.
   Pascal implementations of an exhaustive search algorithm for set packing,
as well as heuristics for set cover, appear in [SDK83]. See Section 22.1.9 (page
717) for details on FTP-ing these codes.
   SYMPHONY is a mixed-integer linear programming solver that includes
a set partitioning solver. It is available at https://github.com/coin-or/
SYMPHONY.
Notes: Survey articles on set packing include [BP76, HP09, Pas97]. A local search
heuristic for set packing is presented in [SW13]. Fixed-parameter tractable [FKN+ 08]
and online [EHM+ 12] versions of set packing have also been studied. Bidding strate-
gies for combinatorial auctions typically reduce to solving set-packing problems, as
described in [dVV03].
    Set-packing relaxations for integer programs are presented in [BW00]. An excellent
exposition on algorithms and reduction rules for set packing is presented in [SDK83],
including the airplane scheduling application discussed previously.

Related problems: Independent set (see page 589), set cover (see page 678).
21.3. STRING MATCHING                                                                    685

“I often repeat repeat myself,                  “I often repeat repeat myself,
I often repeat repeat.                          I often repeat repeat.
I often repeat repeat myself,                   I often repeat repeat myself,
I often repeat repeat.” repeat?                 I often repeat repeat.”
— Jack Prelutsky, A Pizza the Size of the Sun   — Jack Prelutsky, A Pizza the Size of the Sun

                    Input                                         Output

21.3       String Matching
Input description: A text string t of length n. A pattern p of length m.
Problem description: Find an/all instances of pattern p in the text.
Discussion: String matching arises in almost all text processing applications.
Every text editor contains a mechanism to search the current document for
arbitrary strings. Pattern matching programming languages like Python derive
much of their power from their built-in string matching primitives, making it
easy to fashion programs that ﬁlter and modify text. Spell checkers scan an
input text for words appearing in the dictionary and reject any strings that do
not match.
    String matching is a fundamental algorithmic problem that remains sur-
prisingly active. Several issues arise in identifying the right string matching
algorithm for a given application:

   • Are your search patterns and/or texts short? – If your strings are short
     and your queries infrequent, the simple O(mn)-time search algorithm will
     suﬃce. For all possible starting positions 1 ≤ i ≤ n−m+1, it tests whether
     the m characters starting from the ith position of the text are identical
     to the pattern. An implementation of this algorithm (in C) appears in
     Section 2.5.3 (page 43).
     For very short patterns (say m ≤ 10), you can’t hope to beat this simple
     algorithm by much, so you shouldn’t try. Further, we expect much better
     than O(mn) behavior for typical strings, because we advance the pattern
     the instant we observe a text/pattern mismatch. Indeed, the trivial algo-
     rithm usually runs in linear time. But the worst case certainly can occur,
     as with pattern p = am and text t = (am−1 b)n/m .

   • What about longer texts and patterns? – String matching can in fact be
     performed in worst-case linear time. Observe that we need not begin
     the search from scratch after ﬁnding a character mismatch, because the
     pattern preﬁx and text must exactly match prior to the point of mismatch.
     Given a partial match ending at position i, we jump ahead to the ﬁrst
     character position in the pattern/text that provides new information about
686                            CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

        the text in position i + 1. The Knuth–Morris–Pratt (KMP) algorithm
        preprocesses the search pattern to construct such a jump table eﬃciently.
        The details are tricky to get correct, but the resulting algorithm is quite
        short.

  • Do I expect to ﬁnd the pattern, or not? – The Boyer–Moore algorithm
    matches the pattern against the text from right to left, and hence can
    avoid looking at large chunks of text on a mismatch. Suppose the pattern
    is abracadabra, and the eleventh character of the text is x. This pattern
    cannot possibly match from any of the ﬁrst eleven starting positions of
    the text, and so the next necessary position to test is the twenty-second
    character. If we get very lucky, only n/m characters need ever be tested.
    The Boyer–Moore algorithm involves two sets of jump tables in the case
    of a mismatch: one based on the pattern matched so far, the other on the
    text character seen in the mismatch.
        Although somewhat more complicated than Knuth–Morris–Pratt, this is
        worthwhile in practice for patterns of length m > 10, unless the pattern
        is expected to occur many times in the text. Boyer–Moore’s worst-case
        performance is O(n + rm), where r is the number of occurrences of p in t.

      • Will you perform multiple queries on the same text? – Suppose you are
        building a program to repeatedly search a particular text database, such
        as the Bible. Since the text remains ﬁxed, it pays to build a data structure
        to speed up search queries. The suﬃx tree and suﬃx array data structures,
        discussed in Section 15.3 (page 448), are the right tools for the job.

      • Will you search many texts using the same patterns? – Suppose you are
        building a program to screen out dirty words from a text stream. Here, the
        set of patterns remains stable, while the search texts are free to change.
        We may need to ﬁnd all occurrences of any of k diﬀerent patterns, where
        k can be quite large.
        Performing a linear-time scan for each pattern yields an O(k(m+n)) algo-
        rithm. But if k is large, a better solution builds a single ﬁnite automaton
        that recognizes all of these patterns and returns to the appropriate start
        state on any character mismatch. The Aho–Corasick algorithm builds
        such an automaton in linear time. Space savings can be achieved by op-
        timizing the pattern recognition automaton, as discussed in Section 21.7
        (page 702). This approach was used in the original version of fgrep.
        Sometimes multiple patterns are speciﬁed not as a list of strings, but
        concisely as a regular expression. For example, the regular expression
        a(a + b + c)∗ a matches any string on (a, b, c) that begins and ends with
        a distinct a. The best way to test whether an input string is recognized
        by a regular expression R constructs the ﬁnite automaton equivalent to
        R and then simulates this machine on the string. Again, see Section 21.7
        (page 702) for details on constructing automata from regular expressions.
21.3. STRING MATCHING                                                           687

      When the patterns get speciﬁed by context-free grammars instead of reg-
      ular expressions, the problem becomes one of parsing, discussed in Section
      10.8 (page 337).

   • What if our text or pattern contains a spelling error? – The algorithms
     discussed here work only for exact string matching. If you must allow some
     tolerance for spelling errors, your problem becomes approximate string
     matching, which is thoroughly discussed in Section 21.4 (page 688).

Implementations: Strmat is a collection of C programs implementing ex-
act pattern matching algorithms in association with [Gus97], including sev-
eral variants of the KMP and Boyer–Moore algorithms. It is available at
https://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/~gusfield/strmat.html.
    Several versions of the general regular expression pattern matcher (grep) are
readily available. GNU grep found at https://directory.fsf.org/project/
grep/, and uses a fast lazy-state deterministic matcher hybridized with a Boyer–
Moore search for ﬁxed strings.
    The Boost string algorithms library provides C++ routines for basic op-
erations on strings, including search. See http://www.boost.org/doc/html/
string_algo.html.
Notes: All books on string algorithms contain thorough discussions of exact string
matching, including [CHL07, NR07, Gus97]. Good expositions on the Boyer–Moore
[BM77] and Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithms [KMP77] include [BvG99, CLRS09, Man89].
The history of string matching algorithms is somewhat checkered because several pub-
lished proofs were incorrect or incomplete. See [Gus97] for clariﬁcation.
     Aho [Aho90] provides a good survey on algorithms for pattern matching in strings,
particularly for regular expression patterns. The Aho–Corasick algorithm for multiple
patterns is described in [AC75].
     Empirical comparisons of string matching algorithms include [DB86, Hor80, Lec95,
dVS82, YLDF16]. Which algorithm performs best depends upon the properties of the
strings and the size of the alphabet. For long patterns and texts, I recommend that
you use the best implementation of Boyer–Moore that you can ﬁnd. String matching
algorithms for GPUs are considered in [LLCC12].
     The Rabin–Karp algorithm [KR87] uses a hash function to perform string matching
in linear expected time. Its worst-case time remains quadratic, and its performance in
practice appears somewhat worse than the character comparison methods described
above. This algorithm is presented in Section 6.7 (page 188).

Related problems: Suﬃx trees (see page 448), approximate string matching
(see page 688).
688                             CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

                       misplaced              a m i s p e l t
amispelt ? misspelled
                       misprinted             m i s s p e l l ed

                     Input                                    Output

21.4         Approximate String Matching
Input description: A text string t and a pattern string p.
Problem description: What is the minimum-cost way to transform t to p
using insertions, deletions, and substitutions?
Discussion: Approximate string matching is important because we live in an
error-prone world. Spelling correction programs must identify the closest match
for any text string not found in a dictionary. Eﬃcient sequence similarity (ho-
mology) searches on large databases of DNA sequences have revolutionized the
study of molecular biology. Suppose you are interested in a particular human
gene, and discover that it is similar to a particular gene in rats. Likely this new
gene does for people what it does for rats, with any diﬀerences being the result
of genetic mutations during evolution.
    I once encountered approximate string matching when evaluating the per-
formance of an optical character-recognition system. We needed to compare the
answers produced by our system on a test document with the correct results. To
improve our system, we had to identify which letters were getting misidentiﬁed.
The solution was to do an alignment between the two texts. This same principle
is used in ﬁle diﬀerence programs, which identify the lines that have changed
between two versions of a ﬁle.
    When no changes are permitted, our problem reduces to exact string match-
ing, which is discussed in Section 21.3 (page 685). Here, the discussion is re-
stricted to the problem of matching with errors.
    Dynamic programming provides the basic approach to approximate string
matching. Let D[i, j] denote the cost of editing the ﬁrst i characters of the
pattern string p into the ﬁrst j characters of the text t. We must do something
with the tail characters pi and tj . Our only options are matching/substituting
one for the other, deleting pi , or inserting a match for tj . Thus, D[i, j] is the
minimum of the costs of these possibilities:

      • If pi = tj then D[i − 1, j − 1] else D[i − 1, j − 1] + substitution cost.

      • D[i − 1, j] + deletion cost of pi .
21.4. APPROXIMATE STRING MATCHING                                              689

   • D[i, j − 1] + deletion cost of tj .
    A general implementation in C and more complete discussion appears in
Section 10.2 (page 314). Several issues remain before we can make full use of
this recurrence:

   • Do I match the pattern against the full text, or against a substring? –
     The boundary condition of this recurrence is what distinguishes between
     algorithms for string matching and substring matching. Suppose we seek
     to align the full pattern against the full text. Then the cost of D[i, 0]
     must be that of deleting the ﬁrst i characters of the pattern, so D[i, 0] = i.
     Similarly, D[0, j] = j.
     But now suppose that the pattern can occur anywhere within the text.
     The proper cost of D[0, j] becomes 0, since there should be no penalty for
     starting the alignment in the jth position of the text. The cost of D[i, 0]
     remains i, because the only way to match the ﬁrst i pattern characters
     with nothing is to delete them all. The cost of the best substring pattern
     match against the text will be given by minnk=1 D[m, k].
   • How should I select the substitution and insertion/deletion costs? – The
     edit distance algorithm can use diﬀerent costs for insertion, deletion, and
     substitution for speciﬁc pairs of characters. What costs are most appro-
     priate depends on what you plan to do with the alignment.
     The default choice charges the same for each insertion, deletion, or sub-
     stitution. Charging a substitution cost of more than insertion + deletion
     ensures that substitutions will never get performed, because it will always
     be cheaper to just edit both characters out of their strings. With only in-
     sertion and deletion to work with, the problem reduces to longest common
     subsequence, discussed in Section 21.8 (page 706). It often pays to tweak
     the edit distance costs and study the resulting alignments so you can ﬁnd
     the best parameters for the job.
   • How do I ﬁnd the actual alignment of the strings? – The recurrence above
     only yields the cost of the optimal string/pattern alignment, not the se-
     quence of editing operations that achieve it. To obtain such a transcript,
     we can work backwards from the cell D[m, n] in the complete cost matrix
     D. We had to come from either D[m − 1, n] (pattern deletion/text in-
     sertion), D[m, n − 1] (text deletion/pattern insertion), or D[m − 1, n − 1]
     (substitution/match). The chosen option can be reconstructed from these
     costs and the given characters pm and tn . By repeatedly moving back-
     wards to the previous cell, we can reconstruct the entire alignment. Again,
     an implementation in C appears in Section 10.2 (page 314).
   • What if the two strings are very similar to each other? – The dynamic
     programming algorithm above ﬁlls out an m × n matrix to compute edit
     distance. But to seek an alignment involving a combination of at most
     d insertions, deletions, and substitutions, we need only traverse the band
690                            CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

        of O(dn) cells within a distance d of the central diagonal. If no low-cost
        alignment exists within this band, then no low-cost alignment can exist in
        the full cost matrix.
      • Is your pattern short or long? – A recent approach to string matching
        exploits the fact that modern computers can do operations on 64-bit words
        in a single gulp. This is long enough to hold eight 8-bit ASCII characters,
        providing motivation to design bit-parallel algorithms that do more than
        one comparison with each operation.
        The basic idea is quite clever. Construct a bit-mask Bα for each letter
        α of the alphabet, such that ith-bit Bα [i] = 1 iﬀ the ith character of the
        pattern is α. Now suppose you have a match bit-vector Mj for position
        j in the text string, such that Mj [i] = 1 iﬀ the ﬁrst i bits of the pattern
        exactly match the (j − i + 1)st through jth character of the text. We can
        ﬁnd all the bits of Mj+1 using just two operations by (1) shifting Mj one
        bit to the right, and then (2) doing a bitwise AND with Bα , where α is
        the character in position j + 1 of the text.
        The agrep program, discussed below, uses such a bit-parallel algorithm
        generalized to approximate matching. Such algorithms are easy to pro-
        gram and many times faster than dynamic programming.
  • How do I minimize the required storage? – The quadratic space needed
    to store the dynamic programming table usually presents a more serious
    obstacle than its running time. Fortunately, only O(min(m, n)) space is
    needed to compute D[m, n]. We only need to maintain two active rows (or
    columns) of the matrix to compute the optimal cost. The entire matrix is
    required only to reconstruct the actual sequence alignment.
        But we can use Hirschberg’s clever recursive algorithm to eﬃciently re-
        cover the optimal alignment in linear space. During the ﬁrst pass of the
        linear-space algorithm above to compute D[m, n], we can identify which
        middle-element cell D[m/2, x] was used to optimize D[m, n]. This reduces
        our problem to ﬁnding the best paths from D[1, 1] to D[m/2, x] and from
        D[m/2, x] to D[m/2, n]. Both of these can be solved recursively. Each
        round removes half of the matrix elements of the previous round from
        consideration, so the total time remains O(mn). This linear-space algo-
        rithm proves to be a big win in practice on long strings.
      • Should I score long runs of insertions/deletions diﬀerently? – Many string
        matching applications look kindly upon alignments where insertions or
        deletions (indels) get bunched in a small number of runs or gaps. Deleting
        a paragraph from a document should presumably cost less than a similar
        number of scattered single-character edits, because the word represents a
        single (albeit substantial) modiﬁcation.
        String matching with gap penalties provides a way to properly account for
        such changes. Typically, we assign a cost of A + Bt for each indel of t
        consecutive characters, where A is the cost of starting the gap and B is
21.4. APPROXIMATE STRING MATCHING                                           691

     the per-character deletion cost. If A is large relative to B, the alignment
     has an incentive to create relatively few runs of deletions.
     String matching under such aﬃne gap penalties can be done in the same
     quadratic time as regular edit distance. We use separate recurrences E
     and F to encode the cost of being in insertion or deletion gap mode re-
     spectively, so we only pay the cost of initiating the gap once:

                   V (i, j) = max(E(i, j), F (i, j), G(i, j))
                   G(i, j) = V (i − 1, j − 1) + match(i, j)
                   E(i, j) = max(E(i, j − 1), V (i, j − 1) − A) − B
                   F (i, j) = max(F (i − 1, j), V (i − 1, j) − A) − B

     With a constant amount of work per cell, this algorithm takes O(mn)
     time, same as without gap costs.

   • Does similarity mean strings that sound alike? – Other models of ap-
     proximate pattern matching become appropriate in certain applications.
     Particularly interesting is Soundex, a hashing scheme that attempts to pair
     up English words that sound alike. This can be useful in testing whether
     two names that have been spelled diﬀerently are likely to be the same. For
     example, my last name has been spelled “Skina,” “Skinnia,” “Schiena,”
     and occasionally “Skiena.” All of these hash to the same Soundex code,
     S25.
     Soundex drops vowels and silent letters, removes doubled letters, and then
     assigns the remaining letters numbers from the following classes: BFPV
     gets a 1, CGJKQSXZ gets a 2, DT gets a 3, L gets a 4, MN gets a 5,
     and R gets a 6. The characters HWY are not assigned a digit. The
     code starts with the ﬁrst letter of the name and contains at most three
     digits. Although this sounds fairly hokey, experience shows that it works
     reasonably well. Experience indeed: Soundex has been used since the
     1920’s.

Implementations: Several excellent software tools are available for approxi-
mate pattern matching. Manber and Wu’s agrep [WM92a, WM92b] (approx-
imate general regular expression pattern matcher) is a tool supporting text
search with spelling errors. The current version is available at http://www.
tgries.de/agrep/. Navarro’s nrgrep [Nav01b] combines bit-parallelism and ﬁl-
tration, resulting in running times that are more constant than agrep, although
not always faster. It is available at https://www.dcc.uchile.cl/~gnavarro/
software/.
    TRE is a general regular-expression matching library for exact and approx-
imate matching, which is more general than agrep. The worst-case complexity
is O(nm2 ), where m is the list of the regular expressions involved. TRE is
available at https://github.com/laurikari/tre/.
692                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

    Wikipedia gives programs for computing edit (Levenshtein) distance in a
dizzying array of languages (including Ada, C++, Emacs Lisp, JavaScript, Java,
PHP, Python, Ruby VB, and C#) Check it out at https://en.wikibooks.org/
wiki/Algorithm_implementation/Strings/Levenshtein_distance.
Notes: There have been many recent advances in approximate string matching, par-
ticularly in bit-parallel algorithms. Navarro and Raﬃnot [NR07] is the best reference
on these techniques, which are also treated in other books on string algorithmics
[CHL07, Gus97]. String matching with gap penalties is particularly well treated in
[Gus97].
    The basic dynamic programming alignment algorithm is attributed to [WF74],
although it is apparently folklore. The wide range of applications for approximate
string matching was made apparent in Sankoﬀ and Kruskal’s book [SK99], which
remains a useful historical reference. Surveys on approximate pattern matching include
[HD80, Nav01a]. Expositions of Hirschberg’s linear-space algorithm [Hir75] include
[CR03, Gus97].
    Masek and Paterson [MP80] compute the edit distance between m- and n-length
strings in time O(mn/ log(min{m, n})) for constant-sized alphabets, using ideas from
the four Russians algorithm for Boolean matrix multiplication [ADKF70]. A recent
hardness result by Backurs and Indyk [BI15] shows that edit distance cannot be
computed in O(n2− ) time without violating the strong exponential time hypothesis
(SETH). Another recent breakthrough are subquadratic algorithms that approximate
edit distance to within a constant factor [CDG+ 18].
    The shortest-path formulation leads to a variety of algorithms that are good when
the edit distance is small, including an O(n lg n + d2 ) algorithm due to Myers [Mye86]
and an O(dn) algorithm due to Landau and Vishkin [LV88]. Longest increasing sub-
sequence can be done in O(n lg n) time [HS77], as presented in [Man89].
    Bit-parallel algorithms for approximate matching include Myers’s [Mye99b] al-
gorithm for approximate matching in O(mn/w) time, where w is the number of
bits in the computer word. Experimental studies of bit-parallel algorithms include
[FN04, HFN05, NR00].
    Soundex was invented and patented by M. K. Odell and R. C. Russell. Expositions
on Soundex include [BR95, Knu98]. Metaphone is a modern attempt to improve on
Soundex [BR95, Par90]. See [LMS06] for an application of such phonetic hashing
techniques to the problem entity name uniﬁcation.

Related problems: String matching (see page 685), longest common substring
(see page 706).
21.5. TEXT COMPRESSION                                                                                                                 693

   Fourscore and seven years ago our father brought forth on this
   continent a new nation conceived in Liberty and dedicated to this         Fourscore and seven years ago our father brought
                                                                             forth on this continent a new nation conceived in
   proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a       Liberty and dedicated to this proposition that all men
   great civil war testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived    are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil
                                                                             war testing whether that nation or any nation so
   and so dedicated can long endure. We are met on a great battleﬁeld        conceived and so dedicated can long endure. We are
                                                                             met on a great battleﬁeld of that war. We have come
   of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that ﬁeld as a         to dedicate a portion of that ﬁeld as a ﬁnal resting
   ﬁnal resting place for those who here gave their lives that the nation    place for those who here gave their lives that the
                                                                             nation might live. It is altogether ﬁtting and we can
   might live. It is altogether ﬁtting and we can not consecrate we can      not consecrate we can not hallow this ground. The
   not hallow this ground. The brave men living and dead who struggled       brave men living and dead who struggled here have
                                                                             consecrated it for above our poor power to add or
   here have consecrated it for above our poor power to add or detract.      detract. The world will title note nor long remember
                                                                             what we say here but it can never forget what they
   The world will title note nor long remember what we say here but it       did here. It is for us the living here have thus far so
   can never forget what they did here. It is for us the living here have    nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here
                                                                             dedicated to the great task remaining before us that
   thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to   from these honored dead we take increased devotion
                                                                             to that cause for which they here gave the last full
   the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we        measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that
   take increased devotion to that cause for which they here gave the        these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation
                                                                             under God shall have a new birth of freedom and that
   last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that these      government of the people by the people for the people
   dead shall not have died in vain that this nation under God shall         shall not perish from the earth.

   have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people by
   the people for the people shall not perish from the earth.

                                 Input                                                     Output

21.5             Text Compression
Input description: A text string S.
Problem description: Create a shorter text string S  such that S can be
correctly reconstructed from S  .
Discussion: Secondary storage devices quickly ﬁll up on most computer sys-
tems, even though their capacity seems to double every year. Decreasing storage
prices only increases interest in data compression, because there is more data
to compress than ever before. Data compression is the algorithmic problem of
ﬁnding a space-eﬃcient encoding for a given data ﬁle. The rise of computer
networks provides a new mission for data compression, that of increasing the
eﬀective bandwidth by reducing the number of bits before transmission.
    People seem to like inventing ad hoc data-compression methods for their par-
ticular application. Sometimes these outperform general methods, but usually
they don’t. Several issues arise in selecting the right compression algorithm:

   • Must we recover the exact input text after compression? – Lossy vs. loss-
     less encoding is the primary issue in data compression. Document stor-
     age applications demand lossless encodings, because users become quite
     disturbed when their data ﬁles are silently altered. Fidelity is not the
     same concern in image or video compression, because small perturba-
     tions are imperceptible to the viewer. Signiﬁcantly greater compression
     ratios can be obtained using lossy compression, which is why most im-
     age/video/audio compression algorithms exploit this freedom.
   • Can I simplify my data before I compress it? – The most eﬀective way to
     free space on a disk is to delete the ﬁles you don’t need. Likewise, any
     preprocessing you can do to reduce the information content of a ﬁle pays
     oﬀ later in better compression. Can we eliminate redundant white space
694                            CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

        from the ﬁle? Might the document be converted entirely to uppercase
        characters, or have formatting information removed?
        A particularly interesting simpliﬁcation results from applying the Burrows–
        Wheeler transform to the input string. This transform sorts all n cyclic
        shifts of the n character input, and then reports the last character of each
        shift. As an example, the cyclic shifts of abab are abab, baba, abab, and
        baba. After sorting, these become abab, abab, baba, and baba. Reading the
        last character of each of these strings yields the transform result: bbaa.
        Provided the last character of the input string is unique (an end-of-string
        symbol), this transform is perfectly invertible to the original input! The
        Burrows–Wheeler string is typically 10–15% more compressible than the
        original text, because repeated words turn into blocks of repeated charac-
        ters. Further, this transform can be computed in linear time.

      • Does it matter whether the algorithm is patented? – Certain data compres-
        sion algorithms have been patented—most notoriously the LZW variation
        of the Lempel–Ziv algorithm discussed below. Mercifully, this patent has
        now expired, as has the one covering JPEG. Typically there are unre-
        stricted variations of any compression algorithm that perform about as
        well as the patented variant, but problems arise if a patented algorithm
        sneaks into a popular standard.

      • How do I compress image data – The simplest lossless compression algo-
        rithm for image data is run-length coding. Here we replace runs of identical
        pixel values with a single instance of the pixel and an integer giving the
        length of the run. This works well on binary images with large contiguous
        regions of similar pixels, like scanned text. But it performs badly on im-
        ages with many quantization levels and random noise. Correctly selecting
        (1) the number of bits to allocate to the count ﬁeld, and (2) the right
        traversal order to reduce a two-dimensional image into a stream of pixels,
        has a surprisingly important impact on compression.
        For serious audio/image/video compression applications, I recommend
        that you use a popular lossy coding method and not fool around with
        implementing it yourself. JPEG is the standard high-performance image
        compression method, while MPEG is designed to exploit the frame-to-
        frame coherence of video.

      • Must compression run in real time? – Fast decompression is often more
        important than fast compression. A YouTube video is compressed only
        once, but decompressed every time someone plays it. In contrast, an
        operating system that increases eﬀective disk capacity by automatically
        compressing ﬁles will need a symmetric algorithm with fast compression
        times.

   Literally dozens of text compression algorithms are available, but they can
be classiﬁed into two distinct groups. Static algorithms, such as Huﬀman codes,
21.5. TEXT COMPRESSION                                                        695

build a single coding table by analyzing the entire document. Adaptive algo-
rithms, such as Lempel–Ziv, build a coding table on the ﬂy that adapts to the
local character distribution of the document. Adaptive algorithms usually prove
to be the right answer for most problems, but both are interesting:

   • Huﬀman codes – Huﬀman codes replace each alphabet symbol by a variable-
     length code string. Using eight bits-per-symbol to encode English text
     is wasteful, because certain characters (such as “e”) occur far more fre-
     quently than others (such as “q”). Huﬀman codes assign “e” a short code
     word, and “q” a longer one to compress the text.
     Huﬀman codes can be constructed using a greedy algorithm. Sort the sym-
     bols in increasing order by frequency. We merge the two least-frequently
     used symbols x and y into a new symbol xy, whose frequency is the sum
     of its two child symbols. Replacing x and y by xy leaves a smaller set of
     symbols. We now repeat this operation n − 1 times until all symbols have
     been merged together. These merging operations deﬁne a rooted binary
     tree, with the original alphabet symbols as leaves. The left or right choices
     on the root-to-leaf path deﬁne the bits of the binary code word for each
     symbol. Priority queues can eﬃciently maintain the symbols by frequency
     during construction, yielding Huﬀman codes in O(n lg n) time.
     Huﬀman codes are popular but have three disadvantages. Two passes must
     be made over the document on encoding, ﬁrst to build the coding table,
     and then to actually encode the text. The coding table must be explicitly
     stored with the document to decode it, which eats into any space savings
     on short documents. Finally, Huﬀman codes only exploit non-uniform
     symbol distributions, while adaptive algorithms can recognize the higher-
     order redundancies such as in 0101010101. . . .

   • Lempel–Ziv algorithms – Lempel–Ziv algorithms (including the popular
     LZW variant) compress text by building a coding table on the ﬂy as we
     read the document. The coding table changes as we move through the
     text. A clever protocol ensures that the encoder and decoder both work
     with the exact same code table, so no information is lost.
     Lempel–Ziv algorithms build coding tables of frequent substrings, which
     can get arbitrarily long. They can thus exploit often-used syllables, words,
     and phrases to build better encodings. They adapt to local changes in the
     text distribution, which is important because many documents exhibit
     signiﬁcant locality of reference.
     The amazing thing about Lempel–Ziv is how robust it is on diﬀerent types
     of data. It is quite diﬃcult to beat it by using your own application-speciﬁc
     compression algorithm. My recommendation is not to try. If you can
     eliminate application-speciﬁc redundancies using a simple preprocessing
     step, go ahead and do it. But don’t waste much time fooling around. You
     are unlikely to get signiﬁcantly better text compression than with gzip or
     some other popular program, and you might well do worse.
696                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

Implementations: Perhaps the most popular text compression program is
gzip, which implements a public domain variation of the Lempel–Ziv algorithm.
It is distributed under the GNU software license and can be obtained from
https://www.gzip.org.
    There is a natural tradeoﬀ between compression ratio and compression time.
Another choice is bzip2, which uses the Burrows–Wheeler transform. It produces
tighter encodings than gzip at somewhat greater cost in running time. Going
to the extreme, certain compression algorithms devote enormous run times to
squeeze every bit out of a ﬁle. Representative programs of this genre are col-
lected at http://mattmahoney.net/dc/. Personally, I believe that there is a
special place in hell for people who send me ﬁles compressed by weird encoders.
I always delete such messages, and demand that they resend me a gzip ﬁle.
Notes: Many books on data compression are available. Recent and comprehensive
books include Sayood [Say17] and Salomon [Sal06], with [SM10] an authoritative ref-
erence. Also recommended is the older text by Bell, Cleary, and Witten [BCW90].
Surveys on text compression algorithms include [CL98, KA10].
    Good expositions on Huﬀman codes [Huf52] include [AHU83, CLRS09]. The
Lempel–Ziv algorithm and variants are described in [Wel84, ZL78]. The Burrows–
Wheeler transform was introduced in [BW94].
    The annual IEEE Data Compression Conference (https://www.cs.brandeis.edu/
~dcc/) is the primary research venue in this ﬁeld. This is a mature technical area
where most current work is shooting for fairly marginal improvements, particularly in
the case of text compression. More encouragingly, I note that the conference is held
annually at a world-class ski resort in Utah.

Related problems: Shortest common superstring (see page 709), cryptogra-
phy (see page 697).
21.6. CRYPTOGRAPHY                                                          697

The magic words are I5&AE<&UA9VEC’=0
Squeamish Ossifrage. <F1s”F%R92!3<75E96UI<V
                     V@*3W-S:69R86=E+@K_

                 Input                                   Output

21.6      Cryptography
Input description: A plaintext message T or encrypted text E, and key k.
Problem description: Encode T using k giving E, or decode E giving T .
Discussion: Cryptography has grown wildly more important as computer net-
works increasingly make conﬁdential documents more vulnerable to prying eyes.
Cryptography increases security by making messages diﬃcult to read if they fall
into the wrong hands. Although the discipline of cryptography is at least two
thousand years old, its algorithmic and mathematical foundations have only
recently solidiﬁed to the point where provably secure cryptosystems can be en-
visioned.
    Cryptographic ideas and applications go far beyond the tasks of “encryption”
and “decryption.” The ﬁeld now includes mathematical constructs such as
cryptographic hashes, digital signatures, and useful primitive protocols that
provide associated security assurances.
    There are three classes of cryptosystems everyone should be aware of:
   • Caesar shifts – The oldest ciphers involve mapping each character of the
     alphabet to a diﬀerent letter. The weakest such ciphers rotate the alphabet
     by some ﬁxed number of characters (say 13), and thus have only 26 possible
     keys. Better is to use an arbitrary permutation of the letters, giving 26!
     possible keys. Even so, such systems can be easily attacked by counting
     the frequency of each symbol and exploiting the fact that “e” occurs more
     often than “z.” While there are variants that will make this more diﬃcult
     to break, none will be as secure as AES or RSA.
   • Block shuﬄe ciphers – This class of algorithms repeatedly shuﬄes the bits
     of your text as governed by the key. The classic example of such a cipher
     is the Data Encryption Standard (DES). Although approved as a Federal
     Information Processing Standard in 1976, DES was oﬃcially withdrawn as
     a federal standard in 2005, replaced by the stronger Advanced Encryption
     Standard (AES). A simple variant called triple DES permits an eﬀective
     key length of 112 bits by using three rounds of DES with two 56-bit keys.
     But it, too, became vulnerable with time, and as of 2018 is depreciated,
     with usage disallowed after 2023.
698                            CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

        But 256-bit AES is still considered very secure. AES libraries are available
        for all major programming languages, including C/C++, Java, JavaScript,
        and Python, and form the basis for security in WhatsApp, Facebook Mes-
        senger, and many other systems.
      • Public key cryptography – If you fear bad guys reading your messages, you
        should also be afraid to tell anyone else the key you need to decrypt them.
        Public key systems use diﬀerent keys to encode and decode messages.
        Since the encoding key is of no help in decoding, it can be made public
        at no risk to security. This solution to the key distribution problem is
        literally its key to success.
        RSA is the classic example of a public key cryptosystem, named after its
        inventors Rivest, Shamir, and Adelman. The security of RSA is based on
        the relative computational complexities of factoring and primality test-
        ing (see Section 16.8 (page 490)). Encoding is (relatively) fast because
        it relies on primality testing to construct the key, while the hardness of
        decryption follows from that of factoring—an assumption rapidly being
        threatened by advances in quantum computing. As of this writing, the
        largest integer incontrovertibly factored using Shor’s algorithm on a quan-
        tum computer appears to be 15, so this is not an imminent threat. But it
        does bear watching.
        RSA is slow relative to other cryptosystems—roughly 100 to 1,000 times
        slower than AES. Still, it earns its salt by making public keys possible.

     The critical issue in selecting a cryptosystem is identifying your paranoia
level. Who are you trying to stop from reading your stuﬀ: your grandmother,
local thieves, the Maﬁa, or the NSA (National Security Agency)?           If you
can use an accepted implementation of AES or RSA, you should feel pretty
safe against anybody, at least for now. Increasing computer power lays waste
to cryptosystems surprisingly quickly, as discussed above. Be sure to use the
longest possible keys and keep abreast of algorithmic developments if you are
planning a long-term storage of sensitive material.
     That said, I will confess that I use DES to encrypt my ﬁnal exam each
semester. It proved more than suﬃcient the time an ambitious student broke
into my oﬃce looking for it. The story would have been diﬀerent had the
NSA been trying to crack it, but it is important to understand that the most
serious security holes are human, not algorithmic. Ensuring that your password
is long enough, hard to guess, and not written down is far more important than
obsessing about the encryption algorithm.
     Most symmetric key encryption mechanisms are harder to crack than public
key ones for the same key size. This means one can get away with much shorter
key lengths for symmetric key than for public key encryption. NIST and RSA
Labs both provide schedules of recommended key sizes for secure encryption,
and as of this writing they recommend 256-bit symmetric keys as equivalent to
15,360-bit asymmetric keys. This diﬀerence helps explain why symmetric key
algorithms are typically orders of magnitude faster than public key algorithms.
21.6. CRYPTOGRAPHY                                                           699

   Simple ciphers like the Caesar shift are fun and easy to program. For this
reason, it is healthy to use them for applications needing only a casual level of
security (such as hiding the punchlines of jokes). Since they are easy to break,
they should never be used for serious security applications.
   Another thing you should never do is try to develop your own novel cryp-
tosystem. The security of AES and RSA is accepted because these systems have
survived many years of public scrutiny. In this time, many other cryptosystems
have been proposed, proven vulnerable to attack, and then abandoned. This is
not a ﬁeld for amateurs. If you are charged with implementing a cryptosystem,
carefully study a respected program such as PGP to see how they handle issues
such as key selection and key distribution. Any cryptosystem is as strong as its
weakest link.
   Certain other problems related to cryptography arise often in practice:
   • How can I validate the integrity of data against random corruption? –
     There is often a need to validate that transmitted data is identical to that
     which has been received. One solution has the receiver transmit the data
     back to the source, so the original sender can conﬁrm that the two texts are
     identical. This fails when inverse errors are made in retransmission, but a
     more serious problem is that such a scheme cuts your available bandwidth
     in half.
     A more eﬃcient method uses a checksum, a hash of the long text down
     to a large integer. We then transmit the checksum along with the text.
     The checksum can be recomputed from the text on the receiving end, and
     bells set oﬀ if the computed checksum is not identical to what was received.
     The simplest checksum scheme just adds up the byte or character values
     and takes the sum modulo of some constant, say 28 = 256. But an error
     transposing two or more characters would go undetected under such a
     scheme, because addition is commutative.
     Cyclic-redundancy check (CRC) – The CRC provides a more powerful
     method to compute checksums, that is used in most communications sys-
     tems and internally in computers to validate disk drive transfers. These
     codes compute the remainder in the ratio of two polynomials, the numer-
     ator of which is a function of the input text. The design of these polyno-
     mials involves considerable mathematical sophistication, but ensures that
     all reasonable errors are detected.
   • How can I validate the integrity of data against deliberate corruption? –
     CRC is good at detecting random errors, but not malicious changes to a
     document. Cryptographic hash functions such as MD5 and SHA-256 are
     easy to compute for a given document, but hard to invert. This means
     that for a particular hash code value x, it is hard to construct a document
     d such that H(d) = x. The property makes them valuable for digital
     signatures and other applications.
   • How can I prove that a ﬁle has not been changed? – If I send you a contract
     in electronic form, what is to stop you from editing the ﬁle and then
700                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

      claiming that your version is what we had agreed to? I need a way to prove
      that any modiﬁcation to a document is fraudulent. Digital signatures are
      a cryptographic way for me to stamp my document as genuine, and play
      an important role in maintaining the integrity of the blockchain associated
      with cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin.
      I can compute a checksum for any given ﬁle, and then encrypt this check-
      sum using my own private key. I send you the ﬁle and the encrypted
      checksum. Sure, you can edit the ﬁle, but to fool the judge you must
      also edit the encrypted checksum such that it can be decrypted to yield
      the correct checksum. Designing a ﬁle that yields the same checksum be-
      comes an insurmountable problem. For full security, we need a trusted
      third party to authenticate the timestamp and associate the private key
      with me.

   • How can I restrict access to copyrighted material? – An important ap-
     plication for cryptography is digital rights management for audio and
     video. A key issue here is speed of decryption, so it can keep up with
     data transmission or retrieval in real time. Such stream ciphers usually
     involve eﬃciently generating a stream of pseudorandom bits, say using
     a shift-register generator. The exclusive-or of these bits with the data
     stream gives the encrypted sequence, with the original data recovered by
     exclusive-oring the result with the same stream of pseudorandom bits.
      High-speed cryptosystems have proven to be relatively easy to break. The
      state-of-the-art solution to this problem involves erecting laws like the
      Digital Millennium Copyright Act, which makes it illegal to try to break
      them.

Implementations: Nettle is a comprehensive low-level cryptographic library
in C. Cryptographic hash functions include MD5 and SHA-256. Block ciphers
include DES, AES, and some more recently developed codes. An implemen-
tation of RSA is also provided. Nettle is available at https://www.lysator.
liu.se/~nisse/nettle/. See http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/toolkit
for related cryptographic resources provided by NIST.
    Crypto++ is a large C++ class library of cryptographic schemes, including
all that I have mentioned here. It is available at https://www.cryptopp.com/.
    Many popular open source utilities employ serious cryptography, and serve
as good models of current practice. GnuPG, an open source version of PGP, is
available at https://www.gnupg.org/. OpenSSL, for authenticating access to
computer systems, is available at https://www.openssl.org/.
    The Boost CRC Library provides multiple implementations of cyclic redun-
dancy check algorithms. It is available at https://www.boost.org/libs/crc/.
Notes: The Handbook of Applied Cryptography [MOV96] provides technical surveys
of all aspects of cryptography, and has been generously made available online at http:
//www.cacr.math.uwaterloo.ca/hac/. Schneier [Sch15] provides a thorough overview
of diﬀerent cryptographic algorithms, with [FS03] as perhaps a better introduction.
21.6. CRYPTOGRAPHY                                                                701

Kahn [Kah67] presents the fascinating history of cryptography from ancient times to
1967 and is particularly noteworthy in light of the secretive nature of the subject.
    Expositions on the RSA algorithm [RSA78] include [CLRS09]. The RSA Lab-
oratories home page http://www.rsa.com/rsalabs/ is very informative. Quantum
technologies lead to new secure encryption methods [BB14], and also new ways to
break what we already have. Post-quantum cryptography is an area of active research
[CJL+ 16].
    Of course, the National Security Agency is the place to go to learn the real state
of the art in cryptography. The history of DES is well presented in Schneier [Sch15].
Particularly controversial was the decision by the NSA to limit key length to 56 bits.
    MD5 [Riv92] is the hashing function used by PGP to compute digital signatures.
Expositions include [Sch15, Sta06]. Problems with the security of MD5 have been
exposed [WY05]. The SHA family of hash functions appears more secure, particularly
SHA-256 and SHA-512.

Related problems: Factoring and primality testing (see page 490), text com-
pression (see page 693)).
702                          CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

  T                                  T

                    H                           T                           T
                                                              H
          H                  H
                    H                                         H

  T                                  T

                  Input                                    Output

21.7      Finite State Machine Minimization
Input description: A deterministic ﬁnite automaton M .
Problem description: Create the smallest deterministic ﬁnite automaton M 
such that M  behaves identically to M .
Discussion: Finite state machines are very useful for specifying and recognizing
patterns. Modern programming languages such as Java and Python provide
built-in support for regular expressions, a particularly natural way of deﬁning
automata. Control systems and compilers often use ﬁnite state machines to
encode the current state and possible actions/transitions. Minimizing the size
of these automata reduces both the storage and execution costs of dealing with
such machines.
    Finite state machines are deﬁned by directed graphs. Each vertex represents
a state, and each character-labeled edge deﬁnes a transition from one state
to another on receipt of the given symbol. The automata shown analyzes a
sequence of coin tosses, with dark states signifying that an even number of
heads have been observed. Such automata can be represented using any graph
data structure (see Section 15.4 (page 452)), or by an n × |Σ| transition matrix
M where |Σ| is the size of the symbol alphabet of the automata. Here M [i, j]
reports the state transitioned to from state i on receipt of symbol j.
    Finite state machines are often used to specify search patterns in the guise of
regular expressions, which are patterns formed by and-ing, or-ing, and looping
over smaller regular expressions. For example, the regular expression a(a + b +
c)∗ a matches any string on (a, b, c) that begins and ends with distinct as. The
best way to test whether a string s is recognized by a given regular expression
R constructs the ﬁnite automaton equivalent to R, and then simulates this
machine on S. See Section 21.3 (page 685) for alternative approaches to string
matching.
21.7. FINITE STATE MACHINE MINIMIZATION                                        703

  We consider three diﬀerent problems on ﬁnite automata:

  • Minimizing deterministic ﬁnite state machines – Transition matrices for
    ﬁnite automata can become prohibitively large for sophisticated machines,
    thus fueling the need for tighter encodings. The most direct approach is
    to eliminate redundant states in the automaton. As the example above
    shows, automata of widely varying sizes can compute the same function.
    Algorithms to minimize the number of states in a deterministic ﬁnite au-
    tomaton (DFA) appear in any book on automata theory. The basic ap-
    proach partitions the states into gross equivalence classes, and then reﬁnes
    the partition. Initially, the states are partitioned into accepting, rejecting,
    and non-terminal classes. The transitions from each node now branch to
    a given class on a given symbol. Whenever two states s, t from the same
    class C branch to elements of diﬀerent classes, then C must be partitioned
    into two subclasses, one containing s, the other containing t.
    This algorithm makes a sweep through all the classes looking for a new
    partition, and repeats the process from scratch if it ﬁnds one. This yields
    an O(n2 ) algorithm for constant-sized alphabets, because at most n − 1
    sweeps need ever be performed. The ﬁnal equivalence classes correspond to
    the states in the minimum automaton. In fact, a more eﬃcient O(n log n)
    algorithm is known. Implementations are cited below.

  • Constructing deterministic machines from non-deterministic machines –
    DFAs are simple to work with, because the machine is always in exactly
    one state at any given time. Non-deterministic ﬁnite automata (NFAs)
    can be in multiple states at a time, so their current “state” represents a
    subset of the possible machine states.
    In fact, any NFA can be mechanically converted to an equivalent DFA,
    which can then be minimized as above. However, converting an NFA
    to a DFA might cause an exponential blowup in the number of states,
    which might perversely get eliminated when minimizing the DFA. This
    exponential blowup makes most NFA minimization problems PSPACE-
    hard, which is even worse than NP-complete.
    The proofs of equivalence between NFAs, DFAs, and regular expressions
    are elementary enough to be covered in undergraduate automata theory
    classes. However, they are surprisingly nasty to code. Implementations
    are discussed below.

  • Constructing machines from regular expressions – There are two approaches
    for translating a regular expression to an equivalent ﬁnite automaton.
    NFAs are easier to construct than deterministic automata, but less eﬃ-
    cient to simulate.
    The non-deterministic construction uses -moves, which are optional tran-
    sitions that require no input to ﬁre. On reaching a state with an -move,
    we must assume that the machine is in both states. It is straightforward to
704                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

      construct an automaton using -moves, from a depth-ﬁrst traversal of the
      parse tree of the regular expression. This machine will have O(m) states,
      if m is the length of the regular expression. Simulating this machine on
      a string of length n takes O(mn) time, since we need to consider each
      state/preﬁx pair only once.
      The deterministic construction starts with the parse tree for the regular
      expression, observing that each leaf represents an alphabet symbol in the
      pattern. After recognizing a preﬁx of the text, we can be left in some
      subset of these possible positions, which would correspond to a state in
      the ﬁnite automaton. The derivatives method builds up this automaton
      state-by-state as it is needed. Some regular expressions of length m require
      O(2m ) states in any DFA implementing them, such as (a + b)∗ a(a + b)(a +
      b) . . . (a + b). There is no way to avoid this exponential space blowup.
      Fortunately it takes linear time to simulate an input string on any DFA,
      regardless of the size of the automaton.

Implementations: Grail+ is a C++ package for symbolic computation with
ﬁnite automata and regular expressions. Grail enables one to convert between
diﬀerent machine representations and to minimize automata. It can handle large
machines deﬁned on large alphabets. All code and documentation are accessible
from http://www.csit.upei.ca/~ccampeanu/Grail/, as well as pointers to a
variety of other automaton packages.
    The OpenFst Library (http://www.openfst.org/) is a library for con-
structing, combining, optimizing, and searching weighted ﬁnite state transducers
(FSTs), which are generalizations of ﬁnite state machines where output sym-
bols do not necessary match input symbols. Minimization and conversions to
deterministic machines are provided.
    JFLAP (Java Formal Languages and Automata Package) is a package of
graphical tools for learning the basic concepts of automata theory. Included
are functions to convert between DFAs, NFAs, and regular expressions, and
minimize the resulting automata. High-level automata are also supported, in-
cluding context-free languages and Turing machines. JFLAP is available at
http://www.jflap.org/. A related book [RF06] is also available.
Notes: Aho [Aho90] provides a good survey on algorithms for pattern matching,
with a particularly clear exposition for regular expression patterns. The technique for
regular expression pattern matching with -moves is due to Thompson [Tho68]. Other
expositions on ﬁnite automaton pattern matching include [AHU74]. Expositions on
ﬁnite automata and the theory of computation include [HK11, HMU06, Sip05]. The
major annual meeting of interest in this ﬁeld is the Conference on Implementations
and Applications of Automata (CIAA).
    Hopcroft [Hop71] gave an optimal O(n lg n) algorithm for minimizing the number
of states in DFAs. The derivatives method of constructing a ﬁnite state machine from
a regular expression is due to Brzozowski [Brz64] and has been expanded upon in
[BS86]. Expositions on the derivatives method includes Conway [Con71]. Recent work
on the incremental construction and optimization of automata includes [Wat03]. The
21.7. FINITE STATE MACHINE MINIMIZATION                                             705

problems of compressing a DFA to a minimum NFA [JR93] and testing the equivalence
of two non-deterministic ﬁnite state machines [SM73] are both PSPACE-complete.
    The ineﬃciencies of algorithmic approaches for regular expression pattern match-
ing have been exploited for denial-of-service attacks on websites. If public-facing code
contains a regular expression requiring superlinear computation (in the worst case), an
attacker can overload machines by supplying pathological input that takes excessive
time to parse. See [DCSL18] for a discussion of such attacks.

Related problems: Satisﬁability (see page 537). string matching (see page
685).
706                            CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

   A H AA I G D D E T N W O R T D T S          A H AA I G D D E T N W O R T D T S

   HGITGDDEANWTOSRDSG                          HGITGDDEANWTOSRDSG

   GTAS H I D D E N W O R DTGAG                GTAS H I D D E N W O R DTGAG

   H I G S D D E G N W O R GAD STA             H I G S D D E G N W O R GAD STA

   HAIDAGDENSWORSADTS                          HAIDAGDENSWORSADTS

                    Input                                    Output

21.8        Longest Common Substring/Subsequence
Input description: A set S of strings S1 , . . . , Sn .
Problem description: What is the longest string S  such that all the charac-
ters of S  appear as a substring or subsequence of each Si , 1 ≤ i ≤ n?
Discussion: Longest common substring/subsequence (LCS) arises whenever
we search for similarities across multiple texts. A particularly important ap-
plication concerns ﬁnding a consensus among biological sequences. The genes
for building proteins evolve with time, but the regions critical for function must
remain intact in order for them to work correctly. The longest common subse-
quence of a gene in diﬀerent species provides insight into what has been con-
served over time.
    The longest common subsequence problem for two strings is a special case of
edit distance (see Section 21.4 (page 688)), when substitutions are forbidden and
exact character match, insert, and delete are the only allowable edit operations.
Under these conditions, the edit distance between P and T is n+m−2|lcs(P, T )|,
because we can delete the missing characters from P to the lcs(P, T ) and then
insert the missing characters from T to transform P to T .
    Issues arising in LCS include:
      • Are you looking for a common substring? – When detecting plagiarism,
        we seek to ﬁnd the longest phrase shared between two or more docu-
        ments. Since phrases are strings of consecutive characters, here we want
        the longest common substring between the texts.
        The longest common substring of a set of strings can be identiﬁed in
        linear time, as discussed in Section 15.3 (page 448). The trick is to build
        a suﬃx tree containing all the strings, label each leaf with the input string
        it represents, and then do a depth-ﬁrst traversal to identify the deepest
        node with descendants from each input string.
      • Are you looking for a common scattered subsequence? – For the rest of this
        section we restrict attention to ﬁnding common scattered subsequences.
        This algorithm is a special case of the dynamic programming edit-distance
        computation. Indeed, an implementation is given on page 323.
21.8. LONGEST COMMON SUBSTRING/SUBSEQUENCE                                           707

    Let M [i, j] denote the number of characters in the longest common sub-
    sequence of S[1], . . . , S[i] and T [1], . . . , T [j]. When S[i] = T [j], the last
    pair of characters cannot match, so M [i, j] = max(M [i, j − 1], M [i − 1, j]).
    But if S[i] = T [j], we also have the option to select this character for our
    substring, so M [i, j] = max(M [i − 1, j − 1] + 1, M [i − 1, j], M [i, j − 1]).
    This recurrence computes the length of the longest common subsequence in
    O(nm) time. We can reconstruct the actual sequence by walking backward
    from M [n, m] to establish which characters were matched along the way.

  • What if the strings are permutations? – Permutations are strings with-
    out repeating characters. Two permutations deﬁne n pairs of matching
    characters, and so the above algorithm runs in O(n lg n) time. A particu-
    larly important case occurs in ﬁnding the longest increasing subsequence
    of a numerical sequence p. Sorting the elements of p in increasing order
    yields a sequence s. The longest common subsequence of p and s gives the
    longest increasing subsequence.

  • What if there are relatively few sets of matching characters? – There is a
    faster algorithm when strings do not contain too many copies of the same
    character, like the permutations above. Let r be the number of pairs of
    positions (i, j) such that Si = Tj . In this technique, each of the r pairs
    deﬁnes a point in the plane.
    The complete set of such points can be found in O(n + m + r) time using
    bucketing techniques. We create a bucket for each alphabet symbol c and
    each string (S or T ), then partition the positions of each character of the
    string into the appropriate bucket. We then create a point (s, t) from
    every pair s ∈ Sc and t ∈ Tc in the buckets Sc and Tc .
    A common subsequence describes a monotonically non-decreasing path
    through these points, meaning all moves on this path are up and to the
    right. The longest such path can be found in O((n + r) lg n) time. We
    sort the points in order of increasing x-coordinate, breaking ties in favor
    of increasing y-coordinate. We insert points in this order, and maintain
    the minimum terminal y-coordinate of any path going through exactly k
    points, for 1 ≤ k ≤ n. Each new point (px , py ) changes exactly one of
    these paths, either identifying a new longest subsequence or reducing the
    y-coordinate of the shortest path whose endpoint lies above py .

  • What if we have more than two strings to align? – The basic dynamic pro-
    gramming algorithm can be generalized to k strings, taking O(2k nk ) time,
    where n is the length of the longest string. This algorithm is exponential
    in the number of strings k, and so it becomes expensive for more than a
    few strings. This problem is NP-complete, so no better exact algorithm is
    destined to come along soon.
    Many heuristics have been proposed for multiple sequence alignment.
    They often start by computing the pairwise alignment for each pair of
708                          CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

      strings. One approach replaces the two most similar sequences with a sin-
      gle merged sequence, and repeats until all alignments have been merged
      into one. The catch is that two strings often have many diﬀerent align-
      ments of optimal cost. The “right” alignment to pick depends upon the
      subsequent sequences to merge, and hence unknowable to the heuristic.

Implementations: Several programs are available for multiple sequence align-
ment of DNA/protein sequence data. ClustalW [THG94] is a popular and well-
regarded program for multiple alignment of protein sequences. It is available
at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/. Another respectable option is the
MSA package for multiple sequence alignment [GKS95], which is available at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Schaffer/msa.html.
    Any of the dynamic programming-based approximate string matching pro-
grams of Section 21.4 (page 688) can be used to ﬁnd the longest common sub-
sequence of two strings.
    Combinatorica [PS03] provides a Mathematica implementation of an algo-
rithm to construct the longest increasing subsequence of a permutation. This
algorithm is based on Young tableaux rather than dynamic programming. See
Section 22.1.8 (page 716).
Notes: Surveys of algorithmic results on longest common subsequence (LCS) prob-
lems include [BHR00, GBY91]. The algorithm for the case where all the characters
in each sequence are distinct or infrequent is due to Hunt and Szymanski [HS77], but
recently improved [IR09]. Expositions include [Aho90, Man89]. There has been a
surprising amount of recent work on this problem, including eﬃcient bit-parallel al-
gorithms for LCS [CIPR01]. Masek and Paterson [MP80] solve the longest common
subsequence problem in O(mn/ log(min{m, n})) for constant-sized alphabets, using
the four Russians technique. No strongly subquadratic algorithm is possible without
refuting the strong exponential time hypothesis [ABW15, BK18].
    Construct two random n-character strings on an alphabet of size α. What is the
expected length of their LCS? This problem has been extensively studied, with an
excellent survey by Dancik [Dan94].
    Multiple sequence alignment for computational biology is a large ﬁeld, with the
books of Gusﬁeld [Gus97] and Compeau and Pevzner [CP18] serving as excellent in-
troductions. See [Not02] for a more recent survey. The hardness of multiple sequence
alignment follows from that of shortest common subsequence for large sets of strings
[Mai78].
    We motivated the problem of longest common substring with the application of
plagiarism detection. See [SWA03] for the interesting details of how to implement a
plagiarism detector for computer programs.

Related problems: Approximate string matching (see page 688), shortest
common superstring (see page 709).
21.9. SHORTEST COMMON SUPERSTRING                                            709

        ABRACA                              AB R A C A D A B R A
                                            ABRACA
        RACADA
                                               RACADA
        ACADAB                                   ACADAB
        CADABR                                     CADABR
        ADABRA                                       ADABRA

                  Input                                       Output

21.9      Shortest Common Superstring
Input description: A set of strings S = {S1 , . . . , Sm }.
Problem description: Find the shortest string S  that contains each string
Si as a substring of S  .
Discussion: Shortest common superstring/supersequence (SCS) arises in a va-
riety of applications. A casino gambling addict once asked me how to reconstruct
the pattern of symbols on the wheels of a slot machine. With every spin, the
wheel turns to a random position, displaying the selected symbol as well as
the symbols immediately before/after it. Given enough observations of the slot
machine, the symbol order for each wheel can be determined as the shortest
common (circular) superstring of the observed symbol triples.
    A more important application of shortest common superstring is data/matrix
compression. Suppose we are given a sparse n × m matrix M , meaning that
most elements are zero. We can partition each row into m/k runs of k elements,
and construct the shortest common superstring S  of all these runs. We can
now represent the matrix by the superstring, plus an n × m/k array of pointers
denoting where each run starts in S  . Any particular element M [i, j] can still
be accessed in constant time, but there will be substantial space savings when
|S|  mn.
    Perhaps the most compelling application is in DNA sequence assembly. Ma-
chines readily sequence fragments of 100 to 1,000 base pairs, or characters of
DNA. But the real interest is in sequencing large molecules. Large-scale “shot-
gun” sequencing clones many copies of the target molecule, breaks them ran-
domly into fragments, sequences the fragments, and then proposes the shortest
superstring as the correct sequence.
    Finding a superstring of a set of strings is not diﬃcult, since we can simply
concatenate them together. Finding the shortest such string is what’s problem-
710                           CHAPTER 21. SET AND STRING PROBLEMS

atic. Indeed, shortest common superstring is NP-complete for all reasonable
classes of strings.
    Finding the shortest common superstring can be reduced to the traveling
salesman problem (see Section 19.4 (page 594)). Create a directed overlap graph
G, where vertex vi represents string Si . Assign edge (vi , vj ) weight equal to the
length of Si minus the overlap of Sj with Si . Thus, w(vi , vj ) = 1 for Si = abc
and Sj = bcd. The minimum weight path visiting all the vertices deﬁnes the
shortest common superstring. These edge weights are not symmetric: note that
w(vj , vi ) = 3 for the example above. Unfortunately, asymmetric TSP problems
are much harder to solve in practice than symmetric instances.
    The greedy heuristic provides the standard approach to approximating short-
est common superstring. Identify which pair of strings have the maximum
overlap. Replace them by the merged string, and repeat until only one string
remains. This heuristic can be implemented in linear time. The seemingly most
time-consuming part is in building the overlap graph. The brute-force approach
to ﬁnding the maximum overlap of two length-l strings takes O(l2 ) time for each
of O(n2 ) string pairs. But a faster construction is made possible by suﬃx trees
(see Section 15.3 (page 448)). Build a tree containing all suﬃxes of all strings
from S. String Si overlaps with Sj iﬀ a suﬃx of Si matches the preﬁx of Sj —an
event deﬁned by a vertex of the suﬃx tree. Traversing these vertices in order of
distance from the root deﬁnes the appropriate merging order.
    How well does the greedy heuristic perform? It can certainly be fooled into
creating a superstring that is twice as long as optimal. The optimal merging
order for strings c(ab)k , (ba)k , and (ab)k c is left to right. But greedy starts by
merging the ﬁrst and third string, leaving the middle one no overlap possibility.
The greedy superstring can never be worse than 3.5 times optimal, and usually
will be much better in practice.
    Building superstrings becomes diﬃcult when the input contains both positive
strings (each of which must be a substring of the superstring) and negative
strings (each of which is forbidden to appear in the ﬁnal result). Deciding
whether any such consistent string exists is NP-complete, unless you are allowed
to add an extra character to the alphabet to use as a spacer.
Implementations: Several high-performance programs for DNA sequence as-
sembly are available. Such programs correct for sequencing errors, so the ﬁnal
result is not necessarily a superstring of the input reads. At the very least, they
will serve as excellent models if you really need a short proper superstring.
    CAP3 (Contig Assembly Program) [HM99] and PCAP [HWA+ 03] are the
latest in a series of assemblers by Xiaoqiu Huang and his collaborators, which
are available from http://seq.cs.iastate.edu/. They have been used on
mammalian scale assembly projects involving hundreds of millions of bases.
    The Celera assembler that sequenced the human genome is now available as
open source. See https://sourceforge.net/projects/wgs-assembler/.
Notes: The shortest common superstring (SCS) problem and its application to DNA
shotgun assembly are ably surveyed in [MKT07, Mye99a, SP15]. Kececioglu and
Myers [KM95] report on an algorithm for this more general version of shortest common
21.9. SHORTEST COMMON SUPERSTRING                                                  711

superstring, where the strings are assumed to have character substitution errors. Their
paper is recommended reading to anyone interested in fragment assembly.
    Blum et al. [BJL+ 94] gave the ﬁrst constant-factor approximation algorithms for
shortest common superstring, using a variation of the greedy heuristic. More recent
research has beaten this constant down to 2.367 [Muc13, Pal14], progress towards the
expected factor-2 result. The best approximation ratio so far proven for the standard
greedy heuristic is 3.5 [KS05a]. Fast implementations of such heuristics are described
in [Gus94].
    Experiments on shortest common superstring heuristics are reported in [RBT04],
which suggest that greedy heuristics typically produce solutions within 1.4% of optimal
for a reasonable class of inputs. Experiments with genetic algorithm approaches are
reported in [ZS04]. Analytical results [YZ99] demonstrate very little compression on
the SCS of random sequences, largely because the expected overlap length of any two
random strings is small.

Related problems: Suﬃx trees (see page 448), text compression (see page
693).
