Chapter 22

Algorithmic Resources

This chapter brieﬂy describes resources that the working algorithm designer
should be familiar with. Although some of this information has appeared else-
where in the catalog, we collect the most important pointers here for general
reference.

22.1        Algorithm Libraries
A good algorithm designer does not reinvent the wheel, and a good programmer
does not rewrite code that other people have written. Picasso put it best: “Good
artists borrow. Great artists steal.”
    But a word of caution about stealing. Many of the codes described in this
book have been made available only for research or educational use. Commercial
use may require a licensing arrangement with the author. I urge you to respect
this. Licensing terms from academic institutions are usually quite modest. The
recognition that industry is using a particular code is important to the authors,
often more important than the money involved. Do the right thing and get
a license. Information about terms or whom to contact is usually available
embedded within the documentation, or available at the source’s website.
    Although many of the systems described here may be available by accessing
the algorithm repository, www.algorist.com I strongly encourage you to get
them from the original sites. First, the version on the original site is much
more likely to be up-to-date. Second, there are often extra supporting ﬁles and
documentation that may be of interest to you. Finally, many authors monitor
the downloads of their codes, and so you deny them a well-earned thrill if you
don’t take them from the original site.

22.1.1       LEDA
LEDA, for Library of Eﬃcient Data types and Algorithms, is perhaps the best
single resource available to support combinatorial computing. LEDA was origi-
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to   713
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_22
714                           CHAPTER 22. ALGORITHMIC RESOURCES

nally developed by a group at the Max Planck Institut in Saarbrücken, Germany.
LEDA is unique because of (1) the algorithmic sophistication of its developers,
and (2) the level of continuity and resources invested in the project.
    What LEDA oﬀers is a complete collection of well-implemented C++ data
structures and types. Particularly useful is the graph type, which supports all
basic operations in an intelligent way. A useful library of graph algorithms
is included, which illustrates how cleanly and concisely these algorithms can
be implemented using the LEDA data types. Good implementations of the
most important data structures supporting dictionaries and priority queues are
provided. For more, see the book [MN99].
    LEDA is exclusively available from Algorithmic Solutions Software GmbH
(https://www.algorithmic-solutions.com/). This ensures professional-quality
support, and new releases appear often. A free edition contains all the basic
data structures, including dictionaries, priority queues, graphs, and numerical
types. No source code or advanced algorithms are provided with the free edi-
tion. But the licensing fees for the full library are not outlandish, and free trial
downloads are available. Check it out.

22.1.2     CGAL
The Computational Geometry Algorithms Library or CGAL provides eﬃcient
and reliable geometric algorithms in C++. It is very comprehensive, oﬀering
a rich variety of triangulations, Voronoi diagrams, operations on polygons and
polyhedra, line/curve arrangements, alpha-shapes, convex-hull algorithms, and
geometric search structures. Many work in three dimensions and beyond.
    CGAL (https://www.cgal.org) should be the ﬁrst place to go for serious
geometric computing. CGAL is distributed under a dual-license scheme. It can
be used together with open source software free of charge, but using CGAL in
other contexts requires obtaining a commercial license.

22.1.3     Boost Graph Library
Boost (www.boost.org) provides a well-regarded collection of free peer-reviewed
portable C++ source libraries, encouraging both commercial and non-commercial
use.
    The Boost Graph Library [SLL02] (http://www.boost.org/libs/graph/
doc) is perhaps most relevant for the readers of this book. Implementations of
adjacency lists, matrices, and edge lists are included, along with a reasonable
library of basic graph algorithms. Its interface and components are generic in the
same sense as the C++ Standard Template Library (STL). Other Boost libraries
of interest include string/text processing and math/numeric computation.

22.1.4     Netlib
Netlib (https://netlib.org/) is an online repository of mathematical software
that contains a large number of interesting codes, tables, and papers. Netlib
22.1. ALGORITHM LIBRARIES                                                   715

is important because of its breadth and ease of access. Whenever you need a
specialized piece of mathematical software, you should look here ﬁrst.
    The Guide to Available Mathematical Software (GAMS), is an indexing
service for Netlib and other related software repositories that can help you ﬁnd
what you want. Check it out at https://gams.nist.gov. GAMS is a service
of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

22.1.5     Collected Algorithms of the ACM
An early mechanism for the distribution of useful algorithm implementations
was the Collected Algorithms of the ACM (CALGO). It ﬁrst appeared in Com-
munications of the ACM in 1960, covering such famous algorithms as Floyd’s
linear-time build heap algorithm. More recently, it has been the province of the
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software. Each algorithm/implementation
is described in a brief journal article, with the implementation validated and
collected. These implementations are maintained at https://www.acm.org/
calgo/ and at Netlib.
    Almost 1,000 algorithms have appeared to date. Most of the codes are in
Fortran and are relevant to numerical computing, although several interesting
combinatorial algorithms have slithered their way into CALGO. Since the im-
plementations have been refereed, they are presumably more reliable than most
comparable software.

22.1.6     GitHub and SourceForge
With over 28 million public repositories, the software development platform
GitHub (https://github.com) is the largest host of source code in the world.
A GitHub search should be your second stop when seeking implementations of
algorithms: go there immediately after you check the relevant catalog entry in
this book. All interesting recent codes are likely to be found there, including
over a dozen of the systems referred to in the catalog.
    SourceForge (http://sourceforge.net/) is an older open source software
development website, with over 160,000 registered projects. There is still a lot
of good stuﬀ to be found, including graph libraries such as JUNG and JGraphT,
optimization engines such as lpsolve and JGAP, and much more.

22.1.7     The Stanford GraphBase
The Stanford GraphBase is an interesting program for several reasons. First, it
was composed as a “literate program,” meaning that it was written to be read.
If anybody’s programs deserve to be read, it is Knuth’s, and [Knu94] contains
the full source code of the system.
    The GraphBase contains implementations of several important combinato-
rial algorithms, including matching, minimum spanning trees, and Voronoi di-
agrams, as well as specialized topics like constructing expander graphs and
generating combinatorial objects. Finally, it contains programs for several
716                             CHAPTER 22. ALGORITHMIC RESOURCES

recreational problems, including constructing word ladders (ﬂour–ﬂoor–ﬂood–
blood–brood–broad–bread) and establishing dominance relations among foot-
ball teams. Check it out at http://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/
sgb.html.
    Although the GraphBase is fun to play with, it is not really suited for build-
ing general applications on top of. The GraphBase is perhaps most useful as
an instance generator for constructing a wide variety of graphs to serve as test
data.

22.1.8       Combinatorica
Combinatorica [PS03] is a collection of over 450 algorithms for combinatorics
and graph theory written in Mathematica. Combinatorica has been widely used
for both research and education.
    Although (in my totally unbiased opinion) Combinatorica is more compre-
hensive and better integrated than other libraries of combinatorial algorithms,
it is also the slowest such system available. Combinatorica is best for ﬁnding
quick solutions to small problems, and (if you can read Mathematica code) as
a terse exposition of algorithms for translation into other languages.
    Check out http://www.combinatorica.com for the latest release and asso-
ciated resources. As graphs have become more important, much of its function-
ality has migrated into Mathematica itself. It is also included with the standard
Mathematica distribution in Packages/DiscreteMath/Combinatorica.m.

22.1.9       Programs from Books
Several books on algorithms include working implementations of the algorithms
in a real programming language. Although these implementations are intended
primarily for exposition, they can also be useful for computation. Since they
are typically small and clean, they can prove the right foundation for simple
applications.
    The most useful codes of this genre are described below. Most are available
from the algorithm repository, www.algorist.com.

      • Programming Challenges – If you like the C code that appeared in the
        ﬁrst half of the text, you should check out the programs I wrote for the
        book Programming Challenges [SR03]. Perhaps most useful are additional
        examples of dynamic programming, computational geometry routines like
        convex hull, and a bignum integer arithmetic package. This algorithm
        library is available at:
        https://www.cs.stonybrook.edu/~skiena/392/programs/, and
        https://github.com/SkienaBooks/Algorithm-Design-Manual-Programs.

      • Combinatorial Algorithms for Computers and Calculators – Nijenhuis and
        Wilf [NW78] specializes in algorithms for constructing basic combinatorial
        objects such as permutations, subsets, and partitions. Such algorithms
22.2. DATA SOURCES                                                             717

      are often very short, but they are hard to locate and usually surprisingly
      subtle. Fortran routines for all of the algorithms are provided, as well
      as a discussion of the theory behind each of them. Both random and
      sequential generation algorithms are provided. Descriptions of more recent
      algorithms for several problems, without code, are provided in [Wil89].
      These programs are now available from the algorithm repository website.
      I tracked them down from Neil Sloane, who had them on a magnetic tape,
      while the original authors did not!

   • Computational Geometry in C – O’Rourke [O’R01] is perhaps the best
     practical introduction to computational geometry, because of its careful
     and correct C language implementations of all the main algorithms of
     computational geometry. Fundamental geometric primitives, convex hulls,
     triangulations, Voronoi diagrams, and motion planning are all included.
     Although they were implemented primarily for exposition rather than pro-
     duction use, they should be quite reliable. The codes are available from
     http://cs.smith.edu/~jorourke/code.html.

   • Algorithms in C++ – Sedgewick’s popular algorithms text [Sed98, SW11]
     comes in several diﬀerent language editions, including C, C++, and Java.
     This book distinguishes itself through its use of algorithm animation and
     in its broad topic coverage, including numerical, string, and geometric
     algorithms. Code from the Java edition is available from https://algs4.
     cs.princeton.edu/.

   • Discrete Optimization Algorithms in Pascal – This collection of 28 pro-
     grams for solving discrete optimization problems appears in the book by
     Syslo, Deo, and Kowalik [SDK83]. The package includes programs for
     integer and linear programming, the knapsack and set cover problems,
     traveling salesman, vertex coloring, and scheduling, as well as standard
     network optimization problems. They have been made available from the
     algorithm repository at www.algorist.com.

22.2      Data Sources
It is often important to have interesting data to feed your algorithms, to serve as
test data to ensure correctness or to compare diﬀerent algorithms for raw speed.
Finding good test data can be surprisingly diﬃcult. Here are some pointers:

   • Stanford Network Analysis Project (SNAP) – This resource couples a gen-
     eral purpose network analysis library that scales to hundreds of millions
     of nodes with a nice collection of real-world graphs drawn from social net-
     works, citation networks, and communications networks. All are available
     from https://snap.stanford.edu/.
718                               CHAPTER 22. ALGORITHMIC RESOURCES

      • TSPLIB – This well-respected library of test instances for the traveling
        salesman problem [Rei91] provides the standard collection of hard in-
        stances of TSPs. TSPLIB instances are large, real-world graphs, derived
        from applications such as circuit boards and networks, and are available
        from http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/data.
      • Stanford GraphBase – As discussed in Section 22.1.7, this suite of programs
        by Knuth provides portable generators for a wide variety of graphs. These
        include graphs arising from distance matrices, arts, and literature, as well
        as graphs of more theoretical interest.

22.3         Online Bibliographic Resources
The web is a fantastic resource for people interested in algorithms. What follows
is a selective list of the resources that I use most often. All should be in the
tool chest of every algorist:

      • Google Scholar – This free resource (https://scholar.google.com/) re-
        stricts web searches to things that look like academic papers, making it a
        sounder search for serious information than a general web search. Partic-
        ularly useful is the ability to see which papers cite a given paper. This lets
        you update an old reference to see what has happened since publication,
        and helps to judge the signiﬁcance of a particular article.

      • ACM Digital Library – This collection of bibliographic references provides
        links to essentially every technical paper ever published in computer sci-
        ence. Check out what is available at https://portal.acm.org/.
      • Arxiv – This preprint server with over 1.6 million papers is where re-
        searchers disseminate results before they are formally published—at which
        time they are out of date. This is the place to go to ﬁnd the latest research
        on any topic discussed in this book. Check it out at https://arxiv.org/.

22.4         Professional Consulting Services
Algorist Technologies (http://www.algorist.com) is a consulting ﬁrm that
provides its clients with short-term, expert help in algorithm design and imple-
mentation. Typically, an Algorist consultant is called in for one to three days
worth of intensive discussion and analysis with the client’s own development
staﬀ. Algorist has built an impressive record of performance improvements
with several companies and applications. Email info@algorist.com for more in-
formation on our services.
                                                             Algorist Technologies
                                                        215 West 92nd St. Suite 1F
                                                             New York, NY 10025
