                                                                        | Page 861

Part III: The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual,
Volume III: Profiles

                        The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
Preface | Page 862

Preface
This document describes the RISC-V architecture profiles. It contains the following profiles, all of which
have been ratified:

                                                       Profile
                                                       RVI20U32
                                                       RVI20U64
                                                       RVA20U64
                                                       RVA20S64
                                                       RVA22U64
                                                       RVA22S64
                                                       RVA23U64
                                                       RVA23S64
                                                       RVB23U64
                                                       RVB23S64

Changes made since ratification of RVA23 and RVB23 profiles

 ⚫ Removed outdated text in existing profiles
 ⚫ Removed duplicated definitions of Sha

Changes made since ratification of RVA22 profiles

 ⚫ Clarified that Zihpm was optional in RVA20U64 and became mandatory in RVA22U64

Changes made since public review of RVA22 profiles

 ⚫ Clarified that profile name can be used as ISA base string
 ⚫ Renamed Ssptead to Svade
 ⚫ Fixed Ssu64xl to make supporting UXL=64 mandatory
 ⚫ Added section listing new extension names in profiles document
 ⚫ Added new extension name Sscounterenw
 ⚫ Removed outdated text on Zicntr/Zihpm ratification plan

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                               1.1. Profiles versus Platforms | Page 863

Chapter 1. Introduction
RISC-V was designed to provide a highly modular and extensible instruction set, and includes a large and
growing set of standard extensions. In addition, users may add their own custom extensions. This flexibility
can be used to highly optimize a specialized design by including only the exact set of ISA features required
for an application, but the same flexibility also leads to a combinatorial explosion in possible ISA choices.
Profiles specify a much smaller common set of ISA choices that capture the most value for most users, and
which thereby enable the software community to focus resources on building a rich software ecosystem
with application and operating system portability across different implementations.

               Another pragmatic concern is the long and unwieldy ISA strings required to encode common
              sets of extensions, which will continue to grow as new extensions are defined.

Each profile is built on a standard base ISA plus a set of mandatory ISA extensions, and provides a small set
of standard ISA options to extend the mandatory components. Profiles provide a convenient shorthand for
describing the ISA portions of hardware and software platforms, and also guide the development of
common software toolchains shared by different platforms that use the same profile. The intent is that the
software ecosystem focus on supporting the profiles' mandatory base and standard options, instead of
attempting to support every possible combination of individual extensions. Similarly, hardware vendors
should aim to structure their offerings around standard profiles to increase the likelihood their designs will
have mainstream software support.

               Profiles are not intended to prohibit the use of combinations of individual ISA extensions or
               the addition of custom extensions, which can continue to be used for more specialized
              applications albeit without the expectation of widespread software support or portability
               between hardware platforms.

               As RISC-V evolves over time, the set of ISA features will grow, and new platforms will be added
               that may need different profiles. To manage this evolution, RISC-V is adopting a model of
              regular annual releases of new ISA profiles, following an ISA roadmap managed by the RISC-V
               Technical Steering Committee. The architecture profiles will also be used for branding and to
               advertise compatibility with the RISC-V standard.

This volume describes the general structure of RISC-V architecture profiles and also the specifics of the
officially defined profiles.

1.1. Profiles versus Platforms
Profiles only describe ISA features, not a complete execution environment.

A software platform is a specification for an execution environment, in which software targeted for that
software platform can run.

A hardware platform is a specification for a hardware system (which can be viewed as a physical realization
of an execution environment).

Both software and hardware platforms include specifications for many features beyond details of the ISA
used by RISC-V harts in the platform (e.g., boot process, calling convention, behavior of environment calls,
discovery mechanism, presence of certain memory-mapped hardware devices, etc.). Architecture profiles
factor out ISA-specific definitions from platform definitions to allow ISA profiles to be reused across
different platforms, and to be used by tools (e.g., compilers) that are common across many different
platforms.

A platform can add additional constraints on top of those in a profile. For example, mandating an

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
1.2. Components of a Profile | Page 864

extension that is a standard option in the underlying profile, or constraining some implementation-
specific parameter in the profile to lie within a certain range.

A platform cannot remove mandates or reduce other requirements in a profile.

                 A new profile should be proposed if existing profiles do not match the needs of a new platform.

1.2. Components of a Profile

1.2.1. Profile Family

Every profile is a member of a profile family. A profile family is a set of profiles that share the same base ISA
but which vary in highest-supported privilege mode. The profile families defined in this volume are:

 ⚫ Generic unprivileged instructions (I)
 ⚫ Application processors running rich operating systems with binary software ecosystems (A)
 ⚫ Application processors running rich operating systems with room for customization (B)

                 More profile families may be added over time.

A profile family may be updated no more than annually, and the release calendar year is treated as part of
the profile family name.

Each profile family is described in more detail below.

1.2.2. Profile Privilege Mode

RISC-V has a layered architecture supporting multiple privilege modes, and most RISC-V platforms
support more than one privilege mode. Software is usually written assuming a particular privilege mode
during execution. For example, application code is written assuming it will be run in user mode, and kernel
code is written assuming it will be run in supervisor mode.

                  Software can be run in a mode different than the one for which it was written. For example,
                  privileged code using privileged ISA features can be run in a user-mode execution
                 environment, but will then cause traps into the enclosing execution environment when
                  privileged instructions are executed. This behavior might be exploited, for example, to emulate
                  a privileged execution environment using a user-mode execution environment.

The profile for a privilege mode describes the ISA features for an execution environment that has the
eponymous privilege mode as the most-privileged mode available, but also includes all supported lower-
privilege modes. In general, available instructions vary by privilege mode, and the behavior of RISC-V
instructions can depend on the current privilege mode. For example, an S-mode profile includes U-mode
as well as S-mode and describes the behavior of instructions when running in different modes in an S-
mode execution environment, such as how an ecall instruction in U-mode causes a contained trap into an
S-mode handler whereas an ecall in S-mode causes a requested trap out to the execution environment.

A profile may specify that certain conditions will cause a requested trap (such as an ecall made in the
highest-supported privilege mode) or fatal trap to the enclosing execution environment. The profile does
not specify the behavior of the enclosing execution environment in handling requested or fatal traps.

                  In particular, a profile does not specify the set of ECALLs available in the outer execution
                 environment. This should be documented in the appropriate binary interface to the outer

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                 1.2. Components of a Profile | Page 865

                execution environment (e.g., Linux user ABI, or RISC-V SEE).

                In general, a profile can be implemented by an execution environment using any hardware or
               software technique that provides compatible functionality, including pure software emulation.

A profile does not specify any invisible traps.

                In particular, a profile does not constrain how invisible traps to a more-privileged mode can be
               used to emulate profile features.

A more-privileged profile can always support running software to implement a less-privileged profile from
the same profile family. For example, a platform supporting the S-mode profile can run a supervisor-mode
operating system that provides user-mode execution environments supporting the U-mode profile.

                Instructions in a U-mode profile, which are all executed in user mode, have potentially
               different behaviors than instructions executed in user mode in an S-mode profile. For this
                reason, a U-mode profile cannot be considered a subset of an S-mode profile.

1.2.3. Profile ISA Features

An architecture profile has a mandatory ratified base instruction set (RV32I or RV64I for the current
profiles). The profile also includes ratified ISA extensions placed into two categories:

 1. Mandatory
 2. Optional

As the name implies, Mandatory ISA extensions are a required part of the profile. Implementations of the
profile must provide these. The combination of the profile base ISA plus the mandatory ISA extensions are
termed the profile mandates, and software using the profile can assume these always exist.

The Optional category (also known as options) contains extensions that may be added as options, and which
are expected to be generally supported as options by the software ecosystem for this profile.

                The level of “support” for an Optional extension will likely vary greatly among different
                software components supporting a profile. Users would expect that software claiming
               compatibility with a profile would make use of any available supported options, but as a bare
                minimum software should not report errors or warnings when supported options are present
                in a system.

An optional extension may comprise many individually named and ratified extensions but a profile option
requires that all constituent extensions are present. In particular, unless explicitly listed as a profile option,
individual extensions are not by themselves a profile option even when required as part of a profile option.
For example, the Zbkb extension is not by itself a profile option even though it is a required component of
the Zkn option.

                Profile optional extensions are intended to capture the granularity at which the broad software
               ecosystem is expected to cope with combinations of extensions.

All components of a ratified profile must themselves have been ratified.

Platforms may provide a discovery mechanism to determine what optional extensions are present.

Extensions that are not explicitly listed in the mandatory or optional categories are termed non-profile
extensions, and are not considered parts of the profile. Some non-profile extensions can be added to an
implementation without conflicting with the mandatory or optional components of a profile. In this case,

                                                            The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
1.3. RVA Profiles Rationale | Page 866

the implementation is still compatible with the profile even though additional non-profile extensions are
present. Other non-profile extensions added to an implementation might alter or conflict with the
behavior of the mandatory or optional extensions in a profile, in which case the implementation would not
be compatible with the profile.

                  Extensions that are released after a given profile is released are by definition non-profile
                 extensions. For example, mandatory or optional profile extensions for a new profile might be
                  prototyped as non-profile extensions on an earlier profile.

1.2.4. Profile Naming Convention

A profile name is a string comprised of, in order:

 1. Prefix RV for RISC-V.
 2. A specific profile family name string. Currently a single letter (I, A, or B), but later profiles may have
    longer family name strings.
 3. A numeric string giving the first complete calendar year for which the profile is ratified, represented as
    number of years after year 2000, i.e., 20 for profiles built on specifications ratified during 2019. The
    year string will be longer than two digits in the next century.
 4. A privilege mode (U, S, M). Hypervisor support is treated as an option.
 5. A base ISA XLEN specifier (32, 64).

The initial profiles based on specifications ratified in 2019 are:

 ⚫ RVI20U32 basic unprivileged instructions for RV32I
 ⚫ RVI20U64 basic unprivileged instructions for RV64I
 ⚫ RVA20U64, RVA20S64 64-bit application-processor profiles

                  Profile names are embeddable into RISC-V ISA naming strings. This implies that there will be
                  no standard ISA extension with a name that matches the profile naming convention. This
                 allows tools that process the RISC-V ISA naming string to parse and/or process a combined
                  string.

1.3. RVA Profiles Rationale
RISC-V was designed to provide a highly modular and extensible instruction set and includes a large and
growing set of standard extensions, where each standard extension is a bundle of instruction-set features.
This is no different than other industry ISAs that continue to add new ISA features. Unlike other ISAs,
however, RISC-V has a broad set of contributors and implementers, and also allows users to add their own
custom extensions. For some deep embedded markets, highly customized processor configurations are
desirable for efficiency, and all software is compiled, ported, and/or developed in-house by the same
organization for that specific processor configuration. However, for other markets that expect a substantial
fraction of software to be delivered to end-customers in binary form, compatibility across multiple
implementations from different RISC-V vendors is required.

The RISC-V International ISA extension ratification process ensures that all processor vendors have agreed
to the specification of a standard extension if present. However, by themselves, the ISA extension
specifications do not guarantee that a certain set of standard extensions will be present in all
implementations.

The primary goal of the RVA profiles is to align processor vendors targeting binary software markets, so

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                1.3. RVA Profiles Rationale | Page 867

software can rely on the existence of a certain set of ISA features in a particular generation of RISC-V
implementations.

Alignment is not only for compatibility, but also to ensure RISC-V is competitive in these markets. The
binary app markets are also generally those with the most competitive performance requirements (e.g.,
mobile, client, server). RISC-V International cannot mandate the ISA features that a RISC-V binary
software ecosystem should use, as each ecosystem will typically select the lowest-common denominator
they empirically observe in the deployed devices in their target markets. But we can align hardware
vendors to support a common set of features in each generation through the RVA profiles. Without
proactive alignment through RVA profiles, RISC-V will be uncompetitive, as even if a particular vendor
implements a certain feature, if other vendors do not, then binary distributions will not generally use that
feature and all implementations will suffer. While certain features may be discoverable, and alternate code
provided in case of presence/absence of a feature, the added cost to support such options is only justified
for certain limited cases, and binary app markets will not support a wide range of optional features,
particularly for the nascent RISC-V binary app ecosystems.

To maintain alignment and increase RISC-V competitiveness over time, the mandatory set of extensions
must increase over time in successive generations of RVA profile. (RVA profiles may eventually have to
deprecate previously mandatory instructions, but that is unlikely in the near future.) Note that the RISC-V
ISA will continue to evolve, regardless of whether a given software ecosystem settles on a certain generation
of profile as the baseline for their ecosystem for many years or even decades. There are many existing
binary software ecosystems, which will migrate to RISC-V and evolve at different rates, and more new ones
will doubtless be created over the hopefully long lifetime of RISC-V. High-performance application
processors require considerable investment, and no single binary app ecosystem can justify the
development costs of these processors, especially for RISC-V in its early stage of adoption.

While the heart of the profile is the set of mandatory extensions, there are several kinds of optional
extension that serve important roles in the profile.

The first kind are localized options, whose presence or use necessarily differs along geo-political and/or
jurisdictional boundaries, with crypto being the obvious example. These will always be optional. At least for
crypto, discovery has been found to be perfectly acceptable to handle this optionality on other
architectures, as the use of the extensions is well contained in certain libraries.

The second kind of optional extension is a development option, which represents a new ISA extension in an
early part of its lifecycle but which is intended to become mandatory in a later generation of the RVA
profile. Processor vendors and software toolchain providers will have varying development schedules, and
providing an optional phase in a new extension’s lifecycle provides some flexibility while maintaining
overall alignment, and is particularly appropriate when hardware or software development for the
extension is complex. Denoting an extension as a development option signals to the community that
development should be prioritized for such extensions as they will become mandatory.

The third kind of optional extension are expansion options, which are those that may have a large
implementation cost but are not always needed in a particular platform, and which can be readily handled
by discovery. These are also intended to remain available as expansion options in future versions of the
profile. Several supervisor-mode extensions fall into this category, e.g., Sv57, which has a notable PPA
impact over Sv48 and is not needed on smaller platforms. Some unprivileged extensions that may fall into
this category are possible future matrix extensions. These have large implementation costs, and use of
matrix instructions can be readily supported with discovery and alternate math libraries.

The fourth kind of optional extensions are transitory options, where it is not clear if the extension will
change to a mandatory, localized, or expansion option, or be possibly dropped over time. Cryptography
provides some examples where earlier ciphers have been broken and are now deprecated. We used this
mechanism to enable scalar crypto until vector crypto was ready. Software security features may also be in
this category, with examples of deprecated security features occurring in other architectures. As another

                                                          The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
1.3. RVA Profiles Rationale | Page 868

example, the recent avalanche of new numeric datatypes for AI/ML may eventually subside with a few
survivors actually being used longer term. Denoting an option as transitory signals to the community that
this extension may be removed in a future profile, though the time scale may span many years.

Except for the localized options, it could be argued that the other three kinds of option could be left out of
profiles. Binary distributions of applications willing to invest in discovery can use an optional extension,
and customers compiling their own applications can take advantage of the feature on a particular
implementation, even when that system is mostly running binary distributions that ignore the new
extension. However, there is value in providing guidance to align hardware vendors and software
developers around what extensions are worth implementing and worth discovering, by designating only a
few important features as profile options and limiting their granularity.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                     2.1. RVI20U32 Profile | Page 869

Chapter 2. RVI20 Profiles
The RVI20 profiles document the initial set of unprivileged instructions. These provide a generic target for
software toolchains and represent the minimum level of compatibility with RISC-V ratified standards. The
two profiles RVI20U32 and RVI20U64 correspond to the RV32I and RV64I base ISAs respectively.

               These are designed as unprivileged profiles as opposed to user-mode profiles. Code using this
              profile can run in any privilege mode, and so requested and fatal traps may be horizontal traps
               into an execution environment running in the same privilege mode.

2.1. RVI20U32 Profile
RVI20U32 specifies the ISA features available to generic unprivileged execution environments.

2.1.1. RVI20U32 Mandatory Base

RV32I is the mandatory base ISA for RVI20U32, and is little-endian.

As per the unprivileged architecture specification, the ecall instruction causes a requested trap to the
execution environment.

Misaligned loads and stores might not be supported.

The fence.tso instruction is mandatory.

               The fence.tso instruction was incorrectly described as optional in the 2019 ratified
              specifications. Later versions of the specification of FENCE.TSO correctly indicate that the
               instruction is mandatory.

2.1.2. RVI20U32 Mandatory Extensions

There are no mandatory extensions for RVI20U32.

2.1.3. RVI20U32 Optional Extensions

 ⚫ M Integer multiplication and division.
 ⚫ A Atomic instructions.
 ⚫ F Single-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ D Double-precision floating-point instructions.

               The rationale to not include Q as an optional extension is that quad-precision floating-point is
              unlikely to be implemented in hardware, and so we do not require or expect software to expend
               effort optimizing use of Q instructions in case they are present.

 ⚫ C Compressed Instructions.
 ⚫ Zifencei Instruction-fetch fence.
 ⚫ Misaligned loads and stores may be supported.
 ⚫ Zicntr Base counters and timers.

              The Zicsr extension is not supported independent of the Zicntr or F extensions.

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
2.2. RVI20U64 Profile | Page 870

 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.

2.2. RVI20U64 Profile
RVI20U64 specifies the ISA features available to generic unprivileged execution environments.

2.2.1. RVI20U64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVI20U64, and is little-endian.

As per the unprivileged architecture specification, the ecall instruction causes a requested trap to the
execution environment.

Misaligned loads and stores might not be supported.

The fence.tso instruction is mandatory.

                  The fence.tso instruction was incorrectly described as optional in the 2019 ratified
                  specifications. However, fence.tso is encoded within the standard fence encoding such that
                  implementations must treat it as a simple global fence if they do not natively support TSO-
                 ordering optimizations. As software can always assume without any penalty that fence.tso is
                  being exploited by a hardware implementation, there is no advantage to making the
                  instruction a profile option. Later versions of the unprivileged ISA specifications correctly
                  indicate that fence.tso is mandatory.

2.2.2. RVI20U64 Mandatory Extensions

There are no mandatory extensions for RVI20U64.

2.2.3. RVI20U64 Optional Extensions

 ⚫ M Integer multiplication and division.
 ⚫ A Atomic instructions.
 ⚫ F Single-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ D Double-precision floating-point instructions.

                  The rationale to not include Q as a profile option is that quad-precision floating-point is
                 unlikely to be implemented in hardware, and so we do not require or expect software to expend
                  effort optimizing use of Q instructions in case they are present.

 ⚫ C Compressed Instructions.
 ⚫ Zifencei Instruction-fetch fence.
 ⚫ Misaligned loads and stores may be supported.
 ⚫ Zicntr Base counters and timers.

                 The Zicsr extension is not supported independent of the Zicntr or F extensions.

 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                      3.1. RVA20U64 Profile | Page 871

Chapter 3. RVA20 Profiles
The RVA20 profiles are intended to be used for 64-bit application processors running rich OS stacks. Only
user-mode (RVA20U64) and supervisor-mode (RVA20S64) profiles are specified in this family.

               There is no machine-mode profile currently defined for application processor families. A
               machine-mode profile for application processors would only be used in specifying platforms
               for portable machine-mode software. Given the relatively low volume of portable M-mode
              software in this domain, the wide variety of potential M-mode code, and the very specific needs
               of each type of M-mode software, we are not specifying individual M-mode ISA requirements in
               the A-family profiles.

               Only XLEN=64 application processor profiles are currently defined. It would be possible to also
              define very similar XLEN=32 variants.

3.1. RVA20U64 Profile
The RVA20U64 profile specifies the ISA features available to user-mode execution environments in 64-bit
applications processors. This is the most important profile within the application processor family in terms
of the amount of software that targets this profile.

RVA20U64 has one optional extension (Zihpm).

3.1.1. RVA20U64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVA20U64, and is little-endian.

As per the unprivileged architecture specification, the ecall instruction causes a requested trap to the
execution environment.

The fence.tso instruction is mandatory.

               The fence.tso instruction was incorrectly described as optional in the 2019 ratified
              specifications. Later versions of the specification of FENCE.TSO correctly indicate that the
               instruction is mandatory.

3.1.2. RVA20U64 Mandatory Extensions

 ⚫ M Integer multiplication and division.
 ⚫ A Atomic instructions.
 ⚫ F Single-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ D Double-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ C Compressed Instructions.
 ⚫ Zicsr CSR instructions. These are implied by presence of Zicntr or F.
 ⚫ Zicntr Base counters and timers.
 ⚫ Ziccif Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   instruction fetch, and any instruction fetches of naturally aligned power-of-2 sizes up to
   min(ILEN,XLEN) (i.e., 32 bits for RVA20) are atomic.

              The fetch atomicity requirement facilitates runtime patching of aligned instructions.

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
3.1. RVA20U64 Profile | Page 872

 ⚫ Ziccrse Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   RsrvEventual.
 ⚫ Ziccamoa Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   AMOArithmetic.
 ⚫ Za128rs Reservation sets must be contiguous, naturally aligned, and at most 128 bytes in size.

                  The minimum reservation set size is effectively determined by the size of atomic accesses in the
                 Zalrsc extension.

 ⚫ Zicclsm Misaligned loads and stores to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability
   PMAs must be supported.

                  This requires misaligned support for all regular load and store instructions (including scalar
                  and vector) but not AMOs or other specialized forms of memory access. Even though
                 mandated, misaligned loads and stores might execute extremely slowly. Standard software
                  distributions should assume their existence only for correctness, not for performance.

3.1.3. RVA20U64 Optional Extensions

 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.

                  Hardware performance counters are a supported option in RVA20. The number of counters is
                 platform-specific.

                  The rationale to not make Q an optional extension is that quad-precision floating-point is
                 unlikely to be implemented in hardware, and so we do not require or expect A-profile software
                  to expend effort optimizing use of Q instructions in case they are present.

                  Zifencei is not classed as a supported option in the user-mode profile because it is not
                  sufficient by itself to produce the desired effect in a multiprogrammed multiprocessor
                  environment without OS support, and so the instruction cache flush should always be
                  performed using an OS call rather than using the fence.i instruction. fence.i semantics can
                 be expensive to implement for some hardware memory hierarchy designs, and so alternative
                  non-standard instruction-cache coherence mechanisms can be used behind the OS
                  abstraction. A separate extension is being developed for more general and efficient instruction
                  cache coherence.

                  The execution environment must provide a means to synchronize writes to instruction memory
                  with instruction fetches, the implementation of which likely relies on the Zifencei extension.
                 For example, RISC-V Linux supplies the __riscv_flush_icache system call and a
                  corresponding vDSO call.

3.1.4. RVA20U64 Recommendations

Recommendations are not strictly mandated but are included to guide implementers making design
choices.

Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions on attempts to execute
unimplemented opcodes.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                   3.2. RVA20S64 Profile | Page 873

3.2. RVA20S64 Profile
The RVA20S64 profile specifies the ISA features available to a supervisor-mode execution environment in
64-bit applications processors. RVA20S64 is based on privileged architecture version 1.11.

RVA20S64 has one unprivileged option (Zihpm) and one privileged option (Sv48).

3.2.1. RVA20S64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVA20S64, and is little-endian.

The ecall instruction operates as per the unprivileged architecture specification. An ecall in user mode
causes a contained trap to supervisor mode. An ecall in supervisor mode causes a requested trap to the
execution environment.

3.2.2. RVA20S64 Mandatory Extensions

The following unprivileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ The RVA20S64 mandatory unprivileged extensions include all the mandatory unprivileged extensions
   in RVA20U64.
 ⚫ Zifencei Instruction-fetch fence.

               Zifencei is mandated as it is the only standard way to support instruction-cache coherence

              in RVA20 application processors. A new instruction-cache coherence mechanism is under
               development which might be added as an option in the future.

The following privileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ Ss1p11 Privileged Architecture version 1.11.
 ⚫ Svbare The satp mode Bare must be supported.
 ⚫ Sv39 Page-Based 39-bit Virtual-Memory System.
 ⚫ Svade Page-fault exceptions are raised when a page is accessed when A bit is clear, or written when D
   bit is clear.
 ⚫ Ssccptr Main memory regions with both the cacheability and coherence PMAs must support hardware
   page-table reads.
 ⚫ Sstvecd stvec.MODE must be capable of holding the value 0 (Direct). When stvec.MODE=Direct,
   stvec.BASE must be capable of holding any valid four-byte-aligned address.

 ⚫ Sstvala stval must be written with the faulting virtual address for load, store, and instruction page-
   fault, access-fault, and misaligned exceptions, and for breakpoint exceptions that are defined to write
   an address to stval, other than those caused by execution of the EBREAK or C.EBREAK instructions. For
   virtual-instruction and illegal-instruction exceptions, stval must be written with the faulting
   instruction.

3.2.3. RVA20S64 Optional Extensions

RVA20S64 has one unprivileged option.

 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.

                                                         The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
3.2. RVA20S64 Profile | Page 874

                 The number of counters is platform-specific.

RVA20S64 has the following privileged options:

 ⚫ Sv48 Page-Based 48-bit Virtual-Memory System.
 ⚫ Ssu64xl sstatus.UXL must be capable of holding the value 2 (i.e., UXLEN=64 must be supported).

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                      4.1. RVA22U64 Profile | Page 875

Chapter 4. RVA22 Profiles
The RVA22 profiles are intended to be used for 64-bit application processors running rich OS stacks. Only
user-mode (RVA22U64) and supervisor-mode (RVA22S64) profiles are specified in this family.

4.1. RVA22U64 Profile
The RVA22U64 profile specifies the ISA features available to user-mode execution environments in 64-bit
applications processors. This is the most important profile within the application processor family in terms
of the amount of software that targets this profile.

4.1.1. RVA22U64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVA22U64 and is little-endian.

As per the unprivileged architecture specification, the ecall instruction causes a requested trap to the
execution environment.

4.1.2. RVA22U64 Mandatory Extensions

The following mandatory extensions were present in RVA20U64.

 ⚫ M Integer multiplication and division.
 ⚫ A Atomic instructions.
 ⚫ F Single-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ D Double-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ C Compressed Instructions.
 ⚫ Zicsr CSR instructions. These are implied by presence of F.
 ⚫ Zicntr Base counters and timers.
 ⚫ Ziccif Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   instruction fetch, and any instruction fetches of naturally aligned power-of-2 sizes up to
   min(ILEN,XLEN) (i.e., 32 bits for RVA22) are atomic.
 ⚫ Ziccrse Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   RsrvEventual.
 ⚫ Ziccamoa Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   AMOArithmetic.
 ⚫ Zicclsm Misaligned loads and stores to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability
   PMAs must be supported.

               Even though mandated, misaligned loads and stores might execute extremely slowly. Standard
              software distributions should assume their existence only for correctness, not for performance.

The following mandatory feature was further restricted in RVA22U64:

 ⚫ Za64rs Reservation sets must be contiguous, naturally aligned, and a maximum of 64 bytes.

               The maximum reservation size has been reduced to match the required cache block size. The
              minimum reservation size is effectively set by the instructions in the mandatory Zalrsc

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
4.1. RVA22U64 Profile | Page 876

                  extension.

The following mandatory extensions are new for RVA22U64.

 ⚫ B Bit-manipulation instructions.
 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.

                 Zihpm was optional in RVA20U64.

 ⚫ Zihintpause Pause instruction.

                  While the PAUSE instruction is a HINT that can be implemented as a NOP and hence trivially
                  supported by hardware implementers, its inclusion in the mandatory extension list signifies
                 that software should use the instruction whenever it would make sense and that implementers
                  are expected to exploit this information to optimize hardware execution.

 ⚫ Zic64b Cache blocks must be 64 bytes in size, naturally aligned in the address space.

                  While the general RISC-V specifications are agnostic to cache block size, selecting a common
                  cache block size simplifies the specification and use of the following cache-block extensions
                  within the application processor profile. Software does not have to query a discovery
                  mechanism and/or provide dynamic dispatch to the appropriate code. We choose 64 bytes as
                 it is effectively an industry standard. Implementations may use longer cache blocks to reduce
                  tag cost provided they use 64-byte sub-blocks to remain compatible. Implementations may use
                  shorter cache blocks provided they sequence cache operations across the multiple cache blocks
                  comprising a 64-byte block to remain compatible.

 ⚫ Zicbom Cache-Block Management Operations.
 ⚫ Zicbop Cache-Block Prefetch Operations.

                  As with other HINTS, the inclusion of prefetches in the mandatory set of extensions indicates
                 that software should generate these instructions where they are expected to be useful, and
                  hardware is expected to exploit that information.

 ⚫ Zicboz Cache-Block Zero Operations.
 ⚫ Zfhmin Scalar half-precision floating-point transfer and convert.

                 The hardware cost for Zfhmin is low, and mandating it avoids adding an option to the profile.

 ⚫ Zkt Data-independent execution time.

                  Mandating Zkt enables portable libraries for safe basic cryptographic operations. It is
                 expected that application processors will naturally have this property and so implementation
                  cost is low, if not zero, in most systems that would support RVA22.

4.1.3. RVA22U64 Optional Extensions

RVA22U64 has four profile options (Zfh, V, Zkn, Zks):

 ⚫ Zfh Scalar half-precision floating-point.

                 A future profile might mandate Zfh.

 ⚫ V Vector Extension.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                      4.2. RVA22S64 Profile | Page 877

               The smaller vector extensions (Zve32f, Zve32x, Zve64d, Zve64f, Zve64x) are not provided as
              separately supported profile options. The full V extension is specified as the only supported
               profile option.

 ⚫ Zkn Scalar Crypto NIST Algorithms.
 ⚫ Zks Scalar Crypto ShangMi Algorithms.

               The smaller component scalar crypto extensions (Zbc, Zbkb, Zbkc, Zbkx, Zknd, Zkne, Zknh,
               Zksed, Zksh) are not provided as separate options in the profile. Profile implementers should
              provide all of the instructions in a given algorithm suite as part of the Zkn or Zks supported
               options.

               Access to the entropy source (Zkr) in a system is usually carefully controlled. While the design
               supports unprivileged access to the entropy source, this is unlikely to be commonly used in an
              application processor, and so Zkr was not added as a profile option. This also means the roll-
               up Zk was not added as a profile option.

               The Zfinx, Zdinx, Zhinx, Zhinxmin extensions are incompatible with the profile mandates to
              support the F and D extensions.

4.1.4. RVA22U64 Recommendations

Recommendations are not strictly mandated but are included to guide implementers making design
choices.

Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions on attempts to execute
unimplemented opcodes.

4.2. RVA22S64 Profile
The RVA22S64 profile specifies the ISA features available to a supervisor-mode execution environment in
64-bit applications processors. RVA22S64 is based on privileged architecture version 1.12.

4.2.1. RVA22S64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVA22S64 and is little-endian.

The ecall instruction operates as per the unprivileged architecture specification. An ecall in user mode
causes a contained trap to supervisor mode. An ecall in supervisor mode causes a requested trap to the
execution environment.

4.2.2. RVA22S64 Mandatory Extensions

The following unprivileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ The RVA22S64 mandatory unprivileged extensions include all the mandatory unprivileged extensions
   in RVA22U64.
 ⚫ Zifencei Instruction-fetch fence.

               Zifencei is mandated as it is the only standard way to support instruction-cache coherence

              in RVA22 application processors. A new instruction-cache coherence mechanism is under
               development which might be added as an option in the future.

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
4.2. RVA22S64 Profile | Page 878

The following privileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ Ss1p12 Privileged Architecture version 1.12.

                 Ss1p12 supersedes Ss1p11.

 ⚫ Svbare The satp mode Bare must be supported.
 ⚫ Sv39 Page-Based 39-bit Virtual-Memory System.
 ⚫ Svade Page-fault exceptions are raised when a page is accessed when A bit is clear, or written when D
   bit is clear.
 ⚫ Ssccptr Main memory regions with both the cacheability and coherence PMAs must support hardware
   page-table reads.
 ⚫ Sstvecd stvec.MODE must be capable of holding the value 0 (Direct). When stvec.MODE=Direct,
   stvec.BASE must be capable of holding any valid four-byte-aligned address.

 ⚫ Sstvala stval must be written with the faulting virtual address for load, store, and instruction page-
   fault, access-fault, and misaligned exceptions, and for breakpoint exceptions other than those caused
   by execution of the EBREAK or C.EBREAK instructions. For virtual-instruction and illegal-instruction
   exceptions, stval must be written with the faulting instruction.
 ⚫ Sscounterenw For any hpmcounter that is not read-only zero, the corresponding bit in scounteren
   must be writable.
 ⚫ exsvpbmt Page-Based Memory Types
 ⚫ Svinval Fine-Grained Address-Translation Cache Invalidation.

4.2.3. RVA22S64 Optional Extensions

RVA22S64 has four unprivileged options (Zfh, V, Zkn, Zks) from RVA22U64, and eight privileged options
(Sv48, Sv57, Svnapot, Ssu64xl, Sstc, Sscofpmf, Zkr, H).

The privileged optional extensions are:

 ⚫ Sv48 Page-Based 48-bit Virtual-Memory System.
 ⚫ Sv57 Page-Based 57-bit Virtual-Memory System.
 ⚫ Svnapot NAPOT Translation Contiguity.
 ⚫ Ssu64xl sstatus.UXL must be capable of holding the value 2 (i.e., UXLEN=64 must be supported).
 ⚫ Sstc supervisor-mode timer interrupts.

                  Sstc was not made mandatory in RVA22S64 as it is a more disruptive change affecting system-
                 level architecture, and will take longer for implementations to adopt.

 ⚫ Sscofpmf Count Overflow and Mode-Based Filtering.

                 Platforms may choose to mandate the presence of Sscofpmf.

 ⚫ Zkr Entropy CSR.

                  Technically, Zk is also a privileged-mode option capturing that Zkr, Zkn, and Zkt are all
                 implemented. However, the Zk rollup is less descriptive than specifying the individual
                  extensions explicitly.

 ⚫ Sha The augmented hypervisor extension.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                               4.2. RVA22S64 Profile | Page 879

4.2.4. RVA22S64 Recommendations

⚫ Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions when attempting to
  execute unimplemented opcodes.

                                                     The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
5.1. RVA23U64 Profile | Page 880

Chapter 5. RVA23 Profiles
The RVA23 profiles are intended to align implementations of RISC-V 64-bit application processors to allow
binary software ecosystems to rely on a large set of guaranteed extensions and a small number of
discoverable coarse-grain options. It is explicitly a non-goal of RVA23 to allow more hardware
implementation flexibility by supporting only a minimal set of features and a large number of fine-grain
extensions.

Only user-mode (RVA23U64) and supervisor-mode (RVA23S64) profiles are specified in this family.

5.1. RVA23U64 Profile
The RVA23U64 profile specifies the ISA features available to user-mode execution environments in 64-bit
applications processors. This is the most important profile within the application processor family in terms
of the amount of software that targets this profile.

5.1.1. RVA23U64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVA23U64 and is little-endian. As per the unprivileged architecture
specification, the ECALL instruction causes a requested trap to the execution environment.

5.1.2. RVA23U64 Mandatory Extensions

The following mandatory extensions were present in RVA22U64.

 ⚫ M Integer multiplication and division.
 ⚫ A Atomic instructions.
 ⚫ F Single-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ D Double-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ C Compressed instructions.
 ⚫ B Bit-manipulation instructions.
 ⚫ Zicsr CSR instructions. These are implied by presence of F.
 ⚫ Zicntr Base counters and timers.
 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.
 ⚫ Ziccif Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   instruction fetch, and any instruction fetches of naturally aligned power-of-2 sizes up to
   min(ILEN,XLEN) (i.e., 32 bits for RVA23) are atomic.
 ⚫ Ziccrse Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   RsrvEventual.
 ⚫ Ziccamoa Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   AMOArithmetic.
 ⚫ Zicclsm Misaligned loads and stores to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability
   PMAs must be supported.
 ⚫ Za64rs Reservation sets must be contiguous, naturally aligned, and a maximum of 64 bytes.
 ⚫ Zihintpause Pause hint.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                       5.1. RVA23U64 Profile | Page 881

 ⚫ Zic64b Cache blocks must be 64 bytes in size, naturally aligned in the address space.
 ⚫ Zicbom Cache-Block Management Operations.
 ⚫ Zicbop Cache-Block Prefetch Operations.
 ⚫ Zicboz Cache-Block Zero Operations.
 ⚫ Zfhmin Scalar half-precision floating-point transfer and convert.
 ⚫ Zkt Data-independent execution latency.

The following mandatory extensions are new in RVA23U64:

 ⚫ V Vector extension.

               V was optional in RVA22U64.

 ⚫ Zvfhmin Vector minimal half-precision floating-point.
 ⚫ Zvbb Vector basic bit-manipulation instructions.
 ⚫ Zvkt Vector data-independent execution latency.
 ⚫ Zihintntl Non-temporal locality hints.
 ⚫ Zicond Integer conditional operations.
 ⚫ Zimop may-be-operations.
 ⚫ Zcmop Compressed may-be-operations.
 ⚫ Zcb Additional compressed instructions.
 ⚫ Zfa Additional floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ Zawrs Wait-on-reservation-set instructions.
 ⚫ Supm Pointer masking, with the execution environment providing a means to select PMLEN=0 and
   PMLEN=7 at minimum.

5.1.3. RVA23U64 Optional Extensions

5.1.3.1. Localized Options

The following localized options are new in RVA23U64:

 ⚫ Zvkng Vector crypto NIST algorithms with GCM.
 ⚫ Zvksg Vector crypto ShangMi algorithms with GCM.

                The scalar crypto extensions Zkn and Zks that were options in RVA22 are not options in
               RVA23. The goal is for both hardware and software vendors to move to use vector crypto, as
                vectors are now mandatory and vector crypto is substantially faster than scalar crypto.

                We have included only the Zvkng/Zvksg options with GCM to standardize on a higher
                performance crypto alternative. Zvbc is listed as a development option for use in other
               algorithms, and will become mandatory. Scalar Zbc is now listed as an expansion option, i.e., it
                will probably not become mandatory.

                                                            The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
5.1. RVA23U64 Profile | Page 882

5.1.3.2. Development Options

The following are new development options intended to become mandatory in a future RVA profile.

 ⚫ Zabha Byte and halfword atomic memory operations.
 ⚫ Zacas Compare-and-swap instructions.
 ⚫ Ziccamoc Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must provide
   AMOCASQ-level PMA support.

                  Ziccamoc ensures compare-and-swap instructions are properly supported in main memory
                 regions.

 ⚫ Zvbc Vector carryless multiplication.
 ⚫ Zama16b Misaligned loads, stores and AMOs to main memory regions with both the coherence and
   cacheability PMAs that do not cross a naturally aligned 16-byte boundary are atomic.

                  Zama16b represents the presence of the new Misaligned Atomicity Granule feature added in
                 Sm1p13.

5.1.3.3. Expansion Options

The following expansion options were also present in RVA22U64:

 ⚫ Zfh Scalar half-precision floating-point.

The following are new expansion options in RVA23U64:

 ⚫ Zbc Scalar carryless multiply.
 ⚫ Zicfilp Landing Pads.
 ⚫ Zicfiss Shadow Stack.
 ⚫ Zvfh Vector half-precision floating-point.
 ⚫ Zfbfmin Scalar BF16 converts.
 ⚫ Zvfbfmin Vector BF16 converts.
 ⚫ Zvfbfwma Vector BF16 widening mul-add.

5.1.3.4. Transitory Options

There are no transitory options in RVA23U64.

                  Scalar crypto is no longer an option in RVA23U64, though the Zbc extension has now been
                 exposed as an expansion option.

5.1.4. RVA23U64 Recommendations

Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions on attempts to execute
unimplemented opcodes.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                   5.2. RVA23S64 Profile | Page 883

5.2. RVA23S64 Profile
The RVA23S64 profile specifies the ISA features available to a supervisor-mode execution environment in
64-bit applications processors. RVA23S64 is based on privileged architecture version 1.13.

5.2.1. RVA23S64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVA23S64 and is little-endian. The ECALL instruction operates as per
the unprivileged architecture specification. An ECALL in user mode causes a contained trap to supervisor
mode. An ECALL in supervisor mode causes a requested trap to the execution environment.

5.2.2. RVA23S64 Mandatory Extensions

The following unprivileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ The RVA23S64 mandatory unprivileged extensions include all the mandatory unprivileged extensions
   in RVA23U64.
 ⚫ Zifencei Instruction-fetch fence.

               Zifencei is mandated as it is the only standard way to support instruction-cache coherence

              in RVA23 application processors. A new instruction-cache coherence mechanism, Ziccid,
               might be added as an option in the future.

The following privileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ Ss1p13 Supervisor architecture version 1.13.

              Ss1p13 supersedes Ss1p12.

The following privileged extensions were also mandatory in RVA22S64:

 ⚫ Svbare The satp mode Bare must be supported.
 ⚫ Sv39 Page-based 39-bit virtual-Memory system.
 ⚫ Svade Page-fault exceptions are raised when a page is accessed when A bit is clear, or written when D
   bit is clear.
 ⚫ Ssccptr Main memory regions with both the cacheability and coherence PMAs must support hardware
   page-table reads.
 ⚫ Sstvecd stvec.MODE must be capable of holding the value 0 (Direct). When stvec.MODE=Direct,
   stvec.BASE must be capable of holding any valid four-byte-aligned address.

 ⚫ Sstvala stval must be written with the faulting virtual address for load, store, and instruction page-
   fault, access-fault, and misaligned exceptions, and for breakpoint exceptions that are defined to write
   an address to stval, other than those caused by execution of the EBREAK or C.EBREAK instructions. For
   virtual-instruction and illegal-instruction exceptions, stval must be written with the faulting
   instruction.
 ⚫ Sscounterenw For any hpmcounter that is not read-only zero, the corresponding bit in scounteren
   must be writable.
 ⚫ Svpbmt Page-based memory types
 ⚫ Svinval Fine-Grained Address-Translation Cache Invalidation.

The following are new mandatory extensions:

                                                         The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
5.2. RVA23S64 Profile | Page 884

 ⚫ Svnapot NAPOT Translation Contiguity.

                 Svnapot was optional in RVA22.

 ⚫ Sstc supervisor-mode timer interrupts.

                 Sstc was optional in RVA22.

 ⚫ Sscofpmf count overflow and mode-based filtering.
 ⚫ Ssnpm Pointer masking, with senvcfg.PMM and henvcfg.PMM supporting, at minimum, settings
   PMLEN=0 and PMLEN=7.
 ⚫ Ssu64xl sstatus.UXL must be capable of holding the value 2 (i.e., UXLEN=64 must be supported).

                 Ssu64xl was optional in RVA22.

 ⚫ Sha The augmented hypervisor extension.

                 Sha was optional in RVA22.

5.2.3. RVA23S64 Optional Extensions

RVA23S64 has the same unprivileged options as RVA23U64.

The privileged options in RVA23S64 are listed in the following sections.

5.2.3.1. Localized Options

There are no privileged localized options in RVA23S64.

5.2.3.2. Development Options

There are no privileged development options in RVA23S64.

5.2.3.3. Expansion Options

The following privileged expansion options were present in RVA22S64:

 ⚫ Sv48 Page-based 48-bit virtual-memory system.
 ⚫ Sv57 Page-based 57-bit virtual-memory system.
 ⚫ Zkr Entropy CSR.

The following are new privileged expansion options in RVA23S64

 ⚫ Svadu Hardware A/D bit updates.
 ⚫ Sdtrig Debug triggers.
 ⚫ Ssstrict No non-conforming extensions are present. Attempts to execute unimplemented opcodes or
   access unimplemented CSRs in the standard or reserved encoding spaces raises an illegal instruction
   exception that results in a contained trap to the supervisor-mode trap handler.

                 Ssstrict does not prescribe behavior for the custom encoding spaces or CSRs.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                     5.2. RVA23S64 Profile | Page 885

                Ssstrict definition applies to the execution environment claiming to be RVA23S64-compatible,
                which must have the hypervisor extension. That execution environment will take a contained
                trap to supervisor-mode (however that trap is implemented, including, but not limited to,
                emulation/delegation in the outer execution environment). Ssstrict (and all the other
               RVA23S64 mandates and options) does not apply to any guest VMs run by a hypervisor. An
                RVA23S64 hypervisor can provide guest VMs that are also RVA23S64-compatible but with an
                expanded set of emulated standard instructions. An RVA23S64 hypervisor can also choose to
                implement guest VMs that are not RVA23S64 compatible (e.g., lacking H, or only RVA20S64).

 ⚫ Svvptc Transitions from invalid to valid PTEs will be visible in bounded time without an explicit
   memory-management fence.
 ⚫ Sspm Supervisor-mode pointer masking, with the supervisor execution environment providing a
   means to select PMLEN=0 and PMLEN=7 at minimum.

5.2.3.4. Transitory Options

There are no privileged transitory options in RVA23S64.

5.2.4. RVA23S64 Recommendations

 ⚫ Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions when attempting to
   execute unimplemented opcodes or access unimplemented CSRs.

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
6.1. RVB23U64 Profile | Page 886

Chapter 6. RVB23 Profiles
This chapter specifies the RVB23 profile family. RVB23 is the first major release of the RVB series of RISC-
V Application Processor Profile.

RVB profiles are intended to be used for customized 64-bit application processors that will run rich OS
stacks, but usually as a custom build of standard OS source-code distributions. The approach is to provide a
large guaranteed set of relatively inexpensive and/or widely beneficial features but allow optionality for
more expensive and/or more targeted extensions.

Unlike the RVA profiles, it is explicitly a non-goal of RVB profiles to provide a single standard ISA interface
supporting a wide variety of binary kernel and binary application software distributions. However,
individual software ecosystems may build upon RVB profiles to produce a more targeted standard interface
for a certain market.

Only user-mode (RVB23U64) and supervisor-mode (RVB23S64) profiles are specified in this family.

6.1. RVB23U64 Profile
The RVB23U64 profile specifies the ISA features available to user-mode execution environments in 64-bit
RVB applications processors.

6.1.1. RVB23U64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVB23U64 and is little-endian. As per the unprivileged architecture
specification, the ECALL instruction causes a requested trap to the execution environment.

6.1.2. RVB23U64 Mandatory Extensions

The following mandatory extensions in RVB23U64 were also mandatory in RVA22U64.

 ⚫ M Integer multiplication and division.
 ⚫ A Atomic instructions.
 ⚫ F Single-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ D Double-precision floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ C Compressed instructions.
 ⚫ B Bit-manipulation instructions.
 ⚫ Zicsr CSR instructions. These are implied by presence of F.
 ⚫ Zicntr Base counters and timers.
 ⚫ Zihpm Hardware performance counters.
 ⚫ Ziccif Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   instruction fetch, and any instruction fetches of naturally aligned power-of-2 sizes up to
   min(ILEN,XLEN) (i.e., 32 bits for RVB23) are atomic.
 ⚫ Ziccrse Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   RsrvEventual.
 ⚫ Ziccamoa Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must support
   AMOArithmetic.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                     6.1. RVB23U64 Profile | Page 887

 ⚫ Zicclsm Misaligned loads and stores to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability
   PMAs must be supported.
 ⚫ Za64rs Reservation sets must be contiguous, naturally aligned, and a maximum of 64 bytes.
 ⚫ Zihintpause Pause hint.
 ⚫ Zic64b Cache blocks must be 64 bytes in size, naturally aligned in the address space.
 ⚫ Zicbom Cache-Block Management Operations.
 ⚫ Zicbop Cache-Block Prefetch Operations.
 ⚫ Zicboz Cache-Block Zero Operations.
 ⚫ Zkt Data-independent execution latency.

The following mandatory extensions are also present in RVA23U64:

 ⚫ Zihintntl Non-temporal locality hints.
 ⚫ Zicond Integer conditional operations.
 ⚫ Zimop May-be-operations.
 ⚫ Zcmop Compressed may-be-operations.
 ⚫ Zcb Additional compressed instructions.
 ⚫ Zfa Additional floating-point instructions.
 ⚫ Zawrs Wait-on-reservation-set instructions.

6.1.3. RVB23U64 Optional Extensions

RVB23U64 has 18 profile options listed below.

6.1.3.1. Localized Options

The following extensions are localized options in both RVA23U64 and RVB23U64:

 ⚫ Zvkng Vector crypto NIST Algorithms with GCM.
 ⚫ Zvksg Vector crypto ShangMi Algorithms with GCM.

The following extensions options are localized options in RVB23U64 but are not present in RVA23U64:

 ⚫ Zvkg Vector GCM/GMAC instructions.
 ⚫ Zvknc Vector crypto NIST algorithms with carryless multiply.
 ⚫ Zvksc Vector crypto ShangMi algorithms with carryless multiply.

                RVA profiles mandate the higher-performing but more expensive GHASH options when adding
                vector crypto. To reduce implementation cost, RVB profiles also allow these carryless multiply
               options (Zvknc and Zvksc) to implement GCM efficiently, with GHASH available as a separate
                option.

 ⚫ Zkn Scalar crypto NIST algorithms.
 ⚫ Zks Scalar crypto ShangMi algorithms.

                RVA23 profiles drop support for scalar crypto as an option, as the vector extension is now
               mandatory in RVA23. RVB23 profiles support scalar crypto, as the vector extension is optional

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
6.1. RVB23U64 Profile | Page 888

                  in RVB23.

6.1.3.2. Development Options

The following are new development options intended to become mandatory in a later RVB profile:

 ⚫ Zabha Byte and halfword atomic memory operations.
 ⚫ Zacas Compare-and-swap instructions.
 ⚫ Ziccamoc Main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must provide
   AMOCASQ-level PMA support.
 ⚫ Zama16b Misaligned loads, stores and AMOs to main memory regions with both the coherence and
   cacheability PMAs that do not cross a naturally aligned 16-byte boundary are atomic.

6.1.3.3. Expansion Options

The following are expansion options in RVB23U64, but are mandatory in RVA23U64.

 ⚫ Zfhmin Scalar half-precision floating-point transfer and convert.
 ⚫ V Vector extension.

                 Unclear if other Zve* extensions should also be supported in RVB.

 ⚫ Zvfhmin Vector minimal half-precision floating-point.
 ⚫ Zvbb Vector basic bit-manipulation instructions.
 ⚫ Zvkt Vector data-independent execution latency.
 ⚫ Supm Pointer masking, with the execution environment providing a means to select PMLEN=0 and
   PMLEN=7 at minimum.

The following extensions are expansion options in both RVA23U64 and RVB23U64:

 ⚫ Zfh Scalar half-precision floating-point.
 ⚫ Zbc Scalar carryless multiplication.
 ⚫ Zicfilp Landing Pads.
 ⚫ Zicfiss Shadow Stack.
 ⚫ Zvfh Vector half-precision floating-point.
 ⚫ Zfbfmin Scalar BF16 converts.
 ⚫ Zvfbfmin Vector BF16 converts.
 ⚫ Zvfbfwma Vector BF16 widening mul-add.

The following are expansion options for RVB23U64 as they are not intended to be made mandatory in
future RVB profiles, but are listed as RVA23U64 development options as they are intended to become
mandatory in future RVA profiles.

 ⚫ Zvbc Vector carryless multiplication.

6.1.3.4. Transitory Options

There are no transitory options in RVB23U64.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                     6.2. RVB23S64 Profile | Page 889

6.1.4. RVB23U64 Recommendations

Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions on attempts to execute
unimplemented opcodes.

6.2. RVB23S64 Profile
The RVB23S64 profile specifies the ISA features available to a supervisor-mode execution environment in
64-bit applications processors. RVB23S64 is based on privileged architecture version 1.13.

6.2.1. RVB23S64 Mandatory Base

RV64I is the mandatory base ISA for RVB23S64 and is little-endian. The ECALL instruction operates as per
the unprivileged architecture specification. An ECALL in user mode causes a contained trap to supervisor
mode. An ECALL in supervisor mode causes a requested trap to the execution environment.

6.2.2. RVB23S64 Mandatory Extensions

The following unprivileged extensions are mandatory:

 ⚫ The RVB23S64 mandatory unprivileged extensions include all the mandatory unprivileged extensions
   in RVB23U64.
 ⚫ Zifencei Instruction-fetch fence.

               Zifencei is mandated as it is the only standard way to support instruction-cache coherence

              in RVB23 application processors. A new instruction-cache coherence mechanism, Ziccid,
               might be added as an option in the future.

The following privileged extensions are mandatory, and are also mandatory in RVA23S64.

 ⚫ Ss1p13 Supervisor architecture version 1.13.

              Ss1p13 supersedes Ss1p12.

 ⚫ Svnapot NAPOT Translation Contiguity.

              Svnapot is very low cost to provide, so is made mandatory even in RVB.

 ⚫ Svbare The satp mode Bare must be supported.
 ⚫ Sv39 Page-Based 39-bit Virtual-Memory System.
 ⚫ Svade Page-fault exceptions are raised when a page is accessed when A bit is clear, or written when D
   bit is clear.
 ⚫ Ssccptr Main memory regions with both the cacheability and coherence PMAs must support hardware
   page-table reads.
 ⚫ Sstvecd stvec.MODE must be capable of holding the value 0 (Direct). When stvec.MODE=Direct,
   stvec.BASE must be capable of holding any valid four-byte-aligned address.

 ⚫ Sstvala stval must be written with the faulting virtual address for load, store, and instruction page-
   fault, access-fault, and misaligned exceptions, and for breakpoint exceptions that are defined to write
   an address to stval, other than those caused by execution of the EBREAK or C.EBREAK instructions. For
   virtual-instruction and illegal-instruction exceptions, stval must be written with the faulting
   instruction.

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
6.2. RVB23S64 Profile | Page 890

 ⚫ Sscounterenw For any hpmcounter that is not read-only zero, the corresponding bit in scounteren
   must be writable.
 ⚫ Svpbmt Page-based memory types.
 ⚫ Svinval Fine-Grained Address-Translation Cache Invalidation.
 ⚫ Sstc supervisor-mode timer interrupts.
 ⚫ Sscofpmf Count overflow and mode-based filtering.
 ⚫ Ssu64xl sstatus.UXL must be capable of holding the value 2 (i.e., UXLEN=64 must be supported).

6.2.3. RVB23S64 Optional Extensions

RVB23S64 has the same unprivileged options as RVB23U64.

The privileged options in RVB23S64 are listed in the following sections.

6.2.3.1. Localized Options

There are no privileged localized options in RVB23S64.

6.2.3.2. Development Options

There are no privileged development options in RVB23S64.

6.2.3.3. Expansion Options

The following are privileged expansion options in RVB23S64, but are mandatory in RVA23S64:

 ⚫ Ssnpm Pointer masking, with senvcfg.PMM supporting at minimum, settings PMLEN=0 and
   PMLEN=7.
 ⚫ Sha The augmented hypervisor extension.

When the hypervisor extension is implemented, the following are also mandatory:

 ⚫ If the hypervisor extension is implemented and pointer masking (Ssnpm) is supported then
   henvcfg.PMM must support at minimum, settings PMLEN=0 and PMLEN=7.

The following are privileged expansion options in RVB23S64 that are also privileged expansion options in
RVA23S64:

 ⚫ Sv48 Page-based 48-bit virtual-memory system.
 ⚫ Sv57 Page-based 57-bit virtual-memory system.
 ⚫ Svadu Hardware A/D bit updates.
 ⚫ Zkr Entropy CSR.
 ⚫ Sdtrig Debug triggers.
 ⚫ Ssstrict No non-conforming extensions are present. Attempts to execute unimplemented opcodes or
   access unimplemented CSRs in the standard or reserved encoding spaces raises an illegal instruction
   exception that results in a contained trap to the supervisor-mode trap handler.

                Ssstrict does not prescribe behavior for the custom encoding spaces or CSRs.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                  6.2. RVB23S64 Profile | Page 891

             Ssstrict definition applies to the execution environment claiming to be RVB23S64-compatible.
             That execution environment will take a contained trap to supervisor-mode (however that trap
             is implemented, including, but not limited to, emulation/delegation in the outer execution
             environment). Ssstrict (and all the other RVB23S64 mandates and options) does not apply to
            any guest VMs run by a hypervisor. An RVB23S64 hypervisor can provide guest VMs that are
             also RVB23S64-compatible but with an expanded set of emulated standard instructions. An
             RVB23S64 hypervisor can also choose to implement guest VMs that are not RVB23S64
             compatible (e.g., only RVA20S64).

⚫ Svvptc Transitions from invalid to valid PTEs will be visible in bounded time without an explicit
  memory-management fence.
⚫ Sspm Supervisor-mode pointer masking, with the supervisor execution environment providing a
  means to select PMLEN=0 and PMLEN=7 at minimum.

6.2.4. RVB23S64 Recommendations

⚫ Implementations are strongly recommended to raise illegal-instruction exceptions when attempting to
  execute unimplemented opcodes.

                                                        The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
Index | Page 892

Index
@                                                            F
(compressed                                                  FENCE.I
   formats), 156                                                 finer-grained, 61
(compressed. C.BREAKPOINTINSTR), 164                             forward compatibility, 61
(compressed. C.CA), 163                                          synchronization, 61
(compressed. C.CR), 162                                      FLEN, 129
(compressed. C.DIINST), 163                                  floating point
(compressed. C.NOPINSTR), 164                                    convert and move, 139
(register source specifiers                                      double precision, 137
   c-ext), 156                                                   fused multiply-add, 133
                                                                 load and store, 138
B                                                            floating-point
bi-endian, 23                                                    classification, 136
                                                                 classify, 140
C                                                                compare, 140
compressed                                                       conversion, 134
   C.ANDI, 162                                                   exception flag, 131
   C.SRLI
       C.SRAI, 162                                           H
   cb-format load and store, 160                             hart
   CI, 161                                                      execution environment, 19
   CIW, 161                                                  HINT
   cj-format load and store, 159                                PAUSE, 99
   cr-format load and store, 160
   cs-format load and store, 159                             I
   integer constant generation, 160                          ILEN, 23
   integer register-immediate, 161                           IMAFD, 23
   register-based load and store, 159                        interrupts, 24
core                                                         ISA
   accelerator, 18                                              definition, 17
   cluster
       multiprocessors, 18                                   M
   component, 18                                             memory access
   extensions                                                  implicit and explicit, 22, 22
       coprocessor, 18                                       MUL
                                                               DIV, 69
D                                                              div by zero, 69
decomposition, 49                                              DIVU, 69
design                                                         MULH, 68
   high performance, 48                                        MULHSU, 68
   scalable, 48                                                MULHU, 68
double-precision                                               Zmmul, 70
   floating point, 137
   to single-precision, 139                                  N
                                                             NaN
E                                                              canonical, 131
endian                                                            bfloat16, 150
   bi-, 23                                                        double-precision, 137
   little and big, 23                                             half-precision, 143
exceptions, 24                                                    quad-precision, 141
                                                                  single-precision, 132

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                        Index | Page 893

    generation, 131            values, 26
    propagation, 131

O
operations
   memory, 49
   subnormal, 132

P
PAUSE
  duration, 99
  encoding, 99
  energy consumption, 99
  HINT, 99
  LR/RC sequences, 99

R
RV32E
  design, 47
  difference from RV32I, 47
RV64I
  HINT, 45
  LD, 44
  LUI, 44
  RV64I-only, 43
  SLLI, 43
  SLLIW, 43
  SRAI, 43
  SRAIW, 43
  SRLI, 43
  SRLIW, 43
RV64I-only
  ADDW, 44
  SLLW, 44
  SRAW, 44
  SRLW, 44
  SUBW, 44
RVWMO, 48

S
single-precision
   to double-precision, 139
store instruction word
   not included, 60

T
tininess
    handling, 132
traps, 24

U
unspecified
   behaviors, 26

                              The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
Bibliography | Page 894

Bibliography
RISC-V ELF psABI Specification. github.com/riscv/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/ .

RISC-V Assembly Programmer’s Manual. github.com/riscv/riscv-asm-manual .

SAIL ISA Specification Language. github.com/rems-project/sail

The RISC-V Debug Specification. github.com/riscv/riscv-debug-spec

AMD. (2017). AMD Random Number Generator. Advanced Micro Devices. www.amd.com/system/files/
TechDocs/amd-random-number-generator.pdf

Amdahl, G. M., Blaauw, G. A., & F. P. Brooks, J. (1964). Architecture of the IBM System/360. IBM Journal of
R. & D., 8(2).

Anderson, R. J. (2020). Security engineering - a guide to building dependable distributed systems (3. ed.). Wiley.
www.cl.cam.ac.uk/ rja14/book.html

Aoki, K., Ichikawa, T., Kanda, M., Matsui, M., Moriai, S., Nakajima, J., & Tokita, T. (2000). Camellia: A 128-
bit block cipher suitable for multiple platforms—design and analysis. International Workshop on Selected
Areas in Cryptography, 39–56.

ARM. (2017). ARM TrustZone True Random Number Generator: Technical Reference Manual. ARM.
infocenter.arm.com/help/index.jsp?topic=/com.arm.doc.100976_0000_00_en

Bak, P. (1986). The Devil’s Staircase. Phys. Today, 39(12), 38–45. doi.org/10.1063/1.881047

Banik, S., Bogdanov, A., Isobe, T., Shibutani, K., Hiwatari, H., Akishita, T., & Regazzoni, F. (2015). Midori: A
block cipher for low energy. International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and
Information Security, 411–436.

Banik, S., Pandey, S. K., Peyrin, T., Sasaki, Y., Sim, S. M., & Todo, Y. (2017). GIFT: a small present.
International Conference on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 321–345.

Bardou, R., Focardi, R., Kawamoto, Y., Simionato, L., Steel, G., & Tsay, J.-K. (2012). Efficient Padding Oracle
Attacks on Cryptographic Hardware. In R. Safavi-Naini & R. Canetti (Eds.), Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO
2012 - 32nd Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 19-23, 2012. Proceedings (Vol. 7417,
pp. 608–625). Springer. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32009-5_36

Barker, E., & Kelsey, J. (2015). Recommendation for Random Number Generation Using Deterministic Random
Bit Generators. NIST Special Publication SP 800-90A Revision 1. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-90Ar1

Barker, E., Kelsey, J., McKay, K., Roginsky, A., & Turan, M. S. (2025). Recommendation for Random Bit
Generator (RBG) Constructions. NIST Special Publication SP 800-90C. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-90C

Baudet, M., Lubicz, D., Micolod, J., & Tassiaux, A. (2011). On the Security of Oscillator-Based Random
Number Generators. J. Cryptology, 24(2), 398–425. doi.org/10.1007/s00145-010-9089-3

Beierle, C., Jean, J., Kölbl, S., Leander, G., Moradi, A., Peyrin, T., Sasaki, Y., Sasdrich, P., & Sim, S. M. (2016).
The SKINNY family of block ciphers and its low-latency variant MANTIS. Annual International Cryptology
Conference, 123–153.

Blum, L., Blum, M., & Shub, M. (1986). A Simple Unpredictable Pseudo-Random Number Generator. SIAM
J. Comput., 15(2), 364–383. doi.org/10.1137/0215025

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                               Bibliography | Page 895

Blum, M. (1986). Independent unbiased coin flips from a correlated biased source – A finite state Markov
chain. Combinatorica, 6(2), 97–108. doi.org/10.1007/BF02579167

Bogdanov, A., Knudsen, L. R., Leander, G., Paar, C., Poschmann, A., Robshaw, M. J. B., Seurin, Y., & Vikkelsoe,
C. (2007). PRESENT: An ultra-lightweight block cipher. International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, 450–466.

Buchholz, W. (1962). Planning a computer system: Project Stretch. McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Criteria, C. (2017). Common Methodology for Information Technology Security Evaluation: Evaluation
methodology. Specification: Version 3.1 Revision 5. commoncriteriaportal.org/

Dworkin, M. (2007). Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and
GMAC. NIST Special Publication SP 800-38D. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-38D

Evtyushkin, D., & Ponomarev, D. V. (2016). Covert Channels through Random Number Generator:
Mechanisms, Capacity Estimation and Mitigations. In E. R. Weippl, S. Katzenbeisser, C. Kruegel, A. C.
Myers, & S. Halevi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, Vienna, Austria, October 24-28, 2016 (pp. 843–857). ACM. doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978374

Gharachorloo, K., Lenoski, D., Laudon, J., Gibbons, P., Gupta, A., & Hennessy, J. (1990). Memory Consistency
and Event Ordering in Scalable Shared-Memory Multiprocessors. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 15–26.

Goldberg, R. P. (1974). Survey of virtual machine research. Computer, 7(6), 34–45.

Grover, L. K. (1996). A Fast Quantum Mechanical Algorithm for Database Search. Proceedings of the Twenty-
Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 212–219. doi.org/10.1145/237814.237866

Hajimiri, A., & Lee, T. H. (1998). A general theory of phase noise in electrical oscillators. IEEE Journal of
Solid-State Circuits, 33(2), 179–194. doi.org/10.1109/4.658619

Hajimiri, A., Limotyrakis, S., & Lee, T. H. (1999). Jitter and phase noise in ring oscillators. _ IEEE Journal of
Solid-State Circuits_, 34(6), 790–804. doi.org/10.1109/4.766813

Hamburg, M., Kocher, P., & Marson, M. E. (2012). Analysis of Intel’s Ivy Bridge Digital Random Number
Generator. Technical Report, Cryptography Research (Prepared for Intel).

Heil, T. H., & Smith, J. E. (1996). Selective Dual Path Execution. University of Wisconsin - Madison.

Hurley-Smith, D., & Hernández-Castro, J. C. (2020). Quantum Leap and Crash: Searching and Finding Bias
in Quantum Random Number Generators. ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security, 23(3), 1–25. doi.org/
10.1145/3403643

IEEE. (2008). IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers.
doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2008.4610935

IEEE. (2019). IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers.
doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8766229

ISO. (2016). Information technology – Security techniques – Testing methods for the mitigation of non-invasive
attack classes against cryptographic modules (Standard ISO/IEC 17825:2016; Issue ISO/IEC 17825:2016).
International Organization for Standardization.

ISO/IEC. (2018). IT Security techniques – Hash-functions – Part 3: Dedicated hash-functions. ISO/IEC
Standard 10118-3:2018.

                                                            The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
Bibliography | Page 896

ISO/IEC. (2018). Information technology – Security techniques – Encryption algorithms – Part 3: Block ciphers.
Amendment 2: SM4. ISO/IEC Standard 18033-3:2010/DAmd 2 (en).

ITU. (2019). Quantum noise random number generator architecture. International Telecommunications
Union. www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.1702-201911-I/en

Jaques, S., Naehrig, M., Roetteler, M., & Virdia, F. (2020). Implementing Grover Oracles for Quantum Key
Search on AES and LowMC. In A. Canteaut & Y. Ishai (Eds.), Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2020 -
39th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Zagreb,
Croatia, May 10-14, 2020, Proceedings, Part II (Vol. 12106, pp. 280–310). Springer. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-45724-2_10

Karaklajic, D., Schmidt, J.-M., & Verbauwhede, I. (2013). Hardware Designer’s Guide to Fault Attacks. IEEE
Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., 21(12), 2295–2306. doi.org/10.1109/TVLSI.2012.2231707

Katevenis, M. G. H., Sherburne, R. W., Jr., Patterson, D. A., & Séquin, C. H. (1983, August). The RISC II
micro-architecture. Proceedings VLSI 83 Conference.

Killmann, W., & Schindler, W. (2001). A Proposal for: Functionality classes and evaluation methodology for true
(physical) random number generators. BSI. www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/
Zertifizierung/Interpretationen/
AIS_31_Functionality_classes_evaluation_methodology_for_true_RNG_e.html

Killmann, W., & Schindler, W. (2011). A Proposal for: Functionality classes for random number generators. BSI.
www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Zertifizierung/Interpretationen/
AIS_31_Functionality_classes_for_random_number_generators_e.html

Kim, H., Mutlu, O., Stark, J., & Patt, Y. N. (2005). Wish Branches: Combining Conditional Branching and
Predication for Adaptive Predicated Execution. Proceedings of the 38th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture, 43–54.

Klauser, A., Austin, T., Grunwald, D., & Calder, B. (1998). Dynamic Hammock Predication for Non-
Predicated Instruction Set Architectures. Proceedings of the 1998 International Conference on Parallel
Architectures and Compilation Techniques.

Kocher, P., Horn, J., Fogh, A., Genkin, D., Gruss, D., Haas, W., Hamburg, M., Lipp, M., Mangard, S., Prescher,
T., Schwarz, M., & Yarom, Y. (2019). Spectre Attacks: Exploiting Speculative Execution. Proceedings of 2019
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 1–19. doi.org/10.1109/SP.2019.00002

Kwon, D., Kim, J., Park, S., Sung, S. H., Sohn, Y., Song, J. H., Yeom, Y., Yoon, E.-J., Lee, S., Lee, J., & others.
(2003). New block cipher: ARIA. International Conference on Information Security and Cryptology, 432–445.

Lacharme, P. (2008). Post-Processing Functions for a Biased Physical Random Number Generator. In K.
Nyberg (Ed.), Fast Software Encryption, 15th International Workshop, FSE 2008, Lausanne, Switzerland,
February 10-13, 2008, Revised Selected Papers (Vol. 5086, pp. 334–342). Springer. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
540-71039-4_21

Lee, D. D., Kong, S. I., Hill, M. D., Taylor, G. S., Hodges, D. A., Katz, R. H., & Patterson, D. A. (1989). A VLSI
Chip Set for a Multiprocessor Workstation–Part I: An RISC Microprocessor with Coprocessor Interface and
Support for Symbolic Processing. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 24(6), 1688–1698. doi.org/10.1109/
4.45007

Lee, R. B., Shi, Z. J., Yin, Y. L., Rivest, R. L., & Robshaw, M. J. B. (2004). On permutation operations in cipher
design. International Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing, 2004. Proceedings. ITCC
2004., 2, 569–577.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                                 Bibliography | Page 897

Lee, Y., Waterman, A., Avizienis, R., Cook, H., Sun, C., Stojanović, V., & Asanović, K. (2014). A 45nm 1.3GHz
16.7 double-precision GFLOPS/W RISC-V processor with vector accelerators. Proceedings of the 40th
European Solid State Circuits Conference, 199–202. doi.org/10.1109/ESSCIRC.2014.6942056

Liberty, J. S., Barrera, A., Boerstler, D. W., Chadwick, T. B., Cottier, S. R., Hofstee, H. P., Rosser, J. A., & Tsai,
M. L. (2013). True hardware random number generation implemented in the 32-nm SOI POWER7+
processor. IBM J. Res. Dev., 57(6). doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2013.2279599

Markettos, A. T., & Moore, S. W. (2009). The Frequency Injection Attack on Ring-Oscillator-Based True
Random Number Generators. In C. Clavier & K. Gaj (Eds.), Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems -
CHES 2009, 11th International Workshop, Lausanne, Switzerland, September 6-9, 2009, Proceedings (Vol. 5747,
pp. 317–331). Springer. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-04138-9_23

Marshall, B., Newell, G. R., Page, D., Saarinen, M.-J. O., & Wolf, C. (2020). The design of scalar AES
Instruction Set Extensions for RISC-V. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(1), 109–136. doi.org/10.46586/tches.v2021.i1.109-136

Marshall, B., Page, D., & Pham, T. (2019). XCrypto: a cryptographic ISE for RISC-V (No.1.0.0; Issue 1.0.0).
github.com/scarv/xcrypto

Mechalas, J. P. (2018). Intel Digital Random Number Generator (DRNG) Software Implementation Guide. Intel
Technical Report, Version 2.1. software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/articles/intel-digital-
random-number-generator-drng-software-implementation-guide.html

Michael, M. M., & Scott, M. L. (1996). Simple, Fast, and Practical Non-Blocking and Blocking Concurrent
Queue Algorithms. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
Computing, 267–275. doi.org/10.1145/248052.248106

Micikevicius, P., Oberman, S., Dubey, P., Cornea, M., Rodriguez, A., Bratt, I., Grisenthwaite, R., Jouppi, N.,
Chou, C., Huffman, A., Schulte, M., Wittig, R., Jani, D., & Deng, S. (2023). OCP 8-bit Floating Point
Specification (OFP8). github.com/opencomputeproject/FP8

Moghimi, D., Sunar, B., Eisenbarth, T., & Heninger, N. (2020). TPM-FAIL: TPM meets Timing and Lattice
Attacks. 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), To appear. www.usenix.org/conference/
usenixsecurity20/presentation/moghimi-tpm

Müller, S. (2020). Documentation and Analysis of the Linux Random Number Generator, Version 3.6. Prepared
for BSI by atsec information security GmbH. www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/
Publications/Studies/LinuxRNG/LinuxRNG_EN.pdf

Navarro, J., Iyer, S., Druschel, P., & Cox, A. (2002). Practical, Transparent Operating System Support for
Superpages. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 36(SI), 89–104. doi.org/10.1145/844128.844138

NIST. (2001). Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FIPS 197. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.197

NIST. (2013). Digital Signature Standard (DSS). Federal Information Processing Standards Publication FIPS
186-4. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.186-4

NIST. (2015). Secure Hash Standard (SHS). Federal Information Processing Standards Publication FIPS 180-
4. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.180-4

NIST. (2015). SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash and Extendable-Output Functions. Federal
Information Processing Standards Publication FIPS 202. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.202

NIST. (2016). Submission Requirements and Evaluation Criteria for the Post-Quantum Cryptography

                                                              The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
Bibliography | Page 898

Standardization Process. Official Call for Proposals, National Institute for Standards and Technology.
csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/post-quantum-crypto/documents/call-for-proposals-final-dec-2016.pdf

NIST. (2019). Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. Federal Information Processing Standards
Publication FIPS 140-3. doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.140-3

NIST, & CCCS. (2021). Implementation Guidance for FIPS 140-3 and the Cryptographic Module Validation
Program.     CMVP.      csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/
documents/fips%20140-3/FIPS%20140-3%20IG.pdf

NSA/CSS. (2015). Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite. apps.nsa.gov/iaarchive/programs/iad-
initiatives/cnsa-suite.cfm

Pan, H., Hindman, B., & Asanović, K. (2009, March). Lithe: Enabling Efficient Composition of Parallel
Libraries. Proceedings of the 1st USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Parallelism (HotPar ’09).

Pan, H., Hindman, B., & Asanović, K. (2010, June). Composing Parallel Software Efficiently with Lithe. 31st
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation.

Patterson, D. A., & Séquin, C. H. (1981). RISC I: A Reduced Instruction Set VLSI Computer. Proceedings of
the 8th Annual Symposium on Computer Architecture, 443–457.

Rajwar, R., & Goodman, J. R. (2001). Speculative lock elision: enabling highly concurrent multithreaded
execution. Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchitecture,
294–305.

Rambus. (2020). TRNG-IP-76 / EIP-76 Family of FIPS Approved True Random Generators. Commercial Crypto
IP. Formerly (2017) available from Inside Secure. www.rambus.com/security/crypto-accelerator-hardware-
cores/basic-crypto-blocks/trng-ip-76/

Roux, P. (2014). Innocuous Double Rounding of Basic Arithmetic Operations. Journal of Formalized
Reasoning, 7(1), 131–142. doi.org/10.6092/issn.1972-5787/4359

Saarinen, M.-J. O. (2020). Lightweight SHA ISA. github.com/mjosaarinen/lwsha_isa .

Saarinen, M.-J. O. (2020). Lightweight AES ISA. github.com/mjosaarinen/lwaes_isa .

Saarinen, M.-J. O. (2021). On Entropy and Bit Patterns of Ring Oscillator Jitter. Preprint arXiv:2102.02196
[cs.CR]. doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2102.02196

SAC. (2016). GB/T 32905-2016: SM3 Cryptographic Hash Algorithm. Also GM/T 0004-2012. Standardization
Administration of China. www.gmbz.org.cn/upload/2018-07-24/1532401392982079739.pdf

SAC. (2016). GB/T 32907-2016: SM4 Block Cipher Algorithm. Also GM/T 0002-2012. Standardization
Administration of China. www.gmbz.org.cn/upload/2018-04-04/1522788048733065051.pdf

Serebryany, K., Stepanov, E., Shlyapnikov, A., Tsyrklevich, V., & Vyukov, D. (2018). Memory Tagging and
how it improves C/C++ memory safety. CoRR. doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.09517

Shor, P. W. (1994). Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms and factoring. 35th Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, 20-22 November 1994, 124–134.
doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1994.365700

Sinharoy, B., Kalla, R., Starke, W. J., Le, H. Q., Cargnoni, R., Van Norstrand, J. A., Ronchetti, B. J., Stuecheli, J.,
Leenstra, J., Guthrie, G. L., Nguyen, D. Q., Blaner, B., Marino, C. F., Retter, E., & Williams, P. (2011). IBM
POWER7 multicore server processor. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 55(3), 1–1.

The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
                                                                                              Bibliography | Page 899

Suzaki, T., Minematsu, K., Morioka, S., & Kobayashi, E. (2012). TWINE: A Lightweight Block Cipher for
Multiple Platforms. International Conference on Selected Areas in Cryptography, 339–354.

Thornton, J. E. (1965). Parallel Operation in the Control Data 6600. Proceedings of the October 27-29, 1964,
Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part II: Very High Speed Computer Systems, 33–40.

Tremblay, M., Chan, J., Chaudhry, S., Conigliaro, A. W., & Tse, S. S. (2000). The MAJC Architecture: A
Synthesis of Parallelism and Scalability. IEEE Micro, 20(6), 12–25.

Tseng, J., & Asanović, K. (2000). Energy-Efficient Register Access. Proc. of the 13th Symposium on Integrated
Circuits and Systems Design, 377–384.

Turan, M. S., Barker, E., Kelsey, J., McKay, K. A., Baish, M. L., & Boyle, M. (2018). Recommendation for the
Entropy Sources Used for Random Bit Generation. NIST Special Publication SP 800-90B. doi.org/10.6028/
NIST.SP.800-90B

Ungar, D., Blau, R., Foley, P., Samples, D., & Patterson, D. (1984). Architecture of SOAR: Smalltalk on a RISC.
Proceedings of the 11th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 188–197. doi.org/10.1145/
800015.808182

Valtchanov, B., Fischer, V., Aubert, A., & Bernard, F. (2010). Characterization of randomness sources in ring
oscillator-based true random number generators in FPGAs. In E. Gramatová, Z. Kotásek, A. Steininger, H. T.
Vierhaus, & H. Zimmermann (Eds.), 13th IEEE International Symposium on Design and Diagnostics of
Electronic Circuits and Systems, DDECS 2010, Vienna, Austria, April 14-16, 2010 (pp. 48–53). IEEE Computer
Society. doi.org/10.1109/DDECS.2010.5491819

Varchola, M., & Drutarovský, M. (2010). New High Entropy Element for FPGA Based True Random
Number Generators. In S. Mangard & F.-X. Standaert (Eds.), Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
CHES 2010, 12th International Workshop, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 17-20, 2010. Proceedings (Vol. 6225,
pp. 351–365). Springer. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15031-9_24

von Neumann, J. (1951). Various Techniques Used in Connection with Random Digits. In A. S. Householder,
G. E. Forsythe, & H. H. Germond (Eds.), Monte Carlo Method (Vol. 12, pp. 36–38). US Government Printing
Office. mcnp.lanl.gov/pdf_files/nbs_vonneumann.pdf

Wang, S., & Kanwar, P. (2019). BFloat16: The secret to high performance on Cloud TPUs. cloud.google.com/
blog/products/ai-machine-learning/bfloat16-the-secret-to-high-performance-on-cloud-tpus

Waterman, A. (2011). Improving Energy Efficiency and Reducing Code Size with RISC-V Compressed (Issue
UCB/EECS-2011-63) [Master’s thesis]. University of California, Berkeley.

Waterman, A. (2016). Design of the RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture (Issue UCB/EECS-2016-1) [PhD
thesis]. University of California, Berkeley.

Waterman, A., Lee, Y., Patterson, D. A., & Asanović, K. (2011). The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume I:
Base User-Level ISA (UCB/EECS-2011-62; Issue UCB/EECS-2011-62). EECS Department, University of
California, Berkeley.

Waterman, A., Lee, Y., Patterson, D. A., & Asanović, K. (2014). The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume I:
Base User-Level ISA Version 2.0 (UCB/EECS-2014-54; Issue UCB/EECS-2014-54). EECS Department,
University of California, Berkeley.

Zhang, W., Bao, Z., Lin, D., Rijmen, V., Yang, B., & Verbauwhede, I. (2015). RECTANGLE: a bit-slice
lightweight block cipher suitable for multiple platforms. Science China Information Sciences, 58(12), 1–15.

                                                           The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual | © RISC-V International
