Preface

This book (known as CS:APP) is for computer scientists, computer engineers, and
others who want to be able to write better programs by learning what is going on
“under the hood” of a computer system.
     Our aim is to explain the enduring concepts underlying all computer systems,
and to show you the concrete ways that these ideas affect the correctness, perfor-
mance, and utility of your application programs. Many systems books are written
from a builder’s perspective, describing how to implement the hardware or the sys-
tems software, including the operating system, compiler, and network interface.
This book is written from a programmer’s perspective, describing how application
programmers can use their knowledge of a system to write better programs. Of
course, learning what a system is supposed to do provides a good first step in learn-
ing how to build one, so this book also serves as a valuable introduction to those
who go on to implement systems hardware and software. Most systems books also
tend to focus on just one aspect of the system, for example, the hardware archi-
tecture, the operating system, the compiler, or the network. This book spans all
of these aspects, with the unifying theme of a programmer’s perspective.
     If you study and learn the concepts in this book, you will be on your way to
becoming the rare power programmer who knows how things work and how to
fix them when they break. You will be able to write programs that make better
use of the capabilities provided by the operating system and systems software,
that operate correctly across a wide range of operating conditions and run-time
parameters, that run faster, and that avoid the flaws that make programs vulner-
able to cyberattack. You will be prepared to delve deeper into advanced topics
such as compilers, computer architecture, operating systems, embedded systems,
networking, and cybersecurity.

Assumptions about the Reader’s Background
This book focuses on systems that execute x86-64 machine code. x86-64 is the latest
in an evolutionary path followed by Intel and its competitors that started with the
8086 microprocessor in 1978. Due to the naming conventions used by Intel for
its microprocessor line, this class of microprocessors is referred to colloquially as
“x86.” As semiconductor technology has evolved to allow more transistors to be
integrated onto a single chip, these processors have progressed greatly in their
computing power and their memory capacity. As part of this progression, they
have gone from operating on 16-bit words, to 32-bit words with the introduction
of IA32 processors, and most recently to 64-bit words with x86-64.
     We consider how these machines execute C programs on Linux. Linux is one
of a number of operating systems having their heritage in the Unix operating
system developed originally by Bell Laboratories. Other members of this class

 New to C?       Advice on the C programming language
 To help readers whose background in C programming is weak (or nonexistent), we have also included
 these special notes to highlight features that are especially important in C. We assume you are familiar
 with C++ or Java.

                    of operating systems include Solaris, FreeBSD, and MacOS X. In recent years,
                    these operating systems have maintained a high level of compatibility through the
                    efforts of the Posix and Standard Unix Specification standardization efforts. Thus,
                    the material in this book applies almost directly to these “Unix-like” operating
                    systems.
                         The text contains numerous programming examples that have been compiled
                    and run on Linux systems. We assume that you have access to such a machine, and
                    are able to log in and do simple things such as listing files and changing directo-
                    ries. If your computer runs Microsoft Windows, we recommend that you install
                    one of the many different virtual machine environments (such as VirtualBox or
                    VMWare) that allow programs written for one operating system (the guest OS)
                    to run under another (the host OS).
                         We also assume that you have some familiarity with C or C++. If your only
                    prior experience is with Java, the transition will require more effort on your part,
                    but we will help you. Java and C share similar syntax and control statements.
                    However, there are aspects of C (particularly pointers, explicit dynamic memory
                    allocation, and formatted I/O) that do not exist in Java. Fortunately, C is a small
                    language, and it is clearly and beautifully described in the classic “K&R” text
                    by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie [61]. Regardless of your programming
                    background, consider K&R an essential part of your personal systems library. If
                    your prior experience is with an interpreted language, such as Python, Ruby, or
                    Perl, you will definitely want to devote some time to learning C before you attempt
                    to use this book.
                         Several of the early chapters in the book explore the interactions between C
                    programs and their machine-language counterparts. The machine-language exam-
                    ples were all generated by the GNU gcc compiler running on x86-64 processors.
                    We do not assume any prior experience with hardware, machine language, or
                    assembly-language programming.

                    How to Read the Book
                    Learning how computer systems work from a programmer’s perspective is great
                    fun, mainly because you can do it actively. Whenever you learn something new,
                    you can try it out right away and see the result firsthand. In fact, we believe that
                    the only way to learn systems is to do systems, either working concrete problems
                    or writing and running programs on real systems.
                         This theme pervades the entire book. When a new concept is introduced, it
                    is followed in the text by one or more practice problems that you should work

                                                                   code/intro/hello.c
 1   #include <stdio.h>
 2
 3   int main()
 4   {
 5       printf("hello, world\n");
 6       return 0;
 7   }
                                                                   code/intro/hello.c

Figure 1 A typical code example.

immediately to test your understanding. Solutions to the practice problems are
at the end of each chapter. As you read, try to solve each problem on your own
and then check the solution to make sure you are on the right track. Each chapter
is followed by a set of homework problems of varying difficulty. Your instructor
has the solutions to the homework problems in an instructor’s manual. For each
homework problem, we show a rating of the amount of effort we feel it will require:

   ◆ Should require just a few minutes. Little or no programming required.
  ◆◆ Might require up to 20 minutes. Often involves writing and testing some
     code. (Many of these are derived from problems we have given on exams.)
 ◆◆◆ Requires a significant effort, perhaps 1–2 hours. Generally involves writ-
     ing and testing a significant amount of code.
◆◆◆◆ A lab assignment, requiring up to 10 hours of effort.

     Each code example in the text was formatted directly, without any manual
intervention, from a C program compiled with gcc and tested on a Linux system.
Of course, your system may have a different version of gcc, or a different compiler
altogether, so your compiler might generate different machine code; but the
overall behavior should be the same. All of the source code is available from the
CS:APP Web page (“CS:APP” being our shorthand for the book’s title) at csapp
.cs.cmu.edu. In the text, the filenames of the source programs are documented
in horizontal bars that surround the formatted code. For example, the program in
Figure 1 can be found in the file hello.c in directory code/intro/. We encourage
you to try running the example programs on your system as you encounter them.
     To avoid having a book that is overwhelming, both in bulk and in content, we
have created a number of Web asides containing material that supplements the
main presentation of the book. These asides are referenced within the book with
a notation of the form chap:top, where chap is a short encoding of the chapter sub-
ject, and top is a short code for the topic that is covered. For example, Web Aside
data:bool contains supplementary material on Boolean algebra for the presenta-
tion on data representations in Chapter 2, while Web Aside arch:vlog contains

               material describing processor designs using the Verilog hardware description lan-
               guage, supplementing the presentation of processor design in Chapter 4. All of
               these Web asides are available from the CS:APP Web page.

               Book Overview
               The CS:APP book consists of 12 chapters designed to capture the core ideas in
               computer systems. Here is an overview.

               Chapter 1: A Tour of Computer Systems. This chapter introduces the major ideas
                    and themes in computer systems by tracing the life cycle of a simple “hello,
                    world” program.
               Chapter 2: Representing and Manipulating Information. We cover computer arith-
                    metic, emphasizing the properties of unsigned and two’s-complement num-
                    ber representations that affect programmers. We consider how numbers
                    are represented and therefore what range of values can be encoded for
                    a given word size. We consider the effect of casting between signed and
                    unsigned numbers. We cover the mathematical properties of arithmetic op-
                    erations. Novice programmers are often surprised to learn that the (two’s-
                    complement) sum or product of two positive numbers can be negative. On
                    the other hand, two’s-complement arithmetic satisfies many of the algebraic
                    properties of integer arithmetic, and hence a compiler can safely transform
                    multiplication by a constant into a sequence of shifts and adds. We use the
                    bit-level operations of C to demonstrate the principles and applications of
                    Boolean algebra. We cover the IEEE floating-point format in terms of how
                    it represents values and the mathematical properties of floating-point oper-
                    ations.
                         Having a solid understanding of computer arithmetic is critical to writ-
                    ing reliable programs. For example, programmers and compilers cannot re-
                    place the expression (x<y) with (x-y < 0), due to the possibility of overflow.
                    They cannot even replace it with the expression (-y < -x), due to the asym-
                    metric range of negative and positive numbers in the two’s-complement
                    representation. Arithmetic overflow is a common source of programming
                    errors and security vulnerabilities, yet few other books cover the properties
                    of computer arithmetic from a programmer’s perspective.
               Chapter 3: Machine-Level Representation of Programs. We teach you how to read
                    the x86-64 machine code generated by a C compiler. We cover the ba-
                    sic instruction patterns generated for different control constructs, such as
                    conditionals, loops, and switch statements. We cover the implementation
                    of procedures, including stack allocation, register usage conventions, and
                    parameter passing. We cover the way different data structures such as struc-
                    tures, unions, and arrays are allocated and accessed. We cover the instruc-
                    tions that implement both integer and floating-point arithmetic. We also
                    use the machine-level view of programs as a way to understand common
                    code security vulnerabilities, such as buffer overflow, and steps that the pro-

 Aside     What is an aside?
 You will encounter asides of this form throughout the text. Asides are parenthetical remarks that give
 you some additional insight into the current topic. Asides serve a number of purposes. Some are little
 history lessons. For example, where did C, Linux, and the Internet come from? Other asides are meant
 to clarify ideas that students often find confusing. For example, what is the difference between a cache
 line, set, and block? Other asides give real-world examples, such as how a floating-point error crashed
 a French rocket or the geometric and operational parameters of a commercial disk drive. Finally, some
 asides are just fun stuff. For example, what is a “hoinky”?

      grammer, the compiler, and the operating system can take to reduce these
      threats. Learning the concepts in this chapter helps you become a better
      programmer, because you will understand how programs are represented
      on a machine. One certain benefit is that you will develop a thorough and
      concrete understanding of pointers.

Chapter 4: Processor Architecture. This chapter covers basic combinational and
     sequential logic elements, and then shows how these elements can be com-
     bined in a datapath that executes a simplified subset of the x86-64 instruction
     set called “Y86-64.” We begin with the design of a single-cycle datapath.
     This design is conceptually very simple, but it would not be very fast. We
     then introduce pipelining, where the different steps required to process an
     instruction are implemented as separate stages. At any given time, each
     stage can work on a different instruction. Our five-stage processor pipeline is
     much more realistic. The control logic for the processor designs is described
     using a simple hardware description language called HCL. Hardware de-
     signs written in HCL can be compiled and linked into simulators provided
     with the textbook, and they can be used to generate Verilog descriptions
     suitable for synthesis into working hardware.

Chapter 5: Optimizing Program Performance. This chapter introduces a number
     of techniques for improving code performance, with the idea being that pro-
     grammers learn to write their C code in such a way that a compiler can then
     generate efficient machine code. We start with transformations that reduce
     the work to be done by a program and hence should be standard practice
     when writing any program for any machine. We then progress to trans-
     formations that enhance the degree of instruction-level parallelism in the
     generated machine code, thereby improving their performance on modern
     “superscalar” processors. To motivate these transformations, we introduce
     a simple operational model of how modern out-of-order processors work,
     and show how to measure the potential performance of a program in terms
     of the critical paths through a graphical representation of a program. You
     will be surprised how much you can speed up a program by simple transfor-
     mations of the C code.

               Chapter 6: The Memory Hierarchy. The memory system is one of the most visible
                    parts of a computer system to application programmers. To this point, you
                    have relied on a conceptual model of the memory system as a linear array
                    with uniform access times. In practice, a memory system is a hierarchy of
                    storage devices with different capacities, costs, and access times. We cover
                    the different types of RAM and ROM memories and the geometry and
                    organization of magnetic-disk and solid state drives. We describe how these
                    storage devices are arranged in a hierarchy. We show how this hierarchy is
                    made possible by locality of reference. We make these ideas concrete by
                    introducing a unique view of a memory system as a “memory mountain”
                    with ridges of temporal locality and slopes of spatial locality. Finally, we
                    show you how to improve the performance of application programs by
                    improving their temporal and spatial locality.

               Chapter 7: Linking. This chapter covers both static and dynamic linking, including
                    the ideas of relocatable and executable object files, symbol resolution, re-
                    location, static libraries, shared object libraries, position-independent code,
                    and library interpositioning. Linking is not covered in most systems texts,
                    but we cover it for two reasons. First, some of the most confusing errors that
                    programmers can encounter are related to glitches during linking, especially
                    for large software packages. Second, the object files produced by linkers are
                    tied to concepts such as loading, virtual memory, and memory mapping.

               Chapter 8: Exceptional Control Flow. In this part of the presentation, we step
                    beyond the single-program model by introducing the general concept of
                    exceptional control flow (i.e., changes in control flow that are outside the
                    normal branches and procedure calls). We cover examples of exceptional
                    control flow that exist at all levels of the system, from low-level hardware ex-
                    ceptions and interrupts, to context switches between concurrent processes,
                    to abrupt changes in control flow caused by the receipt of Linux signals, to
                    the nonlocal jumps in C that break the stack discipline.
                         This is the part of the book where we introduce the fundamental idea
                    of a process, an abstraction of an executing program. You will learn how
                    processes work and how they can be created and manipulated from appli-
                    cation programs. We show how application programmers can make use of
                    multiple processes via Linux system calls. When you finish this chapter, you
                    will be able to write a simple Linux shell with job control. It is also your first
                    introduction to the nondeterministic behavior that arises with concurrent
                    program execution.

               Chapter 9: Virtual Memory. Our presentation of the virtual memory system seeks
                    to give some understanding of how it works and its characteristics. We want
                    you to know how it is that the different simultaneous processes can each use
                    an identical range of addresses, sharing some pages but having individual
                    copies of others. We also cover issues involved in managing and manip-
                    ulating virtual memory. In particular, we cover the operation of storage
                    allocators such as the standard-library malloc and free operations. Cov-

      ering this material serves several purposes. It reinforces the concept that
      the virtual memory space is just an array of bytes that the program can
      subdivide into different storage units. It helps you understand the effects
      of programs containing memory referencing errors such as storage leaks
      and invalid pointer references. Finally, many application programmers write
      their own storage allocators optimized toward the needs and characteris-
      tics of the application. This chapter, more than any other, demonstrates the
      benefit of covering both the hardware and the software aspects of computer
      systems in a unified way. Traditional computer architecture and operating
      systems texts present only part of the virtual memory story.

Chapter 10: System-Level I/O. We cover the basic concepts of Unix I/O such as
     files and descriptors. We describe how files are shared, how I/O redirection
     works, and how to access file metadata. We also develop a robust buffered
     I/O package that deals correctly with a curious behavior known as short
     counts, where the library function reads only part of the input data. We
     cover the C standard I/O library and its relationship to Linux I/O, focusing
     on limitations of standard I/O that make it unsuitable for network program-
     ming. In general, the topics covered in this chapter are building blocks for
     the next two chapters on network and concurrent programming.

Chapter 11: Network Programming. Networks are interesting I/O devices to pro-
     gram, tying together many of the ideas that we study earlier in the text, such
     as processes, signals, byte ordering, memory mapping, and dynamic storage
     allocation. Network programs also provide a compelling context for con-
     currency, which is the topic of the next chapter. This chapter is a thin slice
     through network programming that gets you to the point where you can
     write a simple Web server. We cover the client-server model that underlies
     all network applications. We present a programmer’s view of the Internet
     and show how to write Internet clients and servers using the sockets inter-
     face. Finally, we introduce HTTP and develop a simple iterative Web server.

Chapter 12: Concurrent Programming. This chapter introduces concurrent pro-
     gramming using Internet server design as the running motivational example.
     We compare and contrast the three basic mechanisms for writing concur-
     rent programs—processes, I/O multiplexing, and threads—and show how
     to use them to build concurrent Internet servers. We cover basic principles
     of synchronization using P and V semaphore operations, thread safety and
     reentrancy, race conditions, and deadlocks. Writing concurrent code is es-
     sential for most server applications. We also describe the use of thread-level
     programming to express parallelism in an application program, enabling
     faster execution on multi-core processors. Getting all of the cores working
     on a single computational problem requires a careful coordination of the
     concurrent threads, both for correctness and to achieve high performance.

               New to This Edition
               The first edition of this book was published with a copyright of 2003, while the
               second had a copyright of 2011. Considering the rapid evolution of computer
               technology, the book content has held up surprisingly well. Intel x86 machines
               running C programs under Linux (and related operating systems) has proved to
               be a combination that continues to encompass many systems today. However,
               changes in hardware technology, compilers, program library interfaces, and the
               experience of many instructors teaching the material have prompted a substantial
               revision.
                   The biggest overall change from the second edition is that we have switched
               our presentation from one based on a mix of IA32 and x86-64 to one based
               exclusively on x86-64. This shift in focus affected the contents of many of the
               chapters. Here is a summary of the significant changes.

               Chapter 1: A Tour of Computer Systems We have moved the discussion of Am-
                    dahl’s Law from Chapter 5 into this chapter.
               Chapter 2: Representing and Manipulating Information. A consistent bit of feed-
                    back from readers and reviewers is that some of the material in this chapter
                    can be a bit overwhelming. So we have tried to make the material more ac-
                    cessible by clarifying the points at which we delve into a more mathematical
                    style of presentation. This enables readers to first skim over mathematical
                    details to get a high-level overview and then return for a more thorough
                    reading.
               Chapter 3: Machine-Level Representation of Programs. We have converted from
                    the earlier presentation based on a mix of IA32 and x86-64 to one based
                    entirely on x86-64. We have also updated for the style of code generated by
                    more recent versions of gcc. The result is a substantial rewriting, including
                    changing the order in which some of the concepts are presented. We also
                    have included, for the first time, a presentation of the machine-level support
                    for programs operating on floating-point data. We have created a Web aside
                    describing IA32 machine code for legacy reasons.
               Chapter 4: Processor Architecture. We have revised the earlier processor design,
                    based on a 32-bit architecture, to one that supports 64-bit words and oper-
                    ations.
               Chapter 5: Optimizing Program Performance. We have updated the material to
                    reflect the performance capabilities of recent generations of x86-64 proces-
                    sors. With the introduction of more functional units and more sophisticated
                    control logic, the model of program performance we developed based on a
                    data-flow representation of programs has become a more reliable predictor
                    of performance than it was before.
               Chapter 6: The Memory Hierarchy. We have updated the material to reflect more
                    recent technology.

Chapter 7: Linking. We have rewritten this chapter for x86-64, expanded the
     discussion of using the GOT and PLT to create position-independent code,
     and added a new section on a powerful linking technique known as library
     interpositioning.
Chapter 8: Exceptional Control Flow. We have added a more rigorous treatment
     of signal handlers, including async-signal-safe functions, specific guidelines
     for writing signal handlers, and using sigsuspend to wait for handlers.
Chapter 9: Virtual Memory. This chapter has changed only slightly.
Chapter 10: System-Level I/O. We have added a new section on files and the file
     hierarchy, but otherwise, this chapter has changed only slightly.
Chapter 11: Network Programming. We have introduced techniques for protocol-
     independent and thread-safe network programming using the modern
     getaddrinfo and getnameinfo functions, which replace the obsolete and
     non-reentrant gethostbyname and gethostbyaddr functions.
Chapter 12: Concurrent Programming. We have increased our coverage of using
     thread-level parallelism to make programs run faster on multi-core ma-
     chines.

    In addition, we have added and revised a number of practice and homework
problems throughout the text.

Origins of the Book
This book stems from an introductory course that we developed at Carnegie Mel-
lon University in the fall of 1998, called 15-213: Introduction to Computer Systems
(ICS) [14]. The ICS course has been taught every semester since then. Over 400
students take the course each semester. The students range from sophomores to
graduate students in a wide variety of majors. It is a required core course for all
undergraduates in the CS and ECE departments at Carnegie Mellon, and it has
become a prerequisite for most upper-level systems courses in CS and ECE.
     The idea with ICS was to introduce students to computers in a different way.
Few of our students would have the opportunity to build a computer system. On
the other hand, most students, including all computer scientists and computer
engineers, would be required to use and program computers on a daily basis. So we
decided to teach about systems from the point of view of the programmer, using
the following filter: we would cover a topic only if it affected the performance,
correctness, or utility of user-level C programs.
     For example, topics such as hardware adder and bus designs were out. Top-
ics such as machine language were in; but instead of focusing on how to write
assembly language by hand, we would look at how a C compiler translates C con-
structs into machine code, including pointers, loops, procedure calls, and switch
statements. Further, we would take a broader and more holistic view of the system
as both hardware and systems software, covering such topics as linking, loading,

               processes, signals, performance optimization, virtual memory, I/O, and network
               and concurrent programming.
                    This approach allowed us to teach the ICS course in a way that is practical,
               concrete, hands-on, and exciting for the students. The response from our students
               and faculty colleagues was immediate and overwhelmingly positive, and we real-
               ized that others outside of CMU might benefit from using our approach. Hence
               this book, which we developed from the ICS lecture notes, and which we have
               now revised to reflect changes in technology and in how computer systems are
               implemented.
                    Via the multiple editions and multiple translations of this book, ICS and many
               variants have become part of the computer science and computer engineering
               curricula at hundreds of colleges and universities worldwide.

               For Instructors: Courses Based on the Book
               Instructors can use the CS:APP book to teach a number of different types of
               systems courses. Five categories of these courses are illustrated in Figure 2. The
               particular course depends on curriculum requirements, personal taste, and
               the backgrounds and abilities of the students. From left to right in the figure,
               the courses are characterized by an increasing emphasis on the programmer’s
               perspective of a system. Here is a brief description.

               ORG. A computer organization course with traditional topics covered in an un-
                   traditional style. Traditional topics such as logic design, processor architec-
                   ture, assembly language, and memory systems are covered. However, there
                   is more emphasis on the impact for the programmer. For example, data rep-
                   resentations are related back to the data types and operations of C programs,
                   and the presentation on assembly code is based on machine code generated
                   by a C compiler rather than handwritten assembly code.
               ORG+. The ORG course with additional emphasis on the impact of hardware
                  on the performance of application programs. Compared to ORG, students
                  learn more about code optimization and about improving the memory per-
                  formance of their C programs.
               ICS. The baseline ICS course, designed to produce enlightened programmers who
                    understand the impact of the hardware, operating system, and compilation
                    system on the performance and correctness of their application programs.
                    A significant difference from ORG+ is that low-level processor architecture
                    is not covered. Instead, programmers work with a higher-level model of a
                    modern out-of-order processor. The ICS course fits nicely into a 10-week
                    quarter, and can also be stretched to a 15-week semester if covered at a
                    more leisurely pace.
               ICS+. The baseline ICS course with additional coverage of systems programming
                    topics such as system-level I/O, network programming, and concurrent pro-
                    gramming. This is the semester-long Carnegie Mellon course, which covers
                    every chapter in CS:APP except low-level processor architecture.

                                                           Course
Chapter     Topic                         ORG       ORG+       ICS      ICS+     SP
    1       Tour of systems                 •          •         •        •       •
    2       Data representation             •          •         •        •       ? (d)
    3       Machine language                •          •         •        •       •
    4       Processor architecture          •          •
    5       Code optimization                          •        •        •
    6       Memory hierarchy                ? (a)      •        •        •        ? (a)
    7       Linking                                             ? (c)    ? (c)    •
    8       Exceptional control flow                            •        •        •
    9       Virtual memory                  ? (b)      •        •        •        •
   10       System-level I/O                                             •        •
   11       Network programming                                          •        •
   12       Concurrent programming                                       •        •

Figure 2 Five systems courses based on the CS:APP book. ICS+ is the 15-213 course
from Carnegie Mellon. Notes: The ? symbol denotes partial coverage of a chapter, as
follows: (a) hardware only; (b) no dynamic storage allocation; (c) no dynamic linking;
(d) no floating point.

SP. A systems programming course. This course is similar to ICS+, but it drops
     floating point and performance optimization, and it places more empha-
     sis on systems programming, including process control, dynamic linking,
     system-level I/O, network programming, and concurrent programming. In-
     structors might want to supplement from other sources for advanced topics
     such as daemons, terminal control, and Unix IPC.

    The main message of Figure 2 is that the CS:APP book gives a lot of options
to students and instructors. If you want your students to be exposed to lower-
level processor architecture, then that option is available via the ORG and ORG+
courses. On the other hand, if you want to switch from your current computer
organization course to an ICS or ICS+ course, but are wary of making such a
drastic change all at once, then you can move toward ICS incrementally. You
can start with ORG, which teaches the traditional topics in a nontraditional way.
Once you are comfortable with that material, then you can move to ORG+,
and eventually to ICS. If students have no experience in C (e.g., they have only
programmed in Java), you could spend several weeks on C and then cover the
material of ORG or ICS.
    Finally, we note that the ORG+ and SP courses would make a nice two-term
sequence (either quarters or semesters). Or you might consider offering ICS+ as
one term of ICS and one term of SP.

               For Instructors: Classroom-Tested Laboratory Exercises
               The ICS+ course at Carnegie Mellon receives very high evaluations from students.
               Median scores of 5.0/5.0 and means of 4.6/5.0 are typical for the student course
               evaluations. Students cite the fun, exciting, and relevant laboratory exercises as
               the primary reason. The labs are available from the CS:APP Web page. Here are
               examples of the labs that are provided with the book.

               Data Lab. This lab requires students to implement simple logical and arithmetic
                    functions, but using a highly restricted subset of C. For example, they must
                    compute the absolute value of a number using only bit-level operations. This
                    lab helps students understand the bit-level representations of C data types
                    and the bit-level behavior of the operations on data.
               Binary Bomb Lab. A binary bomb is a program provided to students as an object-
                    code file. When run, it prompts the user to type in six different strings. If
                    any of these are incorrect, the bomb “explodes,” printing an error message
                    and logging the event on a grading server. Students must “defuse” their
                    own unique bombs by disassembling and reverse engineering the programs
                    to determine what the six strings should be. The lab teaches students to
                    understand assembly language and also forces them to learn how to use a
                    debugger.
               Buffer Overflow Lab. Students are required to modify the run-time behavior of
                     a binary executable by exploiting a buffer overflow vulnerability. This lab
                     teaches the students about the stack discipline and about the danger of
                     writing code that is vulnerable to buffer overflow attacks.
               Architecture Lab. Several of the homework problems of Chapter 4 can be com-
                     bined into a lab assignment, where students modify the HCL description of
                     a processor to add new instructions, change the branch prediction policy, or
                     add or remove bypassing paths and register ports. The resulting processors
                     can be simulated and run through automated tests that will detect most of
                     the possible bugs. This lab lets students experience the exciting parts of pro-
                     cessor design without requiring a complete background in logic design and
                     hardware description languages.
               Performance Lab. Students must optimize the performance of an application ker-
                     nel function such as convolution or matrix transposition. This lab provides
                     a very clear demonstration of the properties of cache memories and gives
                     students experience with low-level program optimization.
               Cache Lab. In this alternative to the performance lab, students write a general-
                    purpose cache simulator, and then optimize a small matrix transpose kernel
                    to minimize the number of misses on a simulated cache. We use the Valgrind
                    tool to generate real address traces for the matrix transpose kernel.
               Shell Lab. Students implement their own Unix shell program with job control,
                     including the Ctrl+C and Ctrl+Z keystrokes and the fg, bg, and jobs com-

      mands. This is the student’s first introduction to concurrency, and it gives
      them a clear idea of Unix process control, signals, and signal handling.
Malloc Lab. Students implement their own versions of malloc, free, and (op-
     tionally) realloc. This lab gives students a clear understanding of data
     layout and organization, and requires them to evaluate different trade-offs
     between space and time efficiency.
Proxy Lab. Students implement a concurrent Web proxy that sits between their
     browsers and the rest of the World Wide Web. This lab exposes the students
     to such topics as Web clients and servers, and ties together many of the con-
     cepts from the course, such as byte ordering, file I/O, process control, signals,
     signal handling, memory mapping, sockets, and concurrency. Students like
     being able to see their programs in action with real Web browsers and Web
     servers.

    The CS:APP instructor’s manual has a detailed discussion of the labs, as well
as directions for downloading the support software.

Acknowledgments for the Third Edition
It is a pleasure to acknowledge and thank those who have helped us produce this
third edition of the CS:APP text.
      We would like to thank our Carnegie Mellon colleagues who have taught the
ICS course over the years and who have provided so much insightful feedback
and encouragement: Guy Blelloch, Roger Dannenberg, David Eckhardt, Franz
Franchetti, Greg Ganger, Seth Goldstein, Khaled Harras, Greg Kesden, Bruce
Maggs, Todd Mowry, Andreas Nowatzyk, Frank Pfenning, Markus Pueschel, and
Anthony Rowe. David Winters was very helpful in installing and configuring the
reference Linux box.
      Jason Fritts (St. Louis University) and Cindy Norris (Appalachian State)
provided us with detailed and thoughtful reviews of the second edition. Yili Gong
(Wuhan University) wrote the Chinese translation, maintained the errata page for
the Chinese version, and contributed many bug reports. Godmar Back (Virginia
Tech) helped us improve the text significantly by introducing us to the notions of
async-signal safety and protocol-independent network programming.
      Many thanks to our eagle-eyed readers who reported bugs in the second edi-
tion: Rami Ammari, Paul Anagnostopoulos, Lucas Bärenfänger, Godmar Back,
Ji Bin, Sharbel Bousemaan, Richard Callahan, Seth Chaiken, Cheng Chen, Libo
Chen, Tao Du, Pascal Garcia, Yili Gong, Ronald Greenberg, Dorukhan Gülöz,
Dong Han, Dominik Helm, Ronald Jones, Mustafa Kazdagli, Gordon Kindlmann,
Sankar Krishnan, Kanak Kshetri, Junlin Lu, Qiangqiang Luo, Sebastian Luy,
Lei Ma, Ashwin Nanjappa, Gregoire Paradis, Jonas Pfenninger, Karl Pichotta,
David Ramsey, Kaustabh Roy, David Selvaraj, Sankar Shanmugam, Dominique
Smulkowska, Dag Sørbø, Michael Spear, Yu Tanaka, Steven Tricanowicz, Scott
Wright, Waiki Wright, Han Xu, Zhengshan Yan, Firo Yang, Shuang Yang, John
Ye, Taketo Yoshida, Yan Zhu, and Michael Zink.

                    Thanks also to our readers who have contributed to the labs, including God-
               mar Back (Virginia Tech), Taymon Beal (Worcester Polytechnic Institute), Aran
               Clauson (Western Washington University), Cary Gray (Wheaton College), Paul
               Haiduk (West Texas A&M University), Len Hamey (Macquarie University), Ed-
               die Kohler (Harvard), Hugh Lauer (Worcester Polytechnic Institute), Robert
               Marmorstein (Longwood University), and James Riely (DePaul University).
                    Once again, Paul Anagnostopoulos of Windfall Software did a masterful job
               of typesetting the book and leading the production process. Many thanks to Paul
               and his stellar team: Richard Camp (copyediting), Jennifer McClain (proofread-
               ing), Laurel Muller (art production), and Ted Laux (indexing). Paul even spotted
               a bug in our description of the origins of the acronym BSS that had persisted
               undetected since the first edition!
                    Finally, we would like to thank our friends at Prentice Hall. Marcia Horton
               and our editor, Matt Goldstein, have been unflagging in their support and encour-
               agement, and we are deeply grateful to them.

               Acknowledgments from the Second Edition
               We are deeply grateful to the many people who have helped us produce this second
               edition of the CS:APP text.
                    First and foremost, we would like to recognize our colleagues who have taught
               the ICS course at Carnegie Mellon for their insightful feedback and encourage-
               ment: Guy Blelloch, Roger Dannenberg, David Eckhardt, Greg Ganger, Seth
               Goldstein, Greg Kesden, Bruce Maggs, Todd Mowry, Andreas Nowatzyk, Frank
               Pfenning, and Markus Pueschel.
                    Thanks also to our sharp-eyed readers who contributed reports to the errata
               page for the first edition: Daniel Amelang, Rui Baptista, Quarup Barreirinhas,
               Michael Bombyk, Jörg Brauer, Jordan Brough, Yixin Cao, James Caroll, Rui Car-
               valho, Hyoung-Kee Choi, Al Davis, Grant Davis, Christian Dufour, Mao Fan,
               Tim Freeman, Inge Frick, Max Gebhardt, Jeff Goldblat, Thomas Gross, Anita
               Gupta, John Hampton, Hiep Hong, Greg Israelsen, Ronald Jones, Haudy Kazemi,
               Brian Kell, Constantine Kousoulis, Sacha Krakowiak, Arun Krishnaswamy, Mar-
               tin Kulas, Michael Li, Zeyang Li, Ricky Liu, Mario Lo Conte, Dirk Maas, Devon
               Macey, Carl Marcinik, Will Marrero, Simone Martins, Tao Men, Mark Morris-
               sey, Venkata Naidu, Bhas Nalabothula, Thomas Niemann, Eric Peskin, David Po,
               Anne Rogers, John Ross, Michael Scott, Seiki, Ray Shih, Darren Shultz, Erik
               Silkensen, Suryanto, Emil Tarazi, Nawanan Theera-Ampornpunt, Joe Trdinich,
               Michael Trigoboff, James Troup, Martin Vopatek, Alan West, Betsy Wolff, Tim
               Wong, James Woodruff, Scott Wright, Jackie Xiao, Guanpeng Xu, Qing Xu, Caren
               Yang, Yin Yongsheng, Wang Yuanxuan, Steven Zhang, and Day Zhong. Special
               thanks to Inge Frick, who identified a subtle deep copy bug in our lock-and-copy
               example, and to Ricky Liu for his amazing proofreading skills.
                    Our Intel Labs colleagues Andrew Chien and Limor Fix were exceptionally
               supportive throughout the writing of the text. Steve Schlosser graciously provided
               some disk drive characterizations. Casey Helfrich and Michael Ryan installed

and maintained our new Core i7 box. Michael Kozuch, Babu Pillai, and Jason
Campbell provided valuable insight on memory system performance, multi-core
systems, and the power wall. Phil Gibbons and Shimin Chen shared their consid-
erable expertise on solid state disk designs.
     We have been able to call on the talents of many, including Wen-Mei Hwu,
Markus Pueschel, and Jiri Simsa, to provide both detailed comments and high-
level advice. James Hoe helped us create a Verilog version of the Y86 processor
and did all of the work needed to synthesize working hardware.
     Many thanks to our colleagues who provided reviews of the draft manu-
script: James Archibald (Brigham Young University), Richard Carver (George
Mason University), Mirela Damian (Villanova University), Peter Dinda (North-
western University), John Fiore (Temple University), Jason Fritts (St. Louis Uni-
versity), John Greiner (Rice University), Brian Harvey (University of California,
Berkeley), Don Heller (Penn State University), Wei Chung Hsu (University of
Minnesota), Michelle Hugue (University of Maryland), Jeremy Johnson (Drexel
University), Geoff Kuenning (Harvey Mudd College), Ricky Liu, Sam Mad-
den (MIT), Fred Martin (University of Massachusetts, Lowell), Abraham Matta
(Boston University), Markus Pueschel (Carnegie Mellon University), Norman
Ramsey (Tufts University), Glenn Reinmann (UCLA), Michela Taufer (Univer-
sity of Delaware), and Craig Zilles (UIUC).
     Paul Anagnostopoulos of Windfall Software did an outstanding job of type-
setting the book and leading the production team. Many thanks to Paul and his
superb team: Rick Camp (copyeditor), Joe Snowden (compositor), MaryEllen N.
Oliver (proofreader), Laurel Muller (artist), and Ted Laux (indexer).
     Finally, we would like to thank our friends at Prentice Hall. Marcia Horton has
always been there for us. Our editor, Matt Goldstein, provided stellar leadership
from beginning to end. We are profoundly grateful for their help, encouragement,
and insights.

Acknowledgments from the First Edition
We are deeply indebted to many friends and colleagues for their thoughtful crit-
icisms and encouragement. A special thanks to our 15-213 students, whose infec-
tious energy and enthusiasm spurred us on. Nick Carter and Vinny Furia gener-
ously provided their malloc package.
    Guy Blelloch, Greg Kesden, Bruce Maggs, and Todd Mowry taught the course
over multiple semesters, gave us encouragement, and helped improve the course
material. Herb Derby provided early spiritual guidance and encouragement. Al-
lan Fisher, Garth Gibson, Thomas Gross, Satya, Peter Steenkiste, and Hui Zhang
encouraged us to develop the course from the start. A suggestion from Garth
early on got the whole ball rolling, and this was picked up and refined with the
help of a group led by Allan Fisher. Mark Stehlik and Peter Lee have been very
supportive about building this material into the undergraduate curriculum. Greg
Kesden provided helpful feedback on the impact of ICS on the OS course. Greg
Ganger and Jiri Schindler graciously provided some disk drive characterizations

               and answered our questions on modern disks. Tom Stricker showed us the mem-
               ory mountain. James Hoe provided useful ideas and feedback on how to present
               processor architecture.
                    A special group of students—Khalil Amiri, Angela Demke Brown, Chris
               Colohan, Jason Crawford, Peter Dinda, Julio Lopez, Bruce Lowekamp, Jeff
               Pierce, Sanjay Rao, Balaji Sarpeshkar, Blake Scholl, Sanjit Seshia, Greg Stef-
               fan, Tiankai Tu, Kip Walker, and Yinglian Xie—were instrumental in helping
               us develop the content of the course. In particular, Chris Colohan established a
               fun (and funny) tone that persists to this day, and invented the legendary “binary
               bomb” that has proven to be a great tool for teaching machine code and debugging
               concepts.
                    Chris Bauer, Alan Cox, Peter Dinda, Sandhya Dwarkadas, John Greiner,
               Don Heller, Bruce Jacob, Barry Johnson, Bruce Lowekamp, Greg Morrisett,
               Brian Noble, Bobbie Othmer, Bill Pugh, Michael Scott, Mark Smotherman, Greg
               Steffan, and Bob Wier took time that they did not have to read and advise us
               on early drafts of the book. A very special thanks to Al Davis (University of
               Utah), Peter Dinda (Northwestern University), John Greiner (Rice University),
               Wei Hsu (University of Minnesota), Bruce Lowekamp (College of William &
               Mary), Bobbie Othmer (University of Minnesota), Michael Scott (University of
               Rochester), and Bob Wier (Rocky Mountain College) for class testing the beta
               version. A special thanks to their students as well!
                    We would also like to thank our colleagues at Prentice Hall. Marcia Horton,
               Eric Frank, and Harold Stone have been unflagging in their support and vision.
               Harold also helped us present an accurate historical perspective on RISC and
               CISC processor architectures. Jerry Ralya provided sharp insights and taught us
               a lot about good writing.
                    Finally, we would like to acknowledge the great technical writers Brian
               Kernighan and the late W. Richard Stevens, for showing us that technical books
               can be beautiful.
                    Thank you all.

               Randy Bryant
               Dave O’Hallaron
               Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

               Pearson would like to thank and acknowledge Chetan Venkatesh, MS Ramaiah
               Institute of Technology, Desny Antony, Don Bosco College, and Chitra Dhawale,
               SP College, for reviewing the Global Edition.
About the Authors

                              Randal E. Bryant received his bachelor’s degree from
                              the University of Michigan in 1973 and then attended
                              graduate school at the Massachusetts Institute of
                              Technology, receiving his PhD degree in computer
                              science in 1981. He spent three years as an assistant
                              professor at the California Institute of Technology,
                              and has been on the faculty at Carnegie Mellon since
                              1984. For five of those years he served as head of the
                              Computer Science Department, and for ten of them
                              he served as Dean of the School of Computer Science.
                              He is currently a university professor of computer sci-
ence. He also holds a courtesy appointment with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering.
     Professor Bryant has taught courses in computer systems at both the under-
graduate and graduate level for around 40 years. Over many years of teaching
computer architecture courses, he began shifting the focus from how computers
are designed to how programmers can write more efficient and reliable programs
if they understand the system better. Together with Professor O’Hallaron, he de-
veloped the course 15-213, Introduction to Computer Systems, at Carnegie Mellon
that is the basis for this book. He has also taught courses in algorithms, program-
ming, computer networking, distributed systems, and VLSI design.
     Most of Professor Bryant’s research concerns the design of software tools
to help software and hardware designers verify the correctness of their systems.
These include several types of simulators, as well as formal verification tools that
prove the correctness of a design using mathematical methods. He has published
over 150 technical papers. His research results are used by major computer manu-
facturers, including Intel, IBM, Fujitsu, and Microsoft. He has won several major
awards for his research. These include two inventor recognition awards and a
technical achievement award from the Semiconductor Research Corporation, the
Kanellakis Theory and Practice Award from the Association for Computer Ma-
chinery (ACM), and the W. R. G. Baker Award, the Emmanuel Piore Award, the
Phil Kaufman Award, and the A. Richard Newton Award from the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He is a fellow of both the ACM and
the IEEE and a member of both the US National Academy of Engineering and
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

36   About the Authors

                                               David R. O’Hallaron is a professor of computer science
                                               and electrical and computer engineering at Carnegie
                                               Mellon University. He received his PhD from the Uni-
                                               versity of Virginia. He served as the director of Intel
                                               Labs, Pittsburgh, from 2007 to 2010.
                                                    He has taught computer systems courses at the un-
                                               dergraduate and graduate levels for 20 years on such
                                               topics as computer architecture, introductory com-
                                               puter systems, parallel processor design, and Internet
                                               services. Together with Professor Bryant, he developed
                                               the course at Carnegie Mellon that led to this book. In
                   2004, he was awarded the Herbert Simon Award for Teaching Excellence by the
                   CMU School of Computer Science, an award for which the winner is chosen based
                   on a poll of the students.
                        Professor O’Hallaron works in the area of computer systems, with specific in-
                   terests in software systems for scientific computing, data-intensive computing, and
                   virtualization. The best-known example of his work is the Quake project, an en-
                   deavor involving a group of computer scientists, civil engineers, and seismologists
                   who have developed the ability to predict the motion of the ground during strong
                   earthquakes. In 2003, Professor O’Hallaron and the other members of the Quake
                   team won the Gordon Bell Prize, the top international prize in high-performance
                   computing. His current work focuses on the notion of autograding, that is, pro-
                   grams that evaluate the quality of other programs.
