CHAPTER
                 1
          A Tour of Computer Systems

          1.1    Information Is Bits + Context    39
          1.2    Programs Are Translated by Other Programs into Different Forms     40
          1.3    It Pays to Understand How Compilation Systems Work    42
          1.4    Processors Read and Interpret Instructions Stored in Memory   43
          1.5    Caches Matter   47
          1.6    Storage Devices Form a Hierarchy       50
          1.7    The Operating System Manages the Hardware      50
          1.8    Systems Communicate with Other Systems Using Networks         55
          1.9    Important Themes      58
          1.10   Summary    63
                 Bibliographic Notes   64
                 Solutions to Practice Problems    64

                          computer system consists of hardware and systems software that work to-
                    A     gether to run application programs. Specific implementations of systems
                    change over time, but the underlying concepts do not. All computer systems have
                    similar hardware and software components that perform similar functions. This
                    book is written for programmers who want to get better at their craft by under-
                    standing how these components work and how they affect the correctness and
                    performance of their programs.
                        You are poised for an exciting journey. If you dedicate yourself to learning the
                    concepts in this book, then you will be on your way to becoming a rare “power pro-
                    grammer,” enlightened by an understanding of the underlying computer system
                    and its impact on your application programs.
                        You are going to learn practical skills such as how to avoid strange numerical
                    errors caused by the way that computers represent numbers. You will learn how
                    to optimize your C code by using clever tricks that exploit the designs of modern
                    processors and memory systems. You will learn how the compiler implements
                    procedure calls and how to use this knowledge to avoid the security holes from
                    buffer overflow vulnerabilities that plague network and Internet software. You will
                    learn how to recognize and avoid the nasty errors during linking that confound
                    the average programmer. You will learn how to write your own Unix shell, your
                    own dynamic storage allocation package, and even your own Web server. You will
                    learn the promises and pitfalls of concurrency, a topic of increasing importance as
                    multiple processor cores are integrated onto single chips.
                        In their classic text on the C programming language [61], Kernighan and
                    Ritchie introduce readers to C using the hello program shown in Figure 1.1.
                    Although hello is a very simple program, every major part of the system must
                    work in concert in order for it to run to completion. In a sense, the goal of this
                    book is to help you understand what happens and why when you run hello on
                    your system.
                        We begin our study of systems by tracing the lifetime of the hello program,
                    from the time it is created by a programmer, until it runs on a system, prints its
                    simple message, and terminates. As we follow the lifetime of the program, we will
                    briefly introduce the key concepts, terminology, and components that come into
                    play. Later chapters will expand on these ideas.

                                                                                       code/intro/hello.c
                     1    #include <stdio.h>
                     2
                     3    int main()
                     4    {
                     5        printf("hello, world\n");
                     6        return 0;
                     7    }
                                                                                       code/intro/hello.c

Figure 1.1 The hello program. (Source: [60])
                                                                       Section 1.1    Information Is Bits + Context   39

 #      i      n      c      l      u      d       e      SP     <      s      t      d       i         o     .
 35    105    110     99    108    117    100     101     32     60    115    116    100     105       111    46
 h      >      \n     \n     i      n      t       SP     m      a      i      n       (      )         \n    {
104     62     10     10    105    110    116      32    109     97    105    110      40     41        10   123

 \n     SP     SP     SP      SP    p      r       i      n      t      f       (      "      h         e     l
 10     32     32     32      32   112    114     105    110    116    102      40     34    104       101   108
 l      o      ,      SP     w      o      r       l      d      \      n       "      )      ;         \n    SP
108    111     44     32    119    111    114     108    100     92    110      34     41     59        10    32
 SP     SP     SP     r      e      t      u       r      n      SP      0      ;      \n     }         \n
 32     32     32    114    101    116    117     114    110     32      48     59     10    125        10

Figure 1.2 The ASCII text representation of hello.c.

1.1 Information Is Bits + Context
Our hello program begins life as a source program (or source file) that the
programmer creates with an editor and saves in a text file called hello.c. The
source program is a sequence of bits, each with a value of 0 or 1, organized in 8-bit
chunks called bytes. Each byte represents some text character in the program.
      Most computer systems represent text characters using the ASCII standard
that represents each character with a unique byte-size integer value.1 For example,
Figure 1.2 shows the ASCII representation of the hello.c program.
      The hello.c program is stored in a file as a sequence of bytes. Each byte has
an integer value that corresponds to some character. For example, the first byte
has the integer value 35, which corresponds to the character ‘#’. The second byte
has the integer value 105, which corresponds to the character ‘i’, and so on. Notice
that each text line is terminated by the invisible newline character ‘\n’, which is
represented by the integer value 10. Files such as hello.c that consist exclusively
of ASCII characters are known as text files. All other files are known as binary
files.
      The representation of hello.c illustrates a fundamental idea: All information
in a system—including disk files, programs stored in memory, user data stored in
memory, and data transferred across a network—is represented as a bunch of bits.
The only thing that distinguishes different data objects is the context in which
we view them. For example, in different contexts, the same sequence of bytes
might represent an integer, floating-point number, character string, or machine
instruction.
      As programmers, we need to understand machine representations of numbers
because they are not the same as integers and real numbers. They are finite

1. Other encoding methods are used to represent text in non-English languages. See the aside on page
86 for a discussion on this.

 Aside        Origins of the C programming language
  C was developed from 1969 to 1973 by Dennis Ritchie of Bell Laboratories. The American National
 Standards Institute (ANSI) ratified the ANSI C standard in 1989, and this standardization later became
 the responsibility of the International Standards Organization (ISO). The standards define the C
 language and a set of library functions known as the C standard library. Kernighan and Ritchie describe
 ANSI C in their classic book, which is known affectionately as “K&R” [61]. In Ritchie’s words [92], C
 is “quirky, flawed, and an enormous success.” So why the success?

     .   C was closely tied with the Unix operating system. C was developed from the beginning as the
         system programming language for Unix. Most of the Unix kernel (the core part of the operating
         system), and all of its supporting tools and libraries, were written in C. As Unix became popular in
         universities in the late 1970s and early 1980s, many people were exposed to C and found that they
         liked it. Since Unix was written almost entirely in C, it could be easily ported to new machines,
         which created an even wider audience for both C and Unix.
     .   C is a small, simple language.The design was controlled by a single person, rather than a committee,
         and the result was a clean, consistent design with little baggage. The K&R book describes the
         complete language and standard library, with numerous examples and exercises, in only 261 pages.
         The simplicity of C made it relatively easy to learn and to port to different computers.
     .   C was designed for a practical purpose. C was designed to implement the Unix operating system.
         Later, other people found that they could write the programs they wanted, without the language
         getting in the way.

      C is the language of choice for system-level programming, and there is a huge installed base of
 application-level programs as well. However, it is not perfect for all programmers and all situations.
 C pointers are a common source of confusion and programming errors. C also lacks explicit support
 for useful abstractions such as classes, objects, and exceptions. Newer languages such as C++ and Java
 address these issues for application-level programs.

                        approximations that can behave in unexpected ways. This fundamental idea is
                        explored in detail in Chapter 2.

                        1.2     Programs Are Translated by Other Programs
                                into Different Forms
                        The hello program begins life as a high-level C program because it can be read
                        and understood by human beings in that form. However, in order to run hello.c
                        on the system, the individual C statements must be translated by other programs
                        into a sequence of low-level machine-language instructions. These instructions are
                        then packaged in a form called an executable object program and stored as a binary
                        disk file. Object programs are also referred to as executable object files.
                            On a Unix system, the translation from source file to object file is performed
                        by a compiler driver:
                              Section 1.2   Programs Are Translated by Other Programs into Different Forms   41

                                                                       printf.o

 hello.c        Pre-     hello.i                hello.s                 hello.o                 hello
                                    Compiler               Assembler                 Linker
             processor
                                     (cc1)                   (as)                    (ld)
               (cpp)
  Source                 Modified              Assembly                Relocatable            Executable
 program                  source               program                    object                object
   (text)                program                 (text)                 programs               program
                           (text)                                        (binary)              (binary)

Figure 1.3 The compilation system.

linux> gcc -o hello hello.c

Here, the gcc compiler driver reads the source file hello.c and translates it into
an executable object file hello. The translation is performed in the sequence
of four phases shown in Figure 1.3. The programs that perform the four phases
(preprocessor, compiler, assembler, and linker) are known collectively as the
compilation system.

  .
      Preprocessing phase. The preprocessor (cpp) modifies the original C program
      according to directives that begin with the ‘#’ character. For example, the
      #include <stdio.h> command in line 1 of hello.c tells the preprocessor
      to read the contents of the system header file stdio.h and insert it directly
      into the program text. The result is another C program, typically with the .i
      suffix.
  .
      Compilation phase. The compiler (cc1) translates the text file hello.i into
      the text file hello.s, which contains an assembly-language program. This
      program includes the following definition of function main:

      1     main:
      2       subq       $8, %rsp
      3       movl       $.LC0, %edi
      4       call       puts
      5       movl       $0, %eax
      6       addq       $8, %rsp
      7       ret

           Each of lines 2–7 in this definition describes one low-level machine-
      language instruction in a textual form. Assembly language is useful because
      it provides a common output language for different compilers for different
      high-level languages. For example, C compilers and Fortran compilers both
      generate output files in the same assembly language.
  .
      Assembly phase. Next, the assembler (as) translates hello.s into machine-
      language instructions, packages them in a form known as a relocatable object
      program, and stores the result in the object file hello.o. This file is a binary
      file containing 17 bytes to encode the instructions for function main. If we
      were to view hello.o with a text editor, it would appear to be gibberish.

 Aside    The GNU project
 Gcc is one of many useful tools developed by the GNU (short for GNU’s Not Unix) project. The
 GNU project is a tax-exempt charity started by Richard Stallman in 1984, with the ambitious goal of
 developing a complete Unix-like system whose source code is unencumbered by restrictions on how
 it can be modified or distributed. The GNU project has developed an environment with all the major
 components of a Unix operating system, except for the kernel, which was developed separately by
 the Linux project. The GNU environment includes the emacs editor, gcc compiler, gdb debugger,
 assembler, linker, utilities for manipulating binaries, and other components. The gcc compiler has
 grown to support many different languages, with the ability to generate code for many different
 machines. Supported languages include C, C++, Fortran, Java, Pascal, Objective-C, and Ada.
      The GNU project is a remarkable achievement, and yet it is often overlooked. The modern open-
 source movement (commonly associated with Linux) owes its intellectual origins to the GNU project’s
 notion of free software (“free” as in “free speech,” not “free beer”). Further, Linux owes much of its
 popularity to the GNU tools, which provide the environment for the Linux kernel.

                      .
                          Linking phase.Notice that our hello program calls the printf function, which
                          is part of the standard C library provided by every C compiler. The printf
                          function resides in a separate precompiled object file called printf.o, which
                          must somehow be merged with our hello.o program. The linker (ld) handles
                          this merging. The result is the hello file, which is an executable object file (or
                          simply executable) that is ready to be loaded into memory and executed by
                          the system.

                    1.3      It Pays to Understand How Compilation Systems Work
                    For simple programs such as hello.c, we can rely on the compilation system to
                    produce correct and efficient machine code. However, there are some important
                    reasons why programmers need to understand how compilation systems work:

                      .
                          Optimizing program performance. Modern compilers are sophisticated tools
                          that usually produce good code. As programmers, we do not need to know
                          the inner workings of the compiler in order to write efficient code. However,
                          in order to make good coding decisions in our C programs, we do need a
                          basic understanding of machine-level code and how the compiler translates
                          different C statements into machine code. For example, is a switch statement
                          always more efficient than a sequence of if-else statements? How much
                          overhead is incurred by a function call? Is a while loop more efficient than
                          a for loop? Are pointer references more efficient than array indexes? Why
                          does our loop run so much faster if we sum into a local variable instead of an
                          argument that is passed by reference? How can a function run faster when we
                          simply rearrange the parentheses in an arithmetic expression?
                                Section 1.4   Processors Read and Interpret Instructions Stored in Memory   43

          In Chapter 3, we introduce x86-64, the machine language of recent gen-
      erations of Linux, Macintosh, and Windows computers. We describe how
      compilers translate different C constructs into this language. In Chapter 5,
      you will learn how to tune the performance of your C programs by making
      simple transformations to the C code that help the compiler do its job better.
      In Chapter 6, you will learn about the hierarchical nature of the memory sys-
      tem, how C compilers store data arrays in memory, and how your C programs
      can exploit this knowledge to run more efficiently.
  .
      Understanding link-time errors. In our experience, some of the most perplex-
      ing programming errors are related to the operation of the linker, especially
      when you are trying to build large software systems. For example, what does
      it mean when the linker reports that it cannot resolve a reference? What is the
      difference between a static variable and a global variable? What happens if
      you define two global variables in different C files with the same name? What
      is the difference between a static library and a dynamic library? Why does it
      matter what order we list libraries on the command line? And scariest of all,
      why do some linker-related errors not appear until run time? You will learn
      the answers to these kinds of questions in Chapter 7.
  .
      Avoiding security holes. For many years, buffer overflow vulnerabilities have
      accounted for many of the security holes in network and Internet servers.
      These vulnerabilities exist because too few programmers understand the need
      to carefully restrict the quantity and forms of data they accept from untrusted
      sources. A first step in learning secure programming is to understand the con-
      sequences of the way data and control information are stored on the program
      stack. We cover the stack discipline and buffer overflow vulnerabilities in
      Chapter 3 as part of our study of assembly language. We will also learn about
      methods that can be used by the programmer, compiler, and operating system
      to reduce the threat of attack.

1.4 Processors Read and Interpret Instructions
    Stored in Memory
At this point, our hello.c source program has been translated by the compilation
system into an executable object file called hello that is stored on disk. To run
the executable file on a Unix system, we type its name to an application program
known as a shell:

linux> ./hello
hello, world
linux>

     The shell is a command-line interpreter that prints a prompt, waits for you
to type a command line, and then performs the command. If the first word of the
command line does not correspond to a built-in shell command, then the shell

Figure 1.4                      CPU
Hardware organization                   Register file
of a typical system. CPU:
central processing unit,           PC                   ALU
ALU: arithmetic/logic unit,
                                                              System bus     Memory bus
PC: program counter, USB:
Universal Serial Bus.
                                                                    I/O                        Main
                                    Bus interface
                                                                   bridge                     memory

                                                                   I/O bus
                                                                                             Expansion slots for
                                                                                             other devices such
                                        USB             Graphics               Disk          as network adapters
                                      controller        adapter              controller

                                  Mouse Keyboard        Display
                                                                                          hello executable
                                                                               Disk        stored on disk

                     assumes that it is the name of an executable file that it should load and run. So
                     in this case, the shell loads and runs the hello program and then waits for it to
                     terminate. The hello program prints its message to the screen and then terminates.
                     The shell then prints a prompt and waits for the next input command line.

                     1.4.1 Hardware Organization of a System
                     To understand what happens to our hello program when we run it, we need
                     to understand the hardware organization of a typical system, which is shown
                     in Figure 1.4. This particular picture is modeled after the family of recent Intel
                     systems, but all systems have a similar look and feel. Don’t worry about the
                     complexity of this figure just now. We will get to its various details in stages
                     throughout the course of the book.

                     Buses
                     Running throughout the system is a collection of electrical conduits called buses
                     that carry bytes of information back and forth between the components. Buses
                     are typically designed to transfer fixed-size chunks of bytes known as words. The
                     number of bytes in a word (the word size) is a fundamental system parameter that
                     varies across systems. Most machines today have word sizes of either 4 bytes (32
                     bits) or 8 bytes (64 bits). In this book, we do not assume any fixed definition of
                     word size. Instead, we will specify what we mean by a “word” in any context that
                     requires this to be defined.
                                   Section 1.4   Processors Read and Interpret Instructions Stored in Memory   45

I/O Devices
Input/output (I/O) devices are the system’s connection to the external world. Our
example system has four I/O devices: a keyboard and mouse for user input, a
display for user output, and a disk drive (or simply disk) for long-term storage of
data and programs. Initially, the executable hello program resides on the disk.
     Each I/O device is connected to the I/O bus by either a controller or an adapter.
The distinction between the two is mainly one of packaging. Controllers are chip
sets in the device itself or on the system’s main printed circuit board (often called
the motherboard). An adapter is a card that plugs into a slot on the motherboard.
Regardless, the purpose of each is to transfer information back and forth between
the I/O bus and an I/O device.
     Chapter 6 has more to say about how I/O devices such as disks work. In
Chapter 10, you will learn how to use the Unix I/O interface to access devices from
your application programs. We focus on the especially interesting class of devices
known as networks, but the techniques generalize to other kinds of devices as well.

Main Memory
The main memory is a temporary storage device that holds both a program and
the data it manipulates while the processor is executing the program. Physically,
main memory consists of a collection of dynamic random access memory (DRAM)
chips. Logically, memory is organized as a linear array of bytes, each with its own
unique address (array index) starting at zero. In general, each of the machine
instructions that constitute a program can consist of a variable number of bytes.
The sizes of data items that correspond to C program variables vary according
to type. For example, on an x86-64 machine running Linux, data of type short
require 2 bytes, types int and float 4 bytes, and types long and double 8 bytes.
     Chapter 6 has more to say about how memory technologies such as DRAM
chips work, and how they are combined to form main memory.

Processor
The central processing unit (CPU), or simply processor, is the engine that inter-
prets (or executes) instructions stored in main memory. At its core is a word-size
storage device (or register) called the program counter (PC). At any point in time,
the PC points at (contains the address of) some machine-language instruction in
main memory.2
    From the time that power is applied to the system until the time that the
power is shut off, a processor repeatedly executes the instruction pointed at by the
program counter and updates the program counter to point to the next instruction.
A processor appears to operate according to a very simple instruction execution
model, defined by its instruction set architecture. In this model, instructions execute

2. PC is also a commonly used acronym for “personal computer.” However, the distinction between
the two should be clear from the context.

                    in strict sequence, and executing a single instruction involves performing a series
                    of steps. The processor reads the instruction from memory pointed at by the
                    program counter (PC), interprets the bits in the instruction, performs some simple
                    operation dictated by the instruction, and then updates the PC to point to the next
                    instruction, which may or may not be contiguous in memory to the instruction that
                    was just executed.
                          There are only a few of these simple operations, and they revolve around
                    main memory, the register file, and the arithmetic/logic unit (ALU). The register
                    file is a small storage device that consists of a collection of word-size registers, each
                    with its own unique name. The ALU computes new data and address values. Here
                    are some examples of the simple operations that the CPU might carry out at the
                    request of an instruction:
                      .
                          Load: Copy a byte or a word from main memory into a register, overwriting
                          the previous contents of the register.
                      .
                          Store: Copy a byte or a word from a register to a location in main memory,
                          overwriting the previous contents of that location.
                      .
                          Operate: Copy the contents of two registers to the ALU, perform an arithmetic
                          operation on the two words, and store the result in a register, overwriting the
                          previous contents of that register.
                      .
                          Jump: Extract a word from the instruction itself and copy that word into the
                          program counter (PC), overwriting the previous value of the PC.

                         We say that a processor appears to be a simple implementation of its in-
                    struction set architecture, but in fact modern processors use far more complex
                    mechanisms to speed up program execution. Thus, we can distinguish the pro-
                    cessor’s instruction set architecture, describing the effect of each machine-code
                    instruction, from its microarchitecture, describing how the processor is actually
                    implemented. When we study machine code in Chapter 3, we will consider the
                    abstraction provided by the machine’s instruction set architecture. Chapter 4 has
                    more to say about how processors are actually implemented. Chapter 5 describes
                    a model of how modern processors work that enables predicting and optimizing
                    the performance of machine-language programs.

                    1.4.2 Running the hello Program
                    Given this simple view of a system’s hardware organization and operation, we can
                    begin to understand what happens when we run our example program. We must
                    omit a lot of details here that will be filled in later, but for now we will be content
                    with the big picture.
                         Initially, the shell program is executing its instructions, waiting for us to type a
                    command. As we type the characters ./hello at the keyboard, the shell program
                    reads each one into a register and then stores it in memory, as shown in Figure 1.5.
                         When we hit the enter key on the keyboard, the shell knows that we have
                    finished typing the command. The shell then loads the executable hello file by
                    executing a sequence of instructions that copies the code and data in the hello
                                                                              Section 1.5    Caches Matter        47

Figure 1.5                     CPU
Reading the hello                       Register file
command from the
keyboard.                          PC                   ALU

                                                              System bus     Memory bus

                                                                     I/O                     Main  “hello”
                                   Bus interface
                                                                   bridge                   memory

                                                                   I/O bus
                                                                                            Expansion slots for
                                                                                            other devices such
                                       USB              Graphics               Disk         as network adapters
                                     controller         adapter              controller

                                  Mouse Keyboard        Display
                                              User                             Disk
                                             types
                                            “hello”

object file from disk to main memory. The data includes the string of characters
hello, world\n that will eventually be printed out.
     Using a technique known as direct memory access (DMA, discussed in Chap-
ter 6), the data travel directly from disk to main memory, without passing through
the processor. This step is shown in Figure 1.6.
     Once the code and data in the hello object file are loaded into memory,
the processor begins executing the machine-language instructions in the hello
program’s main routine. These instructions copy the bytes in the hello, world\n
string from memory to the register file, and from there to the display device, where
they are displayed on the screen. This step is shown in Figure 1.7.

1.5 Caches Matter
An important lesson from this simple example is that a system spends a lot of
time moving information from one place to another. The machine instructions in
the hello program are originally stored on disk. When the program is loaded,
they are copied to main memory. As the processor runs the program, instruc-
tions are copied from main memory into the processor. Similarly, the data string
hello,world\n, originally on disk, is copied to main memory and then copied
from main memory to the display device. From a programmer’s perspective, much
of this copying is overhead that slows down the “real work” of the program. Thus,
a major goal for system designers is to make these copy operations run as fast as
possible.
     Because of physical laws, larger storage devices are slower than smaller stor-
age devices. And faster devices are more expensive to build than their slower

                    CPU
                             Register file

                        PC                   ALU

                                                     System bus       Memory bus

                                                              I/O                      Main  “hello, world\n”
                        Bus interface
                                                            bridge                    memory
                                                                                              hello code

                                                            I/O bus
                                                                                     Expansion slots for
                                                                                     other devices such
                            USB              Graphics                   Disk         as network adapters
                          controller         adapter                  controller

                       Mouse Keyboard        Display
                                                                                   hello executable
                                                                        Disk        stored on disk

Figure 1.6 Loading the executable from disk into main memory.

                    CPU
                             Register file

                        PC                   ALU

                                                     System bus       Memory bus

                                                              I/O                      Main  “hello, world\n”
                        Bus interface
                                                            bridge                    memory hello code

                                                            I/O bus
                                                                                     Expansion slots for
                                                                                     other devices such
                            USB              Graphics                   Disk         as network adapters
                          controller         adapter                  controller

                       Mouse Keyboard        Display
                                                                                   hello executable
                                         “hello, world\n”               Disk         stored on disk

Figure 1.7 Writing the output string from memory to the display.
                                                                              Section 1.5   Caches Matter    49

Figure 1.8                       CPU chip
Cache memories.                                     Register file

                                    Cache                           ALU
                                   memories

                                                                          System bus   Memory bus

                                                                               I/O                   Main
                                            Bus interface                                           memory
                                                                              bridge

counterparts. For example, the disk drive on a typical system might be 1,000 times
larger than the main memory, but it might take the processor 10,000,000 times
longer to read a word from disk than from memory.
      Similarly, a typical register file stores only a few hundred bytes of information,
as opposed to billions of bytes in the main memory. However, the processor can
read data from the register file almost 100 times faster than from memory. Even
more troublesome, as semiconductor technology progresses over the years, this
processor–memory gap continues to increase. It is easier and cheaper to make
processors run faster than it is to make main memory run faster.
      To deal with the processor–memory gap, system designers include smaller,
faster storage devices called cache memories (or simply caches) that serve as
temporary staging areas for information that the processor is likely to need in
the near future. Figure 1.8 shows the cache memories in a typical system. An L1
cache on the processor chip holds tens of thousands of bytes and can be accessed
nearly as fast as the register file. A larger L2 cache with hundreds of thousands
to millions of bytes is connected to the processor by a special bus. It might take 5
times longer for the processor to access the L2 cache than the L1 cache, but this is
still 5 to 10 times faster than accessing the main memory. The L1 and L2 caches are
implemented with a hardware technology known as static random access memory
(SRAM). Newer and more powerful systems even have three levels of cache: L1,
L2, and L3. The idea behind caching is that a system can get the effect of both
a very large memory and a very fast one by exploiting locality, the tendency for
programs to access data and code in localized regions. By setting up caches to hold
data that are likely to be accessed often, we can perform most memory operations
using the fast caches.
      One of the most important lessons in this book is that application program-
mers who are aware of cache memories can exploit them to improve the perfor-
mance of their programs by an order of magnitude. You will learn more about
these important devices and how to exploit them in Chapter 6.

                                                  L0:
   Smaller,                                             Regs    CPU registers hold words
    faster,                                                     retrieved from cache memory.
     and                                    L1:    L1 cache
   costlier                                        (SRAM)
                                                                   L1 cache holds cache lines
  (per byte)                                                       retrieved from L2 cache.
   storage                            L2:          L2 cache
   devices                                         (SRAM)
                                                                       L2 cache holds cache lines
                                                                       retrieved from L3 cache.
                                L3:                L3 cache
                                                   (SRAM)
  Larger,                                                                   L3 cache holds cache lines
   slower,                                                                  retrieved from memory.
     and                  L4:                     Main memory
  cheaper                                           (DRAM)
                                                                                Main memory holds disk blocks
 (per byte)                                                                     retrieved from local disks.
  storage           L5:                 Local secondary storage
  devices                                     (local disks)                          Local disks hold files
                                                                                     retrieved from disks on
              L6:                      Remote secondary storage                      remote network server.
                                (distributed file systems, Web servers)

Figure 1.9 An example of a memory hierarchy.

                            1.6         Storage Devices Form a Hierarchy
                            This notion of inserting a smaller, faster storage device (e.g., cache memory)
                            between the processor and a larger, slower device (e.g., main memory) turns out
                            to be a general idea. In fact, the storage devices in every computer system are
                            organized as a memory hierarchy similar to Figure 1.9. As we move from the top
                            of the hierarchy to the bottom, the devices become slower, larger, and less costly
                            per byte. The register file occupies the top level in the hierarchy, which is known
                            as level 0 or L0. We show three levels of caching L1 to L3, occupying memory
                            hierarchy levels 1 to 3. Main memory occupies level 4, and so on.
                                 The main idea of a memory hierarchy is that storage at one level serves as a
                            cache for storage at the next lower level. Thus, the register file is a cache for the
                            L1 cache. Caches L1 and L2 are caches for L2 and L3, respectively. The L3 cache
                            is a cache for the main memory, which is a cache for the disk. On some networked
                            systems with distributed file systems, the local disk serves as a cache for data stored
                            on the disks of other systems.
                                 Just as programmers can exploit knowledge of the different caches to improve
                            performance, programmers can exploit their understanding of the entire memory
                            hierarchy. Chapter 6 will have much more to say about this.

                            1.7         The Operating System Manages the Hardware
                            Back to our hello example. When the shell loaded and ran the hello program,
                            and when the hello program printed its message, neither program accessed the
                                             Section 1.7   The Operating System Manages the Hardware   51

Figure 1.10                                     Application programs
Layered view of a                                                                    Software
                                                 Operating system
computer system.
                                    Processor      Main memory         I/O devices   Hardware

Figure 1.11                                         Processes
Abstractions provided by
an operating system.                                        Virtual memory

                                                                          Files

                                    Processor      Main memory         I/O devices

keyboard, display, disk, or main memory directly. Rather, they relied on the
services provided by the operating system. We can think of the operating system as
a layer of software interposed between the application program and the hardware,
as shown in Figure 1.10. All attempts by an application program to manipulate the
hardware must go through the operating system.
      The operating system has two primary purposes: (1) to protect the hardware
from misuse by runaway applications and (2) to provide applications with simple
and uniform mechanisms for manipulating complicated and often wildly different
low-level hardware devices. The operating system achieves both goals via the
fundamental abstractions shown in Figure 1.11: processes, virtual memory, and
files. As this figure suggests, files are abstractions for I/O devices, virtual memory
is an abstraction for both the main memory and disk I/O devices, and processes
are abstractions for the processor, main memory, and I/O devices. We will discuss
each in turn.

1.7.1 Processes
When a program such as hello runs on a modern system, the operating system
provides the illusion that the program is the only one running on the system. The
program appears to have exclusive use of both the processor, main memory, and
I/O devices. The processor appears to execute the instructions in the program, one
after the other, without interruption. And the code and data of the program appear
to be the only objects in the system’s memory. These illusions are provided by the
notion of a process, one of the most important and successful ideas in computer
science.
    A process is the operating system’s abstraction for a running program. Multi-
ple processes can run concurrently on the same system, and each process appears
to have exclusive use of the hardware. By concurrently, we mean that the instruc-
tions of one process are interleaved with the instructions of another process. In
most systems, there are more processes to run than there are CPUs to run them.

 Aside     Unix, Posix, and the Standard Unix Specification
 The 1960s was an era of huge, complex operating systems, such as IBM’s OS/360 and Honeywell’s
 Multics systems. While OS/360 was one of the most successful software projects in history, Multics
 dragged on for years and never achieved wide-scale use. Bell Laboratories was an original partner in
 the Multics project but dropped out in 1969 because of concern over the complexity of the project
 and the lack of progress. In reaction to their unpleasant Multics experience, a group of Bell Labs
 researchers—Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, Doug McIlroy, and Joe Ossanna—began work in 1969
 on a simpler operating system for a Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-7 computer, written entirely
 in machine language. Many of the ideas in the new system, such as the hierarchical file system and the
 notion of a shell as a user-level process, were borrowed from Multics but implemented in a smaller,
 simpler package. In 1970, Brian Kernighan dubbed the new system “Unix” as a pun on the complexity
 of “Multics.” The kernel was rewritten in C in 1973, and Unix was announced to the outside world in
 1974 [93].
      Because Bell Labs made the source code available to schools with generous terms, Unix developed
 a large following at universities. The most influential work was done at the University of California
 at Berkeley in the late 1970s and early 1980s, with Berkeley researchers adding virtual memory and
 the Internet protocols in a series of releases called Unix 4.xBSD (Berkeley Software Distribution).
 Concurrently, Bell Labs was releasing their own versions, which became known as System V Unix.
 Versions from other vendors, such as the Sun Microsystems Solaris system, were derived from these
 original BSD and System V versions.
      Trouble arose in the mid 1980s as Unix vendors tried to differentiate themselves by adding new
 and often incompatible features. To combat this trend, IEEE (Institute for Electrical and Electron-
 ics Engineers) sponsored an effort to standardize Unix, later dubbed “Posix” by Richard Stallman.
 The result was a family of standards, known as the Posix standards, that cover such issues as the C
 language interface for Unix system calls, shell programs and utilities, threads, and network program-
 ming. More recently, a separate standardization effort, known as the “Standard Unix Specification,”
 has joined forces with Posix to create a single, unified standard for Unix systems. As a result of these
 standardization efforts, the differences between Unix versions have largely disappeared.

                    Traditional systems could only execute one program at a time, while newer multi-
                    core processors can execute several programs simultaneously. In either case, a
                    single CPU can appear to execute multiple processes concurrently by having the
                    processor switch among them. The operating system performs this interleaving
                    with a mechanism known as context switching. To simplify the rest of this discus-
                    sion, we consider only a uniprocessor system containing a single CPU. We will
                    return to the discussion of multiprocessor systems in Section 1.9.2.
                        The operating system keeps track of all the state information that the process
                    needs in order to run. This state, which is known as the context, includes informa-
                    tion such as the current values of the PC, the register file, and the contents of main
                    memory. At any point in time, a uniprocessor system can only execute the code
                    for a single process. When the operating system decides to transfer control from
                    the current process to some new process, it performs a context switch by saving
                    the context of the current process, restoring the context of the new process, and
                                                Section 1.7    The Operating System Manages the Hardware      53

Figure 1.12                     Time                          Process A   Process B
Process context
                                                                                      User code
switching.                                     read                                                 Context
                                                                                      Kernel code
                                                                                                    switch
                                                                                      User code
                                       Disk interrupt                                               Context
                                              Return                                  Kernel code   switch
                                          from read                                   User code

then passing control to the new process. The new process picks up exactly where
it left off. Figure 1.12 shows the basic idea for our example hello scenario.
     There are two concurrent processes in our example scenario: the shell process
and the hello process. Initially, the shell process is running alone, waiting for input
on the command line. When we ask it to run the hello program, the shell carries
out our request by invoking a special function known as a system call that passes
control to the operating system. The operating system saves the shell’s context,
creates a new hello process and its context, and then passes control to the new
hello process. After hello terminates, the operating system restores the context
of the shell process and passes control back to it, where it waits for the next
command-line input.
     As Figure 1.12 indicates, the transition from one process to another is man-
aged by the operating system kernel. The kernel is the portion of the operating
system code that is always resident in memory. When an application program
requires some action by the operating system, such as to read or write a file, it
executes a special system call instruction, transferring control to the kernel. The
kernel then performs the requested operation and returns back to the application
program. Note that the kernel is not a separate process. Instead, it is a collection
of code and data structures that the system uses to manage all the processes.
     Implementing the process abstraction requires close cooperation between
both the low-level hardware and the operating system software. We will explore
how this works, and how applications can create and control their own processes,
in Chapter 8.

1.7.2 Threads
Although we normally think of a process as having a single control flow, in modern
systems a process can actually consist of multiple execution units, called threads,
each running in the context of the process and sharing the same code and global
data. Threads are an increasingly important programming model because of the
requirement for concurrency in network servers, because it is easier to share data
between multiple threads than between multiple processes, and because threads
are typically more efficient than processes. Multi-threading is also one way to make
programs run faster when multiple processors are available, as we will discuss in

Figure 1.13                                                                    Memory
                                                                               invisible to
Process virtual address                             Kernel virtual memory
                                                                               user code
space. (The regions are not                               User stack
drawn to scale.)                                     (created at run time)

                                                  Memory-mapped region for   printf function
                                                      shared libraries

                                                        Run-time heap
                                                     (created by malloc)

                                                       Read/write data
                                                                               Loaded from the
                                                                               hello executable file
                                                  Read-only code and data
                                  Program
                                      start
                                              0

                    Section 1.9.2. You will learn the basic concepts of concurrency, including how to
                    write threaded programs, in Chapter 12.

                    1.7.3 Virtual Memory
                    Virtual memory is an abstraction that provides each process with the illusion that it
                    has exclusive use of the main memory. Each process has the same uniform view of
                    memory, which is known as its virtual address space. The virtual address space for
                    Linux processes is shown in Figure 1.13. (Other Unix systems use a similar layout.)
                    In Linux, the topmost region of the address space is reserved for code and data
                    in the operating system that is common to all processes. The lower region of the
                    address space holds the code and data defined by the user’s process. Note that
                    addresses in the figure increase from the bottom to the top.
                         The virtual address space seen by each process consists of a number of well-
                    defined areas, each with a specific purpose. You will learn more about these areas
                    later in the book, but it will be helpful to look briefly at each, starting with the
                    lowest addresses and working our way up:

                       .
                           Program code and data.Code begins at the same fixed address for all processes,
                           followed by data locations that correspond to global C variables. The code and
                           data areas are initialized directly from the contents of an executable object
                           file—in our case, the hello executable. You will learn more about this part of
                           the address space when we study linking and loading in Chapter 7.
                       .
                           Heap.The code and data areas are followed immediately by the run-time heap.
                           Unlike the code and data areas, which are fixed in size once the process begins
                                  Section 1.8   Systems Communicate with Other Systems Using Networks   55

      running, the heap expands and contracts dynamically at run time as a result
      of calls to C standard library routines such as malloc and free. We will study
      heaps in detail when we learn about managing virtual memory in Chapter 9.
  .
      Shared libraries. Near the middle of the address space is an area that holds the
      code and data for shared libraries such as the C standard library and the math
      library. The notion of a shared library is a powerful but somewhat difficult
      concept. You will learn how they work when we study dynamic linking in
      Chapter 7.
  .
      Stack. At the top of the user’s virtual address space is the user stack that
      the compiler uses to implement function calls. Like the heap, the user stack
      expands and contracts dynamically during the execution of the program. In
      particular, each time we call a function, the stack grows. Each time we return
      from a function, it contracts. You will learn how the compiler uses the stack
      in Chapter 3.
  .
      Kernel virtual memory. The top region of the address space is reserved for the
      kernel. Application programs are not allowed to read or write the contents of
      this area or to directly call functions defined in the kernel code. Instead, they
      must invoke the kernel to perform these operations.

     For virtual memory to work, a sophisticated interaction is required between
the hardware and the operating system software, including a hardware translation
of every address generated by the processor. The basic idea is to store the contents
of a process’s virtual memory on disk and then use the main memory as a cache
for the disk. Chapter 9 explains how this works and why it is so important to the
operation of modern systems.

1.7.4 Files
A file is a sequence of bytes, nothing more and nothing less. Every I/O device,
including disks, keyboards, displays, and even networks, is modeled as a file. All
input and output in the system is performed by reading and writing files, using a
small set of system calls known as Unix I/O.
     This simple and elegant notion of a file is nonetheless very powerful because
it provides applications with a uniform view of all the varied I/O devices that
might be contained in the system. For example, application programmers who
manipulate the contents of a disk file are blissfully unaware of the specific disk
technology. Further, the same program will run on different systems that use
different disk technologies. You will learn about Unix I/O in Chapter 10.

1.8 Systems Communicate with Other Systems
    Using Networks
Up to this point in our tour of systems, we have treated a system as an isolated
collection of hardware and software. In practice, modern systems are often linked
to other systems by networks. From the point of view of an individual system, the

 Aside    The Linux project
 In August 1991, a Finnish graduate student named Linus Torvalds modestly announced a new Unix-like
 operating system kernel:
 From: torvalds@klaava.Helsinki.FI (Linus Benedict Torvalds)
 Newsgroups: comp.os.minix
 Subject: What would you like to see most in minix?
 Summary: small poll for my new operating system
 Date: 25 Aug 91 20:57:08 GMT
 Hello everybody out there using minix -
 I’m doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won’t be big and
 professional like gnu) for 386(486) AT clones. This has been brewing
 since April, and is starting to get ready. I’d like any feedback on
 things people like/dislike in minix, as my OS resembles it somewhat
 (same physical layout of the file-system (due to practical reasons)
 among other things).

 I’ve currently ported bash(1.08) and gcc(1.40), and things seem to work.
 This implies that I’ll get something practical within a few months, and
 I’d like to know what features most people would want. Any suggestions
 are welcome, but I won’t promise I’ll implement them :-)

 Linus (torvalds@kruuna.helsinki.fi)
     As Torvalds indicates, his starting point for creating Linux was Minix, an operating system devel-
 oped by Andrew S. Tanenbaum for educational purposes [113].
     The rest, as they say, is history. Linux has evolved into a technical and cultural phenomenon. By
 combining forces with the GNU project, the Linux project has developed a complete, Posix-compliant
 version of the Unix operating system, including the kernel and all of the supporting infrastructure.
 Linux is available on a wide array of computers, from handheld devices to mainframe computers. A
 group at IBM has even ported Linux to a wristwatch!

                    network can be viewed as just another I/O device, as shown in Figure 1.14. When
                    the system copies a sequence of bytes from main memory to the network adapter,
                    the data flow across the network to another machine, instead of, say, to a local
                    disk drive. Similarly, the system can read data sent from other machines and copy
                    these data to its main memory.
                         With the advent of global networks such as the Internet, copying information
                    from one machine to another has become one of the most important uses of
                    computer systems. For example, applications such as email, instant messaging, the
                    World Wide Web, FTP, and telnet are all based on the ability to copy information
                    over a network.
                                 Section 1.8   Systems Communicate with Other Systems Using Networks         57

Figure 1.14                     CPU chip
A network is another I/O                 Register file
device.
                                    PC                   ALU

                                                                System bus      Memory bus

                                                                      I/O                         Main
                                    Bus interface
                                                                     bridge                      memory

                                                                                           Expansion slots

                                                                    I/O bus

                                        USB              Graphics                  Disk            Network
                                      controller         adapter                 controller        adapter

                                   Mouse Keyboard        Monitor
                                                                                                   Network
                                                                                    Disk

  1.User types                   2. Client sends “hello”
 “hello” at the                   string to telnet server                     3. Server sends “hello”
    keyboard          Local                                    Remote         string to the shell, which
                      telnet                                    telnet        runs the hello program
                      client                                   server          and passes the output
                                  4. Telnet server sends                         to the telnet server
  5. Client prints              “hello, world\n” string
“hello, world\n”                         to client
  string on display

Figure 1.15 Using telnet to run hello remotely over a network.

     Returning to our hello example, we could use the familiar telnet application
to run hello on a remote machine. Suppose we use a telnet client running on our
local machine to connect to a telnet server on a remote machine. After we log in
to the remote machine and run a shell, the remote shell is waiting to receive an
input command. From this point, running the hello program remotely involves
the five basic steps shown in Figure 1.15.
     After we type in the hello string to the telnet client and hit the enter key,
the client sends the string to the telnet server. After the telnet server receives the
string from the network, it passes it along to the remote shell program. Next, the
remote shell runs the hello program and passes the output line back to the telnet
server. Finally, the telnet server forwards the output string across the network to
the telnet client, which prints the output string on our local terminal.
     This type of exchange between clients and servers is typical of all network
applications. In Chapter 11 you will learn how to build network applications and
apply this knowledge to build a simple Web server.

                    1.9     Important Themes
                    This concludes our initial whirlwind tour of systems. An important idea to take
                    away from this discussion is that a system is more than just hardware. It is a
                    collection of intertwined hardware and systems software that must cooperate in
                    order to achieve the ultimate goal of running application programs. The rest of
                    this book will fill in some details about the hardware and the software, and it will
                    show how, by knowing these details, you can write programs that are faster, more
                    reliable, and more secure.
                         To close out this chapter, we highlight several important concepts that cut
                    across all aspects of computer systems. We will discuss the importance of these
                    concepts at multiple places within the book.

                    1.9.1 Amdahl’s Law
                    Gene Amdahl, one of the early pioneers in computing, made a simple but insight-
                    ful observation about the effectiveness of improving the performance of one part
                    of a system. This observation has come to be known as Amdahl’s law. The main
                    idea is that when we speed up one part of a system, the effect on the overall sys-
                    tem performance depends on both how significant this part was and how much
                    it sped up. Consider a system in which executing some application requires time
                    Told. Suppose some part of the system requires a fraction α of this time, and that
                    we improve its performance by a factor of k. That is, the component originally re-
                    quired time αTold, and it now requires time (αTold)/k. The overall execution time
                    would thus be
                                              Tnew = (1 − α)Told + (αTold)/k
                                                   = Told[(1 − α) + α/k]
                    From this, we can compute the speedup S = Told/Tnew as
                                                               1
                                                    S=                                             (1.1)
                                                         (1 − α) + α/k
                         As an example, consider the case where a part of the system that initially
                    consumed 60% of the time (α = 0.6) is sped up by a factor of 3 (k = 3). Then
                    we get a speedup of 1/[0.4 + 0.6/3] = 1.67×. Even though we made a substantial
                    improvement to a major part of the system, our net speedup was significantly less
                    than the speedup for the one part. This is the major insight of Amdahl’s law—
                    to significantly speed up the entire system, we must improve the speed of a very
                    large fraction of the overall system.

                    Practice Problem 1.1 (solution page 64)
                    Suppose you work as a truck driver, and you have been hired to carry a load of
                    potatoes from Boise, Idaho, to Minneapolis, Minnesota, a total distance of 2,500
                    kilometers. You estimate you can average 100 km/hr driving within the speed
                    limits, requiring a total of 25 hours for the trip.
                                                                         Section 1.9   Important Themes     59

 Aside      Expressing relative performance
 The best way to express a performance improvement is as a ratio of the form Told /Tnew , where Told is
 the time required for the original version and Tnew is the time required by the modified version. This
 will be a number greater than 1.0 if any real improvement occurred. We use the suffix ‘×’ to indicate
 such a ratio, where the factor “2.2×” is expressed verbally as “2.2 times.”
      The more traditional way of expressing relative change as a percentage works well when the
 change is small, but its definition is ambiguous. Should it be 100 . (Told − Tnew )/Tnew , or possibly
 100 . (Told − Tnew )/Told , or something else? In addition, it is less instructive for large changes. Saying
 that “performance improved by 120%” is more difficult to comprehend than simply saying that the
 performance improved by 2.2×.

 A. You hear on the news that Montana has just abolished its speed limit, which
    constitutes 1,500 km of the trip. Your truck can travel at 150 km/hr. What
    will be your speedup for the trip?
 B. You can buy a new turbocharger for your truck at www.fasttrucks.com. They
    stock a variety of models, but the faster you want to go, the more it will cost.
    How fast must you travel through Montana to get an overall speedup for
    your trip of 1.67×?

Practice Problem 1.2 (solution page 64)
A car manufacturing company has promised their customers that the next release
of a new engine will show a 4× performance improvement. You have been as-
signed the task of delivering on that promise. You have determined that only 90%
of the engine can be improved. How much (i.e., what value of k) would you need
to improve this part to meet the overall performance target of the engine?

     One interesting special case of Amdahl’s law is to consider the effect of setting
k to ∞. That is, we are able to take some part of the system and speed it up to the
point at which it takes a negligible amount of time. We then get

                                              1
                                    S∞ =                                           (1.2)
                                           (1 − α)

So, for example, if we can speed up 60% of the system to the point where it requires
close to no time, our net speedup will still only be 1/0.4 = 2.5×.
     Amdahl’s law describes a general principle for improving any process. In
addition to its application to speeding up computer systems, it can guide a company
trying to reduce the cost of manufacturing razor blades, or a student trying to
improve his or her grade point average. Perhaps it is most meaningful in the world

                    of computers, where we routinely improve performance by factors of 2 or more.
                    Such high factors can only be achieved by optimizing large parts of a system.

                    1.9.2 Concurrency and Parallelism
                    Throughout the history of digital computers, two demands have been constant
                    forces in driving improvements: we want them to do more, and we want them to
                    run faster. Both of these factors improve when the processor does more things at
                    once. We use the term concurrency to refer to the general concept of a system with
                    multiple, simultaneous activities, and the term parallelism to refer to the use of
                    concurrency to make a system run faster. Parallelism can be exploited at multiple
                    levels of abstraction in a computer system. We highlight three levels here, working
                    from the highest to the lowest level in the system hierarchy.

                    Thread-Level Concurrency
                    Building on the process abstraction, we are able to devise systems where multiple
                    programs execute at the same time, leading to concurrency. With threads, we
                    can even have multiple control flows executing within a single process. Support
                    for concurrent execution has been found in computer systems since the advent
                    of time-sharing in the early 1960s. Traditionally, this concurrent execution was
                    only simulated, by having a single computer rapidly switch among its executing
                    processes, much as a juggler keeps multiple balls flying through the air. This form
                    of concurrency allows multiple users to interact with a system at the same time,
                    such as when many people want to get pages from a single Web server. It also
                    allows a single user to engage in multiple tasks concurrently, such as having a
                    Web browser in one window, a word processor in another, and streaming music
                    playing at the same time. Until recently, most actual computing was done by a
                    single processor, even if that processor had to switch among multiple tasks. This
                    configuration is known as a uniprocessor system.
                         When we construct a system consisting of multiple processors all under the
                    control of a single operating system kernel, we have a multiprocessor system.
                    Such systems have been available for large-scale computing since the 1980s, but
                    they have more recently become commonplace with the advent of multi-core
                    processors and hyperthreading. Figure 1.16 shows a taxonomy of these different
                    processor types.
                         Multi-core processors have several CPUs (referred to as “cores”) integrated
                    onto a single integrated-circuit chip. Figure 1.17 illustrates the organization of a

Figure 1.16                     All processors
Categorizing different                               Multiprocessors
processor configurations.
Multiprocessors are
becoming prevalent                Uniprocessors     Multi-     Hyper-
                                                    core      threaded
with the advent of multi-
core processors and
hyperthreading.
                                                                                   Section 1.9    Important Themes   61

Figure 1.17                     Processor package
Multi-core processor             Core 0                                     Core 3
organization. Four
processor cores are                   Regs                                          Regs
integrated onto a single
chip.
                                       L1           L1                                L1            L1
                                    d-cache      i-cache           ...             d-cache       i-cache

                                      L2 unified cache                               L2 unified cache

                                                             L3 unified cache
                                                           (shared by all cores)

                                                              Main memory

typical multi-core processor, where the chip has four CPU cores, each with its
own L1 and L2 caches, and with each L1 cache split into two parts—one to hold
recently fetched instructions and one to hold data. The cores share higher levels of
cache as well as the interface to main memory. Industry experts predict that they
will be able to have dozens, and ultimately hundreds, of cores on a single chip.
     Hyperthreading, sometimes called simultaneous multi-threading, is a tech-
nique that allows a single CPU to execute multiple flows of control. It involves
having multiple copies of some of the CPU hardware, such as program counters
and register files, while having only single copies of other parts of the hardware,
such as the units that perform floating-point arithmetic. Whereas a conventional
processor requires around 20,000 clock cycles to shift between different threads,
a hyperthreaded processor decides which of its threads to execute on a cycle-by-
cycle basis. It enables the CPU to take better advantage of its processing resources.
For example, if one thread must wait for some data to be loaded into a cache, the
CPU can proceed with the execution of a different thread. As an example, the In-
tel Core i7 processor can have each core executing two threads, and so a four-core
system can actually execute eight threads in parallel.
     The use of multiprocessing can improve system performance in two ways.
First, it reduces the need to simulate concurrency when performing multiple tasks.
As mentioned, even a personal computer being used by a single person is expected
to perform many activities concurrently. Second, it can run a single application
program faster, but only if that program is expressed in terms of multiple threads
that can effectively execute in parallel. Thus, although the principles of concur-
rency have been formulated and studied for over 50 years, the advent of multi-core
and hyperthreaded systems has greatly increased the desire to find ways to write
application programs that can exploit the thread-level parallelism available with

                    the hardware. Chapter 12 will look much more deeply into concurrency and its
                    use to provide a sharing of processing resources and to enable more parallelism
                    in program execution.

                    Instruction-Level Parallelism
                    At a much lower level of abstraction, modern processors can execute multiple
                    instructions at one time, a property known as instruction-level parallelism. For
                    example, early microprocessors, such as the 1978-vintage Intel 8086, required
                    multiple (typically 3–10) clock cycles to execute a single instruction. More recent
                    processors can sustain execution rates of 2–4 instructions per clock cycle. Any
                    given instruction requires much longer from start to finish, perhaps 20 cycles or
                    more, but the processor uses a number of clever tricks to process as many as 100
                    instructions at a time. In Chapter 4, we will explore the use of pipelining, where the
                    actions required to execute an instruction are partitioned into different steps and
                    the processor hardware is organized as a series of stages, each performing one
                    of these steps. The stages can operate in parallel, working on different parts of
                    different instructions. We will see that a fairly simple hardware design can sustain
                    an execution rate close to 1 instruction per clock cycle.
                         Processors that can sustain execution rates faster than 1 instruction per cycle
                    are known as superscalar processors. Most modern processors support superscalar
                    operation. In Chapter 5, we will describe a high-level model of such processors.
                    We will see that application programmers can use this model to understand the
                    performance of their programs. They can then write programs such that the gen-
                    erated code achieves higher degrees of instruction-level parallelism and therefore
                    runs faster.

                    Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data (SIMD) Parallelism
                    At the lowest level, many modern processors have special hardware that allows
                    a single instruction to cause multiple operations to be performed in parallel, a
                    mode known as single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) parallelism. For example,
                    recent generations of Intel and AMD processors have instructions that can add 8
                    pairs of single-precision floating-point numbers (C data type float) in parallel.
                         These SIMD instructions are provided mostly to speed up applications that
                    process image, sound, and video data. Although some compilers attempt to auto-
                    matically extract SIMD parallelism from C programs, a more reliable method is to
                    write programs using special vector data types supported in compilers such as gcc.
                    We describe this style of programming in Web Aside opt:simd, as a supplement to
                    the more general presentation on program optimization found in Chapter 5.

                    1.9.3 The Importance of Abstractions in Computer Systems
                    The use of abstractions is one of the most important concepts in computer science.
                    For example, one aspect of good programming practice is to formulate a simple
                    application program interface (API) for a set of functions that allow programmers
                    to use the code without having to delve into its inner workings. Different program-
                                                                                     Section 1.10    Summary   63

Figure 1.18                                                  Virtual machine
Some abstractions
provided by a computer                                                  Processes
system. A major theme
                                                    Instruction set
in computer systems                                  architecture              Virtual memory
is to provide abstract
representations at                                                                           Files
different levels to hide
the complexity of the            Operating system     Processor        Main memory         I/O devices
actual implementations.

ming languages provide different forms and levels of support for abstraction, such
as Java class declarations and C function prototypes.
     We have already been introduced to several of the abstractions seen in com-
puter systems, as indicated in Figure 1.18. On the processor side, the instruction set
architecture provides an abstraction of the actual processor hardware. With this
abstraction, a machine-code program behaves as if it were executed on a proces-
sor that performs just one instruction at a time. The underlying hardware is far
more elaborate, executing multiple instructions in parallel, but always in a way
that is consistent with the simple, sequential model. By keeping the same execu-
tion model, different processor implementations can execute the same machine
code while offering a range of cost and performance.
     On the operating system side, we have introduced three abstractions: files as
an abstraction of I/O devices, virtual memory as an abstraction of program mem-
ory, and processes as an abstraction of a running program. To these abstractions
we add a new one: the virtual machine, providing an abstraction of the entire
computer, including the operating system, the processor, and the programs. The
idea of a virtual machine was introduced by IBM in the 1960s, but it has become
more prominent recently as a way to manage computers that must be able to run
programs designed for multiple operating systems (such as Microsoft Windows,
Mac OS X, and Linux) or different versions of the same operating system.
     We will return to these abstractions in subsequent sections of the book.

1.10     Summary
A computer system consists of hardware and systems software that cooperate
to run application programs. Information inside the computer is represented as
groups of bits that are interpreted in different ways, depending on the context.
Programs are translated by other programs into different forms, beginning as
ASCII text and then translated by compilers and linkers into binary executable
files.
      Processors read and interpret binary instructions that are stored in main mem-
ory. Since computers spend most of their time copying data between memory, I/O
devices, and the CPU registers, the storage devices in a system are arranged in a hi-
erarchy, with the CPU registers at the top, followed by multiple levels of hardware
cache memories, DRAM main memory, and disk storage. Storage devices that are
higher in the hierarchy are faster and more costly per bit than those lower in the

                    hierarchy. Storage devices that are higher in the hierarchy serve as caches for de-
                    vices that are lower in the hierarchy. Programmers can optimize the performance
                    of their C programs by understanding and exploiting the memory hierarchy.
                         The operating system kernel serves as an intermediary between the applica-
                    tion and the hardware. It provides three fundamental abstractions: (1) Files are
                    abstractions for I/O devices. (2) Virtual memory is an abstraction for both main
                    memory and disks. (3) Processes are abstractions for the processor, main memory,
                    and I/O devices.
                         Finally, networks provide ways for computer systems to communicate with
                    one another. From the viewpoint of a particular system, the network is just another
                    I/O device.

                    Bibliographic Notes
                    Ritchie has written interesting firsthand accounts of the early days of C and
                    Unix [91, 92]. Ritchie and Thompson presented the first published account of
                    Unix [93]. Silberschatz, Galvin, and Gagne [102] provide a comprehensive history
                    of the different flavors of Unix. The GNU (www.gnu.org) and Linux (www.linux
                    .org) Web pages have loads of current and historical information. The Posix
                    standards are available online at (www.unix.org).

                    Solutions to Practice Problems
                    Solution to Problem 1.1 (page 58)
                    This problem illustrates that Amdahl’s law applies to more than just computer
                    systems.
                      A. In terms of Equation 1.1, we have α = 0.6 and k = 1.5. More directly, travel-
                         ing the 1,500 kilometers through Montana will require 10 hours, and the rest
                         of the trip also requires 10 hours. This will give a speedup of 25/(10 + 10) =
                         1.25×.
                      B. In terms of Equation 1.1, we have α = 0.6, and we require S = 1.67, from
                         which we can solve for k. More directly, to speed up the trip by 1.67×, we
                         must decrease the overall time to 15 hours. The parts outside of Montana
                         will still require 10 hours, so we must drive through Montana in 5 hours.
                         This requires traveling at 300 km/hr, which is pretty fast for a truck!

                    Solution to Problem 1.2 (page 59)
                    Amdahl’s law is best understood by working through some examples. This one
                    requires you to look at Equation 1.1 from an unusual perspective. This problem
                    is a simple application of the equation. You are given S = 4 and α = 0.9, and you
                    must then solve for k:
                                                        4 = 1/(1 − 0.9) + 0.9/k
                                              0.4 + 3.6/k = 1.0
                                                        k = 6.0
