CHAPTER
                 3
          Machine-Level Representation
          of Programs

          3.1    A Historical Perspective    202
          3.2    Program Encodings     205
          3.3    Data Formats    213
          3.4    Accessing Information      215
          3.5    Arithmetic and Logical Operations         227
          3.6    Control   236
          3.7    Procedures    274
          3.8    Array Allocation and Access       291
          3.9    Heterogeneous Data Structures       301
          3.10   Combining Control and Data in Machine-Level Programs   312
          3.11   Floating-Point Code     329
          3.12   Summary      345
                 Bibliographic Notes   346
                 Homework Problems          347
                 Solutions to Practice Problems      361

                         omputers execute machine code, sequences of bytes encoding the low-level
                    C    operations that manipulate data, manage memory, read and write data on
                    storage devices, and communicate over networks. A compiler generates machine
                    code through a series of stages, based on the rules of the programming language,
                    the instruction set of the target machine, and the conventions followed by the op-
                    erating system. The gcc C compiler generates its output in the form of assembly
                    code, a textual representation of the machine code giving the individual instruc-
                    tions in the program. Gcc then invokes both an assembler and a linker to generate
                    the executable machine code from the assembly code. In this chapter, we will take
                    a close look at machine code and its human-readable representation as assem-
                    bly code.
                         When programming in a high-level language such as C, and even more so
                    in Java, we are shielded from the detailed machine-level implementation of our
                    program. In contrast, when writing programs in assembly code (as was done in the
                    early days of computing) a programmer must specify the low-level instructions
                    the program uses to carry out a computation. Most of the time, it is much more
                    productive and reliable to work at the higher level of abstraction provided by a
                    high-level language. The type checking provided by a compiler helps detect many
                    program errors and makes sure we reference and manipulate data in consistent
                    ways. With modern optimizing compilers, the generated code is usually at least as
                    efficient as what a skilled assembly-language programmer would write by hand.
                    Best of all, a program written in a high-level language can be compiled and
                    executed on a number of different machines, whereas assembly code is highly
                    machine specific.
                         So why should we spend our time learning machine code? Even though com-
                    pilers do most of the work in generating assembly code, being able to read and
                    understand it is an important skill for serious programmers. By invoking the com-
                    piler with appropriate command-line parameters, the compiler will generate a file
                    showing its output in assembly-code form. By reading this code, we can under-
                    stand the optimization capabilities of the compiler and analyze the underlying
                    inefficiencies in the code. As we will experience in Chapter 5, programmers seek-
                    ing to maximize the performance of a critical section of code often try different
                    variations of the source code, each time compiling and examining the generated
                    assembly code to get a sense of how efficiently the program will run. Furthermore,
                    there are times when the layer of abstraction provided by a high-level language
                    hides information about the run-time behavior of a program that we need to under-
                    stand. For example, when writing concurrent programs using a thread package, as
                    covered in Chapter 12, it is important to understand how program data are shared
                    or kept private by the different threads and precisely how and where shared data
                    are accessed. Such information is visible at the machine-code level. As another
                    example, many of the ways programs can be attacked, allowing malware to in-
                    fest a system, involve nuances of the way programs store their run-time control
                    information. Many attacks involve exploiting weaknesses in system programs to
                    overwrite information and thereby take control of the system. Understanding how
                    these vulnerabilities arise and how to guard against them requires a knowledge of
                    the machine-level representation of programs. The need for programmers to learn
                                                Chapter 3   Machine-Level Representation of Programs   201

machine code has shifted over the years from one of being able to write programs
directly in assembly code to one of being able to read and understand the code
generated by compilers.
     In this chapter, we will learn the details of one particular assembly language
and see how C programs get compiled into this form of machine code. Reading
the assembly code generated by a compiler involves a different set of skills than
writing assembly code by hand. We must understand the transformations typical
compilers make in converting the constructs of C into machine code. Relative to
the computations expressed in the C code, optimizing compilers can rearrange
execution order, eliminate unneeded computations, replace slow operations with
faster ones, and even change recursive computations into iterative ones. Under-
standing the relation between source code and the generated assembly can often
be a challenge—it’s much like putting together a puzzle having a slightly differ-
ent design than the picture on the box. It is a form of reverse engineering—trying
to understand the process by which a system was created by studying the system
and working backward. In this case, the system is a machine-generated assembly-
language program, rather than something designed by a human. This simplifies
the task of reverse engineering because the generated code follows fairly regu-
lar patterns and we can run experiments, having the compiler generate code for
many different programs. In our presentation, we give many examples and pro-
vide a number of exercises illustrating different aspects of assembly language and
compilers. This is a subject where mastering the details is a prerequisite to under-
standing the deeper and more fundamental concepts. Those who say “I understand
the general principles, I don’t want to bother learning the details” are deluding
themselves. It is critical for you to spend time studying the examples, working
through the exercises, and checking your solutions with those provided.
     Our presentation is based on x86-64, the machine language for most of the
processors found in today’s laptop and desktop machines, as well as those that
power very large data centers and supercomputers. This language has evolved
over a long history, starting with Intel Corporation’s first 16-bit processor in 1978,
through to the expansion to 32 bits, and most recently to 64 bits. Along the way,
features have been added to make better use of the available semiconductor tech-
nology, and to satisfy the demands of the marketplace. Much of the development
has been driven by Intel, but its rival Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) has also
made important contributions. The result is a rather peculiar design with features
that make sense only when viewed from a historical perspective. It is also laden
with features providing backward compatibility that are not used by modern com-
pilers and operating systems. We will focus on the subset of the features used by
gcc and Linux. This allows us to avoid much of the complexity and many of the
arcane features of x86-64.
     Our technical presentation starts with a quick tour to show the relation be-
tween C, assembly code, and machine code. We then proceed to the details of
x86-64, starting with the representation and manipulation of data and the imple-
mentation of control. We see how control constructs in C, such as if, while, and
switch statements, are implemented. We then cover the implementation of pro-
cedures, including how the program maintains a run-time stack to support the

 Web Aside ASM:IA32            IA32 programming
 IA32, the 32-bit predecessor to x86-64, was introduced by Intel in 1985. It served as the machine
 language of choice for several decades. Most x86 microprocessors sold today, and most operating
 systems installed on these machines, are designed to run x86-64. However, they can also execute IA32
 programs in a backward compatibility mode. As a result, many application programs are still based on
 IA32. In addition, many existing systems cannot execute x86-64, due to limitations of their hardware
 or system software. IA32 continues to be an important machine language. You will find that having a
 background in x86-64 will enable you to learn the IA32 machine language quite readily.

                    passing of data and control between procedures, as well as storage for local vari-
                    ables. Next, we consider how data structures such as arrays, structures, and unions
                    are implemented at the machine level. With this background in machine-level pro-
                    gramming, we can examine the problems of out-of-bounds memory references and
                    the vulnerability of systems to buffer overflow attacks. We finish this part of the
                    presentation with some tips on using the gdb debugger for examining the run-time
                    behavior of a machine-level program. The chapter concludes with a presentation
                    on machine-program representations of code involving floating-point data and
                    operations.
                         The computer industry has recently made the transition from 32-bit to 64-
                    bit machines. A 32-bit machine can only make use of around 4 gigabytes (232
                    bytes) of random access memory, With memory prices dropping at dramatic
                    rates, and our computational demands and data sizes increasing, it has become
                    both economically feasible and technically desirable to go beyond this limitation.
                    Current 64-bit machines can use up to 256 terabytes (248 bytes) of memory, and
                    could readily be extended to use up to 16 exabytes (264 bytes). Although it is
                    hard to imagine having a machine with that much memory, keep in mind that
                    4 gigabytes seemed like an extreme amount of memory when 32-bit machines
                    became commonplace in the 1970s and 1980s.
                         Our presentation focuses on the types of machine-level programs generated
                    when compiling C and similar programming languages targeting modern oper-
                    ating systems. As a consequence, we make no attempt to describe many of the
                    features of x86-64 that arise out of its legacy support for the styles of programs
                    written in the early days of microprocessors, when much of the code was writ-
                    ten manually and where programmers had to struggle with the limited range of
                    addresses allowed by 16-bit machines.

                    3.1     A Historical Perspective
                    The Intel processor line, colloquially referred to as x86, has followed a long evo-
                    lutionary development. It started with one of the first single-chip 16-bit micropro-
                    cessors, where many compromises had to be made due to the limited capabilities
                    of integrated circuit technology at the time. Since then, it has grown to take ad-
                                                                 Section 3.1   A Historical Perspective   203

vantage of technology improvements as well as to satisfy the demands for higher
performance and for supporting more advanced operating systems.
    The list that follows shows some models of Intel processors and some of their
key features, especially those affecting machine-level programming. We use the
number of transistors required to implement the processors as an indication of
how they have evolved in complexity. In this table, “K” denotes 1,000 (103), “M”
denotes 1,000,000 (106), and “G” denotes 1,000,000,000 (109).

  8086 (1978, 29 K transistors). One of the first single-chip, 16-bit microproces-
        sors. The 8088, a variant of the 8086 with an 8-bit external bus, formed
        the heart of the original IBM personal computers. IBM contracted with
        then-tiny Microsoft to develop the MS-DOS operating system. The orig-
        inal models came with 32,768 bytes of memory and two floppy drives (no
        hard drive). Architecturally, the machines were limited to a 655,360-byte
        address space—addresses were only 20 bits long (1,048,576 bytes address-
        able), and the operating system reserved 393,216 bytes for its own use.
        In 1980, Intel introduced the 8087 floating-point coprocessor (45 K tran-
        sistors) to operate alongside an 8086 or 8088 processor, executing the
        floating-point instructions. The 8087 established the floating-point model
        for the x86 line, often referred to as “x87.”
  80286 (1982, 134 K transistors). Added more (and now obsolete) addressing
       modes. Formed the basis of the IBM PC-AT personal computer, the
       original platform for MS Windows.
  i386 (1985, 275 K transistors). Expanded the architecture to 32 bits. Added the
        flat addressing model used by Linux and recent versions of the Windows
        operating system. This was the first machine in the series that could fully
        support a Unix operating system.
  i486 (1989, 1.2 M transistors). Improved performance and integrated the float-
        ing-point unit onto the processor chip but did not significantly change the
        instruction set.
  Pentium (1993, 3.1 M transistors). Improved performance but only added mi-
        nor extensions to the instruction set.
  PentiumPro (1995, 5.5 M transistors). Introduced a radically new processor
        design, internally known as the P6 microarchitecture. Added a class of
        “conditional move” instructions to the instruction set.
  Pentium/MMX (1997, 4.5 M transistors). Added new class of instructions to the
        Pentium processor for manipulating vectors of integers. Each datum can
        be 1, 2, or 4 bytes long. Each vector totals 64 bits.
  Pentium II (1997, 7 M transistors). Continuation of the P6 microarchitecture.
  Pentium III (1999, 8.2 M transistors). Introduced SSE, a class of instructions for
        manipulating vectors of integer or floating-point data. Each datum can be
        1, 2, or 4 bytes, packed into vectors of 128 bits. Later versions of this chip

                             went up to 24 M transistors, due to the incorporation of the level-2 cache
                             on chip.
                      Pentium 4 (2000, 42 M transistors). Extended SSE to SSE2, adding new data
                            types (including double-precision floating point), along with 144 new in-
                            structions for these formats. With these extensions, compilers can use SSE
                            instructions, rather than x87 instructions, to compile floating-point code.
                      Pentium 4E (2004, 125 M transistors). Added hyperthreading, a method to run
                            two programs simultaneously on a single processor, as well as EM64T,
                            Intel’s implementation of a 64-bit extension to IA32 developed by Ad-
                            vanced Micro Devices (AMD), which we refer to as x86-64.
                      Core 2 (2006, 291 M transistors). Returned to a microarchitecture similar to
                           P6. First multi-core Intel microprocessor, where multiple processors are
                           implemented on a single chip. Did not support hyperthreading.
                      Core i7, Nehalem (2008, 781 M transistors). Incorporated both hyperthreading
                            and multi-core, with the initial version supporting two executing pro-
                            grams on each core and up to four cores on each chip.
                      Core i7, Sandy Bridge (2011, 1.17 G transistors). Introduced AVX, an exten-
                           sion of the SSE to support data packed into 256-bit vectors.
                      Core i7, Haswell (2013, 1.4 G transistors). Extended AVX to AVX2, adding
                           more instructions and instruction formats.

                         Each successive processor has been designed to be backward compatible—
                    able to run code compiled for any earlier version. As we will see, there are many
                    strange artifacts in the instruction set due to this evolutionary heritage. Intel has
                    had several names for their processor line, including IA32, for “Intel Architecture
                    32-bit” and most recently Intel64, the 64-bit extension to IA32, which we will refer
                    to as x86-64. We will refer to the overall line by the commonly used colloquial
                    name “x86,” reflecting the processor naming conventions up through the i486.
                         Over the years, several companies have produced processors that are com-
                    patible with Intel processors, capable of running the exact same machine-level
                    programs. Chief among these is Advanced Micro Devices (AMD). For years,
                    AMD lagged just behind Intel in technology, forcing a marketing strategy where
                    they produced processors that were less expensive although somewhat lower in
                    performance. They became more competitive around 2002, being the first to break
                    the 1-gigahertz clock-speed barrier for a commercially available microprocessor,
                    and introducing x86-64, the widely adopted 64-bit extension to Intel’s IA32. Al-
                    though we will talk about Intel processors, our presentation holds just as well for
                    the compatible processors produced by Intel’s rivals.
                         Much of the complexity of x86 is not of concern to those interested in programs
                    for the Linux operating system as generated by the gcc compiler. The memory
                    model provided in the original 8086 and its extensions in the 80286 became ob-
                    solete with the i386. The original x87 floating-point instructions became obsolete

 Aside                Moore’s Law

                                            Intel microprocessor complexity
                1.0E+10
                                                                                        Haswell
                                                                             Sandybridge
                1.0E+09
                                                                          Nehalem
                                                                  Pentium 4e    Core 2 Duo
                1.0E+08                                     Pentium 4
  Transistors

                                                                     Pentium III
                1.0E+07                            PentiumPro
                                                                Pentium II
                                                i486      Pentium
                1.0E+06
                                 80286
                                           i386
                1.0E+05
                          8086

                1.0E+04
                      1975       1980    1985      1990    1995    2000      2005   2010     2015
                                                           Year

 If we plot the number of transistors in the different Intel processors versus the year of introduction, and
 use a logarithmic scale for the y-axis, we can see that the growth has been phenomenal. Fitting a line
 through the data, we see that the number of transistors increases at an annual rate of approximately
 37%, meaning that the number of transistors doubles about every 26 months. This growth has been
 sustained over the multiple-decade history of x86 microprocessors.
      In 1965, Gordon Moore, a founder of Intel Corporation, extrapolated from the chip technology of
 the day (by which they could fabricate circuits with around 64 transistors on a single chip) to predict
 that the number of transistors per chip would double every year for the next 10 years. This prediction
 became known as Moore’s Law. As it turns out, his prediction was just a little bit optimistic, but also too
 short-sighted. Over more than 50 years, the semiconductor industry has been able to double transistor
 counts on average every 18 months.
      Similar exponential growth rates have occurred for other aspects of computer technology, including
 the storage capacities of magnetic disks and semiconductor memories. These remarkable growth rates
 have been the major driving forces of the computer revolution.

with the introduction of SSE2. Although we see vestiges of the historical evolu-
tion of x86 in x86-64 programs, many of the most arcane features of x86 do not
appear.

3.2 Program Encodings
Suppose we write a C program as two files p1.c and p2.c. We can then compile
this code using a Unix command line:

                    linux> gcc -Og -o p p1.c p2.c

                    The command gcc indicates the gcc C compiler. Since this is the default compiler
                    on Linux, we could also invoke it as simply cc. The command-line option -Og1
                    instructs the compiler to apply a level of optimization that yields machine code
                    that follows the overall structure of the original C code. Invoking higher levels of
                    optimization can generate code that is so heavily transformed that the relationship
                    between the generated machine code and the original source code is difficult to
                    understand. We will therefore use -Og optimization as a learning tool and then see
                    what happens as we increase the level of optimization. In practice, higher levels
                    of optimization (e.g., specified with the option -O1 or -O2) are considered a better
                    choice in terms of the resulting program performance.
                         The gcc command invokes an entire sequence of programs to turn the source
                    code into executable code. First, the C preprocessor expands the source code to
                    include any files specified with #include commands and to expand any macros,
                    specified with #define declarations. Second, the compiler generates assembly-
                    code versions of the two source files having names p1.s and p2.s. Next, the
                    assembler converts the assembly code into binary object-code files p1.o and p2.o.
                    Object code is one form of machine code—it contains binary representations of all
                    of the instructions, but the addresses of global values are not yet filled in. Finally,
                    the linker merges these two object-code files along with code implementing library
                    functions (e.g., printf) and generates the final executable code file p (as specified
                    by the command-line directive -o p). Executable code is the second form of
                    machine code we will consider—it is the exact form of code that is executed by
                    the processor. The relation between these different forms of machine code and
                    the linking process is described in more detail in Chapter 7.

                    3.2.1 Machine-Level Code
                    As described in Section 1.9.3, computer systems employ several different forms
                    of abstraction, hiding details of an implementation through the use of a simpler
                    abstract model. Two of these are especially important for machine-level program-
                    ming. First, the format and behavior of a machine-level program is defined by the
                    instruction set architecture, or ISA, defining the processor state, the format of the
                    instructions, and the effect each of these instructions will have on the state. Most
                    ISAs, including x86-64, describe the behavior of a program as if each instruction is
                    executed in sequence, with one instruction completing before the next one begins.
                    The processor hardware is far more elaborate, executing many instructions con-
                    currently, but it employs safeguards to ensure that the overall behavior matches
                    the sequential operation dictated by the ISA. Second, the memory addresses used
                    by a machine-level program are virtual addresses, providing a memory model that

                    1. This optimization level was introduced in gcc version 4.8. Earlier versions of gcc, as well as non-
                    GNU compilers, will not recognize this option. For these, using optimization level one (specified with
                    the command-line flag -O1) is probably the best choice for generating code that follows the original
                    program structure.

appears to be a very large byte array. The actual implementation of the mem-
ory system involves a combination of multiple hardware memories and operating
system software, as described in Chapter 9.
    The compiler does most of the work in the overall compilation sequence,
transforming programs expressed in the relatively abstract execution model pro-
vided by C into the very elementary instructions that the processor executes. The
assembly-code representation is very close to machine code. Its main feature is
that it is in a more readable textual format, as compared to the binary format of
machine code. Being able to understand assembly code and how it relates to the
original C code is a key step in understanding how computers execute programs.
    The machine code for x86-64 differs greatly from the original C code. Parts of
the processor state are visible that normally are hidden from the C programmer:

  .
      The program counter (commonly referred to as the PC, and called %rip in x86-
      64) indicates the address in memory of the next instruction to be executed.
  .
      The integer register file contains 16 named locations storing 64-bit values.
      These registers can hold addresses (corresponding to C pointers) or integer
      data. Some registers are used to keep track of critical parts of the program
      state, while others are used to hold temporary data, such as the arguments
      and local variables of a procedure, as well as the value to be returned by a
      function.
  .
      The condition code registers hold status information about the most recently
      executed arithmetic or logical instruction. These are used to implement con-
      ditional changes in the control or data flow, such as is required to implement
      if and while statements.
  .
      A set of vector registers can each hold one or more integer or floating-point
      values.

     Whereas C provides a model in which objects of different data types can be
declared and allocated in memory, machine code views the memory as simply
a large byte-addressable array. Aggregate data types in C such as arrays and
structures are represented in machine code as contiguous collections of bytes.
Even for scalar data types, assembly code makes no distinctions between signed or
unsigned integers, between different types of pointers, or even between pointers
and integers.
     The program memory contains the executable machine code for the program,
some information required by the operating system, a run-time stack for managing
procedure calls and returns, and blocks of memory allocated by the user (e.g., by
using the malloc library function). As mentioned earlier, the program memory
is addressed using virtual addresses. At any given time, only limited subranges of
virtual addresses are considered valid. For example, x86-64 virtual addresses are
represented by 64-bit words. In current implementations of these machines, the
upper 16 bits must be set to zero, and so an address can potentially specify a byte
over a range of 248, or 64 terabytes. More typical programs will only have access
to a few megabytes, or perhaps several gigabytes. The operating system manages

 Aside     The ever-changing forms of generated code
 In our presentation, we will show the code generated by a particular version of gcc with particular
 settings of the command-line options. If you compile code on your own machine, chances are you will be
 using a different compiler or a different version of gcc and hence will generate different code. The open-
 source community supporting gcc keeps changing the code generator, attempting to generate more
 efficient code according to changing code guidelines provided by the microprocessor manufacturers.
      Our goal in studying the examples shown in our presentation is to demonstrate how to examine
 assembly code and map it back to the constructs found in high-level programming languages. You will
 need to adapt these techniques to the style of code generated by your particular compiler.

                    this virtual address space, translating virtual addresses into the physical addresses
                    of values in the actual processor memory.
                         A single machine instruction performs only a very elementary operation. For
                    example, it might add two numbers stored in registers, transfer data between
                    memory and a register, or conditionally branch to a new instruction address. The
                    compiler must generate sequences of such instructions to implement program
                    constructs such as arithmetic expression evaluation, loops, or procedure calls and
                    returns.

                    3.2.2 Code Examples
                    Suppose we write a C code file mstore.c containing the following function defi-
                    nition:

                    long mult2(long, long);

                    void multstore(long x, long y, long *dest) {
                        long t = mult2(x, y);
                        *dest = t;
                    }

                        To see the assembly code generated by the C compiler, we can use the -S
                    option on the command line:

                    linux> gcc -Og -S mstore.c

                    This will cause gcc to run the compiler, generating an assembly file mstore.s,
                    and go no further. (Normally it would then invoke the assembler to generate an
                    object-code file.)
                         The assembly-code file contains various declarations, including the following
                    set of lines:

                    multstore:
                      pushq    %rbx

 Aside     How do I display the byte representation of a program?
 To display the binary object code for a program (say, mstore), we use a disassembler (described below)
 to determine that the code for the procedure is 14 bytes long. Then we run the GNU debugging tool
 gdb on file mstore.o and give it the command
 (gdb) x/14xb multstore
 telling it to display (abbreviated ‘x’) 14 hex-formatted (also ‘x’) bytes (‘b’) starting at the address where
 function multstore is located. You will find that gdb has many useful features for analyzing machine-
 level programs, as will be discussed in Section 3.10.2.

  movq      %rdx, %rbx
  call      mult2
  movq      %rax, (%rbx)
  popq      %rbx
  ret

Each indented line in the code corresponds to a single machine instruction. For
example, the pushq instruction indicates that the contents of register %rbx should
be pushed onto the program stack. All information about local variable names or
data types has been stripped away.
    If we use the -c command-line option, gcc will both compile and assemble
the code
linux> gcc -Og -c mstore.c

This will generate an object-code file mstore.o that is in binary format and hence
cannot be viewed directly. Embedded within the 1,368 bytes of the file mstore.o
is a 14-byte sequence with the hexadecimal representation
53 48 89 d3 e8 00 00 00 00 48 89 03 5b c3

This is the object code corresponding to the assembly instructions listed previously.
A key lesson to learn from this is that the program executed by the machine is
simply a sequence of bytes encoding a series of instructions. The machine has
very little information about the source code from which these instructions were
generated.
     To inspect the contents of machine-code files, a class of programs known as
disassemblers can be invaluable. These programs generate a format similar to
assembly code from the machine code. With Linux systems, the program objdump
(for “object dump”) can serve this role given the -d command-line flag:
linux> objdump -d mstore.o

The result (where we have added line numbers on the left and annotations in
italicized text) is as follows:

                              Disassembly of function sum in binary file mstore.o
                     1        0000000000000000 <multstore>:
                              Offset   Bytes                        Equivalent assembly language
                     2            0:   53                           push    %rbx
                     3            1:   48 89 d3                     mov     %rdx,%rbx
                     4            4:   e8 00 00 00 00               callq   9 <multstore+0x9>
                     5            9:   48 89 03                     mov     %rax,(%rbx)
                     6            c:   5b                           pop     %rbx
                     7            d:   c3                           retq

                    On the left we see the 14 hexadecimal byte values, listed in the byte sequence
                    shown earlier, partitioned into groups of 1 to 5 bytes each. Each of these groups
                    is a single instruction, with the assembly-language equivalent shown on the right.
                         Several features about machine code and its disassembled representation are
                    worth noting:
                         .
                             x86-64 instructions can range in length from 1 to 15 bytes. The instruction
                             encoding is designed so that commonly used instructions and those with fewer
                             operands require a smaller number of bytes than do less common ones or ones
                             with more operands.
                         .
                             The instruction format is designed in such a way that from a given starting
                             position, there is a unique decoding of the bytes into machine instructions.
                             For example, only the instruction pushq %rbx can start with byte value 53.
                         .
                             The disassembler determines the assembly code based purely on the byte
                             sequences in the machine-code file. It does not require access to the source or
                             assembly-code versions of the program.
                         .
                             The disassembler uses a slightly different naming convention for the instruc-
                             tions than does the assembly code generated by gcc. In our example, it has
                             omitted the suffix ‘q’ from many of the instructions. These suffixes are size
                             designators and can be omitted in most cases. Conversely, the disassembler
                             adds the suffix ‘q’ to the call and ret instructions. Again, these suffixes can
                             safely be omitted.

                        Generating the actual executable code requires running a linker on the set
                    of object-code files, one of which must contain a function main. Suppose in file
                    main.c we had the following function:

                    #include <stdio.h>

                    void multstore(long, long, long *);

                    int main() {
                        long d;
                        multstore(2, 3, &d);
                        printf("2 * 3 --> %ld\n", d);
                        return 0;
                    }

long mult2(long a, long b) {
    long s = a * b;
    return s;
 }

Then we could generate an executable program prog as follows:

linux> gcc -Og -o prog main.c mstore.c

The file prog has grown to 8,655 bytes, since it contains not just the machine
code for the procedures we provided but also code used to start and terminate
the program as well as to interact with the operating system.
    We can disassemble the file prog:

linux> objdump -d prog

The disassembler will extract various code sequences, including the following:

      Disassembly of function sum in binary file prog
1    0000000000400540 <multstore>:
2      400540: 53                                push     %rbx
3      400541: 48 89 d3                          mov      %rdx,%rbx
4      400544: e8 42 00 00 00                    callq    40058b <mult2>
5      400549: 48 89 03                          mov      %rax,(%rbx)
6      40054c: 5b                                pop      %rbx
7      40054d: c3                                retq
8      40054e: 90                                nop
9      40054f: 90                                nop

     This code is almost identical to that generated by the disassembly of mstore.c.
One important difference is that the addresses listed along the left are different—
the linker has shifted the location of this code to a different range of addresses. A
second difference is that the linker has filled in the address that the callq instruc-
tion should use in calling the function mult2 (line 4 of the disassembly). One task
for the linker is to match function calls with the locations of the executable code for
those functions. A final difference is that we see two additional lines of code (lines
8–9). These instructions will have no effect on the program, since they occur after
the return instruction (line 7). They have been inserted to grow the code for the
function to 16 bytes, enabling a better placement of the next block of code in terms
of memory system performance.

3.2.3 Notes on Formatting
The assembly code generated by gcc is difficult for a human to read. On one hand,
it contains information with which we need not be concerned, while on the other
hand, it does not provide any description of the program or how it works. For
example, suppose we give the command

linux> gcc -Og -S mstore.c

                    to generate the file mstore.s. The full content of the file is as follows:

                            .file    "010-mstore.c"
                            .text
                            .globl multstore
                            .type    multstore, @function
                    multstore:
                            pushq    %rbx
                            movq     %rdx, %rbx
                            call     mult2
                            movq     %rax, (%rbx)
                            popq     %rbx
                            ret
                            .size    multstore, .-multstore
                            .ident "GCC: (Ubuntu 4.8.1-2ubuntu1~12.04) 4.8.1"
                            .section         .note.GNU-stack,"",@progbits

                        All of the lines beginning with ‘.’ are directives to guide the assembler and
                    linker. We can generally ignore these. On the other hand, there are no explanatory
                    remarks about what the instructions do or how they relate to the source code.
                        To provide a clearer presentation of assembly code, we will show it in a form
                    that omits most of the directives, while including line numbers and explanatory
                    annotations. For our example, an annotated version would appear as follows:

                          void multstore(long x, long y, long *dest)
                          x in %rdi, y in %rsi, dest in %rdx
                     1    multstore:
                     2      pushq   %rbx                     Save %rbx
                     3      movq    %rdx, %rbx               Copy dest to %rbx
                     4      call    mult2                    Call mult2(x, y)
                     5      movq    %rax, (%rbx)             Store result at *dest
                     6      popq    %rbx                     Restore %rbx
                     7      ret                              Return

                        We typically show only the lines of code relevant to the point being discussed.
                    Each line is numbered on the left for reference and annotated on the right by a
                    brief description of the effect of the instruction and how it relates to the computa-
                    tions of the original C code. This is a stylized version of the way assembly-language
                    programmers format their code.
                        We also provide Web asides to cover material intended for dedicated machine-
                    language enthusiasts. One Web aside describes IA32 machine code. Having a
                    background in x86-64 makes learning IA32 fairly simple. Another Web aside gives
                    a brief presentation of ways to incorporate assembly code into C programs. For
                    some applications, the programmer must drop down to assembly code to access
                    low-level features of the machine. One approach is to write entire functions in
                    assembly code and combine them with C functions during the linking stage. A
                                                                             Section 3.3   Data Formats   213

 Aside       ATT versus Intel assembly-code formats
 In our presentation, we show assembly code in ATT format (named after AT&T, the company that
 operated Bell Laboratories for many years), the default format for gcc, objdump, and the other tools we
 will consider. Other programming tools, including those from Microsoft as well as the documentation
 from Intel, show assembly code in Intel format. The two formats differ in a number of ways. As an
 example, gcc can generate code in Intel format for the sum function using the following command line:
 linux> gcc -Og -S -masm=intel mstore.c
 This gives the following assembly code:
 multstore:
   push     rbx
   mov      rbx, rdx
   call     mult2
   mov      QWORD PTR [rbx], rax
   pop      rbx
   ret
        We see that the Intel and ATT formats differ in the following ways:

    .   The Intel code omits the size designation suffixes. We see instruction push and mov instead of pushq
        and movq.
    .   The Intel code omits the ‘%’ character in front of register names, using rbx instead of %rbx.
    .   The Intel code has a different way of describing locations in memory—for example, QWORD PTR
        [rbx] rather than (%rbx).
    .   Instructions with multiple operands list them in the reverse order. This can be very confusing when
        switching between the two formats.

 Although we will not be using Intel format in our presentation, you will encounter it in documentation
 from Intel and Microsoft.

second is to use gcc’s support for embedding assembly code directly within C
programs.

3.3 Data Formats
Due to its origins as a 16-bit architecture that expanded into a 32-bit one, Intel
uses the term “word” to refer to a 16-bit data type. Based on this, they refer to 32-
bit quantities as “double words,” and 64-bit quantities as “quad words.” Figure 3.1
shows the x86-64 representations used for the primitive data types of C. Standard
int values are stored as double words (32 bits). Pointers (shown here as char *)
are stored as 8-byte quad words, as would be expected in a 64-bit machine. With
x86-64, data type long is implemented with 64 bits, allowing a very wide range
of values. Most of our code examples in this chapter use pointers and long data

 Web Aside ASM:EASM              Combining assembly code with C programs
 Although a C compiler does a good job of converting the computations expressed in a program into
 machine code, there are some features of a machine that cannot be accessed by a C program. For
 example, every time an x86-64 processor executes an arithmetic or logical operation, it sets a 1-bit
 condition code flag, named PF (for “parity flag”), to 1 when the lower 8 bits in the resulting computation
 have an even number of ones and to 0 otherwise. Computing this information in C requires at least
 seven shifting, masking, and exclusive-or operations (see Problem 2.65). Even though the hardware
 performs this computation as part of every arithmetic or logical operation, there is no way for a C
 program to determine the value of the PF condition code flag. This task can readily be performed by
 incorporating a small number of assembly-code instructions into the program.
      There are two ways to incorporate assembly code into C programs. First, we can write an entire
 function as a separate assembly-code file and let the assembler and linker combine this with code we
 have written in C. Second, we can use the inline assembly feature of gcc, where brief sections of assembly
 code can be incorporated into a C program using the asm directive. This approach has the advantage
 that it minimizes the amount of machine-specific code.
      Of course, including assembly code in a C program makes the code specific to a particular class of
 machines (such as x86-64), and so it should only be used when the desired feature can only be accessed
 in this way.

                    C declaration     Intel data type        Assembly-code suffix      Size (bytes)
                    char              Byte                             b                    1
                    short             Word                             w                    2
                    int               Double word                      l                    4
                    long              Quad word                        q                    8
                    char *            Quad word                        q                    8
                    float             Single precision                 s                    4
                    double            Double precision                 l                    8

Figure 3.1 Sizes of C data types in x86-64. With a 64-bit machine, pointers are 8 bytes
                    long.

                    types, and so they will operate on quad words. The x86-64 instruction set includes
                    a full complement of instructions for bytes, words, and double words as well.
                         Floating-point numbers come in two principal formats: single-precision (4-
                    byte) values, corresponding to C data type float, and double-precision (8-byte)
                    values, corresponding to C data type double. Microprocessors in the x86 family
                    historically implemented all floating-point operations with a special 80-bit (10-
                    byte) floating-point format (see Problem 2.86). This format can be specified in C
                    programs using the declaration long double. We recommend against using this
                    format, however. It is not portable to other classes of machines, and it is typically

not implemented with the same high-performance hardware as is the case for
single- and double-precision arithmetic.
      As the table of Figure 3.1 indicates, most assembly-code instructions gener-
ated by gcc have a single-character suffix denoting the size of the operand. For
example, the data movement instruction has four variants: movb (move byte),
movw (move word), movl (move double word), and movq (move quad word). The
suffix ‘l’ is used for double words, since 32-bit quantities are considered to be
“long words.” The assembly code uses the suffix ‘l’ to denote a 4-byte integer as
well as an 8-byte double-precision floating-point number. This causes no ambigu-
ity, since floating-point code involves an entirely different set of instructions and
registers.

3.4 Accessing Information
An x86-64 central processing unit (CPU) contains a set of 16 general-purpose
registers storing 64-bit values. These registers are used to store integer data as well
as pointers. Figure 3.2 diagrams the 16 registers. Their names all begin with %r, but
otherwise follow multiple different naming conventions, owing to the historical
evolution of the instruction set. The original 8086 had eight 16-bit registers, shown
in Figure 3.2 as registers %ax through %bp. Each had a specific purpose, and hence
they were given names that reflected how they were to be used. With the extension
to IA32, these registers were expanded to 32-bit registers, labeled %eax through
%ebp. In the extension to x86-64, the original eight registers were expanded to 64
bits, labeled %rax through %rbp. In addition, eight new registers were added, and
these were given labels according to a new naming convention: %r8 through %r15.
     As the nested boxes in Figure 3.2 indicate, instructions can operate on data
of different sizes stored in the low-order bytes of the 16 registers. Byte-level
operations can access the least significant byte, 16-bit operations can access the
least significant 2 bytes, 32-bit operations can access the least significant 4 bytes,
and 64-bit operations can access entire registers.
     In later sections, we will present a number of instructions for copying and
generating 1-, 2-, 4-, and 8-byte values. When these instructions have registers as
destinations, two conventions arise for what happens to the remaining bytes in
the register for instructions that generate less than 8 bytes: Those that generate 1-
or 2-byte quantities leave the remaining bytes unchanged. Those that generate 4-
byte quantities set the upper 4 bytes of the register to zero. The latter convention
was adopted as part of the expansion from IA32 to x86-64.
     As the annotations along the right-hand side of Figure 3.2 indicate, different
registers serve different roles in typical programs. Most unique among them is the
stack pointer, %rsp, used to indicate the end position in the run-time stack. Some
instructions specifically read and write this register. The other 15 registers have
more flexibility in their uses. A small number of instructions make specific use of
certain registers. More importantly, a set of standard programming conventions
governs how the registers are to be used for managing the stack, passing function

                    63                                   31                 15       7           0

                    %rax                                  %eax              %ax          %al         Return value

                    %rbx                                  %ebx              %bx          %bl         Callee saved

                    %rcx                                  %ecx              %cx          %cl         4th argument

                    %rdx                                  %edx              %dx          %dl         3rd argument

                    %rsi                                  %esi              %si          %sil        2nd argument

                    %rdi                                  %edi              %di          %dil        1st argument

                    %rbp                                  %ebp              %bp          %bpl        Callee saved

                    %rsp                                  %esp              %sp          %spl        Stack pointer

                    %r8                                   %r8d              %r8w         %r8b        5th argument

                    %r9                                   %r9d              %r9w         %r9b        6th argument

                    %r10                                  %r10d             %r10w        %r10b       Caller saved

                    %r11                                  %r11d             %r11w        %r11b       Caller saved

                    %r12                                  %r12d             %r12w        %r12b       Callee saved

                    %r13                                  %r13d             %r13w        %r13b       Callee saved

                    %r14                                  %r14d             %r14w        %r14b       Callee saved

                    %r15                                  %r15d             %r15w        %r15b       Callee saved

Figure 3.2 Integer registers. The low-order portions of all 16 registers can be accessed
                    as byte, word (16-bit), double word (32-bit), and quad word (64-bit) quantities.

                    arguments, returning values from functions, and storing local and temporary data.
                    We will cover these conventions in our presentation, especially in Section 3.7,
                    where we describe the implementation of procedures.

                    3.4.1 Operand Specifiers
                    Most instructions have one or more operands specifying the source values to use
                    in performing an operation and the destination location into which to place the

Type           Form               Operand value                  Name
Immediate      $Imm               Imm                            Immediate

Register       ra                 R[ra ]                         Register

Memory         Imm                M[Imm]                         Absolute
Memory         (ra )              M[R[ra ]]                      Indirect
Memory         Imm(rb )           M[Imm + R[rb ]]                Base + displacement
Memory         (rb ,ri )          M[R[rb ] + R[ri ]]             Indexed
Memory         Imm(rb ,ri )       M[Imm + R[rb ] + R[ri ]]       Indexed
Memory         (,ri ,s )          M[R[ri ] . s]                  Scaled indexed
Memory         Imm(,ri ,s )       M[Imm + R[ri ] . s]            Scaled indexed
Memory         (rb ,ri ,s )       M[R[rb ] + R[ri ] . s]         Scaled indexed
Memory         Imm(rb ,ri ,s )    M[Imm + R[rb ] + R[ri ] . s]   Scaled indexed

Figure 3.3 Operand forms. Operands can denote immediate (constant) values, register
values, or values from memory. The scaling factor s must be either 1, 2, 4, or 8.

result. x86-64 supports a number of operand forms (see Figure 3.3). Source values
can be given as constants or read from registers or memory. Results can be stored
in either registers or memory. Thus, the different operand possibilities can be
classified into three types. The first type, immediate, is for constant values. In ATT-
format assembly code, these are written with a ‘$’ followed by an integer using
standard C notation—for example, $-577 or $0x1F. Different instructions allow
different ranges of immediate values; the assembler will automatically select the
most compact way of encoding a value. The second type, register, denotes the
contents of a register, one of the sixteen 8-, 4-, 2-, or 1-byte low-order portions of
the registers for operands having 64, 32, 16, or 8 bits, respectively. In Figure 3.3,
we use the notation ra to denote an arbitrary register a and indicate its value with
the reference R[ra ], viewing the set of registers as an array R indexed by register
identifiers.
     The third type of operand is a memory reference, in which we access some
memory location according to a computed address, often called the effective ad-
dress. Since we view the memory as a large array of bytes, we use the notation
Mb [Addr] to denote a reference to the b-byte value stored in memory starting at
address Addr. To simplify things, we will generally drop the subscript b.
     As Figure 3.3 shows, there are many different addressing modes allowing dif-
ferent forms of memory references. The most general form is shown at the bottom
of the table with syntax Imm(rb ,ri ,s). Such a reference has four components: an
immediate offset Imm, a base register rb , an index register ri , and a scale factor
s, where s must be 1, 2, 4, or 8. Both the base and index must be 64-bit registers.
The effective address is computed as Imm + R[rb ] + R[ri ] . s. This general form is
often seen when referencing elements of arrays. The other forms are simply spe-
cial cases of this general form where some of the components are omitted. As we

                    will see, the more complex addressing modes are useful when referencing array
                    and structure elements.

                    Practice Problem 3.1 (solution page 361)
                    Assume the following values are stored at the indicated memory addresses and
                    registers:

                    Address      Value         Register      Value
                     0x100       0xFF            %rax        0x100
                     0x104       0xAB            %rcx          0x1
                     0x108       0x13            %rdx          0x3
                     0x10C       0x11

                        Fill in the following table showing the values for the indicated operands:

                    Operand                Value
                    %rax
                    0x104
                    $0x108
                    (%rax)
                    4(%rax)
                    9(%rax,%rdx)
                    260(%rcx,%rdx)
                    0xFC(,%rcx,4)
                    (%rax,%rdx,4)

                    3.4.2 Data Movement Instructions
                    Among the most heavily used instructions are those that copy data from one lo-
                    cation to another. The generality of the operand notation allows a simple data
                    movement instruction to express a range of possibilities that in many machines
                    would require a number of different instructions. We present a number of differ-
                    ent data movement instructions, differing in their source and destination types,
                    what conversions they perform, and other side effects they may have. In our pre-
                    sentation, we group the many different instructions into instruction classes, where
                    the instructions in a class perform the same operation but with different operand
                    sizes.
                         Figure 3.4 lists the simplest form of data movement instructions—mov class.
                    These instructions copy data from a source location to a destination location,
                    without any transformation. The class consists of four instructions: movb, movw,
                    movl, and movq. All four of these instructions have similar effects; they differ
                    primarily in that they operate on data of different sizes: 1, 2, 4, and 8 bytes,
                    respectively.

Instruction           Effect       Description
mov           S, D    D ← S        Move
  movb                             Move byte
  movw                             Move word
  movl                             Move double word
  movq                             Move quad word

movabsq       I, R    R ← I        Move absolute quad word

Figure 3.4 Simple data movement instructions.

     The source operand designates a value that is immediate, stored in a register,
or stored in memory. The destination operand designates a location that is either a
register or a memory address. x86-64 imposes the restriction that a move instruc-
tion cannot have both operands refer to memory locations. Copying a value from
one memory location to another requires two instructions—the first to load the
source value into a register, and the second to write this register value to the des-
tination. Referring to Figure 3.2, register operands for these instructions can be
the labeled portions of any of the 16 registers, where the size of the register must
match the size designated by the last character of the instruction (‘b’, ‘w’, ‘l’, or
‘q’). For most cases, the mov instructions will only update the specific register bytes
or memory locations indicated by the destination operand. The only exception is
that when movl has a register as the destination, it will also set the high-order 4
bytes of the register to 0. This exception arises from the convention, adopted in
x86-64, that any instruction that generates a 32-bit value for a register also sets the
high-order portion of the register to 0.
     The following mov instruction examples show the five possible combinations
of source and destination types. Recall that the source operand comes first and
the destination second.

1        movl $0x4050,%eax              Immediate--Register, 4 bytes
2        movw %bp,%sp                   Register--Register, 2 bytes
3        movb (%rdi,%rcx),%al           Memory--Register,    1 byte
4        movb $-17,(%esp)               Immediate--Memory,   1 byte
5        movq %rax,-12(%rbp)            Register--Memory,    8 bytes

     A final instruction documented in Figure 3.4 is for dealing with 64-bit imme-
diate data. The regular movq instruction can only have immediate source operands
that can be represented as 32-bit two’s-complement numbers. This value is then
sign extended to produce the 64-bit value for the destination. The movabsq in-
struction can have an arbitrary 64-bit immediate value as its source operand and
can only have a register as a destination.
     Figures 3.5 and 3.6 document two classes of data movement instructions for
use when copying a smaller source value to a larger destination. All of these
instructions copy data from a source, which can be either a register or stored

 Aside     Understanding how data movement changes a destination register
 As described, there are two different conventions regarding whether and how data movement instruc-
 tions modify the upper bytes of a destination register. This distinction is illustrated by the following
 code sequence:
  1      movabsq $0x0011223344556677, %rax              %rax = 0011223344556677
  2      movb    $-1, %al                               %rax = 00112233445566FF
  3      movw    $-1, %ax                               %rax = 001122334455FFFF
  4      movl    $-1, %eax                              %rax = 00000000FFFFFFFF
  5      movq    $-1, %rax                              %rax = FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF

      In the following discussion, we use hexadecimal notation. In the example, the instruction on line 1
 initializes register %rax to the pattern 0011223344556677. The remaining instructions have immediate
 value −1 as their source values. Recall that the hexadecimal representation of −1 is of the form FF. . .F,
 where the number of F’s is twice the number of bytes in the representation. The movb instruction (line 2)
 therefore sets the low-order byte of %rax to FF, while the movw instruction (line 3) sets the low-order
 2 bytes to FFFF, with the remaining bytes unchanged. The movl instruction (line 4) sets the low-order
 4 bytes to FFFFFFFF, but it also sets the high-order 4 bytes to 00000000. Finally, the movq instruction
 (line 5) sets the complete register to FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF.

                    Instruction     Effect                      Description
                    movz S, R       R ← ZeroExtend(S)           Move with zero extension
                      movzbw                                    Move zero-extended byte to word
                      movzbl                                    Move zero-extended byte to double word
                      movzwl                                    Move zero-extended word to double word
                      movzbq                                    Move zero-extended byte to quad word
                      movzwq                                    Move zero-extended word to quad word

Figure 3.5 Zero-extending data movement instructions. These instructions have a
                    register or memory location as the source and a register as the destination.

                    in memory, to a register destination. Instructions in the movz class fill out the
                    remaining bytes of the destination with zeros, while those in the movs class fill
                    them out by sign extension, replicating copies of the most significant bit of the
                    source operand. Observe that each instruction name has size designators as its
                    final two characters—the first specifying the source size, and the second specifying
                    the destination size. As can be seen, there are three instructions in each of these
                    classes, covering all cases of 1- and 2-byte source sizes and 2- and 4-byte destination
                    sizes, considering only cases where the destination is larger than the source, of
                    course.

Instruction     Effect                            Description
movs S, R       R ← SignExtend(S)                 Move with sign extension
  movsbw                                          Move sign-extended byte to word
  movsbl                                          Move sign-extended byte to double word
  movswl                                          Move sign-extended word to double word
  movsbq                                          Move sign-extended byte to quad word
  movswq                                          Move sign-extended word to quad word
  movslq                                          Move sign-extended double word to quad word

cltq            %rax ← SignExtend(%eax)           Sign-extend %eax to %rax

Figure 3.6 Sign-extending data movement instructions. The movs instructions have
a register or memory location as the source and a register as the destination. The cltq
instruction is specific to registers %eax and %rax.

     Note the absence of an explicit instruction to zero-extend a 4-byte source
value to an 8-byte destination in Figure 3.5. Such an instruction would logically
be named movzlq, but this instruction does not exist. Instead, this type of data
movement can be implemented using a movl instruction having a register as the
destination. This technique takes advantage of the property that an instruction
generating a 4-byte value with a register as the destination will fill the upper 4
bytes with zeros. Otherwise, for 64-bit destinations, moving with sign extension is
supported for all three source types, and moving with zero extension is supported
for the two smaller source types.
     Figure 3.6 also documents the cltq instruction. This instruction has no
operands—it always uses register %eax as its source and %rax as the destination for
the sign-extended result. It therefore has the exact same effect as the instruction
movslq %eax, %rax, but it has a more compact encoding.

Practice Problem 3.2 (solution page 361)
For each of the following lines of assembly language, determine the appropriate
instruction suffix based on the operands. (For example, mov can be rewritten as
movb, movw, movl, or movq.)

  mov         %eax, (%rsp)
  mov         (%rax), %dx
  mov         $0xFF, %bl
  mov         (%rsp,%rdx,4), %dl
  mov         (%rdx), %rax
  mov         %dx, (%rax)

 Aside     Comparing byte movement instructions
 The following example illustrates how different data movement instructions either do or do not change
 the high-order bytes of the destination. Observe that the three byte-movement instructions movb,
 movsbq, and movzbq differ from each other in subtle ways. Here is an example:
  1      movabsq $0x0011223344556677, %rax             %rax = 0011223344556677
  2      movb    $0xAA, %dl                            %dl = AA
  3      movb %dl,%al                                  %rax = 00112233445566AA
  4      movsbq %dl,%rax                               %rax = FFFFFFFFFFFFFFAA
  5      movzbq %dl,%rax                               %rax = 00000000000000AA

      In the following discussion, we use hexadecimal notation for all of the values. The first two lines
 of the code initialize registers %rax and %dl to 0011223344556677 and AA, respectively. The remaining
 instructions all copy the low-order byte of %rdx to the low-order byte of %rax. The movb instruction
 (line 3) does not change the other bytes. The movsbq instruction (line 4) sets the other 7 bytes to
 either all ones or all zeros depending on the high-order bit of the source byte. Since hexadecimal A
 represents binary value 1010, sign extension causes the higher-order bytes to each be set to FF. The
 movzbq instruction (line 5) always sets the other 7 bytes to zero.

                    Practice Problem 3.3 (solution page 362)
                    Each of the following lines of code generates an error message when we invoke
                    the assembler. Explain what is wrong with each line.

                      movb $0xF, (%ebx)
                      movl %rax, (%rsp)
                      movw (%rax),4(%rsp)
                      movb %al,%sl
                      movq %rax,$0x123
                      movl %eax,%rdx
                      movb %si, 8(%rbp)

                    3.4.3 Data Movement Example
                    As an example of code that uses data movement instructions, consider the data
                    exchange routine shown in Figure 3.7, both as C code and as assembly code
                    generated by gcc.
                         As Figure 3.7(b) shows, function exchange is implemented with just three
                    instructions: two data movements (movq) plus an instruction to return back to
                    the point from which the function was called (ret). We will cover the details of
                    function call and return in Section 3.7. Until then, it suffices to say that arguments
                    are passed to functions in registers. Our annotated assembly code documents
                    these. A function returns a value by storing it in register %rax, or in one of the
                    low-order portions of this register.

(a) C code
long exchange(long *xp, long y)
{
    long x = *xp;
    *xp = y;
    return x;
}
(b) Assembly code
     long exchange(long *xp, long y)
     xp in %rdi, y in %rsi
1    exchange:
2      movq    (%rdi), %rax          Get x at xp. Set as return value.
3      movq    %rsi, (%rdi)          Store y at xp.
4      ret                           Return.

Figure 3.7 C and assembly code for exchange routine. Registers %rdi and %rsi
hold parameters xp and y, respectively.

     When the procedure begins execution, procedure parameters xp and y are
stored in registers %rdi and %rsi, respectively. Instruction 2 then reads x from
memory and stores the value in register %rax, a direct implementation of the
operation x = *xp in the C program. Later, register %rax will be used to return
a value from the function, and so the return value will be x. Instruction 3 writes y
to the memory location designated by xp in register %rdi, a direct implementation
of the operation *xp = y. This example illustrates how the mov instructions can be
used to read from memory to a register (line 2), and to write from a register to
memory (line 3).
     Two features about this assembly code are worth noting. First, we see that what
we call “pointers” in C are simply addresses. Dereferencing a pointer involves
copying that pointer into a register, and then using this register in a memory
reference. Second, local variables such as x are often kept in registers rather than
stored in memory locations. Register access is much faster than memory access.

Practice Problem 3.4 (solution page 362)
Assume variables sp and dp are declared with types

    src_t *sp;
    dest_t *dp;

where src_t and dest_t are data types declared with typedef. We wish to use
the appropriate pair of data movement instructions to implement the operation

    *dp = (dest_t) *sp;

 New to C?        Some examples of pointers
 Function exchange (Figure 3.7(a)) provides a good illustration of the use of pointers in C. Argument
 xp is a pointer to a long integer, while y is a long integer itself. The statement
      long x = *xp;
 indicates that we should read the value stored in the location designated by xp and store it as a local
 variable named x. This read operation is known as pointer dereferencing. The C operator ‘*’ performs
 pointer dereferencing.
      The statement
      *xp = y;
 does the reverse—it writes the value of parameter y at the location designated by xp. This is also a form
 of pointer dereferencing (and hence the operator *), but it indicates a write operation since it is on the
 left-hand side of the assignment.
      The following is an example of exchange in action:
      long a = 4;
      long b = exchange(&a, 3);
      printf("a = %ld, b = %ld\verb@\@n", a, b);
      This code will print
 a = 3, b = 4
     The C operator ‘&’ (called the “address of” operator) creates a pointer, in this case to the location
 holding local variable a. Function exchange overwrites the value stored in a with 3 but returns the
 previous value, 4, as the function value. Observe how by passing a pointer to exchange, it could modify
 data held at some remote location.

                         Assume that the values of sp and dp are stored in registers %rdi and %rsi,
                    respectively. For each entry in the table, show the two instructions that implement
                    the specified data movement. The first instruction in the sequence should read
                    from memory, do the appropriate conversion, and set the appropriate portion of
                    register %rax. The second instruction should then write the appropriate portion
                    of %rax to memory. In both cases, the portions may be %rax, %eax, %ax, or %al,
                    and they may differ from one another.
                         Recall that when performing a cast that involves both a size change and a
                    change of “signedness” in C, the operation should change the size first (Section
                    2.2.6).

                    src_t               dest_t               Instruction
                    long                long                 movq (%rdi), %rax
                                                             movq %rax, (%rsi)
                    char                int

char               unsigned

unsigned char      long

int                char

unsigned           unsigned char

char               short

Practice Problem 3.5 (solution page 363)
You are given the following information. A function with prototype

void decode1(long *xp, long *yp, long *zp);

is compiled into assembly code, yielding the following:

  void decode1(long *xp, long *yp, long *zp)
  xp in %rdi, yp in %rsi, zp in %rdx
decode1:
  movq      (%rdi), %r8
  movq      (%rsi), %rcx
  movq      (%rdx), %rax
  movq      %r8, (%rsi)
  movq      %rcx, (%rdx)
  movq      %rax, (%rdi)
  ret

Parameters xp, yp, and zp are stored in registers %rdi, %rsi, and %rdx, respec-
tively.
     Write C code for decode1 that will have an effect equivalent to the assembly
code shown.

3.4.4 Pushing and Popping Stack Data
The final two data movement operations are used to push data onto and pop data
from the program stack, as documented in Figure 3.8. As we will see, the stack
plays a vital role in the handling of procedure calls. By way of background, a stack
is a data structure where values can be added or deleted, but only according to
a “last-in, first-out” discipline. We add data to a stack via a push operation and
remove it via a pop operation, with the property that the value popped will always
be the value that was most recently pushed and is still on the stack. A stack can be
implemented as an array, where we always insert and remove elements from one

                    Instruction    Effect                         Description
                    pushq S        R[%rsp] ← R[%rsp] − 8;         Push quad word
                                   M[R[%rsp]] ← S
                    popq D         D ← M[R[%rsp]];                Pop quad word
                                   R[%rsp] ← R[%rsp] + 8

Figure 3.8 Push and pop instructions.

                                       Initially                pushq %rax                 popq %rdx
                                   %rax      0x123             %rax    0x123              %rax    0x123
                                   %rdx            0           %rdx           0           %rdx    0x123
                                   %rsp      0x108             %rsp    0x100              %rsp    0x108

                                    Stack “bottom”             Stack “bottom”             Stack “bottom”

                    Increasing
                     address

                           0x108                       0x108                      0x108
                                     Stack “top”                   0x123                      0x123
                                                       0x100
                                                                Stack “top”
                                                                                           Stack “top”

Figure 3.9 Illustration of stack operation. By convention, we draw stacks upside down,
                    so that the “top” of the stack is shown at the bottom. With x86-64, stacks grow toward
                    lower addresses, so pushing involves decrementing the stack pointer (register %rsp) and
                    storing to memory, while popping involves reading from memory and incrementing the
                    stack pointer.

                    end of the array. This end is called the top of the stack. With x86-64, the program
                    stack is stored in some region of memory. As illustrated in Figure 3.9, the stack
                    grows downward such that the top element of the stack has the lowest address of
                    all stack elements. (By convention, we draw stacks upside down, with the stack
                    “top” shown at the bottom of the figure.) The stack pointer %rsp holds the address
                    of the top stack element.
                         The pushq instruction provides the ability to push data onto the stack, while
                    the popq instruction pops it. Each of these instructions takes a single operand—the
                    data source for pushing and the data destination for popping.
                         Pushing a quad word value onto the stack involves first decrementing the
                    stack pointer by 8 and then writing the value at the new top-of-stack address.

Therefore, the behavior of the instruction pushq %rbp is equivalent to that of the
pair of instructions

  subq $8,%rsp                    Decrement stack pointer
  movq %rbp,(%rsp)                Store %rbp on stack

except that the pushq instruction is encoded in the machine code as a single byte,
whereas the pair of instructions shown above requires a total of 8 bytes. The first
two columns in Figure 3.9 illustrate the effect of executing the instruction pushq
%rax when %rsp is 0x108 and %rax is 0x123. First %rsp is decremented by 8, giving
0x100, and then 0x123 is stored at memory address 0x100.
     Popping a quad word involves reading from the top-of-stack location and
then incrementing the stack pointer by 8. Therefore, the instruction popq %rax
is equivalent to the following pair of instructions:

  movq (%rsp),%rax                Read %rax from stack
  addq $8,%rsp                    Increment stack pointer

     The third column of Figure 3.9 illustrates the effect of executing the instruction
popq %edx immediately after executing the pushq. Value 0x123 is read from
memory and written to register %rdx. Register %rsp is incremented back to 0x108.
As shown in the figure, the value 0x123 remains at memory location 0x104 until it
is overwritten (e.g., by another push operation). However, the stack top is always
considered to be the address indicated by %rsp.
     Since the stack is contained in the same memory as the program code and
other forms of program data, programs can access arbitrary positions within the
stack using the standard memory addressing methods. For example, assuming the
topmost element of the stack is a quad word, the instruction movq 8(%rsp),%rdx
will copy the second quad word from the stack to register %rdx.

3.5 Arithmetic and Logical Operations
Figure 3.10 lists some of the x86-64 integer and logic operations. Most of the
operations are given as instruction classes, as they can have different variants with
different operand sizes. (Only leaq has no other size variants.) For example, the
instruction class add consists of four addition instructions: addb, addw, addl, and
addq, adding bytes, words, double words, and quad words, respectively. Indeed,
each of the instruction classes shown has instructions for operating on these four
different sizes of data. The operations are divided into four groups: load effective
address, unary, binary, and shifts. Binary operations have two operands, while
unary operations have one operand. These operands are specified using the same
notation as described in Section 3.4.

3.5.1 Load Effective Address
The load effective address instruction leaq is actually a variant of the movq in-
struction. It has the form of an instruction that reads from memory to a register,

                    Instruction       Effect                 Description
                    leaq   S, D       D ← &S                 Load effective address

                    inc    D          D   ← D+1              Increment
                    dec    D          D   ← D−1              Decrement
                    neg    D          D   ← -D               Negate
                    not    D          D   ← ~D               Complement

                    add    S, D       D   ← D+S              Add
                    sub    S, D       D   ← D−S              Subtract
                    imul   S, D       D   ← D∗S              Multiply
                    xor    S, D       D   ← D^S              Exclusive-or
                    or     S, D       D   ← D|S              Or
                    and    S, D       D   ← D&S              And

                    sal    k, D       D   ← D << k           Left shift
                    shl    k, D       D   ← D << k           Left shift (same as sal)
                    sar    k, D       D   ← D >>A k          Arithmetic right shift
                    shr    k, D       D   ← D >>L k          Logical right shift

Figure 3.10 Integer arithmetic operations. The load effective address (leaq)
                    instruction is commonly used to perform simple arithmetic. The remaining ones are
                    more standard unary or binary operations. We use the notation >>A and >>L to denote
                    arithmetic and logical right shift, respectively. Note the nonintuitive ordering of the
                    operands with ATT-format assembly code.

                    but it does not reference memory at all. Its first operand appears to be a mem-
                    ory reference, but instead of reading from the designated location, the instruction
                    copies the effective address to the destination. We indicate this computation in
                    Figure 3.10 using the C address operator &S. This instruction can be used to gener-
                    ate pointers for later memory references. In addition, it can be used to compactly
                    describe common arithmetic operations. For example, if register %rdx contains
                    value x, then the instruction leaq 7(%rdx,%rdx,4), %rax will set register %rax
                    to 5x + 7. Compilers often find clever uses of leaq that have nothing to do with
                    effective address computations. The destination operand must be a register.

                    Practice Problem 3.6 (solution page 363)
                    Suppose register %rbx holds value p and %rdx holds value q. Fill in the table below
                    with formulas indicating the value that will be stored in register %rax for each of
                    the given assembly-code instructions:

                    Instruction                       Result
                    leaq 9(%rdx), %rax
                    leaq (%rdx,%rbx), %rax
                    leaq (%rdx,%rbx,3), %rax
                    leaq 2(%rbx,%rbx,7), %rax

leaq 0xE(,%rdx,3), %rax
leaq 6(%rbx,%rdx,7), %rax

    As an illustration of the use of leaq in compiled code, consider the following
C program:

long scale(long x, long y, long z) {
    long t = x + 4 * y + 12 * z;
    return t;
}

    When compiled, the arithmetic operations of the function are implemented
by a sequence of three leaq functions, as is documented by the comments on the
right-hand side:

  long scale(long x, long y, long z)
  x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
scale:
  leaq     (%rdi,%rsi,4), %rax          x + 4*y
  leaq     (%rdx,%rdx,2), %rdx          z + 2*z = 3*z
  leaq     (%rax,%rdx,4), %rax          (x+4*y) + 4*(3*z) = x + 4*y + 12*z
  ret

     The ability of the leaq instruction to perform addition and limited forms of
multiplication proves useful when compiling simple arithmetic expressions such
as this example.

Practice Problem 3.7 (solution page 364)
Consider the following code, in which we have omitted the expression being
computed:

short scale3(short x, short y, short z) {
  short t =          ;
  return t;
}

    Compiling the actual function with gcc yields the following assembly code:

  short scale3(short x, short y, short z)
  x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
scale3:
  leaq (%rsi,%rsi,9), %rbx
  leaq (%rbx,%rdx), %rbx
  leaq (%rbx,%rdi,%rsi), %rbx
  ret

    Fill in the missing expression in the C code.

                    3.5.2 Unary and Binary Operations
                    Operations in the second group are unary operations, with the single operand
                    serving as both source and destination. This operand can be either a register or
                    a memory location. For example, the instruction incq (%rsp) causes the 8-byte
                    element on the top of the stack to be incremented. This syntax is reminiscent of
                    the C increment (++) and decrement (--) operators.
                         The third group consists of binary operations, where the second operand
                    is used as both a source and a destination. This syntax is reminiscent of the C
                    assignment operators, such as x -= y. Observe, however, that the source operand
                    is given first and the destination second. This looks peculiar for noncommutative
                    operations. For example, the instruction subq %rax,%rdx decrements register
                    %rdx by the value in %rax. (It helps to read the instruction as “Subtract %rax from
                    %rdx.”) The first operand can be either an immediate value, a register, or a memory
                    location. The second can be either a register or a memory location. As with the
                    mov instructions, the two operands cannot both be memory locations. Note that
                    when the second operand is a memory location, the processor must read the value
                    from memory, perform the operation, and then write the result back to memory.

                    Practice Problem 3.8 (solution page 364)
                    Assume the following values are stored at the indicated memory addresses and
                    registers:
                    Address       Value           Register    Value
                     0x100        0xFF              %rax      0x100
                     0x108        0xAB              %rcx        0x1
                     0x110        0x13              %rdx        0x3
                     0x118        0x11

                         Fill in the following table showing the effects of the following instructions,
                    in terms of both the register or memory location that will be updated and the
                    resulting value:
                    Instruction                     Destination       Value
                    addq %rcx,(%rax)
                    subq %rdx,8(%rax)
                    imulq $16,(%rax,%rdx,8)
                    incq 16(%rax)
                    decq %rcx
                    subq %rdx,%rax

                    3.5.3 Shift Operations
                    The final group consists of shift operations, where the shift amount is given first
                    and the value to shift is given second. Both arithmetic and logical right shifts are

possible. The different shift instructions can specify the shift amount either as
an immediate value or with the single-byte register %cl. (These instructions are
unusual in only allowing this specific register as the operand.) In principle, having
a 1-byte shift amount would make it possible to encode shift amounts ranging up
to 28 − 1 = 255. With x86-64, a shift instruction operating on data values that are
w bits long determines the shift amount from the low-order m bits of register
%cl, where 2m = w. The higher-order bits are ignored. So, for example, when
register %cl has hexadecimal value 0xFF, then instruction salb would shift by
7, while salw would shift by 15, sall would shift by 31, and salq would shift
by 63.
     As Figure 3.10 indicates, there are two names for the left shift instruction: sal
and shl. Both have the same effect, filling from the right with zeros. The right
shift instructions differ in that sar performs an arithmetic shift (fill with copies of
the sign bit), whereas shr performs a logical shift (fill with zeros). The destination
operand of a shift operation can be either a register or a memory location. We
denote the two different right shift operations in Figure 3.10 as >>A (arithmetic)
and >>L (logical).

Practice Problem 3.9 (solution page 364)
Suppose we want to generate assembly code for the following C function:

long shift_left4_rightn(long x, long n)
{
    x <<= 4;
    x >>= n;
    return x;
}

    The code that follows is a portion of the assembly code that performs the
actual shifts and leaves the final value in register %rax. Two key instructions
have been omitted. Parameters x and n are stored in registers %rdi and %rsi,
respectively.

  long shift_left4_rightn(long x, long n)
  x in %rdi, n in %rsi
shift_left4_rightn:
  movq    %rdi, %rax          Get x
                              x <<= 4
  movl      %esi, %ecx        Get n (4 bytes)
                              x >>= n

    Fill in the missing instructions, following the annotations on the right. The
right shift should be performed arithmetically.

                    (a) C code
                    long arith(long x, long y, long z)
                    {
                        long t1 = x ^ y;
                        long t2 = z * 48;
                        long t3 = t1 & 0x0F0F0F0F;
                        long t4 = t2 - t3;
                        return t4;
                    }
                    (b) Assembly code
                          long arith(long x, long y, long z)
                          x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
                     1    arith:
                     2      xorq        %rsi, %rdi               t1 = x ^ y
                     3      leaq        (%rdx,%rdx,2), %rax      3*z
                     4      salq        $4, %rax                 t2 = 16 * (3*z) = 48*z
                     5      andl        $252645135, %edi         t3 = t1 & 0x0F0F0F0F
                     6      subq        %rdi, %rax               Return t2 - t3
                     7      ret
Figure 3.11 C and assembly code for arithmetic function.

                    3.5.4 Discussion
                    We see that most of the instructions shown in Figure 3.10 can be used for either
                    unsigned or two’s-complement arithmetic. Only right shifting requires instructions
                    that differentiate between signed versus unsigned data. This is one of the features
                    that makes two’s-complement arithmetic the preferred way to implement signed
                    integer arithmetic.
                         Figure 3.11 shows an example of a function that performs arithmetic opera-
                    tions and its translation into assembly code. Arguments x, y, and z are initially
                    stored in registers %rdi, %rsi, and %rdx, respectively. The assembly-code instruc-
                    tions correspond closely with the lines of C source code. Line 2 computes the value
                    of x^y. Lines 3 and 4 compute the expression z*48 by a combination of leaq and
                    shift instructions. Line 5 computes the and of t1 and 0x0F0F0F0F. The final sub-
                    traction is computed by line 6. Since the destination of the subtraction is register
                    %rax, this will be the value returned by the function.
                         In the assembly code of Figure 3.11, the sequence of values in register %rax
                    corresponds to program values 3*z, z*48, and t4 (as the return value). In general,
                    compilers generate code that uses individual registers for multiple program values
                    and moves program values among the registers.

                    Practice Problem 3.10 (solution page 365)
                    Consider the following code, in which we have omitted the expression being
                    computed:

short arith3(short x, short y, short z)
{
    short p1 =          ;
    short p2 =          ;
    short p3 =          ;
    short p4 =          ;
    return p4;
}

     The portion of the generated assembly code implementing these expressions
is as follows:

  short arith3(short x, short y, short z)
  x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
arith3:
  orq      %rsi, %rdx
  sarq     $9, %rdx
  notq     %rdx
  movq     %rdx, %bax
  subq     %rsi, %rbx
  ret

    Based on this assembly code, fill in the missing portions of the C code.

Practice Problem 3.11 (solution page 365)
It is common to find assembly-code lines of the form

xorq %rcx,%rcx

in code that was generated from C where no exclusive-or operations were
present.
 A. Explain the effect of this particular exclusive-or instruction and what useful
    operation it implements.
 B. What would be the more straightforward way to express this operation in
    assembly code?
 C. Compare the number of bytes to encode any two of these three different
    implementations of the same operation.

3.5.5 Special Arithmetic Operations
As we saw in Section 2.3, multiplying two 64-bit signed or unsigned integers can
yield a product that requires 128 bits to represent. The x86-64 instruction set
provides limited support for operations involving 128-bit (16-byte) numbers. Con-
tinuing with the naming convention of word (2 bytes), double word (4 bytes), and
quad word (8 bytes), Intel refers to a 16-byte quantity as an oct word. Figure 3.12

                    Instruction    Effect                                          Description
                    imulq   S      R[%rdx]:R[%rax] ← S × R[%rax]                   Signed full multiply
                    mulq    S      R[%rdx]:R[%rax] ← S × R[%rax]                   Unsigned full multiply

                    cqto           R[%rdx]:R[%rax] ← SignExtend(R[%rax])           Convert to oct word

                    idivq   S      R[%rdx] ← R[%rdx]:R[%rax] mod S;                Signed divide
                                   R[%rax] ← R[%rdx]:R[%rax] ÷ S

                    divq    S      R[%rdx] ← R[%rdx]:R[%rax] mod S;                Unsigned divide
                                   R[%rax] ← R[%rdx]:R[%rax] ÷ S

Figure 3.12 Special arithmetic operations. These operations provide full 128-bit
                    multiplication and division, for both signed and unsigned numbers. The pair of registers
                    %rdx and %rax are viewed as forming a single 128-bit oct word.

                    describes instructions that support generating the full 128-bit product of two 64-bit
                    numbers, as well as integer division.
                         The imulq instruction has two different forms One form, shown in Figure 3.10,
                    is as a member of the imul instruction class. In this form, it serves as a “two-
                    operand” multiply instruction, generating a 64-bit product from two 64-bit oper-
                    ands. It implements the operations *u64 and *t64 described in Sections 2.3.4 and 2.3.5.
                    (Recall that when truncating the product to 64 bits, both unsigned multiply and
                    two’s-complement multiply have the same bit-level behavior.)
                         Additionally, the x86-64 instruction set includes two different “one-operand”
                    multiply instructions to compute the full 128-bit product of two 64-bit values—
                    one for unsigned (mulq) and one for two’s-complement (imulq) multiplication.
                    For both of these instructions, one argument must be in register %rax, and the
                    other is given as the instruction source operand. The product is then stored in
                    registers %rdx (high-order 64 bits) and %rax (low-order 64 bits). Although the
                    name imulq is used for two distinct multiplication operations, the assembler can
                    tell which one is intended by counting the number of operands.
                         As an example, the following C code demonstrates the generation of a 128-bit
                    product of two unsigned 64-bit numbers x and y:

                    #include <inttypes.h>

                    typedef unsigned __int128 uint128_t;

                    void store_uprod(uint128_t *dest, uint64_t x, uint64_t y) {
                        *dest = x * (uint128_t) y;
                    }

                         In this program, we explicitly declare x and y to be 64-bit numbers, using defi-
                    nitions declared in the file inttypes.h , as part of an extension of the C standard.
                    Unfortunately, this standard does not make provisions for 128-bit values. Instead,

we rely on support provided by gcc for 128-bit integers, declared using the name
__int128. Our code uses a typedef declaration to define data type uint128_t,
following the naming pattern for other data types found in inttypes.h. The code
specifies that the resulting product should be stored at the 16 bytes designated by
pointer dest.
     The assembly code generated by gcc for this function is as follows:

      void store_uprod(uint128_t *dest, uint64_t x, uint64_t y)
      dest in %rdi, x in %rsi, y in %rdx
 1     store_uprod:
 2       movq    %rsi, %rax                   Copy x to multiplicand
 3       mulq    %rdx                         Multiply by y
 4       movq    %rax, (%rdi)                 Store lower 8 bytes at dest
 5       movq    %rdx, 8(%rdi)                Store upper 8 bytes at dest+8
 6       ret

     Observe that storing the product requires two movq instructions: one for the
low-order 8 bytes (line 4), and one for the high-order 8 bytes (line 5). Since the
code is generated for a little-endian machine, the high-order bytes are stored at
higher addresses, as indicated by the address specification 8(%rdi).
     Our earlier table of arithmetic operations (Figure 3.10) does not list any
division or modulus operations. These operations are provided by the single-
operand divide instructions similar to the single-operand multiply instructions.
The signed division instruction idivl takes as its dividend the 128-bit quantity
in registers %rdx (high-order 64 bits) and %rax (low-order 64 bits). The divisor is
given as the instruction operand. The instruction stores the quotient in register
%rax and the remainder in register %rdx.
     For most applications of 64-bit addition, the dividend is given as a 64-bit value.
This value should be stored in register %rax. The bits of %rdx should then be set to
either all zeros (unsigned arithmetic) or the sign bit of %rax (signed arithmetic).
The latter operation can be performed using the instruction cqto.2 This instruction
takes no operands—it implicitly reads the sign bit from %rax and copies it across
all of %rdx.
     As an illustration of the implementation of division with x86-64, the following
C function computes the quotient and remainder of two 64-bit, signed numbers:

void remdiv(long x, long y,
             long *qp, long *rp) {
    long q = x/y;
    long r = x%y;
    *qp = q;
    *rp = r;
}

2. This instruction is called cqo in the Intel documentation, one of the few cases where the ATT-format
name for an instruction does not match the Intel name.

                         This compiles to the following assembly code:
                          void remdiv(long x, long y, long *qp, long *rp)
                          x in %rdi, y in %rsi, qp in %rdx, rp in %rcx
                     1    remdiv:
                     2      movq      %rdx, %r8              Copy qp
                     3      movq      %rdi, %rax             Move x to lower 8 bytes of dividend
                     4      cqto                             Sign-extend to upper 8 bytes of dividend
                     5      idivq     %rsi                   Divide by y
                     6      movq      %rax, (%r8)            Store quotient at qp
                     7      movq      %rdx, (%rcx)           Store remainder at rp
                     8      ret

                         In this code, argument rp must first be saved in a different register (line 2),
                    since argument register %rdx is required for the division operation. Lines 3–4 then
                    prepare the dividend by copying and sign-extending x. Following the division, the
                    quotient in register %rax gets stored at qp (line 6), while the remainder in register
                    %rdx gets stored at rp (line 7).
                         Unsigned division makes use of the divq instruction. Typically, register %rdx
                    is set to zero beforehand.

                    Practice Problem 3.12 (solution page 365)
                    Consider the following function for computing the quotient and remainder of two
                    unsigned 64-bit numbers:
                    void uremdiv(unsigned long x, unsigned long y,
                                 unsigned long *qp, unsigned long *rp) {
                        unsigned long q = x/y;
                        unsigned long r = x%y;
                        *qp = q;
                        *rp = r;
                    }

                    Modify the assembly code shown for signed division to implement this function.

                    3.6     Control
                    So far, we have only considered the behavior of straight-line code, where instruc-
                    tions follow one another in sequence. Some constructs in C, such as conditionals,
                    loops, and switches, require conditional execution, where the sequence of oper-
                    ations that get performed depends on the outcomes of tests applied to the data.
                    Machine code provides two basic low-level mechanisms for implementing condi-
                    tional behavior: it tests data values and then alters either the control flow or the
                    data flow based on the results of these tests.
                         Data-dependent control flow is the more general and more common approach
                    for implementing conditional behavior, and so we will examine this first. Normally,

both statements in C and instructions in machine code are executed sequentially,
in the order they appear in the program. The execution order of a set of machine-
code instructions can be altered with a jump instruction, indicating that control
should pass to some other part of the program, possibly contingent on the result
of some test. The compiler must generate instruction sequences that build upon
this low-level mechanism to implement the control constructs of C.
     In our presentation, we first cover the two ways of implementing conditional
operations. We then describe methods for presenting loops and switch state-
ments.

3.6.1 Condition Codes
In addition to the integer registers, the CPU maintains a set of single-bit condition
code registers describing attributes of the most recent arithmetic or logical oper-
ation. These registers can then be tested to perform conditional branches. These
condition codes are the most useful:

     CF: Carry flag. The most recent operation generated a carry out of the most
          significant bit. Used to detect overflow for unsigned operations.
     ZF: Zero flag. The most recent operation yielded zero.
     SF: Sign flag. The most recent operation yielded a negative value.
     OF: Overflow flag. The most recent operation caused a two’s-complement
          overflow—either negative or positive.

    For example, suppose we used one of the add instructions to perform the
equivalent of the C assignment t = a+b, where variables a, b, and t are integers.
Then the condition codes would be set according to the following C expressions:

CF       (unsigned) t < (unsigned) a              Unsigned overflow
ZF       (t == 0)                                 Zero
SF       (t < 0)                                  Negative
OF       (a < 0 == b < 0) && (t < 0 != a < 0)     Signed overflow

    The leaq instruction does not alter any condition codes, since it is intended
to be used in address computations. Otherwise, all of the instructions listed in
Figure 3.10 cause the condition codes to be set. For the logical operations, such
as xor, the carry and overflow flags are set to zero. For the shift operations, the
carry flag is set to the last bit shifted out, while the overflow flag is set to zero. For
reasons that we will not delve into, the inc and dec instructions set the overflow
and zero flags, but they leave the carry flag unchanged.
    In addition to the setting of condition codes by the instructions of Figure 3.10,
there are two instruction classes (having 8-, 16-, 32-, and 64-bit forms) that set
condition codes without altering any other registers; these are listed in Figure 3.13.
The cmp instructions set the condition codes according to the differences of their
two operands. They behave in the same way as the sub instructions, except that
they set the condition codes without updating their destinations. With ATT format,

                    Instruction          Based on     Description
                    cmp        S1, S2    S2 − S1      Compare
                      cmpb                            Compare byte
                      cmpw                            Compare word
                      cmpl                            Compare double word
                      cmpq                            Compare quad word

                    test       S1, S2    S1 & S2      Test
                      testb                           Test byte
                      testw                           Test word
                      testl                           Test double word
                      testq                           Test quad word

Figure 3.13 Comparison and test instructions. These instructions set the condition
                    codes without updating any other registers.

                    the operands are listed in reverse order, making the code difficult to read. These
                    instructions set the zero flag if the two operands are equal. The other flags can
                    be used to determine ordering relations between the two operands. The test
                    instructions behave in the same manner as the and instructions, except that they
                    set the condition codes without altering their destinations. Typically, the same
                    operand is repeated (e.g., testq %rax,%rax to see whether %rax is negative, zero,
                    or positive), or one of the operands is a mask indicating which bits should be tested.

                    3.6.2 Accessing the Condition Codes
                    Rather than reading the condition codes directly, there are three common ways
                    of using the condition codes: (1) we can set a single byte to 0 or 1 depending
                    on some combination of the condition codes, (2) we can conditionally jump to
                    some other part of the program, or (3) we can conditionally transfer data. For the
                    first case, the instructions described in Figure 3.14 set a single byte to 0 or to 1
                    depending on some combination of the condition codes. We refer to this entire
                    class of instructions as the set instructions; they differ from one another based on
                    which combinations of condition codes they consider, as indicated by the different
                    suffixes for the instruction names. It is important to recognize that the suffixes for
                    these instructions denote different conditions and not different operand sizes. For
                    example, instructions setl and setb denote “set less” and “set below,” not “set
                    long word” or “set byte.”
                         A set instruction has either one of the low-order single-byte register elements
                    (Figure 3.2) or a single-byte memory location as its destination, setting this byte to
                    either 0 or 1. To generate a 32-bit or 64-bit result, we must also clear the high-order
                    bits. A typical instruction sequence to compute the C expression a < b, where a
                    and b are both of type long, proceeds as follows:

Instruction    Synonym       Effect                        Set condition
sete D         setz          D ← ZF                        Equal / zero
setne D        setnz         D ← ~ ZF                      Not equal / not zero

sets D                       D ← SF                        Negative
setns D                      D ← ~ SF                      Nonnegative

setg    D      setnle        D   ← ~ (SF ^ OF) & ~ZF       Greater (signed >)
setge   D      setnl         D   ← ~ (SF ^ OF)             Greater or equal (signed >=)
setl    D      setnge        D   ← SF ^ OF                 Less (signed <)
setle   D      setng         D   ← (SF ^ OF) | ZF          Less or equal (signed <=)

seta    D      setnbe        D   ← ~ CF & ~ZF              Above (unsigned >)
setae   D      setnb         D   ← ~ CF                    Above or equal (unsigned >=)
setb    D      setnae        D   ← CF                      Below (unsigned <)
setbe   D      setna         D   ← CF | ZF                 Below or equal (unsigned <=)

Figure 3.14 The set instructions. Each instruction sets a single byte to 0 or 1 based on
some combination of the condition codes. Some instructions have “synonyms,” that is,
alternate names for the same machine instruction.

     int comp(data_t a, data_t b)
     a in %rdi, b in %rsi
 1    comp:
 2      cmpq      %rsi, %rdi          Compare a:b
 3      setl      %al                 Set low-order byte of %eax to 0 or 1
 4      movzbl    %al, %eax           Clear rest of %eax (and rest of %rax)
 5      ret

     Note the comparison order of the cmpq instruction (line 2). Although the
arguments are listed in the order %rsi (b), then %rdi (a), the comparison is
really between a and b. Recall also, as discussed in Section 3.4.2, that the movzbl
instruction (line 4) clears not just the high-order 3 bytes of %eax, but the upper 4
bytes of the entire register, %rax, as well.
     For some of the underlying machine instructions, there are multiple possible
names, which we list as “synonyms.” For example, both setg (for “set greater”)
and setnle (for “set not less or equal”) refer to the same machine instruction.
Compilers and disassemblers make arbitrary choices of which names to use.
     Although all arithmetic and logical operations set the condition codes, the de-
scriptions of the different set instructions apply to the case where a comparison
instruction has been executed, setting the condition codes according to the com-
putation t = a-b. More specifically, let a, b, and t be the integers represented in
two’s-complement form by variables a, b, and t, respectively, and so t = a -tw b,
where w depends on the sizes associated with a and b.

                         Consider the sete, or “set when equal,” instruction. When a = b, we will
                    have t = 0, and hence the zero flag indicates equality. Similarly, consider testing
                    for signed comparison with the setl, or “set when less,” instruction. When no
                    overflow occurs (indicated by having OF set to 0), we will have a < b when a -tw b <
                    0, indicated by having SF set to 1, and a ≥ b when a -tw b ≥ 0, indicated by having
                    SF set to 0. On the other hand, when overflow occurs, we will have a < b when
                    a -tw b > 0 (negative overflow) and a > b when a -tw b < 0 (positive overflow). We
                    cannot have overflow when a = b. Thus, when OF is set to 1, we will have a < b if
                    and only if SF is set to 0. Combining these cases, the exclusive-or of the overflow
                    and sign bits provides a test for whether a < b. The other signed comparison tests
                    are based on other combinations of SF ^ OF and ZF.
                         For the testing of unsigned comparisons, we now let a and b be the integers
                    represented in unsigned form by variables a and b. In performing the computation
                    t = a-b, the carry flag will be set by the cmp instruction when a − b < 0, and so the
                    unsigned comparisons use combinations of the carry and zero flags.
                         It is important to note how machine code does or does not distinguish be-
                    tween signed and unsigned values. Unlike in C, it does not associate a data type
                    with each program value. Instead, it mostly uses the same instructions for the two
                    cases, because many arithmetic operations have the same bit-level behavior for
                    unsigned and two’s-complement arithmetic. Some circumstances require different
                    instructions to handle signed and unsigned operations, such as using differ-
                    ent versions of right shifts, division and multiplication instructions, and different
                    combinations of condition codes.

                    Practice Problem 3.13 (solution page 366)
                    The C code

                    int comp(data_t a, data_t b) {
                        return a COMP b;
                    }

                    shows a general comparison between arguments a and b, where data_t, the data
                    type of the arguments, is defined (via typedef) to be one of the integer data types
                    listed in Figure 3.1 and either signed or unsigned. The comparison COMP is defined
                    via #define.
                         Suppose a is in some portion of %rdx while b is in some portion of %rsi. For
                    each of the following instruction sequences, determine which data types data_t
                    and which comparisons COMP could cause the compiler to generate this code.
                    (There can be multiple correct answers; you should list them all.)
                      A.    cmpl      %esi, %edi
                            setl      %al

                      B.    cmpw      %si, %di
                            setge     %al

 C.    cmpb     %sil, %dil
       setbe     %al

 D.    cmpq     %rsi, %rdi
       setne    %a

Practice Problem 3.14 (solution page 366)
The C code
int test(data_t a) {
    return a TEST 0;
}

shows a general comparison between argument a and 0, where we can set the
data type of the argument by declaring data_t with a typedef, and the nature
of the comparison by declaring TEST with a #define declaration. The following
instruction sequences implement the comparison, where a is held in some portion
of register %rdi. For each sequence, determine which data types data_t and which
comparisons TEST could cause the compiler to generate this code. (There can be
multiple correct answers; list all correct ones.)
 A.    testq   %rdi, %rdi
       setge   %al

 B.    testw    %di, %di
       sete     %al

 C.    testb      %dil, %dil
       seta       %al

 D.    testl      %edi, %edi
       setle      %al

3.6.3 Jump Instructions
Under normal execution, instructions follow each other in the order they are
listed. A jump instruction can cause the execution to switch to a completely
new position in the program. These jump destinations are generally indicated in
assembly code by a label. Consider the following (very contrived) assembly-code
sequence:
  movq $0,%rax                 Set %rax to 0
  jmp .L1                      Goto .L1
  movq (%rax),%rdx             Null pointer dereference (skipped)
.L1:
  popq %rdx                    Jump target

                    Instruction          Synonym      Jump condition     Description
                    jmp   Label                       1                  Direct jump
                    jmp   *Operand                    1                  Indirect jump

                    je    Label          jz           ZF                 Equal / zero

                    jne   Label          jnz          ~ZF                Not equal / not zero

                    js    Label                       SF                 Negative
                    jns   Label                       ~SF                Nonnegative

                    jg    Label          jnle         ~(SF ^ OF) & ~ZF   Greater (signed >)
                    jge   Label          jnl          ~(SF ^ OF)         Greater or equal (signed >=)
                    jl    Label          jnge         SF ^ OF            Less (signed <)
                    jle   Label          jng          (SF ^ OF) | ZF     Less or equal (signed <=)

                    ja    Label          jnbe         ~CF & ~ZF          Above (unsigned >)
                    jae   Label          jnb          ~CF                Above or equal (unsigned >=)
                    jb    Label          jnae         CF                 Below (unsigned <)
                    jbe   Label          jna          CF | ZF            Below or equal (unsigned <=)

Figure 3.15 The jump instructions. These instructions jump to a labeled destination
                    when the jump condition holds. Some instructions have “synonyms,” alternate names
                    for the same machine instruction.

                        The instruction jmp .L1 will cause the program to skip over the movq instruc-
                    tion and instead resume execution with the popq instruction. In generating the
                    object-code file, the assembler determines the addresses of all labeled instruc-
                    tions and encodes the jump targets (the addresses of the destination instructions)
                    as part of the jump instructions.
                        Figure 3.15 shows the different jump instructions. The jmp instruction jumps
                    unconditionally. It can be either a direct jump, where the jump target is encoded
                    as part of the instruction, or an indirect jump, where the jump target is read from
                    a register or a memory location. Direct jumps are written in assembly code by
                    giving a label as the jump target, for example, the label .L1 in the code shown.
                    Indirect jumps are written using ‘*’ followed by an operand specifier using one of
                    the memory operand formats described in Figure 3.3. As examples, the instruction
                    jmp *%rax

                    uses the value in register %rax as the jump target, and the instruction
                    jmp *(%rax)

                    reads the jump target from memory, using the value in %rax as the read address.
                        The remaining jump instructions in the table are conditional—they either
                    jump or continue executing at the next instruction in the code sequence, depending
                    on some combination of the condition codes. The names of these instructions

and the conditions under which they jump match those of the set instructions
(see Figure 3.14). As with the set instructions, some of the underlying machine
instructions have multiple names. Conditional jumps can only be direct.

3.6.4 Jump Instruction Encodings
For the most part, we will not concern ourselves with the detailed format of ma-
chine code. On the other hand, understanding how the targets of jump instructions
are encoded will become important when we study linking in Chapter 7. In ad-
dition, it helps when interpreting the output of a disassembler. In assembly code,
jump targets are written using symbolic labels. The assembler, and later the linker,
generate the proper encodings of the jump targets. There are several different en-
codings for jumps, but some of the most commonly used ones are PC relative. That
is, they encode the difference between the address of the target instruction and
the address of the instruction immediately following the jump. These offsets can
be encoded using 1, 2, or 4 bytes. A second encoding method is to give an “abso-
lute” address, using 4 bytes to directly specify the target. The assembler and linker
select the appropriate encodings of the jump destinations.
      As an example of PC-relative addressing, the following assembly code for a
function was generated by compiling a file branch.c. It contains two jumps: the
jmp instruction on line 2 jumps forward to a higher address, while the jg instruction
on line 7 jumps back to a lower one.

1      movq     %rdi, %rax
2      jmp      .L2
3    .L3:
4      sarq     %rax
5    .L2:
6      testq    %rax, %rax
7      jg       .L3
8      rep; ret

     The disassembled version of the .o format generated by the assembler is as
follows:

1        0:    48 89 f8                      mov    %rdi,%rax
2        3:    eb 03                         jmp    8 <loop+0x8>
3        5:    48 d1 f8                      sar    %rax
4        8:    48 85 c0                      test   %rax,%rax
5        b:    7f f8                         jg     5 <loop+0x5>
6        d:    f3 c3                         repz retq

     In the annotations on the right generated by the disassembler, the jump targets
are indicated as 0x8 for the jump instruction on line 2 and 0x5 for the jump
instruction on line 5 (the disassembler lists all numbers in hexadecimal). Looking
at the byte encodings of the instructions, however, we see that the target of the first
jump instruction is encoded (in the second byte) as 0x03. Adding this to 0x5, the

 Aside     What do the instructions rep and repz do?
 Line 8 of the assembly code shown on page 243 contains the instruction combination rep; ret. These
 are rendered in the disassembled code (line 6) as repz retq. One can infer that repz is a synonym
 for rep, just as retq is a synonym for ret. Looking at the Intel and AMD documentation for the
 rep instruction, we find that it is normally used to implement a repeating string operation [3, 51]. It
 seems completely inappropriate here. The answer to this puzzle can be seen in AMD’s guidelines to
 compiler writers [1]. They recommend using the combination of rep followed by ret to avoid making
 the ret instruction the destination of a conditional jump instruction. Without the rep instruction, the
 jg instruction (line 7 of the assembly code) would proceed to the ret instruction when the branch is not
 taken. According to AMD, their processors cannot properly predict the destination of a ret instruction
 when it is reached from a jump instruction. The rep instruction serves as a form of no-operation here,
 and so inserting it as the jump destination does not change behavior of the code, except to make it
 faster on AMD processors. We can safely ignore any rep or repz instruction we see in the rest of the
 code presented in this book.

                    address of the following instruction, we get jump target address 0x8, the address
                    of the instruction on line 4.
                         Similarly, the target of the second jump instruction is encoded as 0xf8 (deci-
                    mal −8) using a single-byte two’s-complement representation. Adding this to 0xd
                    (decimal 13), the address of the instruction on line 6, we get 0x5, the address of
                    the instruction on line 3.
                         As these examples illustrate, the value of the program counter when perform-
                    ing PC-relative addressing is the address of the instruction following the jump, not
                    that of the jump itself. This convention dates back to early implementations, when
                    the processor would update the program counter as its first step in executing an
                    instruction.
                         The following shows the disassembled version of the program after linking:

                     1      4004d0:    48 89 f8                      mov    %rdi,%rax
                     2      4004d3:    eb 03                         jmp    4004d8 <loop+0x8>
                     3      4004d5:    48 d1 f8                      sar    %rax
                     4      4004d8:    48 85 c0                      test   %rax,%rax
                     5      4004db:    7f f8                         jg     4004d5 <loop+0x5>
                     6      4004dd:    f3 c3                         repz retq

                    The instructions have been relocated to different addresses, but the encodings
                    of the jump targets in lines 2 and 5 remain unchanged. By using a PC-relative
                    encoding of the jump targets, the instructions can be compactly encoded (requiring
                    just 2 bytes), and the object code can be shifted to different positions in memory
                    without alteration.

Practice Problem 3.15 (solution page 366)
In the following excerpts from a disassembled binary, some of the information has
been replaced by X’s. Answer the following questions about these instructions.
  A. What is the target of the je instruction below? (You do not need to know
     anything about the callq instruction here.)

          4003fa: 74 02                                je        XXXXXX
          4003fc: ff d0                                callq     *%rax

  B. What is the target of the je instruction below?

          40042f: 74 f4                                je        XXXXXX
          400431: 5d                                   pop       %rbp

  C. What is the address of the ja and pop instructions?

          XXXXXX: 77 02                                ja        400547
          XXXXXX: 5d                                   pop       %rbp

  D. In the code that follows, the jump target is encoded in PC-relative form as a 4-
     byte two’s-complement number. The bytes are listed from least significant to
     most, reflecting the little-endian byte ordering of x86-64. What is the address
     of the jump target?

          4005e8: e9 73 ff ff ff                       jmpq      XXXXXXX
          4005ed: 90                                   nop

    The jump instructions provide a means to implement conditional execution
(if), as well as several different loop constructs.

3.6.5 Implementing Conditional Branches with Conditional Control
The most general way to translate conditional expressions and statements from
C into machine code is to use combinations of conditional and unconditional
jumps. (As an alternative, we will see in Section 3.6.6 that some conditionals
can be implemented by conditional transfers of data rather than control.) For
example, Figure 3.16(a) shows the C code for a function that computes the absolute
value of the difference of two numbers.3 The function also has a side effect of
incrementing one of two counters, encoded as global variables lt_cnt and ge_
cnt. Gcc generates the assembly code shown as Figure 3.16(c). Our rendition of
the machine code into C is shown as the function gotodiff_se (Figure 3.16(b)).
It uses the goto statement in C, which is similar to the unconditional jump of

3. Actually, it can return a negative value if one of the subtractions overflows. Our interest here is to
demonstrate machine code, not to implement robust code.

                    (a) Original C code                      (b) Equivalent goto version
                    long lt_cnt = 0;                          1     long gotodiff_se(long x, long y)
                    long ge_cnt = 0;                          2     {
                                                              3          long result;
                    long absdiff_se(long x, long y)           4          if (x >= y)
                    {                                         5              goto x_ge_y;
                        long result;                          6          lt_cnt++;
                        if (x < y) {                          7          result = y - x;
                            lt_cnt++;                         8          return result;
                            result = y - x;                   9       x_ge_y:
                        }                                    10          ge_cnt++;
                        else {                               11          result = x - y;
                            ge_cnt++;                        12          return result;
                            result = x - y;                  13     }
                        }
                        return result;
                    }

                    (c) Generated assembly code
                          long absdiff_se(long x, long y)
                          x in %rdi, y in %rsi
                     1    absdiff_se:
                     2      cmpq    %rsi, %rdi                    Compare x:y
                     3      jge     .L2                           If >= goto x_ge_y
                     4      addq    $1, lt_cnt(%rip)              lt_cnt++
                     5      movq    %rsi, %rax
                     6      subq    %rdi, %rax                 result = y - x
                     7      ret                                Return
                     8    .L2:                               x_ge_y:
                     9      addq    $1, ge_cnt(%rip)           ge_cnt++
                    10      movq    %rdi, %rax
                    11      subq    %rsi, %rax                    result = x - y
                    12      ret                                   Return

Figure 3.16 Compilation of conditional statements. (a) C procedure absdiff_se
                    contains an if-else statement. The generated assembly code is shown (c), along with
                    (b) a C procedure gotodiff_se that mimics the control flow of the assembly code.

                    assembly code. Using goto statements is generally considered a bad programming
                    style, since their use can make code very difficult to read and debug. We use them
                    in our presentation as a way to construct C programs that describe the control
                    flow of machine code. We call this style of programming “goto code.”
                         In the goto code (Figure 3.16(b)), the statement goto x_ge_y on line 5 causes
                    a jump to the label x_ge_y (since it occurs when x ≥ y) on line 9. Continuing the

 Aside     Describing machine code with C code
 Figure 3.16 shows an example of how we will demonstrate the translation of C language control
 constructs into machine code. The figure contains an example C function (a) and an annotated version
 of the assembly code generated by gcc (c). It also contains a version in C that closely matches the
 structure of the assembly code (b). Although these versions were generated in the sequence (a), (c),
 and (b), we recommend that you read them in the order (a), (b), and then (c). That is, the C rendition
 of the machine code will help you understand the key points, and this can guide you in understanding
 the actual assembly code.

execution from this point, it completes the computations specified by the else
portion of function absdiff_se and returns. On the other hand, if the test x >= y
fails, the program procedure will carry out the steps specified by the if portion of
absdiff_se and return.
     The assembly-code implementation (Figure 3.16(c)) first compares the two
operands (line 2), setting the condition codes. If the comparison result indicates
that x is greater than or equal to y, it then jumps to a block of code starting at
line 8 that increments global variable ge_cnt, computes x-y as the return value,
and returns. Otherwise, it continues with the execution of code beginning at line
4 that increments global variable lt_cnt, computes y-x as the return value, and
returns. We can see, then, that the control flow of the assembly code generated for
absdiff_se closely follows the goto code of gotodiff_se.
     The general form of an if-else statement in C is given by the template

if (test-expr)
     then-statement
else
     else-statement

where test-expr is an integer expression that evaluates either to zero (interpreted
as meaning “false”) or to a nonzero value (interpreted as meaning “true”). Only
one of the two branch statements (then-statement or else-statement) is executed.
     For this general form, the assembly implementation typically adheres to the
following form, where we use C syntax to describe the control flow:

    t = test-expr;
    if (!t)
          goto false;
    then-statement
    goto done;
false:
    else-statement
done:

                    That is, the compiler generates separate blocks of code for then-statement and
                    else-statement. It inserts conditional and unconditional branches to make sure the
                    correct block is executed.

                    Practice Problem 3.16 (solution page 367)
                    When given the C code

                    void cond(short a, short *p)
                    {
                        if (a && *p < a)
                            *p = a;
                    }

                    gcc generates the following assembly code:

                      void cond(short a, short *p)
                      a in %rdi, p in %rsi
                    cond:
                      testq    %rdi, %rdi
                      je       .L1
                      cmpq     %rsi, (%rdi)
                      jle      .L1
                      movq     %rdi, (%rsi)
                    .L1:
                      rep; ret

                      A. Write a goto version in C that performs the same computation and mimics
                         the control flow of the assembly code, in the style shown in Figure 3.16(b).
                         You might find it helpful to first annotate the assembly code as we have done
                         in our examples.
                      B. Explain why the assembly code contains two conditional branches, even
                         though the C code has only one if statement.

                    Practice Problem 3.17 (solution page 367)
                    An alternate rule for translating if statements into goto code is as follows:

                        t = test-expr;
                        if (t)
                              goto true;
                        else-statement
                        goto done;
                    true:
                        then-statement
                    done:

 A. Rewrite the goto version of absdiff_se based on this alternate rule.
 B. Can you think of any reasons for choosing one rule over the other?

Practice Problem 3.18 (solution page 368)
Starting with C code of the form

short test(short x, short y, short z) {
    short val =             ;
    if (          ) {
        if (          )
            val =             ;
        else
            val =             ;
    } else if (           )
        val =           ;
    return val;
}

gcc generates the following assembly code:

 short test(short x, short y, short z)
 x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
test:
  leaq     (%rdx,%rsi), %rax
  subq     %rdi, %rax
  cmpq     $5, %rdx
  jle      .L2
  cmpq     $2, %rsi
  jle      .L3
  movq     %rdi, %rax
  idivq    %rdx, %rax
  ret
.L3:
  movq     %rdi, %rax
  idivq    %rsi, %rax
  ret
.L2:
  cmpq     $3, %rdx
  jge      .L4
  movq     %rdx, %rax
  idivq    %rsi, %rax
.L4:
  rep; ret

    Fill in the missing expressions in the C code.

                      3.6.6 Implementing Conditional Branches with Conditional Moves
                      The conventional way to implement conditional operations is through a condi-
                      tional transfer of control, where the program follows one execution path when
                      a condition holds and another when it does not. This mechanism is simple and
                      general, but it can be very inefficient on modern processors.
                           An alternate strategy is through a conditional transfer of data. This approach
                      computes both outcomes of a conditional operation and then selects one based on
                      whether or not the condition holds. This strategy makes sense only in restricted
                      cases, but it can then be implemented by a simple conditional move instruction
                      that is better matched to the performance characteristics of modern processors.
                      Here, we examine this strategy and its implementation with x86-64.
                           Figure 3.17(a) shows an example of code that can be compiled using a condi-
                      tional move. The function computes the absolute value of its arguments x and y,
                      as did our earlier example (Figure 3.16). Whereas the earlier example had side ef-
                      fects in the branches, modifying the value of either lt_cnt or ge_cnt, this version
                      simply computes the value to be returned by the function.

(a) Original C code                             (b) Implementation using conditional assignment

long absdiff(long x, long y)                     1    long cmovdiff(long x, long y)
{                                                2    {
    long result;                                 3        long rval = y-x;
    if (x < y)                                   4        long eval = x-y;
         result = y - x;                         5        long ntest = x >= y;
    else                                         6        /* Line below requires
         result = x - y;                         7           single instruction: */
    return result;                               8        if (ntest) rval = eval;
}                                                9        return rval;
                                                10    }

(c) Generated assembly code
      long absdiff(long x, long y)
      x in %rdi, y in %rsi
1     absdiff:
2       movq       %rsi, %rax
3       subq       %rdi, %rax          rval = y-x
4       movq       %rdi, %rdx
5       subq       %rsi, %rdx          eval = x-y
6       cmpq       %rsi, %rdi          Compare x:y
7       cmovge     %rdx, %rax          If >=, rval = eval
8       ret                            Return tval

Figure 3.17 Compilation of conditional statements using conditional assignment. (a) C function
absdiff contains a conditional expression. The generated assembly code is shown (c), along with (b) a
C function cmovdiff that mimics the operation of the assembly code.

      For this function, gcc generates the assembly code shown in Figure 3.17(c),
having an approximate form shown by the C function cmovdiff shown in Figure
3.17(b). Studying the C version, we can see that it computes both y-x and x-y,
naming these rval and eval, respectively. It then tests whether x is greater than
or equal to y, and if so, copies eval to rval before returning rval. The assembly
code in Figure 3.17(c) follows the same logic. The key is that the single cmovge
instruction (line 7) of the assembly code implements the conditional assignment
(line 8) of cmovdiff. It will transfer the data from the source register to the
destination, only if the cmpq instruction of line 6 indicates that one value is greater
than or equal to the other (as indicated by the suffix ge).
      To understand why code based on conditional data transfers can outperform
code based on conditional control transfers (as in Figure 3.16), we must understand
something about how modern processors operate. As we will see in Chapters 4
and 5, processors achieve high performance through pipelining, where an instruc-
tion is processed via a sequence of stages, each performing one small portion of
the required operations (e.g., fetching the instruction from memory, determining
the instruction type, reading from memory, performing an arithmetic operation,
writing to memory, and updating the program counter). This approach achieves
high performance by overlapping the steps of the successive instructions, such
as fetching one instruction while performing the arithmetic operations for a pre-
vious instruction. To do this requires being able to determine the sequence of
instructions to be executed well ahead of time in order to keep the pipeline full of
instructions to be executed. When the machine encounters a conditional jump (re-
ferred to as a “branch”), it cannot determine which way the branch will go until it
has evaluated the branch condition. Processors employ sophisticated branch pre-
diction logic to try to guess whether or not each jump instruction will be followed.
As long as it can guess reliably (modern microprocessor designs try to achieve
success rates on the order of 90%), the instruction pipeline will be kept full of
instructions. Mispredicting a jump, on the other hand, requires that the processor
discard much of the work it has already done on future instructions and then begin
filling the pipeline with instructions starting at the correct location. As we will see,
such a misprediction can incur a serious penalty, say, 15–30 clock cycles of wasted
effort, causing a serious degradation of program performance.
      As an example, we ran timings of the absdiff function on an Intel Haswell
processor using both methods of implementing the conditional operation. In a
typical application, the outcome of the test x < y is highly unpredictable, and
so even the most sophisticated branch prediction hardware will guess correctly
only around 50% of the time. In addition, the computations performed in each
of the two code sequences require only a single clock cycle. As a consequence,
the branch misprediction penalty dominates the performance of this function. For
x86-64 code with conditional jumps, we found that the function requires around 8
clock cycles per call when the branching pattern is easily predictable, and around
17.50 clock cycles per call when the branching pattern is random. From this, we can
infer that the branch misprediction penalty is around 19 clock cycles. That means
time required by the function ranges between around 8 and 27 cycles, depending
on whether or not the branch is predicted correctly.

 Aside     How did you determine this penalty?
 Assume the probability of misprediction is p, the time to execute the code without misprediction is
 TOK , and the misprediction penalty is TMP . Then the average time to execute the code as a function of
 p is Tavg (p) = (1 − p)TOK + p(TOK + TMP ) = TOK + pTMP . We are given TOK and Tran , the average time
 when p = 0.5, and we want to determine TMP . Substituting into the equation, we get Tran = Tavg (0.5) =
 TOK + 0.5TMP , and therefore TMP = 2(Tran − TOK ). So, for TOK = 8 and Tran = 17.5, we get TMP = 19.

                        On the other hand, the code compiled using conditional moves requires
                    around 8 clock cycles regardless of the data being tested. The flow of control
                    does not depend on data, and this makes it easier for the processor to keep its
                    pipeline full.

                    Practice Problem 3.19 (solution page 368)
                    Running on a new processor model, our code required around 45 cycles when the
                    branching pattern was random, and around 25 cycles when the pattern was highly
                    predictable.
                      A. What is the approximate miss penalty?
                      B. How many cycles would the function require when the branch is mispre-
                         dicted?

                         Figure 3.18 illustrates some of the conditional move instructions available with
                    x86-64. Each of these instructions has two operands: a source register or memory
                    location S, and a destination register R. As with the different set (Section 3.6.2)
                    and jump (Section 3.6.3) instructions, the outcome of these instructions depends
                    on the values of the condition codes. The source value is read from either memory
                    or the source register, but it is copied to the destination only if the specified
                    condition holds.
                         The source and destination values can be 16, 32, or 64 bits long. Single-
                    byte conditional moves are not supported. Unlike the unconditional instructions,
                    where the operand length is explicitly encoded in the instruction name (e.g., movw
                    and movl), the assembler can infer the operand length of a conditional move
                    instruction from the name of the destination register, and so the same instruction
                    name can be used for all operand lengths.
                         Unlike conditional jumps, the processor can execute conditional move in-
                    structions without having to predict the outcome of the test. The processor simply
                    reads the source value (possibly from memory), checks the condition code, and
                    then either updates the destination register or keeps it the same. We will explore
                    the implementation of conditional moves in Chapter 4.
                         To understand how conditional operations can be implemented via condi-
                    tional data transfers, consider the following general form of conditional expression
                    and assignment:

Instruction      Synonym      Move condition      Description
cmove    S, R    cmovz        ZF                  Equal / zero
cmovne   S, R    cmovnz       ~ZF                 Not equal / not zero

cmovs    S, R                 SF                  Negative
cmovns   S, R                 ~SF                 Nonnegative

cmovg    S, R    cmovnle      ~(SF ^ OF) & ~ZF    Greater (signed >)
cmovge   S, R    cmovnl       ~(SF ^ OF)          Greater or equal (signed >=)
cmovl    S, R    cmovnge      SF ^ OF             Less (signed <)
cmovle   S, R    cmovng       (SF ^ OF) | ZF      Less or equal (signed <=)

cmova    S, R    cmovnbe      ~CF & ~ZF           Above (unsigned >)
cmovae   S, R    cmovnb       ~CF                 Above or equal (Unsigned >=)
cmovb    S, R    cmovnae      CF                  Below (unsigned <)
cmovbe   S, R    cmovna       CF | ZF             Below or equal (unsigned <=)

Figure 3.18 The conditional move instructions. These instructions copy the source
value S to its destination R when the move condition holds. Some instructions have
“synonyms,” alternate names for the same machine instruction.

v = test-expr ? then-expr : else-expr;

The standard way to compile this expression using conditional control transfer
would have the following form:

    if (!test-expr)
        goto false;
    v = then-expr;
    goto done;
false:
    v = else-expr;
done:

This code contains two code sequences—one evaluating then-expr and one evalu-
ating else-expr. A combination of conditional and unconditional jumps is used to
ensure that just one of the sequences is evaluated.
    For the code based on a conditional move, both the then-expr and the else-
expr are evaluated, with the final value chosen based on the evaluation test-expr.
This can be described by the following abstract code:

    v = then-expr;
    ve = else-expr;
    t = test-expr;
    if (!t) v = ve;

The final statement in this sequence is implemented with a conditional move—
value ve is copied to v only if test condition t does not hold.

                         Not all conditional expressions can be compiled using conditional moves.
                    Most significantly, the abstract code we have shown evaluates both then-expr and
                    else-expr regardless of the test outcome. If one of those two expressions could
                    possibly generate an error condition or a side effect, this could lead to invalid
                    behavior. Such is the case for our earlier example (Figure 3.16). Indeed, we put the
                    side effects into this example specifically to force gcc to implement this function
                    using conditional transfers.
                         As a second illustration, consider the following C function:

                    long cread(long *xp) {
                        return (xp ? *xp : 0);
                    }

                    At first, this seems like a good candidate to compile using a conditional move to
                    set the result to zero when the pointer is null, as shown in the following assembly
                    code:

                          long cread(long *xp)
                          Invalid implementation of function cread
                          xp in register %rdi
                     1    cread:
                     2      movq      (%rdi), %rax           v = *xp
                     3      testq     %rdi, %rdi             Test x
                     4      movl      $0, %edx               Set ve = 0
                     5      cmove     %rdx, %rax             If x==0, v = ve
                     6      ret                              Return v

                    This implementation is invalid, however, since the dereferencing of xp by the
                    movq instruction (line 2) occurs even when the test fails, causing a null pointer
                    dereferencing error. Instead, this code must be compiled using branching code.
                         Using conditional moves also does not always improve code efficiency. For
                    example, if either the then-expr or the else-expr evaluation requires a significant
                    computation, then this effort is wasted when the corresponding condition does
                    not hold. Compilers must take into account the relative performance of wasted
                    computation versus the potential for performance penalty due to branch mispre-
                    diction. In truth, they do not really have enough information to make this decision
                    reliably; for example, they do not know how well the branches will follow pre-
                    dictable patterns. Our experiments with gcc indicate that it only uses conditional
                    moves when the two expressions can be computed very easily, for example, with
                    single add instructions. In our experience, gcc uses conditional control transfers
                    even in many cases where the cost of branch misprediction would exceed even
                    more complex computations.
                         Overall, then, we see that conditional data transfers offer an alternative
                    strategy to conditional control transfers for implementing conditional operations.
                    They can only be used in restricted cases, but these cases are fairly common and
                    provide a much better match to the operation of modern processors.

Practice Problem 3.20 (solution page 369)
In the following C function, we have left the definition of operation OP incomplete:

#define OP               /* Unknown operator */

short arith(short x) {
    return x OP 16;
}

When compiled, gcc generates the following assembly code:

  short arith(short x)
  x in %rdi
arith:
  leaq      15(%rdi), %rbx
  testq     %rdi, %rdi
  cmovns    %rdi, %rbx
  sarq      $4, %rbx
  ret

 A. What operation is OP?
 B. Annotate the code to explain how it works.

Practice Problem 3.21 (solution page 369)
Starting with C code of the form

short test(short x, short y) {
    short val =             ;
    if (          ) {
        if (          )
             val =            ;
        else
             val =            ;
    } else if (           )
        val =           ;
    return val;
}

gcc generates the following assembly code:

  short test(short x, short y)
  x in %rdi, y in %rsi
test:
  leaq      12(%rsi), %rbx
  testq     %rdi, %rdi
  jge       .L2

                      movq      %rdi, %rbx
                      imulq     %rsi, %rbx
                      movq      %rdi, %rdx
                      orq       %rsi, %rdx
                      cmpq      %rsi, %rdi
                      cmovge    %rdx, %rbx
                      ret
                    .L2:
                      idivq     %rsi, %rdi
                      cmpq      $10, %rsi
                      cmovge    %rdi, %rbx
                      ret

                         Fill in the missing expressions in the C code.

                    3.6.7 Loops
                    C provides several looping constructs—namely, do-while, while, and for. No
                    corresponding instructions exist in machine code. Instead, combinations of con-
                    ditional tests and jumps are used to implement the effect of loops. Gcc and other
                    compilers generate loop code based on the two basic loop patterns. We will study
                    the translation of loops as a progression, starting with do-while and then working
                    toward ones with more complex implementations, covering both patterns.

                    Do-While Loops
                    The general form of a do-while statement is as follows:

                    do
                         body-statement
                         while (test-expr);

                    The effect of the loop is to repeatedly execute body-statement, evaluate test-expr,
                    and continue the loop if the evaluation result is nonzero. Observe that body-
                    statement is executed at least once.
                         This general form can be translated into conditionals and goto statements as
                    follows:

                    loop:
                        body-statement
                        t = test-expr;
                        if (t)
                           goto loop;

                    That is, on each iteration the program evaluates the body statement and then the
                    test expression. If the test succeeds, the program goes back for another iteration.

(a) C code                                  (b) Equivalent goto version
long fact_do(long n)                        long fact_do_goto(long n)
{                                           {
    long result = 1;                             long result = 1;
    do {                                      loop:
         result *= n;                            result *= n;
         n = n-1;                                n = n-1;
    } while (n > 1);                             if (n > 1)
    return result;                                   goto loop;
}                                                return result;
                                            }

(c) Corresponding assembly-language code
       long fact_do(long n)
       n in %rdi
1      fact_do:
2        movl     $1, %eax          Set result = 1
3      .L2:                       loop:
4        imulq    %rdi, %rax        Compute result *= n
5        subq     $1, %rdi          Decrement n
6        cmpq     $1, %rdi          Compare n:1
7        jg       .L2               If >, goto loop
8        rep; ret                   Return

Figure 3.19 Code for do–while version of factorial program. A conditional jump
causes the program to loop.

    As an example, Figure 3.19(a) shows an implementation of a routine to com-
pute the factorial of its argument, written n!, with a do-while loop. This function
only computes the proper value for n > 0.

Practice Problem 3.22 (solution page 369)

    A. Try to calculate 14! with a 32-bit int. Verify whether the computation of 14!
       overflows.
    B. What if the computation is done with a 64-bit long int?

     The goto code shown in Figure 3.19(b) shows how the loop gets turned into
a lower-level combination of tests and conditional jumps. Following the initial-
ization of result, the program begins looping. First it executes the body of the
loop, consisting here of updates to variables result and n. It then tests whether
n > 1, and, if so, it jumps back to the beginning of the loop. Figure 3.19(c) shows

 Aside     Reverse engineering loops
 A key to understanding how the generated assembly code relates to the original source code is to find a
 mapping between program values and registers. This task was simple enough for the loop of Figure 3.19,
 but it can be much more challenging for more complex programs. The C compiler will often rearrange
 the computations, so that some variables in the C code have no counterpart in the machine code, and
 new values are introduced into the machine code that do not exist in the source code. Moreover, it will
 often try to minimize register usage by mapping multiple program values onto a single register.
      The process we described for fact_do works as a general strategy for reverse engineering loops.
 Look at how registers are initialized before the loop, updated and tested within the loop, and used
 after the loop. Each of these provides a clue that can be combined to solve a puzzle. Be prepared for
 surprising transformations, some of which are clearly cases where the compiler was able to optimize
 the code, and others where it is hard to explain why the compiler chose that particular strategy.

                    the assembly code from which the goto code was generated. The conditional jump
                    instruction jg (line 7) is the key instruction in implementing a loop. It determines
                    whether to continue iterating or to exit the loop.
                         Reverse engineering assembly code, such as that of Figure 3.19(c), requires
                    determining which registers are used for which program values. In this case, the
                    mapping is fairly simple to determine: We know that n will be passed to the
                    function in register %rdi. We can see register %rax getting initialized to 1 (line
                    2). (Recall that, although the instruction has %eax as its destination, it will also
                    set the upper 4 bytes of %rax to 0.) We can see that this register is also updated
                    by multiplication on line 4. Furthermore, since %rax is used to return the function
                    value, it is often chosen to hold program values that are returned. We therefore
                    conclude that %rax corresponds to program value result.

                    Practice Problem 3.23 (solution page 370)
                    For the C code

                    short dw_loop(short x) {
                        short y = x/9;
                        short *p = &x;
                        short n = 4*x;
                        do {
                             x += y;
                             (*p) += 5;
                             n -= 2;
                        } while (n > 0);
                        return x;
                    }

                    gcc generates the following assembly code:

        short dw_loop(short x)
        x initially in %rdi
 1      dw_loop:
 2        movq     %rdi, %rbx
 3        movq     %rdi, %rcx
 4        idivq    $9, %rcx
 5        leaq     (,%rdi,4), %rdx
 6      .L2:
 7        leaq     5(%rbx,%rcx), %rcx
 8        subq     $1, %rdx
 9        testq    %rdx, %rdx
10        jg       .L2
11        rep; ret
     A. Which registers are used to hold program values x, y, and n?
     B. How has the compiler eliminated the need for pointer variable p and the
        pointer dereferencing implied by the expression (*p)+=5?
     C. Add annotations to the assembly code describing the operation of the pro-
        gram, similar to those shown in Figure 3.19(c).

While Loops
The general form of a while statement is as follows:
while (test-expr)
    body-statement
It differs from do-while in that test-expr is evaluated and the loop is potentially
terminated before the first execution of body-statement. There are a number of
ways to translate a while loop into machine code, two of which are used in code
generated by gcc. Both use the same loop structure as we saw for do-while loops
but differ in how to implement the initial test.
     The first translation method, which we refer to as jump to middle, performs
the initial test by performing an unconditional jump to the test at the end of the
loop. It can be expressed by the following template for translating from the general
while loop form to goto code:
    goto test;
loop:
    body-statement
test:
    t = test-expr;
    if (t)
        goto loop;
    As an example, Figure 3.20(a) shows an implementation of the factorial func-
tion using a while loop. This function correctly computes 0! = 1. The adjacent

                    (a) C code                                 (b) Equivalent goto version
                    long fact_while(long n)                    long fact_while_jm_goto(long n)
                    {                                          {
                        long result = 1;                            long result = 1;
                        while (n > 1) {                             goto test;
                            result *= n;                         loop:
                            n = n-1;                                result *= n;
                        }                                           n = n-1;
                        return result;                           test:
                    }                                               if (n > 1)
                                                                        goto loop;
                                                                    return result;
                                                               }

                    (c) Corresponding assembly-language code
                      long fact_while(long n)
                      n in %rdi
                    fact_while:
                      movl     $1, %eax           Set result = 1
                      jmp      .L5                Goto test
                    .L6:                        loop:
                      imulq    %rdi, %rax         Compute result *= n
                      subq     $1, %rdi           Decrement n
                    .L5:                        test:
                      cmpq     $1, %rdi           Compare n:1
                      jg       .L6                If >, goto loop
                      rep; ret                    Return

Figure 3.20 C and assembly code for while version of factorial using jump-to-
                    middle translation. The C function fact_while_jm_goto illustrates the operation of
                    the assembly-code version.

                    function fact_while_jm_goto (Figure 3.20(b)) is a C rendition of the assembly
                    code generated by gcc when optimization is specified with the command-line op-
                    tion -Og. Comparing the goto code generated for fact_while (Figure 3.20(b)) to
                    that for fact_do (Figure 3.19(b)), we see that they are very similar, except that
                    the statement goto test before the loop causes the program to first perform the
                    test of n before modifying the values of result or n. The bottom portion of the
                    figure (Figure 3.20(c)) shows the actual assembly code generated.

                    Practice Problem 3.24 (solution page 371)
                    For C code having the general form

                    short loop_while(short a, short b)
                    {

     short result =                 ;
     while (             ) {
         result =               ;
         a =             ;
     }
     return result;
}

gcc, run with command-line option -Og, produces the following code:
     short loop_while(short a, short b)
     a in %rdi, b in %rsi
 1   loop_while:
 2     movl     $0, %eax
 3     jmp      .L2
 4   .L3:
 5     leaq     (,%rsi,%rdi), %rdx
 6     addq     %rdx, %rax
 7     subq     $1, %rdi
 8   .L2:
 9     cmpq     %rsi, %rdi
10     jg       .L3
11     rep; ret

We can see that the compiler used a jump-to-middle translation, using the jmp
instruction on line 3 to jump to the test starting with label .L2. Fill in the missing
parts of the C code.

    The second translation method, which we refer to as guarded do, first trans-
forms the code into a do-while loop by using a conditional branch to skip over the
loop if the initial test fails. Gcc follows this strategy when compiling with higher
levels of optimization, for example, with command-line option -O1. This method
can be expressed by the following template for translating from the general while
loop form to a do-while loop:
t = test-expr;
if (!t)
    goto done;
do
    body-statement
    while (test-expr);
done:

This, in turn, can be transformed into goto code as
     t = test-expr;
     if (!t)
         goto done;

                    loop:
                        body-statement
                        t = test-expr;
                        if (t)
                            goto loop;
                    done:

                    Using this implementation strategy, the compiler can often optimize the initial
                    test, for example, determining that the test condition will always hold.
                         As an example, Figure 3.21 shows the same C code for a factorial function
                    as in Figure 3.20, but demonstrates the compilation that occurs when gcc is
                    given command-line option -O1. Figure 3.21(c) shows the actual assembly code
                    generated, while Figure 3.21(b) renders this assembly code in a more readable C
                    representation. Referring to this goto code, we see that the loop will be skipped
                    if n ≤ 1, for the initial value of n. The loop itself has the same general structure
                    as that generated for the do-while version of the function (Figure 3.19). One
                    interesting feature, however, is that the loop test (line 9 of the assembly code)
                    has been changed from n > 1 in the original C code to n ? = 1. The compiler has
                    determined that the loop can only be entered when n > 1, and that decrementing
                    n will result in either n > 1 or n = 1. Therefore, the test n ? = 1 will be equivalent to
                    the test n ≤ 1.

                    Practice Problem 3.25 (solution page 371)
                    For C code having the general form
                    long loop_while2(long a, long b)
                    {
                        long result =           ;
                        while (         ) {
                            result =          ;
                            b =          ;
                        }
                        return result;
                    }

                    gcc, run with command-line option -O1, produces the following code:
                          a in %rdi, b in %rsi
                     1    loop_while2:
                     2      testq   %rsi, %rsi
                     3      jle     .L8
                     4      movq    %rsi, %rax
                     5    .L7:
                     6      imulq   %rdi, %rax
                     7      subq    %rdi, %rsi
                     8      testq   %rsi, %rsi

(a) C code                                 (b) Equivalent goto version
long fact_while(long n)                    long fact_while_gd_goto(long n)
{                                          {
    long result = 1;                            long result = 1;
    while (n > 1) {                             if (n <= 1)
        result *= n;                                goto done;
        n = n-1;                             loop:
    }                                           result *= n;
    return result;                              n = n-1;
}                                               if (n != 1)
                                                    goto loop;
                                             done:
                                                return result;
                                           }
(c) Corresponding assembly-language code
     long fact_while(long n)
     n in %rdi
 1   fact_while:
 2     cmpq     $1, %rdi           Compare n:1
 3     jle      .L7                If <=, goto done
 4     movl     $1, %eax           Set result = 1
 5   .L6:                        loop:
 6     imulq    %rdi, %rax         Compute result *= n
 7     subq     $1, %rdi           Decrement n
 8     cmpq     $1, %rdi           Compare n:1
 9     jne      .L6                If !=, goto loop
10     rep; ret                    Return
11   .L7:                        done:
12     movl     $1, %eax           Compute result = 1
13     ret                         Return

Figure 3.21 C and assembly code for while version of factorial using guarded-
do translation. The fact_while_gd_goto function illustrates the operation of the
assembly-code version.

 9     jg       .L7
10     rep; ret
11   .L8:
12     movq     %rsi, %rax
13     ret

     We can see that the compiler used a guarded-do translation, using the jle
instruction on line 3 to skip over the loop code when the initial test fails. Fill in
the missing parts of the C code. Note that the control structure in the assembly

                    code does not exactly match what would be obtained by a direct translation of the
                    C code according to our translation rules. In particular, it has two different ret
                    instructions (lines 10 and 13). However, you can fill out the missing portions of
                    the C code in a way that it will have equivalent behavior to the assembly code.

                    Practice Problem 3.26 (solution page 372)
                    A function test_one has the following overall structure:

                    short test_one(unsigned short x) {
                        short val = 1;
                        while ( ... ) {
                            .
                            .
                            .
                        }
                        return ...;
                    }

                    The gcc C compiler generates the following assembly code:

                            short test_one(unsigned short x)
                            x in %rdi
                     1      test_one:
                     2        movl    $1, %eax
                     3        jmp     .L5
                     4      .L6:
                     5        xorq    %rdi, %rax
                     6        shrq    %rdi               Shift right by 1
                     7      .L5:
                     8        testq   %rdi, %rdi
                     9        jne     .L6
                    10        andl    $0, %eax
                    11        ret

                           Reverse engineer the operation of this code and then do the following:
                         A. Determine what loop translation method was used.
                         B. Use the assembly-code version to fill in the missing parts of the C code.
                         C. Describe in English what this function computes.

                    For Loops
                    The general form of a for loop is as follows:

                    for (init-expr; test-expr; update-expr)
                        body-statement

The C language standard states (with one exception, highlighted in Problem 3.29)
that the behavior of such a loop is identical to the following code using a while
loop:

init-expr;
while (test-expr) {
      body-statement
      update-expr;
}

     The program first evaluates the initialization expression init-expr. It enters a
loop where it first evaluates the test condition test-expr, exiting if the test fails, then
executes the body of the loop body-statement, and finally evaluates the update
expression update-expr.
     The code generated by gcc for a for loop then follows one of our two trans-
lation strategies for while loops, depending on the optimization level. That is, the
jump-to-middle strategy yields the goto code

    init-expr;
    goto test;
loop:
    body-statement
    update-expr;
test:
    t = test-expr;
    if (t)
          goto loop;

while the guarded-do strategy yields

    init-expr;
    t = test-expr;
    if (!t)
          goto done;
loop:
    body-statement
    update-expr;
    t = test-expr;
    if (t)
          goto loop;
done:

    As examples, consider a factorial function written with a for loop:

long fact_for(long n)
{
    long i;
    long result = 1;

                         for (i = 2; i <= n; i++)
                             result *= i;
                         return result;
                    }

                         As shown, the natural way of writing a factorial function with a for loop is
                    to multiply factors from 2 up to n, and so this function is quite different from the
                    code we showed using either a while or a do-while loop.
                         We can identify the different components of the for loop in this code as
                    follows:

                    init-expr          i=2
                    test-expr          i <= n
                    update-expr        i++
                    body-statement     result *= i;

                    Substituting these components into the template we have shown to transform a
                    for loop into a while loop yields the following:

                    long fact_for_while(long n)
                    {
                        long i = 2;
                        long result = 1;
                        while (i <= n) {
                            result *= i;
                            i++;
                        }
                        return result;
                    }

                    Applying the jump-to-middle transformation to the while loop then yields the
                    following version in goto code:

                    long fact_for_jm_goto(long n)
                    {
                         long i = 2;
                         long result = 1;
                         goto test;
                      loop:
                         result *= i;
                         i++;
                      test:
                         if (i <= n)
                              goto loop;
                         return result;
                    }

   Indeed, a close examination of the assembly code produced by gcc with
command-line option -Og closely follows this template:

    long fact_for(long n)
    n in %rdi
fact_for:
  movl     $1, %eax           Set result = 1
  movl     $2, %edx           Set i = 2
  jmp      .L8                Goto test
.L9:                        loop:
  imulq    %rdx, %rax         Compute result *= i
  addq     $1, %rdx           Increment i
.L8:                        test:
  cmpq     %rdi, %rdx         Compare i:n
  jle      .L9                If <=, goto loop
  rep; ret                    Return

Practice Problem 3.27 (solution page 372)
Write goto code for a function called fibonacci to print fibonacci numbers using
a while loop. Apply the guarded-do transformation.

    We see from this presentation that all three forms of loops in C—do-while,
while, and for—can be translated by a simple strategy, generating code that con-
tains one or more conditional branches. Conditional transfer of control provides
the basic mechanism for translating loops into machine code.

Practice Problem 3.28 (solution page 372)
A function test_two has the following overall structure:

short test_two(unsigned short x) {
    short val = 0;
    short i;
    for ( ... ; ... ; ... ) {
        .
        .
        .
    }
    return val;
}

      The gcc C compiler generates the following assembly code:

       test fun_b(unsigned test x)
       x in %rdi
1      test_two:
2        movl    $1, %edx

                     3        movl     $65, %eax
                     4      .L10:
                     5        movq     %rdi, %rcx
                     6        andl     $1, %ecx
                     7        addq     %rax, %rax
                     8        orq      %rcx, %rax
                     9        shrq     %rdi                Shift right by 1
                    10        addq     $1, %rdx
                    11        jne      .L10
                    12        rep; ret

                           Reverse engineer the operation of this code and then do the following:
                         A. Use the assembly-code version to fill in the missing parts of the C code.
                         B. Explain why there is neither an initial test before the loop nor an initial jump
                            to the test portion of the loop.
                         C. Describe in English what this function computes.

                    Practice Problem 3.29 (solution page 373)
                    Executing a continue statement in C causes the program to jump to the end of
                    the current loop iteration. The stated rule for translating a for loop into a while
                    loop needs some refinement when dealing with continue statements. For example,
                    consider the following code:

                           /* Example of for loop containing a continue statement */
                           /* Sum even numbers between 0 and 9 */
                           long sum = 0;
                           long i;
                           for (i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
                               if (i & 1)
                                   continue;
                               sum += i;
                           }

                      A. What would we get if we naively applied our rule for translating the for loop
                         into a while loop? What would be wrong with this code?
                         B. How could you replace the continue statement with a goto statement to
                            ensure that the while loop correctly duplicates the behavior of the for loop?

                    3.6.8 Switch Statements
                    A switch statement provides a multiway branching capability based on the value
                    of an integer index. They are particularly useful when dealing with tests where

there can be a large number of possible outcomes. Not only do they make the C
code more readable, but they also allow an efficient implementation using a data
structure called a jump table. A jump table is an array where entry i is the address of
a code segment implementing the action the program should take when the switch
index equals i. The code performs an array reference into the jump table using the
switch index to determine the target for a jump instruction. The advantage of using
a jump table over a long sequence of if-else statements is that the time taken to
perform the switch is independent of the number of switch cases. Gcc selects the
method of translating a switch statement based on the number of cases and the
sparsity of the case values. Jump tables are used when there are a number of cases
(e.g., four or more) and they span a small range of values.
     Figure 3.22(a) shows an example of a C switch statement. This example has a
number of interesting features, including case labels that do not span a contiguous
range (there are no labels for cases 101 and 105), cases with multiple labels (cases
104 and 106), and cases that fall through to other cases (case 102) because the code
for the case does not end with a break statement.
     Figure 3.23 shows the assembly code generated when compiling switch_eg.
The behavior of this code is shown in C as the procedure switch_eg_impl in
Figure 3.22(b). This code makes use of support provided by gcc for jump tables,
as an extension to the C language. The array jt contains seven entries, each of
which is the address of a block of code. These locations are defined by labels in
the code and indicated in the entries in jt by code pointers, consisting of the labels
prefixed by &&. (Recall that the operator ‘&’ creates a pointer for a data value. In
making this extension, the authors of gcc created a new operator && to create
a pointer for a code location.) We recommend that you study the C procedure
switch_eg_impl and how it relates to the assembly-code version.
     Our original C code has cases for values 100, 102–104, and 106, but the switch
variable n can be an arbitrary integer. The compiler first shifts the range to between
0 and 6 by subtracting 100 from n, creating a new program variable that we call
index in our C version. It further simplifies the branching possibilities by treating
index as an unsigned value, making use of the fact that negative numbers in a
two’s-complement representation map to large positive numbers in an unsigned
representation. It can therefore test whether index is outside of the range 0–6
by testing whether it is greater than 6. In the C and assembly code, there are
five distinct locations to jump to, based on the value of index. These are loc_A
(identified in the assembly code as .L3), loc_B (.L5), loc_C (.L6), loc_D (.L7),
and loc_def (.L8), where the latter is the destination for the default case. Each
of these labels identifies a block of code implementing one of the case branches.
In both the C and the assembly code, the program compares index to 6 and jumps
to the code for the default case if it is greater.
     The key step in executing a switch statement is to access a code location
through the jump table. This occurs in line 16 in the C code, with a goto statement
that references the jump table jt. This computed goto is supported by gcc as an
extension to the C language. In our assembly-code version, a similar operation
occurs on line 5, where the jmp instruction’s operand is prefixed with ‘*’, indicating

(a) Switch statement                         (b) Translation into extended C
void switch_eg(long x, long n,                1    void switch_eg_impl(long x, long n,
               long *dest)                    2                        long *dest)
{                                             3    {
    long val = x;                             4        /* Table of code pointers */
                                              5        static void *jt[7] = {
      switch (n) {                            6            &&loc_A, &&loc_def, &&loc_B,
                                              7            &&loc_C, &&loc_D, &&loc_def,
      case 100:                               8            &&loc_D
          val *= 13;                          9        };
          break;                             10        unsigned long index = n - 100;
                                             11        long val;
      case 102:                              12
          val += 10;                         13         if (index > 6)
          /* Fall through */                 14             goto loc_def;
                                             15         /* Multiway branch */
      case 103:                              16         goto *jt[index];
          val += 11;                         17
          break;                             18     loc_A:    /* Case 100 */
                                             19        val = x * 13;
      case 104:                              20        goto done;
      case 106:                              21     loc_B:    /* Case 102 */
          val *= val;                        22        x = x + 10;
          break;                             23        /* Fall through */
                                             24     loc_C:     /* Case 103 */
      default:                               25        val = x + 11;
          val = 0;                           26        goto done;
      }                                      27     loc_D:    /* Cases 104, 106 */
      *dest = val;                           28        val = x * x;
}                                            29        goto done;
                                             30     loc_def: /* Default case */
                                             31        val = 0;
                                             32     done:
                                             33        *dest = val;
                                             34    }
Figure 3.22 Example switch statement and its translation into extended C. The translation shows the
structure of jump table jt and how it is accessed. Such tables are supported by gcc as an extension to the C
language.

                       an indirect jump, and the operand specifies a memory location indexed by register
                       %eax, which holds the value of index. (We will see in Section 3.8 how array
                       references are translated into machine code.)
                           Our C code declares the jump table as an array of seven elements, each
                       of which is a pointer to a code location. These elements span values 0–6 of

     void switch_eg(long x, long n, long *dest)
     x in %rdi, n in %rsi, dest in %rdx
 1   switch_eg:
 2     subq    $100, %rsi                    Compute index = n-100
 3     cmpq    $6, %rsi                      Compare index:6
 4     ja      .L8                           If >, goto loc_def
 5     jmp     *.L4(,%rsi,8)                 Goto *jg[index]
 6   .L3:                                  loc_A:
 7     leaq    (%rdi,%rdi,2), %rax           3*x
 8     leaq    (%rdi,%rax,4), %rdi           val = 13*x
 9     jmp     .L2                           Goto done
10   .L5:                                  loc_B:
11     addq    $10, %rdi                     x = x + 10
12   .L6:                                  loc_C:
13     addq    $11, %rdi                     val = x + 11
14     jmp     .L2                           Goto done
15   .L7:                                  loc_D:
16     imulq   %rdi, %rdi                    val = x * x
17     jmp     .L2                           Goto done
18   .L8:                                  loc_def:
19     movl    $0, %edi                      val = 0
20   .L2:                                  done:
21     movq    %rdi, (%rdx)                  *dest = val
22     ret                                   Return

Figure 3.23 Assembly code for switch statement example in Figure 3.22.

index, corresponding to values 100–106 of n. Observe that the jump table handles
duplicate cases by simply having the same code label (loc_D) for entries 4 and 6,
and it handles missing cases by using the label for the default case (loc_def) as
entries 1 and 5.
    In the assembly code, the jump table is indicated by the following declarations,
to which we have added comments:

 1     .section            .rodata
 2     .align 8               Align address to multiple of 8
 3   .L4:
 4     .quad    .L3           Case 100: loc_A
 5     .quad   .L8            Case 101: loc_def
 6     .quad   .L5            Case 102: loc_B
 7     .quad   .L6            Case 103: loc_C
 8     .quad   .L7            Case 104: loc_D
 9     .quad   .L8            Case 105: loc_def
10     .quad   .L7            Case 106: loc_D

                         These declarations state that within the segment of the object-code file called
                    .rodata (for “read-only data”), there should be a sequence of seven “quad” (8-
                    byte) words, where the value of each word is given by the instruction address
                    associated with the indicated assembly-code labels (e.g., .L3). Label .L4 marks
                    the start of this allocation. The address associated with this label serves as the
                    base for the indirect jump (line 5).
                         The different code blocks (C labels loc_A through loc_D and loc_def) im-
                    plement the different branches of the switch statement. Most of them simply
                    compute a value for val and then go to the end of the function. Similarly, the
                    assembly-code blocks compute a value for register %rdi and jump to the position
                    indicated by label .L2 at the end of the function. Only the code for case label 102
                    does not follow this pattern, to account for the way the code for this case falls
                    through to the block with label 103 in the original C code. This is handled in the
                    assembly-code block starting with label .L5, by omitting the jmp instruction at
                    the end of the block, so that the code continues execution of the next block. Simi-
                    larly, the C version switch_eg_impl has no goto statement at the end of the block
                    starting with label loc_B.
                         Examining all of this code requires careful study, but the key point is to see
                    that the use of a jump table allows a very efficient way to implement a multiway
                    branch. In our case, the program could branch to five distinct locations with a
                    single jump table reference. Even if we had a switch statement with hundreds of
                    cases, they could be handled by a single jump table access.

                    Practice Problem 3.30 (solution page 374)
                    In the C function that follows, we have omitted the body of the switch statement.
                    In the C code, the case labels did not span a contiguous range, and some cases had
                    multiple labels.

                    void switch2(short x, short *dest) {
                        short val = 0;
                        switch (x) {
                            .
                            . Body of switch statement omitted
                            .
                        }
                        *dest = val;
                    }

                         In compiling the function, gcc generates the assembly code that follows for
                    the initial part of the procedure, with variable x in %rdi:

                          void switch2(short x, short *dest)
                          x in %rdi
                     1    switch2:
                     2      addq      $2, %rdi
                     3      cmpq      $8, %rdi
                     4      ja        .L2
                     5      jmp       *.L4(,%rdi,8)

It generates the following code for the jump table:
 1      .L4:
 2        .quad    .L9
 3        .quad    .L5
 4        .quad    .L6
 5        .quad    .L7
 6        .quad    .L2
 7        .quad    .L7
 8        .quad    .L8
 9        .quad    .L2
10        .quad    .L5
       Based on this information, answer the following questions:
     A. What were the values of the case labels in the switch statement?
     B. What cases had multiple labels in the C code?

Practice Problem 3.31 (solution page 374)
For a C function switcher with the general structure
void switcher(long a, long b, long c, long *dest)
{
    long val;
    switch(a) {
    case           :        /* Case A */
         c =          ;
         /* Fall through */
    case           :        /* Case B */
         val =          ;
         break;
    case           :        /* Case C */
    case           :        /* Case D */
         val =          ;
         break;
    case           :        /* Case E */
         val =          ;
         break;
    default:
         val =          ;
    }
    *dest = val;
}
gcc generates the assembly code and jump table shown in Figure 3.24.
    Fill in the missing parts of the C code. Except for the ordering of case labels
C and D, there is only one way to fit the different cases into the template.

                    (a) Code
                          void switcher(long a, long b, long c, long *dest)
                          a in %rsi, b in %rdi, c in %rdx, d in %rcx
                     1    switcher:
                     2      cmpq     $7, %rdi
                     3      ja       .L2
                     4      jmp      *.L4(,%rdi,8)
                     5      .section          .rodata
                     6    .L7:
                     7      xorq     $15, %rsi
                     8      movq     %rsi, %rdx
                     9    .L3:
                    10      leaq     112(%rdx), %rdi
                    11      jmp      .L6
                    12    .L5:
                    13      leaq     (%rdx,%rsi), %rdi
                    14      salq     $2, %rdi
                    15      jmp      .L6
                    16    .L2:
                    17      movq     %rsi, %rdi
                    18    .L6:
                    19      movq     %rdi, (%rcx)
                    20      ret
                    (b) Jump table
                     1    .L4:
                     2      .quad     .L3
                     3      .quad     .L2
                     4      .quad     .L5
                     5      .quad     .L2
                     6      .quad     .L6
                     7      .quad     .L7
                     8      .quad     .L2
                     9      .quad     .L5
Figure 3.24 Assembly code and jump table for Problem 3.31.

                    3.7     Procedures
                    Procedures are a key abstraction in software. They provide a way to package code
                    that implements some functionality with a designated set of arguments and an
                    optional return value. This function can then be invoked from different points in
                    a program. Well-designed software uses procedures as an abstraction mechanism,
                    hiding the detailed implementation of some action while providing a clear and
                    concise interface definition of what values will be computed and what effects
                    the procedure will have on the program state. Procedures come in many guises

in different programming languages—functions, methods, subroutines, handlers,
and so on—but they all share a general set of features.
    There are many different attributes that must be handled when providing
machine-level support for procedures. For discussion purposes, suppose proce-
dure P calls procedure Q, and Q then executes and returns back to P. These actions
involve one or more of the following mechanisms:

  Passing control. The program counter must be set to the starting address of the
        code for Q upon entry and then set to the instruction in P following the
        call to Q upon return.
  Passing data. P must be able to provide one or more parameters to Q, and Q must
        be able to return a value back to P.
  Allocating and deallocating memory. Q may need to allocate space for local
        variables when it begins and then free that storage before it returns.

     The x86-64 implementation of procedures involves a combination of special
instructions and a set of conventions on how to use the machine resources, such as
the registers and the program memory. Great effort has been made to minimize
the overhead involved in invoking a procedure. As a consequence, it follows what
can be seen as a minimalist strategy, implementing only as much of the above set
of mechanisms as is required for each particular procedure. In our presentation,
we build up the different mechanisms step by step, first describing control, then
data passing, and, finally, memory management.

3.7.1 The Run-Time Stack
A key feature of the procedure-calling mechanism of C, and of most other lan-
guages, is that it can make use of the last-in, first-out memory management disci-
pline provided by a stack data structure. Using our example of procedure P calling
procedure Q, we can see that while Q is executing, P, along with any of the proce-
dures in the chain of calls up to P, is temporarily suspended. While Q is running,
only it will need the ability to allocate new storage for its local variables or to set up
a call to another procedure. On the other hand, when Q returns, any local storage it
has allocated can be freed. Therefore, a program can manage the storage required
by its procedures using a stack, where the stack and the program registers store
the information required for passing control and data, and for allocating memory.
As P calls Q, control and data information are added to the end of the stack. This
information gets deallocated when P returns.
     As described in Section 3.4.4, the x86-64 stack grows toward lower addresses
and the stack pointer %rsp points to the top element of the stack. Data can be
stored on and retrieved from the stack using the pushq and popq instructions.
Space for data with no specified initial value can be allocated on the stack by simply
decrementing the stack pointer by an appropriate amount. Similarly, space can be
deallocated by incrementing the stack pointer.
     When an x86-64 procedure requires storage beyond what it can hold in reg-
isters, it allocates space on the stack. This region is referred to as the procedure’s

Figure 3.25                                            Stack “bottom”
General stack frame
structure. The stack
can be used for passing
arguments, for storing
return information, for
saving registers, and for                                                 Earlier frames
local storage. Portions
may be omitted when not
needed.

                                                             ...
                                                        Argument n
                                                                          Frame for calling
                                Increasing                                function P
                                                             ...
                                 address

                                                        Argument 7

                                                       Return address

                                                       Saved registers

                                                                          Frame for executing
                                                       Local variables    function Q

                                                         Argument
                                                         build area
                                Stack pointer
                                        %rsp
                                                         Stack “top”

                    stack frame. Figure 3.25 shows the overall structure of the run-time stack, includ-
                    ing its partitioning into stack frames, in its most general form. The frame for the
                    currently executing procedure is always at the top of the stack. When procedure P
                    calls procedure Q, it will push the return address onto the stack, indicating where
                    within P the program should resume execution once Q returns. We consider the
                    return address to be part of P’s stack frame, since it holds state relevant to P. The
                    code for Q allocates the space required for its stack frame by extending the cur-
                    rent stack boundary. Within that space, it can save the values of registers, allocate

space for local variables, and set up arguments for the procedures it calls. The
stack frames for most procedures are of fixed size, allocated at the beginning of
the procedure. Some procedures, however, require variable-size frames. This issue
is discussed in Section 3.10.5. Procedure P can pass up to six integral values (i.e.,
pointers and integers) on the stack, but if Q requires more arguments, these can
be stored by P within its stack frame prior to the call.
     In the interest of space and time efficiency, x86-64 procedures allocate only
the portions of stack frames they require. For example, many procedures have
six or fewer arguments, and so all of their parameters can be passed in registers.
Thus, parts of the stack frame diagrammed in Figure 3.25 may be omitted. Indeed,
many functions do not even require a stack frame. This occurs when all of the local
variables can be held in registers and the function does not call any other functions
(sometimes referred to as a leaf procedure, in reference to the tree structure of
procedure calls). For example, none of the functions we have examined thus far
required stack frames.

3.7.2 Control Transfer
Passing control from function P to function Q involves simply setting the program
counter (PC) to the starting address of the code for Q. However, when it later
comes time for Q to return, the processor must have some record of the code
location where it should resume the execution of P. This information is recorded
in x86-64 machines by invoking procedure Q with the instruction call Q. This
instruction pushes an address A onto the stack and sets the PC to the beginning
of Q. The pushed address A is referred to as the return address and is computed
as the address of the instruction immediately following the call instruction. The
counterpart instruction ret pops an address A off the stack and sets the PC to A.
     The general forms of the call and ret instructions are described as follows:

Instruction          Description
call Label           Procedure call
call *Operand        Procedure call
ret                  Return from call

(These instructions are referred to as callq and retq in the disassembly outputs
generated by the program objdump. The added suffix ‘q’ simply emphasizes that
these are x86-64 versions of call and return instructions, not IA32. In x86-64
assembly code, both versions can be used interchangeably.)
    The call instruction has a target indicating the address of the instruction
where the called procedure starts. Like jumps, a call can be either direct or indirect.
In assembly code, the target of a direct call is given as a label, while the target of
an indirect call is given by ‘*’ followed by an operand specifier using one of the
formats described in Figure 3.3.

      %rip       0x400563             %rip       0x400540                  %rip       0x400568
      %rsp 0x7fffffffe840             %rsp 0x7fffffffe838                  %rsp 0x7fffffffe840

                                                  0x400568

(a) Executing call               (b) After call                       (c) After ret

Figure 3.26 Illustration of call and ret functions. The call instruction transfers control to the start of a
function, while the ret instruction returns back to the instruction following the call.

                           Figure 3.26 illustrates the execution of the call and ret instructions for the
                       multstore and main functions introduced in Section 3.2.2. The following are
                       excerpts of the disassembled code for the two functions:

                              Beginning of function multstore
                        1    0000000000400540 <multstore>:
                        2      400540: 53                             push      %rbx
                        3      400541: 48 89 d3                       mov       %rdx,%rbx
                              . . .
                              Return from function multstore
                        4      40054d:     c3                         retq
                              . . .
                              Call to multstore from main
                        5      400563:     e8 d8 ff ff ff             callq     400540 <multstore>
                        6      400568:     48 8b 54 24 08             mov       0x8(%rsp),%rdx

                            In this code, we can see that the call instruction with address 0x400563 in
                       main calls function multstore. This status is shown in Figure 3.26(a), with the
                       indicated values for the stack pointer %rsp and the program counter %rip. The
                       effect of the call is to push the return address 0x400568 onto the stack and to jump
                       to the first instruction in function multstore, at address 0x0400540 (3.26(b)).
                       The execution of function multstore continues until it hits the ret instruction
                       at address 0x40054d. This instruction pops the value 0x400568 from the stack
                       and jumps to this address, resuming the execution of main just after the call
                       instruction (3.26(c)).
                            As a more detailed example of passing control to and from procedures, Figure
                       3.27(a) shows the disassembled code for two functions, top and leaf, as well as
                       the portion of code in function main where top gets called. Each instruction is
                       identified by labels L1–L2 (in leaf), T1–T4 (in top), and M1–M2 in main. Part (b)
                       of the figure shows a detailed trace of the code execution, in which main calls
                       top(100), causing top to call leaf(95). Function leaf returns 97 to top, which

(a) Disassembled code for demonstrating procedure calls and returns
        Disassembly of leaf(long y)
        y in %rdi
 1      0000000000400540 <leaf>:
 2        400540: 48 8d 47 02                        lea     0x2(%rdi),%rax          L1: z+2
 3        400544: c3                                 retq                            L2: Return

 4      0000000000400545 <top>:
        Disassembly of top(long x)
        x in %rdi
 5       400545:     48 83 ef 05                     sub     $0x5,%rdi               T1: x-5
 6       400549:     e8 f2 ff ff ff                  callq   400540 <leaf>           T2: Call leaf(x-5)
 7       40054e:     48 01 c0                        add     %rax,%rax               T3: Double result
 8       400551:     c3                              retq                            T4: Return

        . . .
          Call to top from function main
 9       40055b:     e8 e5 ff ff ff                  callq   400545 <top>            M1: Call top(100)
10       400560:     48 89 c2                        mov     %rax,%rdx               M2: Resume

(b) Execution trace of example code

            Instruction                         State values (at beginning)
Label     PC              Instruction   %rdi   %rax          %rsp              *%rsp      Description
M1        0x40055b        callq         100     —      0x7fffffffe820            —        Call top(100)

T1        0x400545        sub           100     —      0x7fffffffe818         0x400560    Entry of top
T2        0x400549        callq         95      —      0x7fffffffe818         0x400560    Call leaf(95)

L1        0x400540        lea            95     —      0x7fffffffe810         0x40054e    Entry of leaf
L2        0x400544        retq           —      97     0x7fffffffe810         0x40054e    Return 97 from leaf

T3        0x40054e        add            —      97     0x7fffffffe818         0x400560    Resume top
T4        0x400551        retq           —     194     0x7fffffffe818         0x400560    Return 194 from top

M2        0x400560        mov            —     194     0x7fffffffe820            —        Resume main

Figure 3.27 Detailed execution of program involving procedure calls and returns. Using the stack to
store return addresses makes it possible to return to the right point in the procedures.

then returns 194 to main. The first three columns describe the instruction being
executed, including the instruction label, the address, and the instruction type. The
next four columns show the state of the program before the instruction is executed,
including the contents of registers %rdi, %rax, and %rsp, as well as the value at
the top of the stack. The contents of this table should be studied carefully, as they

                        demonstrate the important role of the run-time stack in managing the storage
                        needed to support procedure calls and returns.
                             Instruction L1 of leaf sets %rax to 97, the value to be returned. Instruction L2
                        then returns. It pops 0x400054e from the stack. In setting the PC to this popped
                        value, control transfers back to instruction T3 of top. The program has successfully
                        completed the call to leaf and returned to top.
                             Instruction T3 sets %rax to 194, the value to be returned from top. Instruction
                        T4 then returns. It pops 0x4000560 from the stack, thereby setting the PC to
                        instruction M2 of main. The program has successfully completed the call to top
                        and returned to main. We see that the stack pointer has also been restored to
                        0x7fffffffe820, the value it had before the call to top.
                             We can see that this simple mechanism of pushing the return address onto
                        the stack makes it possible for the function to later return to the proper point
                        in the program. The standard call/return mechanism of C (and of most program-
                        ming languages) conveniently matches the last-in, first-out memory management
                        discipline provided by a stack.

                        Practice Problem 3.32 (solution page 375)
                        The disassembled code for two functions first and last is shown below, along
                        with the code for a call of first by function main:

             Disassembly of last(long u, long v)
             u in %rdi, v in %rsi
      1     0000000000400540 <last>:
      2       400540: 48 89 f8                          mov      %rdi,%rax           L1: u
      3       400543: 48 0f af c6                       imul     %rsi,%rax           L2: u*v
      4       400547: c3                                retq                         L3: Return

             Disassembly of last(long x)
             x in %rdi
      5     0000000000400548 <first>:
      6       400548: 48 8d 77 01                       lea    0x1(%rdi),%rsi        F1: x+1
      7       40054c: 48 83 ef 01                       sub    $0x1,%rdi             F2: x-1
      8       400550: e8 eb ff ff ff                    callq 400540 <last>          F3: Call last(x-1,x+1)
      9       400555: f3 c3                             repz retq                    F4: Return
              .
              .
              .
  10          400560: e8 e3 ff ff ff                    callq    400548 <first>      M1: Call first(10)
  11          400565: 48 89 c2                          mov      %rax,%rdx           M2: Resume

                             Each of these instructions is given a label, similar to those in Figure 3.27(a).
                        Starting with the calling of first(10) by main, fill in the following table to trace
                        instruction execution through to the point where the program returns back to
                        main.

              Instruction                                State values (at beginning)
Label     PC            Instruction    %rdi      %rsi         %rax           %rsp           *%rsp     Description
M1        0x400560      callq              10        —            —    0x7fffffffe820         —       Call first(10)

F1
F2
F3

L1
L2
L3

F4

M2

3.7.3 Data Transfer
In addition to passing control to a procedure when called, and then back again
when the procedure returns, procedure calls may involve passing data as argu-
ments, and returning from a procedure may also involve returning a value. With
x86-64, most of these data passing to and from procedures take place via regis-
ters. For example, we have already seen numerous examples of functions where
arguments are passed in registers %rdi, %rsi, and others, and where values are re-
turned in register %rax. When procedure P calls procedure Q, the code for P must
first copy the arguments into the proper registers. Similarly, when Q returns back
to P, the code for P can access the returned value in register %rax. In this section,
we explore these conventions in greater detail.
      With x86-64, up to six integral (i.e., integer and pointer) arguments can be
passed via registers. The registers are used in a specified order, with the name
used for a register depending on the size of the data type being passed. These are
shown in Figure 3.28. Arguments are allocated to these registers according to their

Operand                            Argument number
size (bits)        1         2         3         4            5         6
     64          %rdi       %rsi      %rdx      %rcx         %r8       %r9
     32          %edi       %esi      %edx      %ecx        %r8d      %r9d
     16          %di        %si       %dx       %cx         %r8w      %r9w
      8          %dil       %sil      %dl       %cl         %r8b      %r9b

Figure 3.28 Registers for passing function arguments. The registers are used in a
specified order and named according to the argument sizes.

                    ordering in the argument list. Arguments smaller than 64 bits can be accessed using
                    the appropriate subsection of the 64-bit register. For example, if the first argument
                    is 32 bits, it can be accessed as %edi.
                         When a function has more than six integral arguments, the other ones are
                    passed on the stack. Assume that procedure P calls procedure Q with n integral
                    arguments, such that n > 6. Then the code for P must allocate a stack frame with
                    enough storage for arguments 7 through n, as illustrated in Figure 3.25. It copies
                    arguments 1–6 into the appropriate registers, and it puts arguments 7 through n
                    onto the stack, with argument 7 at the top of the stack. When passing parameters
                    on the stack, all data sizes are rounded up to be multiples of eight. With the
                    arguments in place, the program can then execute a call instruction to transfer
                    control to procedure Q. Procedure Q can access its arguments via registers and
                    possibly from the stack. If Q, in turn, calls some function that has more than six
                    arguments, it can allocate space within its stack frame for these, as is illustrated
                    by the area labeled “Argument build area” in Figure 3.25.
                         As an example of argument passing, consider the C function proc shown in
                    Figure 3.29(a). This function has eight arguments, including integers with different
                    numbers of bytes (8, 4, 2, and 1), as well as different types of pointers, each of which
                    is 8 bytes.
                         The assembly code generated for proc is shown in Figure 3.29(b). The first
                    six arguments are passed in registers. The last two are passed on the stack, as
                    documented by the diagram of Figure 3.30. This diagram shows the state of the
                    stack during the execution of proc. We can see that the return address was pushed
                    onto the stack as part of the procedure call. The two arguments, therefore, are
                    at positions 8 and 16 relative to the stack pointer. Within the code, we can see
                    that different versions of the add instruction are used according to the sizes of the
                    operands: addq for a1 (long), addl for a2 (int), addw for a3 (short), and addb for
                    a4 (char). Observe that the movl instruction of line 6 reads 4 bytes from memory;
                    the following addb instruction only makes use of the low-order byte.

                    Practice Problem 3.33 (solution page 375)
                    A C function procprob has four arguments u, a, v, and b. Each is either a signed
                    number or a pointer to a signed number, where the numbers have different sizes.
                    The function has the following body:

                         *u += a;
                         *v += b;
                         return sizeof(a) + sizeof(b);

                         It compiles to the following x86-64 code:

                     1    procprob:
                     2      movslq %edi, %rdi
                     3      addq    %rdi, (%rdx)
                     4      addb    %sil, (%rcx)

(a) C code
void proc(long a1, long *a1p,
          int   a2, int   *a2p,
          short a3, short *a3p,
          char a4, char *a4p)
{
    *a1p += a1;
    *a2p += a2;
    *a3p += a3;
    *a4p += a4;
}
(b) Generated assembly code
     void proc(a1, a1p, a2, a2p, a3, a3p, a4, a4p)
     Arguments passed as follows:
       a1 in %rdi           (64 bits)
       a1p in %rsi          (64 bits)
       a2 in %edx           (32 bits)
       a2p in %rcx          (64 bits)
       a3 in %r8w           (16 bits)
       a3p in %r9           (64 bits)
       a4 at %rsp+8         ( 8 bits)
       a4p at %rsp+16       (64 bits)
1    proc:
2      movq       16(%rsp), %rax       Fetch a4p         (64 bits)
3      addq       %rdi, (%rsi)         *a1p += a1        (64 bits)
4      addl       %edx, (%rcx)         *a2p += a2        (32 bits)
5      addw       %r8w, (%r9)          *a3p += a3        (16 bits)
6      movl       8(%rsp), %edx        Fetch a4          ( 8 bits)
7      addb       %dl, (%rax)          *a4p += a4        ( 8 bits)
8      ret                             Return

Figure 3.29 Example of function with multiple arguments of different types.
Arguments 1–6 are passed in registers, while arguments 7–8 are passed on the stack.

Figure 3.30
                                        a4p              16
Stack frame structure for
function proc. Arguments                            a4    8
a4 and a4p are passed on                                             Stack pointer
the stack.                         Return address         0
                                                                     %rsp

                     5          movl      $6, %eax
                     6          ret

                        Determine a valid ordering and types of the four parameters. There are two
                    correct answers.

                    3.7.4 Local Storage on the Stack
                    Most of the procedure examples we have seen so far did not require any local
                    storage beyond what could be held in registers. At times, however, local data must
                    be stored in memory. Common cases of this include these:
                         .
                             There are not enough registers to hold all of the local data.
                         .
                             The address operator ‘&’ is applied to a local variable, and hence we must be
                             able to generate an address for it.
                         .
                             Some of the local variables are arrays or structures and hence must be accessed
                             by array or structure references. We will discuss this possibility when we
                             describe how arrays and structures are allocated.
                    Typically, a procedure allocates space on the stack frame by decrementing the
                    stack pointer. This results in the portion of the stack frame labeled “Local vari-
                    ables” in Figure 3.25.
                          As an example of the handling of the address operator, consider the two
                    functions shown in Figure 3.31(a). The function swap_add swaps the two values
                    designated by pointers xp and yp and also returns the sum of the two values. The
                    function caller creates pointers to local variables arg1 and arg2 and passes these
                    to swap_add. Figure 3.31(b) shows how caller uses a stack frame to implement
                    these local variables. The code for caller starts by decrementing the stack pointer
                    by 16; this effectively allocates 16 bytes on the stack. Letting S denote the value of
                    the stack pointer, we can see that the code computes &arg2 as S + 8 (line 5), &arg1
                    as S (line 6). We can therefore infer that local variables arg1 and arg2 are stored
                    within the stack frame at offsets 0 and 8 relative to the stack pointer. When the call
                    to swap_add completes, the code for caller then retrieves the two values from
                    the stack (lines 8–9), computes their difference, and multiplies this by the value
                    returned by swap_add in register %rax (line 10). Finally, the function deallocates
                    its stack frame by incrementing the stack pointer by 16 (line 11.) We can see with
                    this example that the run-time stack provides a simple mechanism for allocating
                    local storage when it is required and deallocating it when the function completes.
                          As a more complex example, the function call_proc, shown in Figure 3.32,
                    illustrates many aspects of the x86-64 stack discipline. Despite the length of this
                    example, it is worth studying carefully. It shows a function that must allocate
                    storage on the stack for local variables, as well as to pass values to the 8-argument
                    function proc (Figure 3.29). The function creates a stack frame, diagrammed in
                    Figure 3.33.
                          Looking at the assembly code for call_proc (Figure 3.32(b)), we can see
                    that a large portion of the code (lines 2–15) involves preparing to call function

(a) Code for swap_add and calling function
long swap_add(long *xp, long *yp)
{
    long x = *xp;
    long y = *yp;
    *xp = y;
    *yp = x;
    return x + y;
}

long caller()
{
    long arg1 = 534;
    long arg2 = 1057;
    long sum = swap_add(&arg1, &arg2);
    long diff = arg1 - arg2;
    return sum * diff;
}
(b) Generated assembly code for calling function
     long caller()
 1   caller:
 2     subq       $16, %rsp             Allocate 16 bytes for stack frame
 3     movq       $534, (%rsp)          Store 534 in arg1
 4     movq       $1057, 8(%rsp)        Store 1057 in arg2
 5     leaq       8(%rsp), %rsi         Compute &arg2 as second argument
 6     movq       %rsp, %rdi            Compute &arg1 as first argument
 7     call       swap_add              Call swap_add(&arg1, &arg2)
 8     movq       (%rsp), %rdx          Get arg1
 9     subq       8(%rsp), %rdx         Compute diff = arg1 - arg2
10     imulq      %rdx, %rax            Compute sum * diff
11     addq       $16, %rsp             Deallocate stack frame
12     ret                              Return

Figure 3.31 Example of procedure definition and call. The calling code must allocate
a stack frame due to the presence of address operators.

proc. This includes setting up the stack frame for the local variables and function
parameters, and for loading function arguments into registers. As Figure 3.33
shows, local variables x1–x4 are allocated on the stack and have different sizes.
Expressing their locations as offsets relative to the stack pointer, they occupy bytes
24–31 (x1), 20–23 (x2), 18–19 (x3), and 17 (s3). Pointers to these locations are
generated by leaq instructions (lines 7, 10, 12, and 14). Arguments 7 (with value
4) and 8 (a pointer to the location of x4) are stored on the stack at offsets 0 and 8
relative to the stack pointer.

                    (a) C code for calling function
                    long call_proc()
                    {
                        long x1 = 1; int x2 = 2;
                        short x3 = 3; char x4 = 4;
                        proc(x1, &x1, x2, &x2, x3, &x3, x4, &x4);
                        return (x1+x2)*(x3-x4);
                    }
                    (b) Generated assembly code
                          long call_proc()
                     1    call_proc:
                            Set up arguments to proc
                     2      subq        $32, %rsp            Allocate 32-byte stack frame
                     3      movq        $1, 24(%rsp)         Store 1 in &x1
                     4      movl        $2, 20(%rsp)         Store 2 in &x2
                     5      movw        $3, 18(%rsp)         Store 3 in &x3
                     6      movb        $4, 17(%rsp)         Store 4 in &x4
                     7      leaq        17(%rsp), %rax       Create &x4
                     8      movq        %rax, 8(%rsp)        Store &x4 as argument 8
                     9      movl        $4, (%rsp)           Store 4 as argument 7
                    10      leaq        18(%rsp), %r9        Pass &x3 as argument 6
                    11      movl        $3, %r8d             Pass 3 as argument 5
                    12      leaq        20(%rsp), %rcx       Pass &x2 as argument 4
                    13      movl        $2, %edx             Pass 2 as argument 3
                    14      leaq        24(%rsp), %rsi       Pass &x1 as argument 2
                    15      movl        $1, %edi             Pass 1 as argument 1
                            Call proc
                    16      call        proc
                            Retrieve changes to memory
                    17      movslq      20(%rsp), %rdx       Get x2 and convert to long
                    18      addq        24(%rsp), %rdx       Compute x1+x2
                    19      movswl      18(%rsp), %eax       Get x3 and convert to int
                    20      movsbl      17(%rsp), %ecx       Get x4 and convert to int
                    21      subl        %ecx, %eax           Compute x3-x4
                    22      cltq                             Convert to long
                    23      imulq       %rdx, %rax           Compute (x1+x2) * (x3-x4)
                    24      addq        $32, %rsp            Deallocate stack frame
                    25      ret                              Return

Figure 3.32 Example of code to call function proc, defined in Figure 3.29. This code
                    creates a stack frame.

Figure 3.33                              Return address
Stack frame for function                                        32
call_proc. The stack                           x1
                                                                24
frame contains local                   x2           x3     x4
variables, as well as two of                  20     18    17   16
the arguments to pass to                Argument 8 = &x4
                                                                 8
function proc.
                                                                4      Stack pointer
                                                                 0
                                                                       %rsp
                                            Argument 7

    When procedure proc is called, the program will begin executing the code
shown in Figure 3.29(b). As shown in Figure 3.30, arguments 7 and 8 are now
at offsets 8 and 16 relative to the stack pointer, because the return address was
pushed onto the stack.
    When the program returns to call_proc, the code retrieves the values of the
four local variables (lines 17–20) and performs the final computations. It finishes
by incrementing the stack pointer by 32 to deallocate the stack frame.

3.7.5 Local Storage in Registers
The set of program registers acts as a single resource shared by all of the proce-
dures. Although only one procedure can be active at a given time, we must make
sure that when one procedure (the caller) calls another (the callee), the callee does
not overwrite some register value that the caller planned to use later. For this rea-
son, x86-64 adopts a uniform set of conventions for register usage that must be
respected by all procedures, including those in program libraries.
      By convention, registers %rbx, %rbp, and %r12–%r15 are classified as callee-
saved registers. When procedure P calls procedure Q, Q must preserve the values
of these registers, ensuring that they have the same values when Q returns to P as
they did when Q was called. Procedure Q can preserve a register value by either not
changing it at all or by pushing the original value on the stack, altering it, and then
popping the old value from the stack before returning. The pushing of register
values has the effect of creating the portion of the stack frame labeled “Saved
registers” in Figure 3.25. With this convention, the code for P can safely store a
value in a callee-saved register (after saving the previous value on the stack, of
course), call Q, and then use the value in the register without risk of it having been
corrupted.
      All other registers, except for the stack pointer %rsp, are classified as caller-
saved registers. This means that they can be modified by any function. The name
“caller saved” can be understood in the context of a procedure P having some local
data in such a register and calling procedure Q. Since Q is free to alter this register,
it is incumbent upon P (the caller) to first save the data before it makes the call.
      As an example, consider the function P shown in Figure 3.34(a). It calls Q twice.
During the first call, it must retain the value of x for use later. Similarly, during
the second call, it must retain the value computed for Q(y). In Figure 3.34(b),

                    (a) Calling function
                    long P(long x, long y)
                    {
                        long u = Q(y);
                        long v = Q(x);
                        return u + v;
                    }
                    (b) Generated assembly code for the calling function
                          long P(long x, long y)
                          x in %rdi, y in %rsi
                     1    P:
                     2      pushq      %rbp                  Save %rbp
                     3      pushq      %rbx                  Save %rbx
                     4      subq       $8, %rsp              Align stack frame
                     5      movq       %rdi, %rbp            Save x
                     6      movq       %rsi, %rdi            Move y to first argument
                     7      call       Q                     Call Q(y)
                     8      movq       %rax, %rbx            Save result
                     9      movq       %rbp, %rdi            Move x to first argument
                    10      call       Q                     Call Q(x)
                    11      addq       %rbx, %rax            Add saved Q(y) to Q(x)
                    12      addq       $8, %rsp              Deallocate last part of stack
                    13      popq       %rbx                  Restore %rbx
                    14      popq       %rbp                  Restore %rbp
                    15      ret
Figure 3.34 Code demonstrating use of callee-saved registers. Value x must be
                    preserved during the first call, and value Q(y) must be preserved during the second.

                    we can see that the code generated by gcc uses two callee-saved registers: %rbp
                    to hold x, and %rbx to hold the computed value of Q(y). At the beginning of the
                    function, it saves the values of these two registers on the stack (lines 2–3). It copies
                    argument x to %rbp before the first call to Q (line 5). It copies the result of this call
                    to %rbx before the second call to Q (line 8). At the end of the function (lines 13–
                    14), it restores the values of the two callee-saved registers by popping them off the
                    stack. Note how they are popped in the reverse order from how they were pushed,
                    to account for the last-in, first-out discipline of a stack.

                    Practice Problem 3.34 (solution page 376)
                    Consider a function P, which generates local values, named a0–a8. It then calls
                    function Q using these generated values as arguments. Gcc produces the following
                    code for the first part of P:

        long P(long x)
        x in %rdi
 1      P:
 2        pushq       %r15
 3        pushq       %r14
 4        pushq       %r13
 5        pushq       %r12
 6        pushq       %rbp
 7        pushq       %rbx
 8        subq        $24, %rsp
 9        movq        %rdi, %rbx
10        leaq        1(%rdi), %r15
11        leaq        2(%rdi), %r14
12        leaq        3(%rdi), %r13
13        leaq        4(%rdi), %r12
14        leaq        5(%rdi), %rbp
15        leaq        6(%rdi), %rax
16        movq        %rax, (%rsp)
17        leaq        7(%rdi), %rdx
18        movq        %rdx, 8(%rsp)
19        movl        $0, %eax
20        call        Q
              . . .

     A. Identify which local values get stored in callee-saved registers.
     B. Identify which local values get stored on the stack.
     C. Explain why the program could not store all of the local values in callee-
        saved registers.

3.7.6 Recursive Procedures
The conventions we have described for using the registers and the stack allow
x86-64 procedures to call themselves recursively. Each procedure call has its own
private space on the stack, and so the local variables of the multiple outstanding
calls do not interfere with one another. Furthermore, the stack discipline naturally
provides the proper policy for allocating local storage when the procedure is called
and deallocating it before returning.
     Figure 3.35 shows both the C code and the generated assembly code for a
recursive factorial function. We can see that the assembly code uses register %rbx
to hold the parameter n, after first saving the existing value on the stack (line 2)
and later restoring the value before returning (line 11). Due to the stack discipline,
and the register-saving conventions, we can be assured that when the recursive call
to rfact(n-1) returns (line 9) that (1) the result of the call will be held in register

                    (a) C code
                    long rfact(long n)
                    {
                        long result;
                        if (n <= 1)
                             result = 1;
                        else
                             result = n * rfact(n-1);
                        return result;
                    }
                    (b) Generated assembly code
                          long rfact(long n)
                          n in %rdi
                     1    rfact:
                     2      pushq     %rbx                     Save %rbx
                     3      movq      %rdi, %rbx               Store n in callee-saved register
                     4      movl      $1, %eax                 Set return value = 1
                     5      cmpq      $1, %rdi                 Compare n:1
                     6      jle       .L35                     If <=, goto done
                     7      leaq      -1(%rdi), %rdi           Compute n-1
                     8      call      rfact                    Call rfact(n-1)
                     9      imulq     %rbx, %rax               Multiply result by n
                    10    .L35:                              done:
                    11      popq      %rbx                     Restore %rbx
                    12      ret                                Return

Figure 3.35 Code for recursive factorial program. The standard procedure handling
                    mechanisms suffice for implementing recursive functions.

                    %rax, and (2) the value of argument n will held in register %rbx. Multiplying these
                    two values then computes the desired result.
                         We can see from this example that calling a function recursively proceeds just
                    like any other function call. Our stack discipline provides a mechanism where
                    each invocation of a function has its own private storage for state information
                    (saved values of the return location and callee-saved registers). If need be, it
                    can also provide storage for local variables. The stack discipline of allocation and
                    deallocation naturally matches the call-return ordering of functions. This method
                    of implementing function calls and returns even works for more complex patterns,
                    including mutual recursion (e.g., when procedure P calls Q, which in turn calls P).

                    Practice Problem 3.35 (solution page 376)
                    For a C function having the general structure

long rfun(unsigned long x) {
    if (           )
         return         ;
    unsigned long nx =                 ;
    long rv = rfun(nx);
    return           ;
}

gcc generates the following assembly code:

        long rfun(unsigned long x)
        x in %rdi
 1      rfun:
 2        pushq     %rbx
 3        movq      %rdi, %rbx
 4        movl      $0, %eax
 5        testq     %rdi, %rdi
 6        je        .L2
 7        shrq      $2, %rdi
 8        call      rfun
 9        addq      %rbx, %rax
10      .L2:
11        popq      %rbx
12        ret

     A. What value does rfun store in the callee-saved register %rbx?
     B. Fill in the missing expressions in the C code shown above.

3.8 Array Allocation and Access
Arrays in C are one means of aggregating scalar data into larger data types. C
uses a particularly simple implementation of arrays, and hence the translation
into machine code is fairly straightforward. One unusual feature of C is that we
can generate pointers to elements within arrays and perform arithmetic with these
pointers. These are translated into address computations in machine code.
     Optimizing compilers are particularly good at simplifying the address compu-
tations used by array indexing. This can make the correspondence between the C
code and its translation into machine code somewhat difficult to decipher.

3.8.1 Basic Principles
For data type T and integer constant N , consider a declaration of the form

T A[N];

                    Let us denote the starting location as xA. The declaration has two effects. First,
                    it allocates a contiguous region of L . N bytes in memory, where L is the size (in
                    bytes) of data type T . Second, it introduces an identifier A that can be used as
                    a pointer to the beginning of the array. The value of this pointer will be xA. The
                    array elements can be accessed using an integer index ranging between 0 and N −1.
                    Array element i will be stored at address xA + L . i.
                         As examples, consider the following declarations:

                    char    A[12];
                    char   *B[8];
                    int     C[6];
                    double *D[5];

                    These declarations will generate arrays with the following parameters:

                    Array     Element size      Total size   Start address    Element i
                      A             1              12             xA           xA + i
                      B             8              64             xB           xB + 8i
                      C             4              24             xC           xC + 4i
                      D             8              40             xD           xD + 8i

                    Array A consists of 12 single-byte (char) elements. Array C consists of 6 integers,
                    each requiring 4 bytes. B and D are both arrays of pointers, and hence the array
                    elements are 8 bytes each.
                        The memory referencing instructions of x86-64 are designed to simplify array
                    access. For example, suppose E is an array of values of type int and we wish to
                    evaluate E[i], where the address of E is stored in register %rdx and i is stored in
                    register %rcx. Then the instruction

                    movl (%rdx,%rcx,4),%eax

                    will perform the address computation xE + 4i, read that memory location, and
                    copy the result to register %eax. The allowed scaling factors of 1, 2, 4, and 8 cover
                    the sizes of the common primitive data types.

                    Practice Problem 3.36 (solution page 377)
                    Consider the following declarations:

                    int    P[5];
                    short Q[2];
                    int    **R[9];
                    double *S[10];
                    short *T[2];

                       Fill in the following table describing the element size, the total size, and the
                    address of element i for each of these arrays.

Array      Element size     Total size      Start address   Element i
  P                                              xP
  Q                                              xQ
  R                                              xR
  S                                              xS
  T                                              xT

3.8.2 Pointer Arithmetic
C allows arithmetic on pointers, where the computed value is scaled according to
the size of the data type referenced by the pointer. That is, if p is a pointer to data
of type T , and the value of p is xp, then the expression p+i has value xp + L . i,
where L is the size of data type T .
     The unary operators ‘&’ and ‘*’ allow the generation and dereferencing of
pointers. That is, for an expression Expr denoting some object, &Expr is a pointer
giving the address of the object. For an expression AExpr denoting an address,
*AExpr gives the value at that address. The expressions Expr and *&Expr are
therefore equivalent. The array subscripting operation can be applied to both
arrays and pointers. The array reference A[i] is identical to the expression *(A+i).
It computes the address of the ith array element and then accesses this memory
location.
     Expanding on our earlier example, suppose the starting address of integer
array E and integer index i are stored in registers %rdx and %rcx, respectively.
The following are some expressions involving E. We also show an assembly-code
implementation of each expression, with the result being stored in either register
%eax (for data) or register %rax (for pointers).

Expression     Type       Value                 Assembly code
E              int *      xE                    movl %rdx,%rax
E[0]           int        M[xE ]                movl (%rdx),%eax
E[i]           int        M[xE + 4i]            movl (%rdx,%rcx,4),%eax
&E[2]          int *      xE + 8                leaq 8(%rdx),%rax
E+i-1          int *      xE + 4i − 4           leaq -4(%rdx,%rcx,4),%rax
*(E+i-3)       int        M[xE + 4i − 12]       movl -12(%rdx,%rcx,4),%eax
&E[i]-E        long       i                     movq %rcx,%rax

     In these examples, we see that operations that return array values have type
int, and hence involve 4-byte operations (e.g., movl) and registers (e.g., %eax).
Those that return pointers have type int *, and hence involve 8-byte operations
(e.g., leaq) and registers (e.g., %rax). The final example shows that one can
compute the difference of two pointers within the same data structure, with the
result being data having type long and value equal to the difference of the two
addresses divided by the size of the data type.

                    Practice Problem 3.37 (solution page 377)
                    Suppose xP, the address of short integer array P, and long integer index i are stored
                    in registers %rdx and %rcx, respectively. For each of the following expressions, give
                    its type, a formula for its value, and an assembly-code implementation. The result
                    should be stored in register %rax if it is a pointer and register element %ax if it has
                    data type short.
                    Expression       Type          Value        Assembly code
                    P[1]
                    P+3+i
                    P[i * 6 - 5]
                    P[2]
                    &P[i + 2]

                    3.8.3 Nested Arrays
                    The general principles of array allocation and referencing hold even when we
                    create arrays of arrays. For example, the declaration
                    int A[5][3];

                    is equivalent to the declaration
                    typedef int row3_t[3];
                    row3_t A[5];

                    Data type row3_t is defined to be an array of three integers. Array A contains five
                    such elements, each requiring 12 bytes to store the three integers. The total array
                    size is then 4 . 5 . 3 = 60 bytes.
                         Array A can also be viewed as a two-dimensional array with five rows and
                    three columns, referenced as A[0][0] through A[4][2]. The array elements are
                    ordered in memory in row-major order, meaning all elements of row 0, which
                    can be written A[0], followed by all elements of row 1 (A[1]), and so on. This is
                    illustrated in Figure 3.36.
                         This ordering is a consequence of our nested declaration. Viewing A as an
                    array of five elements, each of which is an array of three int’s, we first have A[0],
                    followed by A[1], and so on.
                         To access elements of multidimensional arrays, the compiler generates code to
                    compute the offset of the desired element and then uses one of the mov instructions
                    with the start of the array as the base address and the (possibly scaled) offset as
                    an index. In general, for an array declared as
                    T D[R][C];

                    array element D[i][j] is at memory address

                                                &D[i][j] = xD + L(C . i + j )                        (3.1)

Figure 3.36                      Row   Element    Address
Elements of array in            A[0] A[0][0]      xA
row-major order.
                                       A[0][1]    xA + 4
                                       A[0][2]    xA + 8
                                A[1] A[1][0]      xA + 12
                                       A[1][1]    xA + 16
                                       A[1][2]    xA + 20
                                A[2] A[2][0]      xA + 24
                                       A[2][1]    xA + 28
                                       A[2][2]    xA + 32
                                A[3] A[3][0]      xA + 36
                                       A[3][1]    xA + 40
                                       A[4][2]    xA + 44
                                A[4] A[4][0]      xA + 48
                                       A[4][1]    xA + 52
                                       A[4][2]    xA + 56

where L is the size of data type T in bytes. As an example, consider the 5 × 3 integer
array A defined earlier. Suppose xA, i, and j are in registers %rdi, %rsi, and %rdx,
respectively. Then array element A[i][j] can be copied to register %eax by the
following code:

     A in %rdi, i in %rsi, and j in %rdx
1       leaq      (%rsi,%rsi,2), %rax            Compute 3i
2       leaq      (%rdi,%rax,4), %rax            Compute xA + 12i
3       movl      (%rax,%rdx,4), %eax            Read from M[xA + 12i + 4]

As can be seen, this code computes the element’s address as xA + 12i + 4j = xA +
4(3i + j ) using the scaling and addition capabilities of x86-64 address arithmetic.

Practice Problem 3.38 (solution page 377)
Consider the following source code, where M and N are constants declared with
#define:

long P[M][N];
long Q[N][M];

long sum_element(long i, long j) {
    return P[i][j] + Q[j][i];
}

In compiling this program, gcc generates the following assembly code:

                          long sum_element(long i, long j)
                          i in %rdi, j in %rsi
                     1    sum_element:
                     2      leaq    0(,%rdi,8), %rdx
                     3      subq    %rdi, %rdx
                     4      addq    %rsi, %rdx
                     5      leaq    (%rsi,%rsi,4), %rax
                     6      addq    %rax, %rdi
                     7      movq    Q(,%rdi,8), %rax
                     8      addq    P(,%rdx,8), %rax
                     9      ret

                        Use your reverse engineering skills to determine the values of M and N based
                    on this assembly code.

                    3.8.4 Fixed-Size Arrays
                    The C compiler is able to make many optimizations for code operating on multi-
                    dimensional arrays of fixed size. Here we demonstrate some of the optimizations
                    made by gcc when the optimization level is set with the flag -O1. Suppose we
                    declare data type fix_matrix to be 16 × 16 arrays of integers as follows:

                    #define N 16
                    typedef int fix_matrix[N][N];

                    (This example illustrates a good coding practice. Whenever a program uses some
                    constant as an array dimension or buffer size, it is best to associate a name with
                    it via a #define declaration, and then use this name consistently, rather than
                    the numeric value. That way, if an occasion ever arises to change the value, it
                    can be done by simply modifying the #define declaration.) The code in Figure
                    3.37(a) computes element i, k of the product of arrays A and B—that is, the
                    inner product?of row i from A and column k from B. This product is given by
                    the formula 0≤j <N ai,j . bj,k . Gcc generates code that we then recoded into
                    C, shown as function fix_prod_ele_opt in Figure 3.37(b). This code contains
                    a number of clever optimizations. It removes the integer index j and converts all
                    array references to pointer dereferences. This involves (1) generating a pointer,
                    which we have named Aptr, that points to successive elements in row i of A,
                    (2) generating a pointer, which we have named Bptr, that points to successive
                    elements in column k of B, and (3) generating a pointer, which we have named
                    Bend, that equals the value Bptr will have when it is time to terminate the loop.
                    The initial value for Aptr is the address of the first element of row i of A, given
                    by the C expression &A[i][0]. The initial value for Bptr is the address of the first
                    element of column k of B, given by the C expression &B[0][k]. The value for Bend
                    is the index of what would be the (n + 1)st element in column j of B, given by the
                    C expression &B[N][k].

(a) Original C code
/* Compute i,k of fixed matrix product */
int fix_prod_ele (fix_matrix A, fix_matrix B, long i, long k) {
    long j;
    int result = 0;

     for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
         result += A[i][j] * B[j][k];

     return result;
}
(b) Optimized C code
 1    /* Compute i,k of fixed matrix product */
 2    int fix_prod_ele_opt(fix_matrix A, fix_matrix B, long i, long k) {
 3        int *Aptr = &A[i][0];     /* Points to elements in row i of A    */
 4        int *Bptr = &B[0][k];     /* Points to elements in column k of B */
 5        int *Bend = &B[N][k];     /* Marks stopping point for Bptr       */
 6        int result = 0;
 7        do {                           /* No need for initial test */
 8             result += *Aptr * *Bptr; /* Add next product to sum */
 9             Aptr ++;                  /* Move Aptr to next column */
10             Bptr += N;                /* Move Bptr to next row    */
11        } while (Bptr != Bend);        /* Test for stopping point */
12        return result;
13    }
Figure 3.37 Original and optimized code to compute element i, k of matrix product
for fixed-length arrays. The compiler performs these optimizations automatically.

    The following is the actual assembly code generated by gcc for function fix_
prod_ele. We see that four registers are used as follows: %eax holds result, %rdi
holds Aptr, %rcx holds Bptr, and %rsi holds Bend.

     int fix_prod_ele_opt(fix_matrix A, fix_matrix B, long i, long k)
     A in %rdi, B in %rsi, i in %rdx, k in %rcx
 1    fix_prod_ele:
 2      salq    $6, %rdx              Compute 64 * i
 3      addq    %rdx, %rdi            Compute Aptr = xA + 64i = &A[i][0]
 4      leaq    (%rsi,%rcx,4), %rcx   Compute Bptr = xB + 4k = &B[0][k]
 5      leaq    1024(%rcx), %rsi      Compute Bend = xB + 4k + 1024 = &B[N][k]
 6      movl    $0, %eax              Set result = 0
 7    .L7:                          loop:
 8      movl    (%rdi), %edx          Read *Aptr
 9      imull   (%rcx), %edx          Multiply by *Bptr
10      addl    %edx, %eax            Add to result

                    11      addq     $4, %rdi                  Increment Aptr ++
                    12      addq     $64, %rcx                 Increment Bptr += N
                    13      cmpq     %rsi, %rcx                Compare Bptr:Bend
                    14      jne      .L7                       If !=, goto loop
                    15      rep; ret                           Return

                    Practice Problem 3.39 (solution page 378)
                    Use Equation 3.1 to explain how the computations of the initial values for Aptr,
                    Bptr, and Bend in the C code of Figure 3.37(b) (lines 3–5) correctly describe their
                    computations in the assembly code generated for fix_prod_ele (lines 3–5).

                    Practice Problem 3.40 (solution page 378)
                    The following C code sets the diagonal elements of one of our fixed-size arrays to
                    val:
                    /* Set all diagonal elements to val */
                    void fix_set_diag(fix_matrix A, int val) {
                        long i;
                        for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
                            A[i][i] = val;
                    }

                        When compiled with optimization level -O1, gcc generates the following
                    assembly code:
                     1    fix_set_diag:
                          void fix_set_diag(fix_matrix A, int val)
                          A in %rdi, val in %rsi
                     2      movl     $0, %eax
                     3    .L13:
                     4      movl     %esi, (%rdi,%rax)
                     5      addq     $68, %rax
                     6      cmpq     $1088, %rax
                     7      jne      .L13
                     8      rep; ret

                         Create a C code program fix_set_diag_opt that uses optimizations similar
                    to those in the assembly code, in the same style as the code in Figure 3.37(b). Use
                    expressions involving the parameter N rather than integer constants, so that your
                    code will work correctly if N is redefined.

                    3.8.5 Variable-Size Arrays
                    Historically, C only supported multidimensional arrays where the sizes (with the
                    possible exception of the first dimension) could be determined at compile time.

Programmers requiring variable-size arrays had to allocate storage for these arrays
using functions such as malloc or calloc, and they had to explicitly encode the
mapping of multidimensional arrays into single-dimension ones via row-major in-
dexing, as expressed in Equation 3.1. ISO C99 introduced the capability of having
array dimension expressions that are computed as the array is being allocated.
    In the C version of variable-size arrays, we can declare an array

int A[expr1][expr2]

either as a local variable or as an argument to a function, and then the dimensions
of the array are determined by evaluating the expressions expr1 and expr2 at the
time the declaration is encountered. So, for example, we can write a function to
access element i, j of an n × n array as follows:

int var_ele(long n, int A[n][n], long i, long j) {
    return A[i][j];
}

The parameter n must precede the parameter A[n][n], so that the function can
compute the array dimensions as the parameter is encountered.
   Gcc generates code for this referencing function as

     int var_ele(long n, int A[n][n], long i, long j)
     n in %rdi, A in %rsi, i in %rdx, j in %rcx
 1    var_ele:
 2      imulq     %rdx, %rdi                       Compute n . i
 3      leaq      (%rsi,%rdi,4), %rax              Compute xA + 4(n . i
 4      movl      (%rax,%rcx,4), %eax              Read from M[xA + 4(n . i) + 4j ]
 5      ret

As the annotations show, this code computes the address of element i, j as xA +
4(n . i) + 4j = xA + 4(n . i + j ). The address computation is similar to that of the
fixed-size array (Section 3.8.3), except that (1) the register usage changes due to
added parameter n, and (2) a multiply instruction is used (line 2) to compute n . i,
rather than an leaq instruction to compute 3i. We see therefore that referencing
variable-size arrays requires only a slight generalization over fixed-size ones. The
dynamic version must use a multiplication instruction to scale i by n, rather than
a series of shifts and adds. In some processors, this multiplication can incur a
significant performance penalty, but it is unavoidable in this case.
     When variable-size arrays are referenced within a loop, the compiler can often
optimize the index computations by exploiting the regularity of the access patterns.
For example, Figure 3.38(a) shows C code to compute element i, k of the product
of two n × n arrays A and B. Gcc generates assembly code, which we have recast
into C (Figure 3.38(b)). This code follows a different style from the optimized
code for the fixed-size array (Figure 3.37), but that is more an artifact of the choices
made by the compiler, rather than a fundamental requirement for the two different
functions. The code of Figure 3.38(b) retains loop variable j, both to detect when

(a) Original C code
 1    /* Compute i,k of variable matrix product */
 2    int var_prod_ele(long n, int A[n][n], int B[n][n], long i, long k) {
 3        long j;
 4        int result = 0;
 5
 6           for (j = 0; j < n; j++)
 7               result += A[i][j] * B[j][k];
 8
 9           return result;
10    }
(b) Optimized C code
/* Compute i,k of variable matrix product */
int var_prod_ele_opt(long n, int A[n][n], int B[n][n], long i, long k) {
    int *Arow = A[i];
    int *Bptr = &B[0][k];
    int result = 0;
    long j;
    for (j = 0; j < n; j++) {
        result += Arow[j] * *Bptr;
        Bptr += n;
    }
    return result;
}
Figure 3.38 Original and optimized code to compute element i, k of matrix product for variable-size
arrays. The compiler performs these optimizations automatically.

                        the loop has terminated and to index into an array consisting of the elements of
                        row i of A.
                            The following is the assembly code for the loop of var_prod_ele:

                              Registers: n in %rdi, Arow in %rsi, Bptr in %rcx
                                         4n in %r9, result in %eax, j in %edx
                         1    .L24:                                    loop:
                         2      movl      (%rsi,%rdx,4), %r8d            Read Arow[j]
                         3      imull     (%rcx), %r8d                   Multiply by *Bptr
                         4      addl      %r8d, %eax                     Add to result
                         5      addq      $1, %rdx                       j++
                         6      addq      %r9, %rcx                      Bptr += n
                         7      cmpq      %rdi, %rdx                     Compare j:n
                         8      jne       .L24                           If !=, goto loop

                        We see that the program makes use of both a scaled value 4n (register %r9) for
                        incrementing Bptr as well as the value of n (register %rdi) to check the loop

bounds. The need for two values does not show up in the C code, due to the scaling
of pointer arithmetic.
    We have seen that, with optimizations enabled, gcc is able to recognize pat-
terns that arise when a program steps through the elements of a multidimensional
array. It can then generate code that avoids the multiplication that would result
from a direct application of Equation 3.1. Whether it generates the pointer-based
code of Figure 3.37(b) or the array-based code of Figure 3.38(b), these optimiza-
tions will significantly improve program performance.

3.9 Heterogeneous Data Structures
C provides two mechanisms for creating data types by combining objects of dif-
ferent types: structures, declared using the keyword struct, aggregate multiple
objects into a single unit; unions, declared using the keyword union, allow an
object to be referenced using several different types.

3.9.1 Structures
The C struct declaration creates a data type that groups objects of possibly
different types into a single object. The different components of a structure are
referenced by names. The implementation of structures is similar to that of arrays
in that all of the components of a structure are stored in a contiguous region of
memory and a pointer to a structure is the address of its first byte. The compiler
maintains information about each structure type indicating the byte offset of
each field. It generates references to structure elements using these offsets as
displacements in memory referencing instructions.
     As an example, consider the following structure declaration:

struct rec {
    int i;
    int j;
    int a[2];
    int *p;
};

This structure contains four fields: two 4-byte values of type int, a two-element
array of type int, and an 8-byte integer pointer, giving a total of 24 bytes:

  Offset   0         4           8                      16                      24
Contents       i          j          a[0]      a[1]               p

     Observe that array a is embedded within the structure. The numbers along
the top of the diagram give the byte offsets of the fields from the beginning of the
structure.
     To access the fields of a structure, the compiler generates code that adds the
appropriate offset to the address of the structure. For example, suppose variable r

 New to C?        Representing an object as a struct
 The struct data type constructor is the closest thing C provides to the objects of C++ and Java. It allows
 the programmer to keep information about some entity in a single data structure and to reference that
 information with names.
      For example, a graphics program might represent a rectangle as a structure:
 struct rect {
     long llx;         /* X coordinate of lower-left corner */
     long lly;         /* Y coordinate of lower-left corner */
     unsigned long width; /* Width (in pixels)                                   */
     unsigned long height; /* Height (in pixels)                                 */
     unsigned color;       /* Coding of color                                    */
 };
      We can declare a variable r of type struct rect and set its field values as follows:
      struct rect r;
      r.llx = r.lly = 0;
      r.color = 0xFF00FF;
      r.width = 10;
      r.height = 20;
 where the expression r.llx selects field llx of structure r.
    Alternatively, we can both declare the variable and initialize its fields with a single statement:
      struct rect r = { 0, 0, 0xFF00FF, 10, 20 };
     It is common to pass pointers to structures from one place to another rather than copying them.
 For example, the following function computes the area of a rectangle, where a pointer to the rectangle
 struct is passed to the function:
 long area(struct rect *rp) {
     return (*rp).width * (*rp).height;
 }
      The expression (*rp).width dereferences the pointer and selects the width field of the resulting
 structure. Parentheses are required, because the compiler would interpret the expression *rp.width as
 *(rp.width), which is not valid. This combination of dereferencing and field selection is so common
 that C provides an alternative notation using ->. That is, rp->width is equivalent to the expression
 (*rp).width. For example, we can write a function that rotates a rectangle counterclockwise by 90
 degrees as
 void rotate_left(struct rect *rp) {
     /* Exchange width and height */
     long t = rp->height;
     rp->height = rp->width;
     rp->width = t;
     /* Shift to new lower-left corner */
     rp->llx   -= t;
 }

     New to C?    Representing an object as a struct (continued)
       The objects of C++ and Java are more elaborate than structures in C, in that they also associate
  a set of methods with an object that can be invoked to perform computation. In C, we would simply
  write these as ordinary functions, such as the functions area and rotate_left shown previously.

of type struct rec * is in register %rdi. Then the following code copies element
r->i to element r->j:

         Registers: r in %rdi
 1       movl     (%rdi), %eax              Get r->i
 2       movl     %eax, 4(%rdi)             Store in r->j

Since the offset of field i is 0, the address of this field is simply the value of r. To
store into field j, the code adds offset 4 to the address of r.
     To generate a pointer to an object within a structure, we can simply add the
field’s offset to the structure address. For example, we can generate the pointer
&(r->a[1]) by adding offset 8 + 4 . 1 = 12. For pointer r in register %rdi and long
integer variable i in register %rsi, we can generate the pointer value &(r->a[i])
with the single instruction

         Registers: r in %rdi, i %rsi
 1       leaq     8(%rdi,%rsi,4), %rax          Set %rax to &r->a[i]

      As a final example, the following code implements the statement

       r->p = &r->a[r->i + r->j];

starting with r in register %rdi:

         Registers: r in %rdi
 1       movl     4(%rdi), %eax                    Get r->j
 2       addl     (%rdi), %eax                     Add r->i
 3       cltq                                      Extend to 8 bytes
 4       leaq     8(%rdi,%rax,4), %rax             Compute &r->a[r->i + r->j]
 5       movq     %rax, 16(%rdi)                   Store in r->p

   As these examples show, the selection of the different fields of a structure is
handled completely at compile time. The machine code contains no information
about the field declarations or the names of the fields.

                    Practice Problem 3.41 (solution page 379)
                    Consider the following structure declaration:

                    struct test {
                        short *p;
                        struct {
                             short x;
                             short y;
                        } s;
                        struct test *next;
                    };

                    This declaration illustrates that one structure can be embedded within another,
                    just as arrays can be embedded within structures and arrays can be embedded
                    within arrays.
                         The following procedure (with some expressions omitted) operates on this
                    structure:

                    void st_init(struct test *st) {
                        st->s.y =           ;
                        st->p    =          ;
                        st->next =          ;
                    }

                      A. What are the offsets (in bytes) of the following fields?

                             p:
                           s.x:
                           s.y:
                          next:

                      B. How many total bytes does the structure require?
                      C. The compiler generates the following assembly code for st_init:

                                  void st_init(struct test *st)
                                  st in %rdi
                           1      st_init:
                           2        movl     8(%rdi), %eax
                           3        movl     %eax, 10(%rdi)
                           4        leaq     10(%rdi), %rax
                           5        movq     %rax, (%rdi)
                           6        movq     %rdi, 12(%rdi)
                           7        ret

                          On the basis of this information, fill in the missing expressions in the code
                          for st_init.

Practice Problem 3.42 (solution page 379)
The following code shows the declaration of a structure of type ACE and the
prototype for a function test:

struct ACE {
    short      v;
    struct ACE *p;
};

short test(struct ACE *ptr);

   When the code for fun is compiled, gcc generates the following assembly
code:

        short test(struct ACE *ptr)
        ptr in %rdi
 1      test:
 2        movl     $1, %eax
 3        jmp      .L2
 4      .L3:
 5        imulq    (%rdi), %rax
 6        movq     2(%rdi), %rdi
 7      .L2:
 8        testq    %rdi, %rdi
 9        jne      .L3
10        rep; ret

     A. Use your reverse engineering skills to write C code for test.
     B. Describe the data structure that this structure implements and the operation
        performed by test.

3.9.2 Unions
Unions provide a way to circumvent the type system of C, allowing a single object
to be referenced according to multiple types. The syntax of a union declaration is
identical to that for structures, but its semantics are very different. Rather than
having the different fields reference different blocks of memory, they all reference
the same block.
    Consider the following declarations:

struct S3 {
    char c;
    int i[2];
    double v;
};

                    union U3 {
                        char c;
                        int i[2];
                        double v;
                    };

                    When compiled on an x86-64 Linux machine, the offsets of the fields, as well as
                    the total size of data types S3 and U3, are as shown in the following table:

                    Type     c     i     v     Size
                     S3      0     4     16     24
                     U3      0     0      0      8

                    (We will see shortly why i has offset 4 in S3 rather than 1, and why v has offset 16,
                    rather than 9 or 12.) For pointer p of type union U3 *, references p->c, p->i[0],
                    and p->v would all reference the beginning of the data structure. Observe also
                    that the overall size of a union equals the maximum size of any of its fields.
                         Unions can be useful in several contexts. However, they can also lead to nasty
                    bugs, since they bypass the safety provided by the C type system. One application
                    is when we know in advance that the use of two different fields in a data structure
                    will be mutually exclusive. Then, declaring these two fields as part of a union rather
                    than a structure will reduce the total space allocated.
                         For example, suppose we want to implement a binary tree data structure
                    where each leaf node has two double data values and each internal node has
                    pointers to two children but no data. If we declare this as

                    struct node_s {
                        struct node_s *left;
                        struct node_s *right;
                        double data[2];
                    };

                    then every node requires 32 bytes, with half the bytes wasted for each type of node.
                    On the other hand, if we declare a node as

                    union node_u {
                        struct {
                            union node_u *left;
                            union node_u *right;
                        } internal;
                        double data[2];
                    };

                    then every node will require just 16 bytes. If n is a pointer to a node of type
                    union node_u *, we would reference the data of a leaf node as n->data[0]
                    and n->data[1], and the children of an internal node as n->internal.left and
                    n->internal.right.

    With this encoding, however, there is no way to determine whether a given
node is a leaf or an internal node. A common method is to introduce an enumer-
ated type defining the different possible choices for the union, and then create a
structure containing a tag field and the union:

typedef enum { N_LEAF, N_INTERNAL } nodetype_t;

struct node_t {
    nodetype_t type;
    union {
        struct {
            struct node_t *left;
            struct node_t *right;
        } internal;
        double data[2];
    } info;
};

This structure requires a total of 24 bytes: 4 for type, and either 8 each for
info.internal.left and info.internal.right or 16 for info.data. As we will
discuss shortly, an additional 4 bytes of padding is required between the field for
type and the union elements, bringing the total structure size to 4 + 4 + 16 = 24.
In this case, the savings gain of using a union is small relative to the awkwardness
of the resulting code. For data structures with more fields, the savings can be more
compelling.
     Unions can also be used to access the bit patterns of different data types. For
example, suppose we use a simple cast to convert a value d of type double to a
value u of type unsigned long:

    unsigned long u = (unsigned long) d;

Value u will be an integer representation of d. Except for the case where d is 0.0,
the bit representation of u will be very different from that of d. Now consider the
following code to generate a value of type unsigned long from a double:

unsigned long double2bits(double d) {
    union {
        double d;
        unsigned long u;
    } temp;
    temp.d = d;
    return temp.u;
};

In this code, we store the argument in the union using one data type and access it
using another. The result will be that u will have the same bit representation as d,
including fields for the sign bit, the exponent, and the significand, as described in

                    Section 3.11. The numeric value of u will bear no relation to that of d, except for
                    the case when d is 0.0.
                         When using unions to combine data types of different sizes, byte-ordering
                    issues can become important. For example, suppose we write a procedure that
                    will create an 8-byte double using the bit patterns given by two 4-byte unsigned
                    values:

                    double uu2double(unsigned word0, unsigned word1)
                    {
                        union {
                            double d;
                            unsigned u[2];
                        } temp;

                         temp.u[0] = word0;
                         temp.u[1] = word1;
                         return temp.d;
                    }

                    On a little-endian machine, such as an x86-64 processor, argument word0 will
                    become the low-order 4 bytes of d, while word1 will become the high-order 4
                    bytes. On a big-endian machine, the role of the two arguments will be reversed.

                    Practice Problem 3.43 (solution page 380)
                    Suppose you are given the job of checking that a C compiler generates the proper
                    code for structure and union access. You write the following structure declaration:

                    typedef union {
                        struct {
                            long    u;
                            short v;
                            char    w;
                        } t1;
                        struct {
                            int a[2];
                            char *p;
                        } t2;
                    } u_type;

                    You write a series of functions of the form

                    void get(u_type *up, type *dest) {
                        *dest = expr;
                    }

                    with different access expressions expr and with destination data type type set
                    according to type associated with expr. You then examine the code generated
                    when compiling the functions to see if they match your expectations.

    Suppose in these functions that up and dest are loaded into registers %rdi and
%rsi, respectively. Fill in the following table with data type type and sequences of
one to three instructions to compute the expression and store the result at dest.
expr                          type      Code
up->t1.u                      long      movq (%rdi), %rax
                                        movq %rax, (%rsi)
up->t1.v

&up->t1.w

up->t2.a

up->t2.a[up->t1.u]

*up->t2.p

3.9.3 Data Alignment
Many computer systems place restrictions on the allowable addresses for the
primitive data types, requiring that the address for some objects must be a multiple
of some value K (typically 2, 4, or 8). Such alignment restrictions simplify the design
of the hardware forming the interface between the processor and the memory
system. For example, suppose a processor always fetches 8 bytes from memory
with an address that must be a multiple of 8. If we can guarantee that any double
will be aligned to have its address be a multiple of 8, then the value can be read
or written with a single memory operation. Otherwise, we may need to perform
two memory accesses, since the object might be split across two 8-byte memory
blocks.
     The x86-64 hardware will work correctly regardless of the alignment of data.
However, Intel recommends that data be aligned to improve memory system
performance. Their alignment rule is based on the principle that any primitive
object of K bytes must have an address that is a multiple of K. We can see that
this rule leads to the following alignments:
K      Types
1      char
2      short
4      int, float
8      long, double, char *

                         Alignment is enforced by making sure that every data type is organized and
                    allocated in such a way that every object within the type satisfies its alignment
                    restrictions. The compiler places directives in the assembly code indicating the
                    desired alignment for global data. For example, the assembly-code declaration of
                    the jump table on page 271 contains the following directive on line 2:

                    .align 8

                    This ensures that the data following it (in this case the start of the jump table) will
                    start with an address that is a multiple of 8. Since each table entry is 8 bytes long,
                    the successive elements will obey the 8-byte alignment restriction.
                         For code involving structures, the compiler may need to insert gaps in the
                    field allocation to ensure that each structure element satisfies its alignment re-
                    quirement. The structure will then have some required alignment for its starting
                    address.
                         For example, consider the structure declaration

                    struct S1 {
                        int i;
                        char c;
                        int j;
                    };

                    Suppose the compiler used the minimal 9-byte allocation, diagrammed as follows:

                      Offset   0          4 5             9
                    Contents       i      c       j

                    Then it would be impossible to satisfy the 4-byte alignment requirement for both
                    fields i (offset 0) and j (offset 5). Instead, the compiler inserts a 3-byte gap (shown
                    here as shaded in blue) between fields c and j:

                      Offset   0          4 5         8           12
                    Contents       i      c                   j

                    As a result, j has offset 8, and the overall structure size is 12 bytes. Furthermore,
                    the compiler must ensure that any pointer p of type struct S1* satisfies a 4-byte
                    alignment. Using our earlier notation, let pointer p have value xp. Then xp must
                    be a multiple of 4. This guarantees that both p->i (address xp) and p->j (address
                    xp + 8) will satisfy their 4-byte alignment requirements.
                         In addition, the compiler may need to add padding to the end of the structure
                    so that each element in an array of structures will satisfy its alignment requirement.
                    For example, consider the following structure declaration:

struct S2 {
    int i;
    int j;
    char c;
};

If we pack this structure into 9 bytes, we can still satisfy the alignment requirements
for fields i and j by making sure that the starting address of the structure satisfies
a 4-byte alignment requirement. Consider, however, the following declaration:

struct S2 d[4];

With the 9-byte allocation, it is not possible to satisfy the alignment requirement
for each element of d, because these elements will have addresses xd , xd + 9,
xd + 18, and xd + 27. Instead, the compiler allocates 12 bytes for structure S2,
with the final 3 bytes being wasted space:

  Offset   0          4           8   9       12
Contents       i           j      c

That way, the elements of d will have addresses xd , xd + 12, xd + 24, and xd + 36.
As long as xd is a multiple of 4, all of the alignment restrictions will be satisfied.

Practice Problem 3.44 (solution page 381)
For each of the following structure declarations, determine the offset of each field,
the total size of the structure, and its alignment requirement for x86-64:
 A. struct P1 { short i; int c; int *j; short *d; };
 B. struct P2 { int i[2]; char c[8]; short s[4]; long *j; };
 C. struct P3 { long w[2]; int *c[2] };
 D. struct P4 { char w[16]; char *c[2] };
 E. struct P5 { struct P4 a[2]; struct P1 t };

Practice Problem 3.45 (solution page 381)
Answer the following for the structure declaration

struct {
  int    *a;
  float b;
  char   c;
  short d;
  long   e;
  double f;

 Aside         A case of mandatory alignment
 For most x86-64 instructions, keeping data aligned improves efficiency, but it does not affect program
 behavior. On the other hand, some models of Intel and AMD processors will not work correctly
 with unaligned data for some of the SSE instructions implementing multimedia operations. These
 instructions operate on 16-byte blocks of data, and the instructions that transfer data between the SSE
 unit and memory require the memory addresses to be multiples of 16. Any attempt to access memory
 with an address that does not satisfy this alignment will lead to an exception (see Section 8.1), with the
 default behavior for the program to terminate.
      As a result, any compiler and run-time system for an x86-64 processor must ensure that any memory
 allocated to hold a data structure that may be read from or stored into an SSE register must satisfy a
 16-byte alignment. This requirement has the following two consequences:

      .   The starting address for any block generated by a memory allocation function (alloca, malloc,
          calloc, or realloc) must be a multiple of 16.
      .   The stack frame for most functions must be aligned on a 16-byte boundary. (This requirement has
          a number of exceptions.)

      More recent versions of x86-64 processors implement the AVX multimedia instructions. In addi-
 tion to providing a superset of the SSE instructions, processors supporting AVX also do not have a
 mandatory alignment requirement.

                          int      g;
                          char     *h;
                        } rec;

                          A. What are the byte offsets of all the fields in the structure?
                          B. What is the total size of the structure?
                          C. Rearrange the fields of the structure to minimize wasted space, and then
                             show the byte offsets and total size for the rearranged structure.

                        3.10     Combining Control and Data in
                                 Machine-Level Programs
                        So far, we have looked separately at how machine-level code implements the
                        control aspects of a program and how it implements different data structures. In
                        this section, we look at ways in which data and control interact with each other.
                        We start by taking a deep look into pointers, one of the most important concepts
                        in the C programming language, but one for which many programmers only have
                        a shallow understanding. We review the use of the symbolic debugger gdb for
                        examining the detailed operation of machine-level programs. Next, we see how
                        understanding machine-level programs enables us to study buffer overflow, an
                        important security vulnerability in many real-world systems. Finally, we examine

how machine-level programs implement cases where the amount of stack storage
required by a function can vary from one execution to another.

3.10.1 Understanding Pointers
Pointers are a central feature of the C programming language. They serve as a
uniform way to generate references to elements within different data structures.
Pointers are a source of confusion for novice programmers, but the underlying
concepts are fairly simple. Here we highlight some key principles of pointers and
their mapping into machine code.

  .
      Every pointer has an associated type. This type indicates what kind of object
      the pointer points to. Using the following pointer declarations as illustrations

         int *ip;
         char **cpp;

      variable ip is a pointer to an object of type int, while cpp is a pointer to an
      object that itself is a pointer to an object of type char. In general, if the object
      has type T , then the pointer has type *T . The special void * type represents a
      generic pointer. For example, the malloc function returns a generic pointer,
      which is converted to a typed pointer via either an explicit cast or by the
      implicit casting of the assignment operation. Pointer types are not part of
      machine code; they are an abstraction provided by C to help programmers
      avoid addressing errors.
  .
      Every pointer has a value. This value is an address of some object of the
      designated type. The special NULL (0) value indicates that the pointer does
      not point anywhere.
  .
      Pointers are created with the ‘&’ operator. This operator can be applied to any
      C expression that is categorized as an lvalue, meaning an expression that can
      appear on the left side of an assignment. Examples include variables and the
      elements of structures, unions, and arrays. We have seen that the machine-
      code realization of the ‘&’ operator often uses the leaq instruction to compute
      the expression value, since this instruction is designed to compute the address
      of a memory reference.
  .
      Pointers are dereferenced with the ‘*’ operator. The result is a value having the
      type associated with the pointer. Dereferencing is implemented by a memory
      reference, either storing to or retrieving from the specified address.
  .
      Arrays and pointers are closely related. The name of an array can be referenced
      (but not updated) as if it were a pointer variable. Array referencing (e.g.,
      a[3]) has the exact same effect as pointer arithmetic and dereferencing (e.g.,
      *(a+3)). Both array referencing and pointer arithmetic require scaling the
      offsets by the object size. When we write an expression p+i for pointer p with
      value p, the resulting address is computed as p + L . i, where L is the size of
      the data type associated with p.

                       .
                           Casting from one type of pointer to another changes its type but not its value.
                           One effect of casting is to change any scaling of pointer arithmetic. So, for
                           example, if p is a pointer of type char * having value p, then the expression
                           (int *) p+7 computes p + 28, while (int *) (p+7) computes p + 7. (Recall
                           that casting has higher precedence than addition.)
                       .
                           Pointers can also point to functions. This provides a powerful capability for
                           storing and passing references to code, which can be invoked in some other
                           part of the program. For example, if we have a function defined by the proto-
                           type

                             int fun(int x, int *p);

                           then we can declare and assign a pointer fp to this function by the following
                           code sequence:

                              int (*fp)(int, int *);
                              fp = fun;

                           We can then invoke the function using this pointer:

                              int y = 1;
                              int result = fp(3, &y);

                           The value of a function pointer is the address of the first instruction in the
                           machine-code representation of the function.

 New to C?         Function pointers
 The syntax for declaring function pointers is especially difficult for novice programmers to understand.
 For a declaration such as
      int (*f)(int*);
 it helps to read it starting from the inside (starting with ‘f’) and working outward. Thus, we see that f
 is a pointer, as indicated by (*f). It is a pointer to a function that has a single int * as an argument,
 as indicated by (*f)(int*). Finally, we see that it is a pointer to a function that takes an int * as an
 argument and returns int.
      The parentheses around *f are required, because otherwise the declaration
      int *f(int*);
 would be read as
      (int *) f(int*);
 That is, it would be interpreted as a function prototype, declaring a function f that has an int * as its
 argument and returns an int *.
     Kernighan and Ritchie [61, Sect. 5.12] present a helpful tutorial on reading C declarations.

3.10.2 Life in the Real World: Using the gdb Debugger
The GNU debugger gdb provides a number of useful features to support the
run-time evaluation and analysis of machine-level programs. With the examples
and exercises in this book, we attempt to infer the behavior of a program by
just looking at the code. Using gdb, it becomes possible to study the behavior
by watching the program in action while having considerable control over its
execution.
     Figure 3.39 shows examples of some gdb commands that help when working
with machine-level x86-64 programs. It is very helpful to first run objdump to get
a disassembled version of the program. Our examples are based on running gdb
on the file prog, described and disassembled on page 211. We start gdb with the
following command line:

linux> gdb prog

     The general scheme is to set breakpoints near points of interest in the pro-
gram. These can be set to just after the entry of a function or at a program address.
When one of the breakpoints is hit during program execution, the program will
halt and return control to the user. From a breakpoint, we can examine different
registers and memory locations in various formats. We can also single-step the
program, running just a few instructions at a time, or we can proceed to the next
breakpoint.
     As our examples suggest, gdb has an obscure command syntax, but the online
help information (invoked within gdb with the help command) overcomes this
shortcoming. Rather than using the command-line interface to gdb, many pro-
grammers prefer using ddd, an extension to gdb that provides a graphical user
interface.

3.10.3 Out-of-Bounds Memory References and Buffer Overflow
We have seen that C does not perform any bounds checking for array references,
and that local variables are stored on the stack along with state information such
as saved register values and return addresses. This combination can lead to serious
program errors, where the state stored on the stack gets corrupted by a write to an
out-of-bounds array element. When the program then tries to reload the register
or execute a ret instruction with this corrupted state, things can go seriously
wrong.
     A particularly common source of state corruption is known as buffer overflow.
Typically, some character array is allocated on the stack to hold a string, but the
size of the string exceeds the space allocated for the array. This is demonstrated
by the following program example:

/* Implementation of library function gets() */
char *gets(char *s)
{
    int c;
    char *dest = s;

Command                                 Effect
Starting and stopping
quit                                    Exit gdb
run                                     Run your program (give command-line arguments here)
kill                                    Stop your program

Breakpoints
break multstore                         Set breakpoint at entry to function multstore
break *0x400540                         Set breakpoint at address 0x400540
delete 1                                Delete breakpoint 1
delete                                  Delete all breakpoints

Execution
stepi                                   Execute one instruction
stepi 4                                 Execute four instructions
nexti                                   Like stepi, but proceed through function calls
continue                                Resume execution
finish                                  Run until current function returns

Examining code
disas                                   Disassemble current function
disas multstore                         Disassemble function multstore
disas 0x400544                          Disassemble function around address 0x400544
disas 0x400540, 0x40054d                Disassemble code within specified address range
print /x $rip                           Print program counter in hex

Examining data
print $rax                              Print contents of %rax in decimal
print /x $rax                           Print contents of %rax in hex
print /t $rax                           Print contents of %rax in binary
print 0x100                             Print decimal representation of 0x100
print /x 555                            Print hex representation of 555
print /x ($rsp+8)                       Print contents of %rsp plus 8 in hex
print *(long *) 0x7fffffffe818          Print long integer at address 0x7fffffffe818
print *(long *) ($rsp+8)                Print long integer at address %rsp + 8
x/2g 0x7fffffffe818                     Examine two (8-byte) words starting at address 0x7fffffffe818
x/20b multstore                         Examine first 20 bytes of function multstore

Useful information
info frame                              Information about current stack frame
info registers                          Values of all the registers
help                                    Get information about gdb

Figure 3.39 Example gdb commands. These examples illustrate some of the ways gdb supports debugging
of machine-level programs.

Figure 3.40
Stack organization for
                                 Stack frame
echo function. Character
                                    for caller
array buf is just part of
the saved state. An out-of-                            Return address           %rsp+24
bounds write to buf can
                                 Stack frame
corrupt the program state.
                                    for echo
                                                 [7] [6][5][4][3][2][1][0]      buf = %rsp

     while ((c = getchar()) != ’\n’ && c != EOF)
         *dest++ = c;
     if (c == EOF && dest == s)
         /* No characters read */
         return NULL;
     *dest++ = ’\0’; /* Terminate string */
     return s;
}

/* Read input line and write it back */
void echo()
{
    char buf[8]; /* Way too small! */
    gets(buf);
    puts(buf);
}

     The preceding code shows an implementation of the library function gets
to demonstrate a serious problem with this function. It reads a line from the
standard input, stopping when either a terminating newline character or some
error condition is encountered. It copies this string to the location designated by
argument s and terminates the string with a null character. We show the use of
gets in the function echo, which simply reads a line from standard input and echos
it back to standard output.
     The problem with gets is that it has no way to determine whether sufficient
space has been allocated to hold the entire string. In our echo example, we have
purposely made the buffer very small—just eight characters long. Any string
longer than seven characters will cause an out-of-bounds write.
     By examining the assembly code generated by gcc for echo, we can infer how
the stack is organized:
      void echo()
 1    echo:
 2      subq        $24, %rsp             Allocate 24 bytes on stack
 3      movq        %rsp, %rdi            Compute buf as %rsp
 4      call        gets                  Call gets
 5      movq        %rsp, %rdi            Compute buf as %rsp

                     6      call       puts                  Call puts
                     7      addq       $24, %rsp             Deallocate stack space
                     8      ret                              Return

                         Figure 3.40 illustrates the stack organization during the execution of echo. The
                    program allocates 24 bytes on the stack by subtracting 24 from the stack pointer
                    (line 2). Character buf is positioned at the top of the stack, as can be seen by the
                    fact that %rsp is copied to %rdi to be used as the argument to the calls to both
                    gets and puts. The 16 bytes between buf and the stored return pointer are not
                    used. As long as the user types at most seven characters, the string returned by
                    gets (including the terminating null) will fit within the space allocated for buf.
                    A longer string, however, will cause gets to overwrite some of the information
                    stored on the stack. As the string gets longer, the following information will get
                    corrupted:

                    Characters typed     Additional corrupted state
                    0–7                  None
                    9–23                 Unused stack space
                    24–31                Return address
                    32+                  Saved state in caller

                        No serious consequence occurs for strings of up to 23 characters, but beyond
                    that, the value of the return pointer, and possibly additional saved state, will
                    be corrupted. If the stored value of the return address is corrupted, then the
                    ret instruction (line 8) will cause the program to jump to a totally unexpected
                    location. None of these behaviors would seem possible based on the C code. The
                    impact of out-of-bounds writing to memory by functions such as gets can only be
                    understood by studying the program at the machine-code level.
                        Our code for echo is simple but sloppy. A better version involves using the
                    function fgets, which includes as an argument a count on the maximum number
                    of bytes to read. Problem 3.71 asks you to write an echo function that can handle
                    an input string of arbitrary length. In general, using gets or any function that
                    can overflow storage is considered a bad programming practice. Unfortunately,
                    a number of commonly used library functions, including strcpy, strcat, and
                    sprintf, have the property that they can generate a byte sequence without being
                    given any indication of the size of the destination buffer [97]. Such conditions can
                    lead to vulnerabilities to buffer overflow.

                    Practice Problem 3.46 (solution page 382)
                    Figure 3.41 shows a (low-quality) implementation of a function that reads a line
                    from standard input, copies the string to newly allocated storage, and returns a
                    pointer to the result.
                        Consider the following scenario. Procedure get_line is called with the return
                    address equal to 0x400776 and register %rbx equal to 0x0123456789ABCDEF. You
                    type in the string

                    0123456789012345678901234

(a) C code
/* This is very low-quality code.
   It is intended to illustrate bad programming practices.
   See Practice Problem 3.46. */
char *get_line()
{
    char buf[4];
    char *result;
    gets(buf);
    result = malloc(strlen(buf));
    strcpy(result, buf);
    return result;
}
(b) Disassembly up through call to gets
        char *get_line()
1      0000000000400720 <get_line>:
2        400720: 53                                push    %rbx
3        400721: 48 83 ec 10                       sub     $0x10,%rsp
        Diagram stack at this point
4         400725:    48 89 e7                      mov     %rsp,%rdi
5         400728:    e8 73 ff ff ff                callq   4006a0 <gets>
        Modify diagram to show stack contents at this point

Figure 3.41 C and disassembled code for Practice Problem 3.46.

The program terminates with a segmentation fault. You run gdb and determine
that the error occurs during the execution of the ret instruction of get_line.
    A. Fill in the diagram that follows, indicating as much as you can about the stack
       just after executing the instruction at line 3 in the disassembly. Label the
       quantities stored on the stack (e.g., “Return address”) on the right, and their
       hexadecimal values (if known) within the box. Each box represents 8 bytes.
       Indicate the position of %rsp. Recall that the ASCII codes for characters 0–9
       are 0x30–0x39.

        00 00 00 00 00 40 00 76 Return address

    B. Modify your diagram to show the effect of the call to gets (line 5).
    C. To what address does the program attempt to return?

                      D. What register(s) have corrupted value(s) when get_line returns?
                      E. Besides the potential for buffer overflow, what two other things are wrong
                         with the code for get_line?

                         A more pernicious use of buffer overflow is to get a program to perform
                    a function that it would otherwise be unwilling to do. This is one of the most
                    common methods to attack the security of a system over a computer network.
                    Typically, the program is fed with a string that contains the byte encoding of some
                    executable code, called the exploit code, plus some extra bytes that overwrite the
                    return address with a pointer to the exploit code. The effect of executing the ret
                    instruction is then to jump to the exploit code.
                         In one form of attack, the exploit code then uses a system call to start up a
                    shell program, providing the attacker with a range of operating system functions.
                    In another form, the exploit code performs some otherwise unauthorized task,
                    repairs the damage to the stack, and then executes ret a second time, causing an
                    (apparently) normal return to the caller.
                         As an example, the famous Internet worm of November 1988 used four dif-
                    ferent ways to gain access to many of the computers across the Internet. One was
                    a buffer overflow attack on the finger daemon fingerd, which serves requests by
                    the finger command. By invoking finger with an appropriate string, the worm
                    could make the daemon at a remote site have a buffer overflow and execute code
                    that gave the worm access to the remote system. Once the worm gained access to a
                    system, it would replicate itself and consume virtually all of the machine’s comput-
                    ing resources. As a consequence, hundreds of machines were effectively paralyzed
                    until security experts could determine how to eliminate the worm. The author of
                    the worm was caught and prosecuted. He was sentenced to 3 years probation, 400
                    hours of community service, and a $10,500 fine. Even to this day, however, people
                    continue to find security leaks in systems that leave them vulnerable to buffer
                    overflow attacks. This highlights the need for careful programming. Any interface
                    to the external environment should be made “bulletproof” so that no behavior by
                    an external agent can cause the system to misbehave.

                    3.10.4 Thwarting Buffer Overflow Attacks
                    Buffer overflow attacks have become so pervasive and have caused so many
                    problems with computer systems that modern compilers and operating systems
                    have implemented mechanisms to make it more difficult to mount these attacks
                    and to limit the ways by which an intruder can seize control of a system via a buffer
                    overflow attack. In this section, we will present mechanisms that are provided by
                    recent versions of gcc for Linux.

                    Stack Randomization
                    In order to insert exploit code into a system, the attacker needs to inject both
                    the code as well as a pointer to this code as part of the attack string. Generating

 Aside     Worms and viruses
 Both worms and viruses are pieces of code that attempt to spread themselves among computers. As
 described by Spafford [105], a worm is a program that can run by itself and can propagate a fully working
 version of itself to other machines. A virus is a piece of code that adds itself to other programs, including
 operating systems. It cannot run independently. In the popular press, the term “virus” is used to refer
 to a variety of different strategies for spreading attacking code among systems, and so you will hear
 people saying “virus” for what more properly should be called a “worm.”

this pointer requires knowing the stack address where the string will be located.
Historically, the stack addresses for a program were highly predictable. For all
systems running the same combination of program and operating system version,
the stack locations were fairly stable across many machines. So, for example, if
an attacker could determine the stack addresses used by a common Web server,
it could devise an attack that would work on many machines. Using infectious
disease as an analogy, many systems were vulnerable to the exact same strain of
a virus, a phenomenon often referred to as a security monoculture [96].
     The idea of stack randomization is to make the position of the stack vary from
one run of a program to another. Thus, even if many machines are running identical
code, they would all be using different stack addresses. This is implemented by
allocating a random amount of space between 0 and n bytes on the stack at the
start of a program, for example, by using the allocation function alloca, which
allocates space for a specified number of bytes on the stack. This allocated space is
not used by the program, but it causes all subsequent stack locations to vary from
one execution of a program to another. The allocation range n needs to be large
enough to get sufficient variations in the stack addresses, yet small enough that it
does not waste too much space in the program.
     The following code shows a simple way to determine a “typical” stack address:

int main() {
    long local;
    printf("local at %p\n", &local);
    return 0;
}

This code simply prints the address of a local variable in the main function.
Running the code 10,000 times on a Linux machine in 32-bit mode, the addresses
ranged from 0xff7fc59c to 0xffffd09c, a range of around 223. Running in 64-
bit mode on the newer machine, the addresses ranged from 0x7fff0001b698 to
0x7ffffffaa4a8, a range of nearly 232 .
    Stack randomization has become standard practice in Linux systems. It is
one of a larger class of techniques known as address-space layout randomization,
or ASLR [99]. With ASLR, different parts of the program, including program
code, library code, stack, global variables, and heap data, are loaded into different

                    regions of memory each time a program is run. That means that a program running
                    on one machine will have very different address mappings than the same program
                    running on other machines. This can thwart some forms of attack.
                         Overall, however, a persistent attacker can overcome randomization by brute
                    force, repeatedly attempting attacks with different addresses. A common trick is
                    to include a long sequence of nop (pronounced “no op,” short for “no operation”)
                    instructions before the actual exploit code. Executing this instruction has no ef-
                    fect, other than incrementing the program counter to the next instruction. As long
                    as the attacker can guess an address somewhere within this sequence, the program
                    will run through the sequence and then hit the exploit code. The common term for
                    this sequence is a “nop sled” [97], expressing the idea that the program “slides”
                    through the sequence. If we set up a 256-byte nop sled, then the randomization
                    over n = 223 can be cracked by enumerating 215 = 32,768 starting addresses, which
                    is entirely feasible for a determined attacker. For the 64-bit case, trying to enumer-
                    ate 224 = 16,777,216 is a bit more daunting. We can see that stack randomization
                    and other aspects of ASLR can increase the effort required to successfully attack a
                    system, and therefore greatly reduce the rate at which a virus or worm can spread,
                    but it cannot provide a complete safeguard.

                    Practice Problem 3.47 (solution page 383)
                    Running our stack-checking code 10,000 times on a system running Linux ver-
                    sion 2.6.16, we obtained addresses ranging from a minimum of 0xffffb754 to a
                    maximum of 0xffffd754.
                      A. What is the approximate range of addresses?
                      B. If we attempted a buffer overrun with a 128-byte nop sled, about how many
                         attempts would it take to test all starting addresses?

                    Stack Corruption Detection
                    A second line of defense is to be able to detect when a stack has been corrupted.
                    We saw in the example of the echo function (Figure 3.40) that the corruption
                    typically occurs when the program overruns the bounds of a local buffer. In C,
                    there is no reliable way to prevent writing beyond the bounds of an array. Instead,
                    the program can attempt to detect when such a write has occurred before it can
                    have any harmful effects.
                         Recent versions of gcc incorporate a mechanism known as a stack protector
                    into the generated code to detect buffer overruns. The idea is to store a special
                    canary value4 in the stack frame between any local buffer and the rest of the stack
                    state, as illustrated in Figure 3.42 [26, 97]. This canary value, also referred to as a
                    guard value, is generated randomly each time the program runs, and so there is no

                    4. The term “canary” refers to the historic use of these birds to detect the presence of dangerous gases
                    in coal mines.

Stack frame
   for caller

                      Return address             %rsp+24

Stack frame
                         Canary
   for echo
                [7] [6][5][4][3][2][1][0]        buf = %rsp

Figure 3.42 Stack organization for echo function with stack protector enabled. A
special “canary” value is positioned between array buf and the saved state. The code
checks the canary value to determine whether or not the stack state has been corrupted.

easy way for an attacker to determine what it is. Before restoring the register state
and returning from the function, the program checks if the canary has been altered
by some operation of this function or one that it has called. If so, the program
aborts with an error.
     Recent versions of gcc try to determine whether a function is vulnerable to
a stack overflow and insert this type of overflow detection automatically. In fact,
for our earlier demonstration of stack overflow, we had to give the command-line
option -fno-stack-protector to prevent gcc from inserting this code. Compiling
the function echo without this option, and hence with the stack protector enabled,
gives the following assembly code:

       void echo()
 1     echo:
 2       subq        $24, %rsp                Allocate 24 bytes on stack
 3       movq        %fs:40, %rax             Retrieve canary
 4       movq        %rax, 8(%rsp)            Store on stack
 5       xorl        %eax, %eax               Zero out register
 6       movq        %rsp, %rdi               Compute buf as %rsp
 7       call        gets                     Call gets
 8       movq        %rsp, %rdi               Compute buf as %rsp
 9       call        puts                     Call puts
10       movq        8(%rsp), %rax            Retrieve canary
11       xorq        %fs:40, %rax             Compare to stored value
12       je          .L9                      If =, goto ok
13       call        __stack_chk_fail         Stack corrupted!
14     .L9:                                 ok:
15       addq        $24, %rsp                Deallocate stack space
16       ret

    We see that this version of the function retrieves a value from memory (line 3)
and stores it on the stack at offset 8 from %rsp, just beyond the region allocated for
buf. The instruction argument %fs:40 is an indication that the canary value is read
from memory using segmented addressing, an addressing mechanism that dates

                    back to the 80286 and is seldom found in programs running on modern systems.
                    By storing the canary in a special segment, it can be marked as “read only,” so
                    that an attacker cannot overwrite the stored canary value. Before restoring the
                    register state and returning, the function compares the value stored at the stack
                    location with the canary value (via the xorq instruction on line 11). If the two are
                    identical, the xorq instruction will yield zero, and the function will complete in the
                    normal fashion. A nonzero value indicates that the canary on the stack has been
                    modified, and so the code will call an error routine.
                        Stack protection does a good job of preventing a buffer overflow attack from
                    corrupting state stored on the program stack. It incurs only a small performance
                    penalty, especially because gcc only inserts it when there is a local buffer of
                    type char in the function. Of course, there are other ways to corrupt the state
                    of an executing program, but reducing the vulnerability of the stack thwarts many
                    common attack strategies.

                    Practice Problem 3.48 (solution page 383)
                    The functions intlen, len, and iptoa provide a very convoluted way to compute
                    the number of decimal digits required to represent an integer. We will use this as
                    a way to study some aspects of the gcc stack protector facility.
                    int len(char *s) {
                        return strlen(s);
                    }

                    void iptoa(char *s, long *p) {
                        long val = *p;
                        sprintf(s, "%ld", val);
                    }

                    int intlen(long x) {
                        long v;
                        char buf[12];
                        v = x;
                        iptoa(buf, &v);
                        return len(buf);
                    }

                        The following show portions of the code for intlen, compiled both with and
                    without stack protector:
                    (a) Without protector

                          int intlen(long x)
                          x in %rdi
                     1    intlen:
                     2      subq      $40, %rsp
                     3      movq      %rdi, 24(%rsp)

4         leaq       24(%rsp), %rsi
5         movq       %rsp, %rdi
6         call       iptoa

(b) With protector

       int intlen(long x)
       x in %rdi
1      intlen:
2        subq        $56, %rsp
3        movq        %fs:40, %rax
4        movq        %rax, 40(%rsp)
5        xorl        %eax, %eax
6        movq        %rdi, 8(%rsp)
7        leaq        8(%rsp), %rsi
8        leaq        16(%rsp), %rdi
9        call        iptoa

    A. For both versions: What are the positions in the stack frame for buf, v, and
       (when present) the canary value?
    B. How does the rearranged ordering of the local variables in the protected
       code provide greater security against a buffer overrun attack?

Limiting Executable Code Regions
A final step is to eliminate the ability of an attacker to insert executable code into
a system. One method is to limit which memory regions hold executable code.
In typical programs, only the portion of memory holding the code generated by
the compiler need be executable. The other portions can be restricted to allow
just reading and writing. As we will see in Chapter 9, the virtual memory space
is logically divided into pages, typically with 2,048 or 4,096 bytes per page. The
hardware supports different forms of memory protection, indicating the forms of
access allowed by both user programs and the operating system kernel. Many sys-
tems allow control over three forms of access: read (reading data from memory),
write (storing data into memory), and execute (treating the memory contents as
machine-level code). Historically, the x86 architecture merged the read and exe-
cute access controls into a single 1-bit flag, so that any page marked as readable
was also executable. The stack had to be kept both readable and writable, and
therefore the bytes on the stack were also executable. Various schemes were im-
plemented to be able to limit some pages to being readable but not executable,
but these generally introduced significant inefficiencies.
     More recently, AMD introduced an NX (for “no-execute”) bit into the mem-
ory protection for its 64-bit processors, separating the read and execute access
modes, and Intel followed suit. With this feature, the stack can be marked as be-
ing readable and writable, but not executable, and the checking of whether a page
is executable is performed in hardware, with no penalty in efficiency.

                        Some types of programs require the ability to dynamically generate and ex-
                    ecute code. For example, “just-in-time” compilation techniques dynamically gen-
                    erate code for programs written in interpreted languages, such as Java, to improve
                    execution performance. Whether or not the run-time system can restrict the ex-
                    ecutable code to just that part generated by the compiler in creating the original
                    program depends on the language and the operating system.
                         The techniques we have outlined—randomization, stack protection, and lim-
                    iting which portions of memory can hold executable code—are three of the most
                    common mechanisms used to minimize the vulnerability of programs to buffer
                    overflow attacks. They all have the properties that they require no special effort
                    on the part of the programmer and incur very little or no performance penalty.
                    Each separately reduces the level of vulnerability, and in combination they be-
                    come even more effective. Unfortunately, there are still ways to attack computers
                    [85, 97], and so worms and viruses continue to compromise the integrity of many
                    machines.

                    3.10.5 Supporting Variable-Size Stack Frames
                    We have examined the machine-level code for a variety of functions so far, but
                    they all have the property that the compiler can determine in advance the amount
                    of space that must be allocated for their stack frames. Some functions, however,
                    require a variable amount of local storage. This can occur, for example, when the
                    function calls alloca, a standard library function that can allocate an arbitrary
                    number of bytes of storage on the stack. It can also occur when the code declares
                    a local array of variable size.
                         Although the information presented in this section should rightfully be con-
                    sidered an aspect of how procedures are implemented, we have deferred the
                    presentation to this point, since it requires an understanding of arrays and align-
                    ment.
                         The code of Figure 3.43(a) gives an example of a function containing a
                    variable-size array. The function declares local array p of n pointers, where n is
                    given by the first argument. This requires allocating 8n bytes on the stack, where
                    the value of n may vary from one call of the function to another. The compiler
                    therefore cannot determine how much space it must allocate for the function’s
                    stack frame. In addition, the program generates a reference to the address of local
                    variable i, and so this variable must also be stored on the stack. During execution,
                    the program must be able to access both local variable i and the elements of array
                    p. On returning, the function must deallocate the stack frame and set the stack
                    pointer to the position of the stored return address.
                         To manage a variable-size stack frame, x86-64 code uses register %rbp to serve
                    as a frame pointer (sometimes referred to as a base pointer, and hence the letters
                    bp in %rbp). When using a frame pointer, the stack frame is organized as shown
                    for the case of function vframe in Figure 3.44. We see that the code must save
                    the previous version of %rbp on the stack, since it is a callee-saved register. It then
                    keeps %rbp pointing to this position throughout the execution of the function, and
                    it references fixed-length local variables, such as i, at offsets relative to %rbp.

(a) C code
long vframe(long n, long idx, long *q)           {
    long i;
    long *p[n];
    p[0] = &i;
    for (i = 1; i < n; i++)
        p[i] = q;
    return *p[idx];
}
(b) Portions of generated assembly code
     long vframe(long n, long idx, long *q)
     n in %rdi, idx in %rsi, q in %rdx
     Only portions of code shown
 1   vframe:
 2     pushq      %rbp                               Save old %rbp
 3     movq       %rsp, %rbp                         Set frame pointer
 4     subq       $16, %rsp                          Allocate space for i (%rsp = s1)
 5     leaq       22(,%rdi,8), %rax
 6     andq       $-16, %rax
 7     subq       %rax, %rsp                         Allocate space for array p (%rsp = s2 )
 8     leaq       7(%rsp), %rax
 9     shrq       $3, %rax
10     leaq       0(,%rax,8), %r8                    Set %r8 to &p[0]
11     movq       %r8, %rcx                          Set %rcx to &p[0] (%rcx = p)
           . . .
     Code for initialization loop
     i in %rax and on stack, n in %rdi, p in %rcx, q in %rdx
12   .L3:                                    loop:
13     movq      %rdx, (%rcx,%rax,8)           Set p[i] to q
14     addq      $1, %rax                      Increment i
15     movq      %rax, -8(%rbp)                Store on stack
16   .L2:
17     movq       -8(%rbp), %rax                     Retrieve i from stack
18     cmpq       %rdi, %rax                         Compare i:n
19     jl         .L3                                If <, goto loop
           . . .
     Code for function exit
20      leave                                         Restore %rbp and %rsp
21      ret                                           Return

Figure 3.43 Function requiring the use of a frame pointer. The variable-size array implies that the size of
the stack frame cannot be determined at compile time.

Figure 3.44                                                 Return address
Stack frame structure                                   8
                                 Frame pointer                Saved %rbp
for function vframe.                                    0
The function uses register               %rbp                     i
                                                      –8
%rbp as a frame pointer.                                       (Unused)
The annotations along                                –16                          s1
                                                                             e1
the right-hand side are
in reference to Practice
Problem 3.49.

                                             8n bytes             p

                                                                                  p
                                   Stack pointer                             e2
                                                                                  s2
                                           %rsp

                          Figure 3.43(b) shows portions of the code gcc generates for function vframe.
                     At the beginning of the function, we see code that sets up the stack frame and
                     allocates space for array p. The code starts by pushing the current value of %rbp
                     onto the stack and setting %rbp to point to this stack position (lines 2–3). Next, it
                     allocates 16 bytes on the stack, the first 8 of which are used to store local variable
                     i, and the second 8 of which are unused. Then it allocates space for array p (lines
                     5–11). The details of how much space it allocates and where it positions p within
                     this space are explored in Practice Problem 3.49. Suffice it to say that by the time
                     the program reaches line 11, it has (1) allocated at least 8n bytes on the stack and
                     (2) positioned array p within the allocated region such that at least 8n bytes are
                     available for its use.
                          The code for the initialization loop shows examples of how local variables
                     i and p are referenced. Line 13 shows array element p[i] being set to q. This
                     instruction uses the value in register %rcx as the address for the start of p. We can
                     see instances where local variable i is updated (line 15) and read (line 17). The
                     address of i is given by reference -8(%rbp)—that is, at offset −8 relative to the
                     frame pointer.
                          At the end of the function, the frame pointer is restored to its previous value
                     using the leave instruction (line 20). This instruction takes no arguments. It is
                     equivalent to executing the following two instructions:

                         movq %rbp, %rsp           Set stack pointer to beginning of frame
                         popq %rbp                 Restore saved %rbp and set stack ptr
                                                     to end of caller’s frame

                     That is, the stack pointer is first set to the position of the saved value of %rbp, and
                     then this value is popped from the stack into %rbp. This instruction combination
                     has the effect of deallocating the entire stack frame.

     In earlier versions of x86 code, the frame pointer was used with every function
call. With x86-64 code, it is used only in cases where the stack frame may be of
variable size, as is the case for function vframe. Historically, most compilers used
frame pointers when generating IA32 code. Recent versions of gcc have dropped
this convention. Observe that it is acceptable to mix code that uses frame pointers
with code that does not, as long as all functions treat %rbp as a callee-saved register.

Practice Problem 3.49 (solution page 383)
In this problem, we will explore the logic behind the code in lines 5–11 of Fig-
ure 3.43(b), where space is allocated for variable-size array p. As the annotations
of the code indicate, let us let s1 denote the address of the stack pointer after exe-
cuting the subq instruction of line 4. This instruction allocates the space for local
variable i. Let s2 denote the value of the stack pointer after executing the subq
instruction of line 7. This instruction allocates the storage for local array p. Finally,
let p denote the value assigned to registers %r8 and %rcx in the instructions of lines
10–11. Both of these registers are used to reference array p.
     The right-hand side of Figure 3.44 diagrams the positions of the locations
indicated by s1, s2 , and p. It also shows that there may be an offset of e2 bytes
between the values of s1 and p. This space will not be used. There may also be an
offset of e1 bytes between the end of array p and the position indicated by s1.
  A. Explain, in mathematical terms, the logic in the computation of s2 on lines
     5–7. Hint: Think about the bit-level representation of −16 and its effect in
     the andq instruction of line 6.
  B. Explain, in mathematical terms, the logic in the computation of p on lines
     8–10. Hint: You may want to refer to the discussion on division by powers
     of 2 in Section 2.3.7.
  C. For the following values of n and s1, trace the execution of the code to
     determine what the resulting values would be for s2 , p, e1, and e2 .
       n      s1         s2            p             e1            e2
       5    2,065
       6    2,064

  D. What alignment properties does this code guarantee for the values of s2
     and p?

3.11       Floating-Point Code
The floating-point architecture for a processor consists of the different aspects
that affect how programs operating on floating-point data are mapped onto the
machine, including
  .
      How floating-point values are stored and accessed. This is typically via some
      form of registers.

                      .
                          The instructions that operate on floating-point data.
                      .
                          The conventions used for passing floating-point values as arguments to func-
                          tions and for returning them as results.
                      .
                          The conventions for how registers are preserved during function calls—for
                          example, with some registers designated as caller saved, and others as callee
                          saved.

                         To understand the x86-64 floating-point architecture, it is helpful to have a
                    brief historical perspective. Since the introduction of the Pentium/MMX in 1997,
                    both Intel and AMD have incorporated successive generations of media instruc-
                    tions to support graphics and image processing. These instructions originally fo-
                    cused on allowing multiple operations to be performed in a parallel mode known
                    as single instruction, multiple data, or SIMD (pronounced sim-dee). In this mode
                    the same operation is performed on a number of different data values in parallel.
                    Over the years, there has been a progression of these extensions. The names have
                    changed through a series of major revisions from MMX to SSE (for “streaming
                    SIMD extensions”) and most recently AVX (for “advanced vector extensions”).
                    Within each generation, there have also been different versions. Each of these ex-
                    tensions manages data in sets of registers, referred to as “MM” registers for MMX,
                    “XMM” for SSE, and “YMM” for AVX, ranging from 64 bits for MM registers,
                    to 128 for XMM, to 256 for YMM. So, for example, each YMM register can hold
                    eight 32-bit values, or four 64-bit values, where these values can be either integer
                    or floating point.
                         Starting with SSE2, introduced with the Pentium 4 in 2000, the media in-
                    structions have included ones to operate on scalar floating-point data, using single
                    values in the low-order 32 or 64 bits of XMM or YMM registers. This scalar mode
                    provides a set of registers and instructions that are more typical of the way other
                    processors support floating point. All processors capable of executing x86-64 code
                    support SSE2 or higher, and hence x86-64 floating point is based on SSE or AVX,
                    including conventions for passing procedure arguments and return values [77].
                         Our presentation is based on AVX2, the second version of AVX, introduced
                    with the Core i7 Haswell processor in 2013. Gcc will generate AVX2 code when
                    given the command-line parameter -mavx2. Code based on the different versions
                    of SSE, as well as the first version of AVX, is conceptually similar, although they
                    differ in the instruction names and formats. We present only instructions that
                    arise in compiling floating-point programs with gcc. These are, for the most part,
                    the scalar AVX instructions, although we document occasions where instructions
                    intended for operating on entire data vectors arise. A more complete coverage
                    of how to exploit the SIMD capabilities of SSE and AVX is presented in Web
                    Aside opt:simd on page 582. Readers may wish to refer to the AMD and Intel
                    documentation for the individual instructions [4, 51]. As with integer operations,
                    note that the ATT format we use in our presentation differs from the Intel format
                    used in these documents. In particular, the instruction operands are listed in a
                    different order in these two versions.

255                           127                           0

%ymm0                          %xmm0                            1st FP arg./Return value

%ymm1                          %xmm1                            2nd FP argument

%ymm2                          %xmm2                            3rd FP argument

%ymm3                          %xmm3                            4th FP argument

%ymm4                          %xmm4                            5th FP argument

%ymm5                          %xmm5                            6th FP argument

%ymm6                          %xmm6                            7th FP argument

%ymm7                          %xmm7                            8th FP argument

%ymm8                          %xmm8                            Caller saved

%ymm9                          %xmm9                            Caller saved

%ymm10                         %xmm10                           Caller saved

%ymm11                         %xmm11                           Caller saved

%ymm12                         %xmm12                           Caller saved

%ymm13                         %ymm13                           Caller saved

%ymm14                         %xmm14                           Caller saved

%ymm15                         %xmm15                           Caller saved

Figure 3.45 Media registers. These registers are used to hold floating-point data.
Each YMM register holds 32 bytes. The low-order 16 bytes can be accessed as an XMM
register.

     As is illustrated in Figure 3.45, the AVX floating-point architecture allows
data to be stored in 16 YMM registers, named %ymm0–%ymm15. Each YMM register
is 256 bits (32 bytes) long. When operating on scalar data, these registers only
hold floating-point data, and only the low-order 32 bits (for float) or 64 bits (for
double) are used. The assembly code refers to the registers by their SSE XMM
register names %xmm0–%xmm15, where each XMM register is the low-order 128 bits
(16 bytes) of the corresponding YMM register.

                    Instruction    Source      Destination    Description
                    vmovss           M32           X          Move single precision
                    vmovss           X             M32        Move single precision

                    vmovsd           M64           X          Move double precision
                    vmovsd           X             M64        Move double precision
                    vmovaps          X             X          Move aligned, packed single precision
                    vmovapd          X             X          Move aligned, packed double precision

Figure 3.46 Floating-point movement instructions. These operations transfer values
                    between memory and registers, as well as between pairs of registers. (X: XMM register
                    (e.g., %xmm3); M32 : 32-bit memory range; M64: 64-bit memory range)

                    3.11.1 Floating-Point Movement and Conversion Operations
                    Figure 3.46 shows a set of instructions for transferring floating-point data between
                    memory and XMM registers, as well as from one XMM register to another without
                    any conversions. Those that reference memory are scalar instructions, meaning
                    that they operate on individual, rather than packed, data values. The data are
                    held either in memory (indicated in the table as M32 and M64) or in XMM registers
                    (shown in the table as X). These instructions will work correctly regardless of the
                    alignment of data, although the code optimization guidelines recommend that 32-
                    bit memory data satisfy a 4-byte alignment and that 64-bit data satisfy an 8-byte
                    alignment. Memory references are specified in the same way as for the integer mov
                    instructions, with all of the different possible combinations of displacement, base
                    register, index register, and scaling factor.
                         Gcc uses the scalar movement operations only to transfer data from memory
                    to an XMM register or from an XMM register to memory. For transferring data
                    between two XMM registers, it uses one of two different instructions for copying
                    the entire contents of one XMM register to another—namely, vmovaps for single-
                    precision and vmovapd for double-precision values. For these cases, whether the
                    program copies the entire register or just the low-order value affects neither the
                    program functionality nor the execution speed, and so using these instructions
                    rather than ones specific to scalar data makes no real difference. The letter ‘a’
                    in these instruction names stands for “aligned.” When used to read and write
                    memory, they will cause an exception if the address does not satisfy a 16-byte
                    alignment. For transferring between two registers, there is no possibility of an
                    incorrect alignment.
                         As an example of the different floating-point move operations, consider the
                    C function

                    float float_mov(float v1, float *src, float *dst) {
                        float v2 = *src;
                        *dst = v1;
                        return v2;
                    }

Instruction       Source      Destination      Description
vcvttss2si         X/M32          R32          Convert with truncation single precision to integer
vcvttsd2si         X/M64          R32          Convert with truncation double precision to integer
vcvttss2siq        X/M32          R64          Convert with truncation single precision to quad word integer
vcvttsd2siq        X/M64          R64          Convert with truncation double precision to quad word integer

Figure 3.47 Two-operand floating-point conversion operations. These convert floating-point data to
integers. (X: XMM register (e.g., %xmm3); R32 : 32-bit general-purpose register (e.g., %eax); R64: 64-bit
general-purpose register (e.g., %rax); M32 : 32-bit memory range; M64: 64-bit memory range)

Instruction      Source 1     Source 2      Destination      Description
vcvtsi2ss        M32 /R32         X              X           Convert integer to single precision
vcvtsi2sd        M32 /R32         X              X           Convert integer to double precision
vcvtsi2ssq       M64/R64          X              X           Convert quad word integer to single precision
vcvtsi2sdq       M64/R64          X              X           Convert quad word integer to double precision

Figure 3.48 Three-operand floating-point conversion operations. These instructions convert from the
data type of the first source to the data type of the destination. The second source value has no effect on the
low-order bytes of the result. (X: XMM register (e.g., %xmm3); M32 : 32-bit memory range; M64: 64-bit memory
range)

and its associated x86-64 assembly code

      float float_mov(float v1, float *src, float *dst)
      v1 in %xmm0, src in %rdi, dst in %rsi
 1    float_mov:
 2      vmovaps %xmm0, %xmm1             Copy v1
 3      vmovss (%rdi), %xmm0             Read v2 from src
 4      vmovss %xmm1, (%rsi)             Write v1 to dst
 5      ret                              Return v2 in %xmm0

We can see in this example the use of the vmovaps instruction to copy data from
one register to another and the use of the vmovss instruction to copy data
from memory to an XMM register and from an XMM register to memory.
     Figures 3.47 and 3.48 show sets of instructions for converting between floating-
point and integer data types, as well as between different floating-point formats.
These are all scalar instructions operating on individual data values. Those in
Figure 3.47 convert from a floating-point value read from either an XMM register
or memory and write the result to a general-purpose register (e.g., %rax, %ebx,
etc.). When converting floating-point values to integers, they perform truncation,
rounding values toward zero, as is required by C and most other programming
languages.
     The instructions in Figure 3.48 convert from integer to floating point. They
use an unusual three-operand format, with two sources and a destination. The

                    first operand is read from memory or from a general-purpose register. For our
                    purposes, we can ignore the second operand, since its value only affects the upper
                    bytes of the result. The destination must be an XMM register. In common usage,
                    both the second source and the destination operands are identical, as in the
                    instruction

                         vcvtsi2sdq     %rax, %xmm1, %xmm1

                    This instruction reads a long integer from register %rax, converts it to data type
                    double, and stores the result in the lower bytes of XMM register %xmm1.
                         Finally, for converting between two different floating-point formats, current
                    versions of gcc generate code that requires separate documentation. Suppose
                    the low-order 4 bytes of %xmm0 hold a single-precision value; then it would seem
                    straightforward to use the instruction

                         vcvtss2sd     %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0

                    to convert this to a double-precision value and store the result in the lower 8 bytes
                    of register %xmm0. Instead, we find the following code generated by gcc:

                            Conversion from single to double precision
                     1     vunpcklps    %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0 Replicate first vector element
                     2     vcvtps2pd    %xmm0, %xmm0             Convert two vector elements to double

                         The vunpcklps instruction is normally used to interleave the values in two
                    XMM registers and store them in a third. That is, if one source register contains
                    words [s3, s2 , s1, s0] and the other contains words [d3, d2 , d1, d0], then the value
                    of the destination register will be [s1, d1, s0, d0]. In the code above, we see the
                    same register being used for all three operands, and so if the original register
                    held values [x3, x2 , x1, x0], then the instruction will update the register to hold
                    values [x1, x1, x0, x0]. The vcvtps2pd instruction expands the two low-order single-
                    precision values in the source XMM register to be the two double-precision values
                    in the destination XMM register. Applying this to the result of the preceding
                    vunpcklps instruction would give values [dx0, dx0], where dx0 is the result of
                    converting x to double precision. That is, the net effect of the two instructions is
                    to convert the original single-precision value in the low-order 4 bytes of %xmm0 to
                    double precision and store two copies of it in %xmm0. It is unclear why gcc generates
                    this code. There is neither benefit nor need to have the value duplicated within
                    the XMM register.
                         Gcc generates similar code for converting from double precision to single
                    precision:

                            Conversion from double to single precision
                     1     vmovddup        %xmm0, %xmm0        Replicate first vector element
                     2     vcvtpd2psx      %xmm0, %xmm0        Convert two vector elements to single

Suppose these instructions start with register %xmm0 holding two double-precision
values [x1, x0]. Then the vmovddup instruction will set it to [x0, x0]. The vcvtpd2psx
instruction will convert these values to single precision, pack them into the
low-order half of the register, and set the upper half to 0, yielding a result
[0.0, 0.0, x0, x0] (recall that floating-point value 0.0 is represented by a bit pat-
tern of all zeros). Again, there is no clear value in computing the conversion from
one precision to another this way, rather than by using the single instruction

     vcvtsd2ss %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0

    As an example of the different floating-point conversion operations, consider
the C function

double fcvt(int i, float *fp, double *dp, long *lp)
{
    float f = *fp; double d = *dp; long l = *lp;
    *lp = (long)    d;
    *fp = (float)   i;
    *dp = (double) l;
    return (double) f;
}

and its associated x86-64 assembly code

     double fcvt(int i, float *fp, double *dp, long *lp)
     i in %edi, fp in %rsi, dp in %rdx, lp in %rcx
 1   fcvt:
 2     vmovss (%rsi), %xmm0                             Get f = *fp
 3     movq    (%rcx), %rax                             Get l = *lp
 4     vcvttsd2siq     (%rdx), %r8                      Get d = *dp and convert to long
 5     movq    %r8, (%rcx)                              Store at lp
 6     vcvtsi2ss       %edi, %xmm1, %xmm1               Convert i to float
 7     vmovss %xmm1, (%rsi)                             Store at fp
 8     vcvtsi2sdq      %rax, %xmm1, %xmm1               Convert l to double
 9     vmovsd %xmm1, (%rdx)                             Store at dp
        The following two instructions convert f to double
10      vunpcklps           %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
11      vcvtps2pd           %xmm0, %xmm0
12      ret                                                Return f

     All of the arguments to fcvt are passed through the general-purpose registers,
since they are either integers or pointers. The result is returned in register %xmm0.
As is documented in Figure 3.45, this is the designated return register for float
or double values. In this code, we see a number of the movement and conversion
instructions of Figures 3.46–3.48, as well as gcc’s preferred method of converting
from single to double precision.

                    Practice Problem 3.50 (solution page 383)
                    For the following C code, the expressions val1–val4 all map to the program values
                    i, f, d, and l:
                    double fcvt2(int *ip, float *fp, double *dp, long l)
                    {
                        int i = *ip; float f = *fp; double d = *dp;
                        *ip = (int)     val1;
                        *fp = (float)   val2;
                        *dp = (double) val3;
                        return (double) val4;
                    }

                         Determine the mapping, based on the following x86-64 code for the function:
                          double fcvt2(int *ip, float *fp, double *dp, long l)
                          ip in %rdi, fp in %rsi, dp in %rdx, l in %rcx
                          Result returned in %xmm0
                     1    fcvt2:
                     2      movl    (%rdi), %eax
                     3      vmovss (%rsi), %xmm0
                     4      vcvttsd2si      (%rdx), %r8d
                     5      movl    %r8d, (%rdi)
                     6      vcvtsi2ss       %eax, %xmm1, %xmm1
                     7      vmovss %xmm1, (%rsi)
                     8      vcvtsi2sdq      %rcx, %xmm1, %xmm1
                     9      vmovsd %xmm1, (%rdx)
                    10      vunpcklps       %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
                    11      vcvtps2pd       %xmm0, %xmm0
                    12      ret

                    Practice Problem 3.51 (solution page 384)
                    The following C function converts an argument of type src_t to a return value of
                    type dst_t, where these two types are defined using typedef:
                    dest_t cvt(src_t x)
                    {
                        dest_t y = (dest_t) x;
                        return y;
                    }

                        For execution on x86-64, assume that argument x is either in %xmm0 or in
                    the appropriately named portion of register %rdi (i.e., %rdi or %edi). One or
                    two instructions are to be used to perform the type conversion and to copy the
                    value to the appropriately named portion of register %rax (integer result) or

%xmm0 (floating-point result). Show the instruction(s), including the source and
destination registers.
  Tx           Ty       Instruction(s)
 long        double     vcvtsi2sdq %rdi, %xmm0
double        int
double       float
 long        float
 float        long

3.11.2 Floating-Point Code in Procedures
With x86-64, the XMM registers are used for passing floating-point arguments to
functions and for returning floating-point values from them. As is illustrated in
Figure 3.45, the following conventions are observed:
  .
      Up to eight floating-point arguments can be passed in XMM registers %xmm0–
      %xmm7. These registers are used in the order the arguments are listed. Addi-
      tional floating-point arguments can be passed on the stack.
  .
      A function that returns a floating-point value does so in register %xmm0.
  .
      All XMM registers are caller saved. The callee may overwrite any of these
      registers without first saving it.
    When a function contains a combination of pointer, integer, and floating-
point arguments, the pointers and integers are passed in general-purpose registers,
while the floating-point values are passed in XMM registers. This means that the
mapping of arguments to registers depends on both their types and their ordering.
Here are several examples:
      double f1(int x, double y, long z);

This function would have x in %edi, y in %xmm0, and z in %rsi.
      double f2(double y, int x, long z);

This function would have the same register assignment as function f1.
      double f1(float x, double *y, long *z);

This function would have x in %xmm0, y in %rdi, and z in %rsi.

Practice Problem 3.52 (solution page 384)
For each of the following function declarations, determine the register assignments
for the arguments:
 A. double g1(double a, long b, float c, int d);

                      B. double g2(int a, double *b, float *c, long d);

                      C. double g3(double *a, double b, int c, float d);

                      D. double g4(float a, int *b, float c, double d);

                    3.11.3 Floating-Point Arithmetic Operations
                    Figure 3.49 documents a set of scalar AVX2 floating-point instructions that per-
                    form arithmetic operations. Each has either one (S1) or two (S1, S2 ) source oper-
                    ands and a destination operand D. The first source operand S1 can be either an
                    XMM register or a memory location. The second source operand and the desti-
                    nation operands must be XMM registers. Each operation has an instruction for
                    single precision and an instruction for double precision. The result is stored in the
                    destination register.
                        As an example, consider the following floating-point function:

                    double funct(double a, float x, double b, int i)
                    {
                        return a*x - b/i;
                    }

                         The x86-64 code is as follows:

                          double funct(double a, float x, double b, int i)
                          a in %xmm0, x in %xmm1, b in %xmm2, i in %edi
                     1    funct:
                             The following two instructions convert x to double
                     2       vunpcklps      %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1
                     3       vcvtps2pd      %xmm1, %xmm1
                     4       vmulsd %xmm0, %xmm1, %xmm0                   Multiply a by x
                     5       vcvtsi2sd      %edi, %xmm1, %xmm1            Convert i to double
                     6       vdivsd %xmm1, %xmm2, %xmm2                   Compute b/i

                    Single      Double      Effect                Description
                    vaddss      vaddsd      D   ← S2 + S1         Floating-point add
                    vsubss      vsubsd      D   ← S2 − S1         Floating-point subtract
                    vmulss      vmulsd      D   ← S2 × S1         Floating-point multiply
                    vdivss      vdivsd      D   ← S2 /S1          Floating-point divide
                    vmaxss      vmaxsd      D   ← max(S2 , S1)    Floating-point maximum
                    vminss      vminsd      D   ← min(S2 , S1)    Floating-point minimum
                                                   
                    sqrtss      sqrtsd      D   ← S1              Floating-point square root

Figure 3.49 Scalar floating-point arithmetic operations. These have either one or
                    two source operands and a destination operand.

7      vsubsd   %xmm2, %xmm0, %xmm0                  Subtract from a*x
8      ret                                           Return

     The three floating-point arguments a, x, and b are passed in XMM registers
%xmm0–%xmm2, while integer argument i is passed in register %edi. The standard
two-instruction sequence is used to convert argument x to double (lines 2–3).
Another conversion instruction is required to convert argument i to double (line
5). The function value is returned in register %xmm0.

Practice Problem 3.53 (solution page 384)
For the following C function, the types of the four arguments are defined by
typedef:

double funct1(arg1_t p, arg2_t q, arg3_t r, arg4_t s)
{
    return p/(q+r) - s;
}

When compiled, gcc generates the following code:

     double funct1(arg1_t p, arg2_t q, arg3_t r, arg4_t s)
1    funct1:
2      vcvtsi2ssq     %rsi, %xmm2, %xmm2
3      vaddss %xmm0, %xmm2, %xmm0
4      vcvtsi2ss      %edi, %xmm2, %xmm2
5      vdivss %xmm0, %xmm2, %xmm0
6      vunpcklps      %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
7      vcvtps2pd      %xmm0, %xmm0
8      vsubsd %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0
9      ret

   Determine the possible combinations of types of the four arguments (there
may be more than one).

Practice Problem 3.54 (solution page 385)
Function funct2 has the following prototype:

double funct2(double w, int x, float y, long z);

Gcc generates the following code for the function:

     double funct2(double w, int x, float y, long z)
     w in %xmm0, x in %edi, y in %xmm1, z in %rsi
1    funct2:
2      vcvtsi2ss      %edi, %xmm2, %xmm2
3      vmulss %xmm1, %xmm2, %xmm1

                     4      vunpcklps      %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1
                     5      vcvtps2pd      %xmm1, %xmm2
                     6      vcvtsi2sdq     %rsi, %xmm1, %xmm1
                     7      vdivsd %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0
                     8      vsubsd %xmm0, %xmm2, %xmm0
                     9      ret

                         Write a C version of funct2.

                    3.11.4 Defining and Using Floating-Point Constants
                    Unlike integer arithmetic operations, AVX floating-point operations cannot have
                    immediate values as operands. Instead, the compiler must allocate and initialize
                    storage for any constant values. The code then reads the values from memory. This
                    is illustrated by the following Celsius to Fahrenheit conversion function:
                    double cel2fahr(double temp)
                    {
                        return 1.8 * temp + 32.0;
                    }

                         The relevant parts of the x86-64 assembly code are as follows:
                          double cel2fahr(double temp)
                          temp in %xmm0
                     1    cel2fahr:
                     2      vmulsd .LC2(%rip), %xmm0, %xmm0            Multiply by 1.8
                     3      vaddsd .LC3(%rip), %xmm0, %xmm0            Add 32.0
                     4      ret
                     5    .LC2:
                     6      .long   3435973837                         Low-order 4 bytes of 1.8
                     7      .long   1073532108                         High-order 4 bytes of 1.8
                     8    .LC3:
                     9      .long   0                                  Low-order 4 bytes of 32.0
                    10      .long   1077936128                         High-order 4 bytes of 32.0

                    We see that the function reads the value 1.8 from the memory location labeled
                    .LC2 and the value 32.0 from the memory location labeled .LC3. Looking at the
                    values associated with these labels, we see that each is specified by a pair of .long
                    declarations with the values given in decimal. How should these be interpreted
                    as floating-point values? Looking at the declaration labeled .LC2, we see that the
                    two values are 3435973837 (0xcccccccd) and 1073532108 (0x3ffccccc.) Since
                    the machine uses little-endian byte ordering, the first value gives the low-order 4
                    bytes, while the second gives the high-order 4 bytes. From the high-order bytes,
                    we can extract an exponent field of 0x3ff (1023), from which we subtract a bias of
                    1023 to get an exponent of 0. Concatenating the fraction bits of the two values, we
                    get a fraction field of 0xccccccccccccd, which can be shown to be the fractional
                    binary representation of 0.8, to which we add the implied leading one to get 1.8.

Single       Double     Effect           Description
vxorps       xorpd      D ← S2 ^ S1      Bitwise exclusive-or
vandps       andpd      D ← S2 & S1      Bitwise and

Figure 3.50 Bitwise operations on packed data. These instructions perform Boolean
operations on all 128 bits in an XMM register.

Practice Problem 3.55 (solution page 385)
Show how the numbers declared at label .LC3 encode the number 32.0.

3.11.5 Using Bitwise Operations in Floating-Point Code
At times, we find gcc generating code that performs bitwise operations on XMM
registers to implement useful floating-point results. Figure 3.50 shows some rele-
vant instructions, similar to their counterparts for operating on general-purpose
registers. These operations all act on packed data, meaning that they update the
entire destination XMM register, applying the bitwise operation to all the data in
the two source registers. Once again, our only interest for scalar data is the effect
these instructions have on the low-order 4 or 8 bytes of the destination. These op-
erations are often simple and convenient ways to manipulate floating-point values,
as is explored in the following problem.

Practice Problem 3.56 (solution page 386)
Consider the following C function, where EXPR is a macro defined with #define:

double simplefun(double x) {
    return EXPR(x);
}

     Below, we show the AVX2 code generated for different definitions of EXPR,
where value x is held in %xmm0. All of them correspond to some useful operation on
floating-point values. Identify what the operations are. Your answers will require
you to understand the bit patterns of the constant words being retrieved from
memory.
 A.      1     vmovsd   .LC1(%rip), %xmm1
         2     vandpd   %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0
         3   .LC1:
         4     .long    4294967295
         5     .long    2147483647
         6     .long    0
         7     .long    0

 B.      1     vxorpd   %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0

                      C.   1      vmovsd    .LC2(%rip), %xmm1
                           2      vxorpd    %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0
                           3    .LC2:
                           4      .long     0
                           5      .long     -2147483648
                           6      .long     0
                           7      .long     0

                    3.11.6 Floating-Point Comparison Operations
                    AVX2 provides two instructions for comparing floating-point values:

                      Instruction        Based on     Description
                    ucomiss S1, S2       S2 −S1       Compare single precision
                    ucomisd S1, S2       S2 −S1       Compare double precision

                         These instructions are similar to the cmp instructions (see Section 3.6), in that
                    they compare operands S1 and S2 (but in the opposite order one might expect) and
                    set the condition codes to indicate their relative values. As with cmpq, they follow
                    the ATT-format convention of listing the operands in reverse order. Argument
                    S2 must be in an XMM register, while S1 can be either in an XMM register or in
                    memory.
                         The floating-point comparison instructions set three condition codes: the zero
                    flag ZF, the carry flag CF, and the parity flag PF. We did not document the parity
                    flag in Section 3.6.1, because it is not commonly found in gcc-generated x86 code.
                    For integer operations, this flag is set when the most recent arithmetic or logical
                    operation yielded a value where the least significant byte has even parity (i.e.,
                    an even number of ones in the byte). For floating-point comparisons, however,
                    the flag is set when either operand is NaN. By convention, any comparison in C
                    is considered to fail when one of the arguments is NaN, and this flag is used to
                    detect such a condition. For example, even the comparison x == x yields 0 when x
                    is NaN.
                         The condition codes are set as follows:

                    Ordering S2 :S1    CF     ZF     PF
                    Unordered          1      1      1
                    S2 < S1            1      0      0
                    S2 = S 1           0      1      0
                    S2 > S1            0      0      0

                         The unordered case occurs when either operand is NaN. This can be detected
                    with the parity flag. Commonly, the jp (for “jump on parity”) instruction is used to
                    conditionally jump when a floating-point comparison yields an unordered result.
                    Except for this case, the values of the carry and zero flags are the same as those
                    for an unsigned comparison: ZF is set when the two operands are equal, and CF is

(a) C code
typedef enum {NEG, ZERO, POS, OTHER} range_t;

range_t find_range(float x)
{
    int result;
    if (x < 0)
         result = NEG;
    else if (x == 0)
         result = ZERO;
    else if (x > 0)
         result = POS;
    else
         result = OTHER;
    return result;
}
(b) Generated assembly code
     range_t find_range(float x)
     x in %xmm0
 1   find_range:
 2     vxorps %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1                     Set %xmm1 = 0
 3     vucomiss          %xmm0, %xmm1                 Compare 0:x
 4     ja       .L5                                   If >, goto neg
 5     vucomiss          %xmm1, %xmm0                 Compare x:0
 6     jp       .L8                                   If NaN, goto posornan
 7     movl     $1, %eax                              result = ZERO
 8     je       .L3                                   If =, goto done
 9   .L8:                                           posornan:
10     vucomiss          .LC0(%rip), %xmm0            Compare x:0
11     setbe    %al                                   Set result = NaN ? 1 : 0
12     movzbl %al, %eax                               Zero-extend
13     addl     $2, %eax                              result += 2 (POS for > 0, OTHER for NaN)
14     ret                                            Return
15   .L5:                                           neg:
16     movl     $0, %eax                              result = NEG
17   .L3:                                           done:
18     rep; ret                                       Return

Figure 3.51 Illustration of conditional branching in floating-point code.

                    set when S2 < S1. Instructions such as ja and jb are used to conditionally jump on
                    various combinations of these flags.
                         As an example of floating-point comparisons, the C function of Figure 3.51(a)
                    classifies argument x according to its relation to 0.0, returning an enumerated type
                    as the result. Enumerated types in C are encoded as integers, and so the possible
                    function values are: 0 (NEG), 1 (ZERO), 2 (POS), and 3 (OTHER). This final outcome
                    occurs when the value of x is NaN.
                         Gcc generates the code shown in Figure 3.51(b) for find_range. The code
                    is not very efficient—it compares x to 0.0 three times, even though the required
                    information could be obtained with a single comparison. It also generates floating-
                    point constant 0.0 twice—once using vxorps, and once by reading the value from
                    memory. Let us trace the flow of the function for the four possible comparison
                    results:
                         x < 0.0 The ja branch on line 4 will be taken, jumping to the end with a return
                               value of 0.
                         x = 0.0 The ja (line 4) and jp (line 6) branches will not be taken, but the je
                               branch (line 8) will, returning with %eax equal to 1.
                         x > 0.0 None of the three branches will be taken. The setbe (line 11) will yield
                               0, and this will be incremented by the addl instruction (line 13) to give a
                               return value of 2.
                         x = NaN The jp branch (line 6) will be taken. The third vucomiss instruction
                              (line 10) will set both the carry and the zero flag, and so the setbe
                              instruction (line 11) and the following instruction will set %eax to 1. This
                              gets incremented by the addl instruction (line 13) to give a return value
                              of 3.
                       In Homework Problems 3.73 and 3.74, you are challenged to hand-generate
                    more efficient implementations of find_range.

                    Practice Problem 3.57 (solution page 386)
                    Function funct3 has the following prototype:
                    double funct3(int *ap, double b, long c, float *dp);

                    For this function, gcc generates the following code:
                            double funct3(int *ap, double b, long c, float *dp)
                            ap in %rdi, b in %xmm0, c in %rsi, dp in %rdx
                     1      funct3:
                     2        vmovss (%rdx), %xmm1
                     3        vcvtsi2sd      (%rdi), %xmm2, %xmm2
                     4        vucomisd       %xmm2, %xmm0
                     5        jbe      .L8
                     6        vcvtsi2ssq     %rsi, %xmm0, %xmm0
                     7        vmulss %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm1
                                                                            Section 3.12   Summary   345

 8      vunpcklps      %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1
 9      vcvtps2pd      %xmm1, %xmm0
10      ret
11    .L8:
12      vaddss %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1
13      vcvtsi2ssq     %rsi, %xmm0, %xmm0
14      vaddss %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0
15      vunpcklps      %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
16      vcvtps2pd      %xmm0, %xmm0
17      ret

     Write a C version of funct3.

3.11.7 Observations about Floating-Point Code
We see that the general style of machine code generated for operating on floating-
point data with AVX2 is similar to what we have seen for operating on integer data.
Both use a collection of registers to hold and operate on values, and they use these
registers for passing function arguments.
     Of course, there are many complexities in dealing with the different data types
and the rules for evaluating expressions containing a mixture of data types, and
AVX2 code involves many more different instructions and formats than is usually
seen with functions that perform only integer arithmetic.
     AVX2 also has the potential to make computations run faster by performing
parallel operations on packed data. Compiler developers are working on automat-
ing the conversion of scalar code to parallel code, but currently the most reliable
way to achieve higher performance through parallelism is to use the extensions to
the C language supported by gcc for manipulating vectors of data. See Web Aside
opt:simd on page 582 to see how this can be done.

3.12     Summary
In this chapter, we have peered beneath the layer of abstraction provided by the
C language to get a view of machine-level programming. By having the compiler
generate an assembly-code representation of the machine-level program, we gain
insights into both the compiler and its optimization capabilities, along with the ma-
chine, its data types, and its instruction set. In Chapter 5, we will see that knowing
the characteristics of a compiler can help when trying to write programs that have
efficient mappings onto the machine. We have also gotten a more complete picture
of how the program stores data in different memory regions. In Chapter 12, we
will see many examples where application programmers need to know whether
a program variable is on the run-time stack, in some dynamically allocated data
structure, or part of the global program data. Understanding how programs map
onto machines makes it easier to understand the differences between these kinds
of storage.

                         Machine-level programs, and their representation by assembly code, differ
                    in many ways from C programs. There is minimal distinction between different
                    data types. The program is expressed as a sequence of instructions, each of which
                    performs a single operation. Parts of the program state, such as registers and the
                    run-time stack, are directly visible to the programmer. Only low-level operations
                    are provided to support data manipulation and program control. The compiler
                    must use multiple instructions to generate and operate on different data structures
                    and to implement control constructs such as conditionals, loops, and procedures.
                    We have covered many different aspects of C and how it gets compiled. We
                    have seen that the lack of bounds checking in C makes many programs prone to
                    buffer overflows. This has made many systems vulnerable to attacks by malicious
                    intruders, although recent safeguards provided by the run-time system and the
                    compiler help make programs more secure.
                         We have only examined the mapping of C onto x86-64, but much of what we
                    have covered is handled in a similar way for other combinations of language and
                    machine. For example, compiling C++ is very similar to compiling C. In fact, early
                    implementations of C++ first performed a source-to-source conversion from C++
                    to C and generated object code by running a C compiler on the result. C++ objects
                    are represented by structures, similar to a C struct. Methods are represented by
                    pointers to the code implementing the methods. By contrast, Java is implemented
                    in an entirely different fashion. The object code of Java is a special binary repre-
                    sentation known as Java byte code. This code can be viewed as a machine-level
                    program for a virtual machine. As its name suggests, this machine is not imple-
                    mented directly in hardware. Instead, software interpreters process the byte code,
                    simulating the behavior of the virtual machine. Alternatively, an approach known
                    as just-in-time compilation dynamically translates byte code sequences into ma-
                    chine instructions. This approach provides faster execution when code is executed
                    multiple times, such as in loops. The advantage of using byte code as the low-level
                    representation of a program is that the same code can be “executed” on many
                    different machines, whereas the machine code we have considered runs only on
                    x86-64 machines.

                    Bibliographic Notes
                    Both Intel and AMD provide extensive documentation on their processors. This
                    includes general descriptions of an assembly-language programmer’s view of the
                    hardware [2, 50], as well as detailed references about the individual instruc-
                    tions [3, 51]. Reading the instruction descriptions is complicated by the facts that
                    (1) all documentation is based on the Intel assembly-code format, (2) there are
                    many variations for each instruction due to the different addressing and execution
                    modes, and (3) there are no illustrative examples. Still, these remain the authori-
                    tative references about the behavior of each instruction.
                         The organization x86-64.org has been responsible for defining the application
                    binary interface (ABI) for x86-64 code running on Linux systems [77]. This inter-
                    face describes details for procedure linkages, binary code files, and a number of
                    other features that are required for machine-code programs to execute properly.
                                                                            Homework Problems   347

     As we have discussed, the ATT format used by gcc is very different from the
Intel format used in Intel documentation and by other compilers (including the
Microsoft compilers).
     Muchnick’s book on compiler design [80] is considered the most comprehen-
sive reference on code-optimization techniques. It covers many of the techniques
we discuss here, such as register usage conventions.
     Much has been written about the use of buffer overflow to attack systems over
the Internet. Detailed analyses of the 1988 Internet worm have been published
by Spafford [105] as well as by members of the team at MIT who helped stop its
spread [35]. Since then a number of papers and projects have generated ways both
to create and to prevent buffer overflow attacks. Seacord’s book [97] provides a
wealth of information about buffer overflow and other attacks on code generated
by C compilers.

Homework Problems
3.58 ◆
For a function with prototype

long decode2(long x, long y, long z);

gcc generates the following assembly code:

1    decode2:
2      subq      %rdx, %rsi
3      imulq     %rsi, %rdi
4      movq      %rsi, %rax
5      salq      $63, %rax
6      sarq      $63, %rax
7      xorq      %rdi, %rax
8      ret

Parameters x, y, and z are passed in registers %rdi, %rsi, and %rdx. The code
stores the return value in register %rax.
    Write C code for decode2 that will have an effect equivalent to the assembly
code shown.

3.59 ◆◆
The following code computes the 128-bit product of two 64-bit signed values x and
y and stores the result in memory:

1    typedef __int128 int128_t;
2
3    void store_prod(int128_t *dest, int64_t x, int64_t y) {
4        *dest = x * (int128_t) y;
5    }

Gcc generates the following assembly code implementing the computation:

                     1    store_prod:
                     2      movq    %rdx, %rax
                     3      cqto
                     4      movq    %rsi, %rcx
                     5      sarq    $63, %rcx
                     6      imulq   %rax, %rcx
                     7      imulq   %rsi, %rdx
                     8      addq    %rdx, %rcx
                     9      mulq    %rsi
                    10      addq    %rcx, %rdx
                    11      movq    %rax, (%rdi)
                    12      movq    %rdx, 8(%rdi)
                    13      ret

                         This code uses three multiplications for the multiprecision arithmetic required
                    to implement 128-bit arithmetic on a 64-bit machine. Describe the algorithm used
                    to compute the product, and annotate the assembly code to show how it realizes
                    your algorithm. Hint: When extending arguments of x and y to 128 bits, they can
                    be rewritten as x = 264 . xh + xl and y = 264 . yh + yl , where xh, xl , yh, and yl are 64-
                    bit values. Similarly, the 128-bit product can be written as p = 264 . ph + pl , where
                    ph and pl are 64-bit values. Show how the code computes the values of ph and pl
                    in terms of xh, xl , yh, and yl .

                    3.60 ◆◆
                    Consider the following assembly code:

                          long loop(long x, int n)
                          x in %rdi, n in %esi
                     1    loop:
                     2      movl     %esi, %ecx
                     3      movl     $1, %edx
                     4      movl     $0, %eax
                     5      jmp      .L2
                     6    .L3:
                     7      movq     %rdi, %r8
                     8      andq     %rdx, %r8
                     9      orq      %r8, %rax
                    10      salq     %cl, %rdx
                    11    .L2:
                    12      testq    %rdx, %rdx
                    13      jne      .L3
                    14      rep; ret

                    The preceding code was generated by compiling C code that had the following
                    overall form:
                                                                                  Homework Problems   349

 1      long loop(long x, long n)
 2      {
 3          long result =           ;
 4          long mask;
 5          for (mask =           ; mask                    ; mask =                ) {
 6              result |=            ;
 7          }
 8          return result;
 9      }

     Your task is to fill in the missing parts of the C code to get a program equivalent
to the generated assembly code. Recall that the result of the function is returned
in register %rax. You will find it helpful to examine the assembly code before,
during, and after the loop to form a consistent mapping between the registers and
the program variables.
     A. Which registers hold program values x, n, result, and mask?
     B. What are the initial values of result and mask?
     C. What is the test condition for mask?
     D. How does mask get updated?
     E. How does result get updated?
     F. Fill in all the missing parts of the C code.

3.61 ◆◆
In Section 3.6.6, we examined the following code as a candidate for the use of
conditional data transfer:

long cread(long *xp) {
    return (xp ? *xp : 0);
}

We showed a trial implementation using a conditional move instruction but argued
that it was not valid, since it could attempt to read from a null address.
    Write a C function cread_alt that has the same behavior as cread, except
that it can be compiled to use conditional data transfer. When compiled, the
generated code should use a conditional move instruction rather than one of the
jump instructions.

3.62 ◆◆
The code that follows shows an example of branching on an enumerated type
value in a switch statement. Recall that enumerated types in C are simply a way
to introduce a set of names having associated integer values. By default, the values
assigned to the names count from zero upward. In our code, the actions associated
with the different case labels have been omitted.

                   1       /* Enumerated type creates set of constants numbered 0 and upward */
                   2       typedef enum {MODE_A, MODE_B, MODE_C, MODE_D, MODE_E} mode_t;
                   3
                   4       long switch3(long *p1, long *p2, mode_t action)
                   5       {
                   6           long result = 0;
                   7           switch(action) {
                   8           case MODE_A:
                   9
                  10           case MODE_B:
                  11
                  12           case MODE_C:
                  13
                  14           case MODE_D:
                  15
                  16           case MODE_E:
                  17
                  18           default:
                  19
                  20           }
                  21           return result;
                  22       }

                           The part of the generated assembly code implementing the different actions is
                       shown in Figure 3.52. The annotations indicate the argument locations, the register
                       values, and the case labels for the different jump destinations.
                           Fill in the missing parts of the C code. It contained one case that fell through
                       to another—try to reconstruct this.

                       3.63 ◆◆
                       This problem will give you a chance to reverse engineer a switch statement from
                       disassembled machine code. In the following procedure, the body of the switch
                       statement has been omitted:

                       1       long switch_prob(long x, long n) {
                       2           long result = x;
                       3           switch(n) {
                       4               /* Fill in code here */
                       5
                       6           }
                       7           return result;
                       8       }
                                                                         Homework Problems   351

     p1 in %rdi, p2 in %rsi, action in %edx
 1   .L8:                            MODE_E
 2     movl     $27, %eax
 3     ret
 4   .L3:                            MODE_A
 5     movq     (%rsi), %rax
 6     movq     (%rdi), %rdx
 7     movq     %rdx, (%rsi)
 8     ret
 9   .L5:                            MODE_B
10     movq     (%rdi), %rax
11     addq     (%rsi), %rax
12     movq     %rax, (%rdi)
13     ret
14   .L6:                            MODE_C
15     movq     $59, (%rdi)
16     movq     (%rsi), %rax
17     ret
18   .L7:                            MODE_D
19     movq     (%rsi), %rax
20     movq     %rax, (%rdi)
21     movl     $27, %eax
22     ret
23   .L9:                            default
24     movl     $12, %eax
25     ret
Figure 3.52 Assembly code for Problem 3.62. This code implements the different
branches of a switch statement.

Figure 3.53 shows the disassembled machine code for the procedure.
     The jump table resides in a different area of memory. We can see from
the indirect jump on line 5 that the jump table begins at address 0x4006f8.
Using the gdb debugger, we can examine the six 8-byte words of memory compris-
ing the jump table with the command x/6gx 0x4006f8. Gdb prints the following:

(gdb) x/6gx 0x4006f8
0x4006f8:    0x00000000004005a1        0x00000000004005c3
0x400708:    0x00000000004005a1        0x00000000004005aa
0x400718:    0x00000000004005b2        0x00000000004005bf

   Fill in the body of the switch statement with C code that will have the same
behavior as the machine code.

      long switch_prob(long x, long n)
      x in %rdi, n in %rsi
 1    0000000000400590 <switch_prob>:
 2      400590: 48 83 ee 3c                      sub      $0x3c,%rsi
 3      400594: 48 83 fe 05                      cmp      $0x5,%rsi
 4      400598: 77 29                            ja       4005c3 <switch_prob+0x33>
 5      40059a: ff 24 f5 f8 06 40 00             jmpq     *0x4006f8(,%rsi,8)
 6      4005a1: 48 8d 04 fd 00 00 00             lea      0x0(,%rdi,8),%rax
 7      4005a8: 00
 8      4005a9: c3                               retq
 9      4005aa: 48 89 f8                         mov      %rdi,%rax
10      4005ad: 48 c1 f8 03                      sar      $0x3,%rax
11      4005b1: c3                               retq
12      4005b2: 48 89 f8                         mov      %rdi,%rax
13      4005b5: 48 c1 e0 04                      shl      $0x4,%rax
14      4005b9: 48 29 f8                         sub      %rdi,%rax
15      4005bc: 48 89 c7                         mov      %rax,%rdi
16      4005bf: 48 0f af ff                      imul     %rdi,%rdi
17      4005c3: 48 8d 47 4b                      lea      0x4b(%rdi),%rax
18      4005c7: c3                               retq
Figure 3.53 Disassembled code for Problem 3.63.

                     3.64 ◆◆◆
                     Consider the following source code, where R, S, and T are constants declared with
                     #define:

                      1    long A[R][S][T];
                      2
                      3    long store_ele(long i, long j, long k, long *dest)
                      4    {
                      5        *dest = A[i][j][k];
                      6        return sizeof(A);
                      7    }

                     In compiling this program, gcc generates the following assembly code:

                           long store_ele(long i, long j, long k, long *dest)
                           i in %rdi, j in %rsi, k in %rdx, dest in %rcx
                      1    store_ele:
                      2      leaq    (%rsi,%rsi,2), %rax
                      3      leaq    (%rsi,%rax,4), %rax
                      4      movq    %rdi, %rsi
                      5      salq    $6, %rsi
                      6      addq    %rsi, %rdi
                      7      addq    %rax, %rdi
                                                                             Homework Problems   353

 8        addq      %rdi, %rdx
 9        movq      A(,%rdx,8), %rax
10        movq      %rax, (%rcx)
11        movl      $3640, %eax
12        ret

     A. Extend Equation 3.1 from two dimensions to three to provide a formula for
        the location of array element A[i][j][k].
     B. Use your reverse engineering skills to determine the values of R, S, and T
        based on the assembly code.
3.65 ◆
The following code transposes the elements of an M × M array, where M is a
constant defined by #define:
1       void transpose(long A[M][M]) {
2           long i, j;
3           for (i = 0; i < M; i++)
4               for (j = 0; j < i; j++) {
5                   long t = A[i][j];
6                   A[i][j] = A[j][i];
7                   A[j][i] = t;
8               }
9       }

     When compiled with optimization level -O1, gcc generates the following code
for the inner loop of the function:
1       .L6:
2         movq      (%rdx), %rcx
3         movq      (%rax), %rsi
4         movq      %rsi, (%rdx)
5         movq      %rcx, (%rax)
6         addq      $8, %rdx
7         addq      $120, %rax
8         cmpq      %rdi, %rax
9         jne       .L6

We can see that gcc has converted the array indexing to pointer code.
    A. Which register holds a pointer to array element A[i][j]?
    B. Which register holds a pointer to array element A[j][i]?
    C. What is the value of M?
3.66 ◆
Consider the following source code, where NR and NC are macro expressions de-
clared with #define that compute the dimensions of array A in terms of parame-
ter n. This code computes the sum of the elements of column j of the array.

                     1    long sum_col(long n, long A[NR(n)][NC(n)], long j) {
                     2        long i;
                     3        long result = 0;
                     4        for (i = 0; i < NR(n); i++)
                     5            result += A[i][j];
                     6        return result;
                     7    }

                         In compiling this program, gcc generates the following assembly code:

                          long sum_col(long n, long A[NR(n)][NC(n)], long j)
                          n in %rdi, A in %rsi, j in %rdx
                     1    sum_col:
                     2      leaq     1(,%rdi,4), %r8
                     3      leaq     (%rdi,%rdi,2), %rax
                     4      movq     %rax, %rdi
                     5      testq    %rax, %rax
                     6      jle      .L4
                     7      salq     $3, %r8
                     8      leaq     (%rsi,%rdx,8), %rcx
                     9      movl     $0, %eax
                    10      movl     $0, %edx
                    11    .L3:
                    12      addq     (%rcx), %rax
                    13      addq     $1, %rdx
                    14      addq     %r8, %rcx
                    15      cmpq     %rdi, %rdx
                    16      jne      .L3
                    17      rep; ret
                    18    .L4:
                    19      movl     $0, %eax
                    20      ret

                         Use your reverse engineering skills to determine the definitions of NR and NC.

                    3.67 ◆◆
                    For this exercise, we will examine the code generated by gcc for functions that have
                    structures as arguments and return values, and from this see how these language
                    features are typically implemented.
                        The following C code has a function process having structures as argument
                    and return values, and a function eval that calls process:

                     1    typedef struct {
                     2        long a[2];
                     3        long *p;
                     4    } strA;
                     5
                                                            Homework Problems   355

 6   typedef struct {
 7       long u[2];
 8       long q;
 9   } strB;
10
11   strB process(strA s) {
12       strB r;
13       r.u[0] = s.a[1];
14       r.u[1] = s.a[0];
15       r.q =     *s.p;
16       return r;
17   }
18
19   long eval(long x, long y, long z) {
20       strA s;
21       s.a[0] = x;
22       s.a[1] = y;
23       s.p = &z;
24       strB r = process(s);
25       return r.u[0] + r.u[1] + r.q;
26   }

Gcc generates the following code for these two functions:

     strB process(strA s)
 1   process:
 2     movq     %rdi, %rax
 3     movq     24(%rsp), %rdx
 4     movq     (%rdx), %rdx
 5     movq     16(%rsp), %rcx
 6     movq     %rcx, (%rdi)
 7     movq     8(%rsp), %rcx
 8     movq     %rcx, 8(%rdi)
 9     movq     %rdx, 16(%rdi)
10     ret

     long eval(long x, long y, long z)
     x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
 1   eval:
 2     subq     $104, %rsp
 3     movq     %rdx, 24(%rsp)
 4     leaq     24(%rsp), %rax
 5     movq     %rdi, (%rsp)
 6     movq     %rsi, 8(%rsp)
 7     movq     %rax, 16(%rsp)
 8     leaq     64(%rsp), %rdi
 9     call     process

                    10      movq      72(%rsp), %rax
                    11      addq      64(%rsp), %rax
                    12      addq      80(%rsp), %rax
                    13      addq      $104, %rsp
                    14      ret

                      A. We can see on line 2 of function eval that it allocates 104 bytes on the stack.
                         Diagram the stack frame for eval, showing the values that it stores on the
                         stack prior to calling process.
                      B. What value does eval pass in its call to process?
                      C. How does the code for process access the elements of structure argument s?
                      D. How does the code for process set the fields of result structure r?
                      E. Complete your diagram of the stack frame for eval, showing how eval
                         accesses the elements of structure r following the return from process.
                      F. What general principles can you discern about how structure values are
                         passed as function arguments and how they are returned as function results?

                    3.68 ◆◆◆
                    In the following code, A and B are constants defined with #define:

                     1    typedef struct {
                     2        int x[A][B]; /* Unknown constants A and B */
                     3        long y;
                     4    } str1;
                     5
                     6    typedef struct {
                     7        char array[B];
                     8        int t;
                     9        short s[A];
                    10        long u;
                    11    } str2;
                    12
                    13    void setVal(str1 *p, str2 *q) {
                    14        long v1 = q->t;
                    15        long v2 = q->u;
                    16        p->y = v1+v2;
                    17    }

                    Gcc generates the following code for setVal:

                          void setVal(str1 *p, str2 *q)
                          p in %rdi, q in %rsi
                     1    setVal:
                     2      movslq    8(%rsi), %rax
                     3      addq      32(%rsi), %rax
                                                                                Homework Problems   357

 4         movq     %rax, 184(%rdi)
 5         ret

       What are the values of A and B? (The solution is unique.)

3.69 ◆◆◆
You are charged with maintaining a large C program, and you come across the
following code:

 1      typedef struct {
 2          int first;
 3          a_struct a[CNT];
 4          int last;
 5      } b_struct;
 6
 7      void test(long i, b_struct *bp)
 8      {
 9          int n = bp->first + bp->last;
10          a_struct *ap = &bp->a[i];
11          ap->x[ap->idx] = n;
12      }

     The declarations of the compile-time constant CNT and the structure a_struct
are in a file for which you do not have the necessary access privilege. Fortunately,
you have a copy of the .o version of code, which you are able to disassemble with
the objdump program, yielding the following disassembly:

         void test(long i, b_struct *bp)
         i in %rdi, bp in %rsi
 1      0000000000000000 <test>:
 2         0:   8b 8e 20 01 00 00             mov    0x120(%rsi),%ecx
 3         6:   03 0e                         add    (%rsi),%ecx
 4         8:   48 8d 04 bf                   lea    (%rdi,%rdi,4),%rax
 5         c:   48 8d 04 c6                   lea    (%rsi,%rax,8),%rax
 6        10:   48 8b 50 08                   mov    0x8(%rax),%rdx
 7        14:   48 63 c9                      movslq %ecx,%rcx
 8        17:   48 89 4c d0 10                mov    %rcx,0x10(%rax,%rdx,8)
 9        1c:   c3                            retq

       Using your reverse engineering skills, deduce the following:
     A. The value of CNT.
     B. A complete declaration of structure a_struct. Assume that the only fields
        in this structure are idx and x, and that both of these contain signed values.

                    3.70 ◆◆◆
                    Consider the following union declaration:

                     1    union ele {
                     2        struct {
                     3            long *p;
                     4            long y;
                     5        } e1;
                     6        struct {
                     7            long x;
                     8            union ele *next;
                     9        } e2;
                    10    };

                    This declaration illustrates that structures can be embedded within unions.
                         The following function (with some expressions omitted) operates on a linked
                    list having these unions as list elements:

                     1    void proc (union ele *up) {
                     2        up->          = *(              ) -             ;
                     3    }

                      A. What are the offsets (in bytes) of the following fields:

                          e1.p
                          e1.y
                          e2.x
                          e2.next

                      B. How many total bytes does the structure require?
                      C. The compiler generates the following assembly code for proc:

                                void proc (union ele *up)
                                up in %rdi
                           1    proc:
                           2      movq      8(%rdi), %rax
                           3      movq      (%rax), %rdx
                           4      movq      (%rdx), %rdx
                           5      subq      8(%rax), %rdx
                           6      movq      %rdx, (%rdi)
                           7      ret

                          On the basis of this information, fill in the missing expressions in the code
                          for proc. Hint: Some union references can have ambiguous interpretations.
                          These ambiguities get resolved as you see where the references lead. There
                                                                                Homework Problems   359

     is only one answer that does not perform any casting and does not violate
     any type constraints.

3.71 ◆
Write a function good_echo that reads a line from standard input and writes it to
standard output. Your implementation should work for an input line of arbitrary
length. You may use the library function fgets, but you must make sure your
function works correctly even when the input line requires more space than you
have allocated for your buffer. Your code should also check for error conditions
and return when one is encountered. Refer to the definitions of the standard I/O
functions for documentation [45, 61].

3.72 ◆◆
Figure 3.54(a) shows the code for a function that is similar to function vfunct
(Figure 3.43(a)). We used vfunct to illustrate the use of a frame pointer in man-
aging variable-size stack frames. The new function aframe allocates space for local

(a) C code
 1   #include <alloca.h>
 2
 3   long aframe(long n, long idx, long *q) {
 4       long i;
 5       long **p = alloca(n * sizeof(long *));
 6       p[0] = &i;
 7       for (i = 1; i < n; i++)
 8           p[i] = q;
 9       return *p[idx];
10   }
(b) Portions of generated assembly code
     long aframe(long n, long idx, long *q)
     n in %rdi, idx in %rsi, q in %rdx
 1   aframe:
 2     pushq      %rbp
 3     movq       %rsp, %rbp
 4     subq       $16, %rsp                  Allocate space for i (%rsp = s1)
 5     leaq       30(,%rdi,8), %rax
 6     andq       $-16, %rax
 7     subq       %rax, %rsp                 Allocate space for array p (%rsp = s2 )
 8     leaq       15(%rsp), %r8
 9     andq       $-16, %r8                  Set %r8 to &p[0]
       .
       .
       .

Figure 3.54 Code for Problem 3.72. This function is similar to that of Figure 3.43.

                    array p by calling library function alloca. This function is similar to the more com-
                    monly used function malloc, except that it allocates space on the run-time stack.
                    The space is automatically deallocated when the executing procedure returns.
                        Figure 3.54(b) shows the part of the assembly code that sets up the frame
                    pointer and allocates space for local variables i and p. It is very similar to the
                    corresponding code for vframe. Let us use the same notation as in Problem 3.49:
                    The stack pointer is set to values s1 at line 4 and s2 at line 7. The start address of
                    array p is set to value p at line 9. Extra space e2 may arise between s2 and p, and
                    extra space e1 may arise between the end of array p and s1.
                         A. Explain, in mathematical terms, the logic in the computation of s2 .
                      B. Explain, in mathematical terms, the logic in the computation of p.
                      C. Find values of n and s1 that lead to minimum and maximum values of e1.
                         D. What alignment properties does this code guarantee for the values of s2
                            and p?
                    3.73 ◆
                    Write a function in assembly code that matches the behavior of the function find_
                    range in Figure 3.51. Your code should contain only one floating-point comparison
                    instruction, and then it should use conditional branches to generate the correct
                    result. Test your code on all 232 possible argument values. Web Aside asm:easm
                    on page 214 describes how to incorporate functions written in assembly code into
                    C programs.
                    3.74 ◆◆
                    Write a function in assembly code that matches the behavior of the function find_
                    range in Figure 3.51. Your code should contain only one floating-point comparison
                    instruction, and then it should use conditional moves to generate the correct result.
                    You might want to make use of the instruction cmovp (move if even parity). Test
                    your code on all 232 possible argument values. Web Aside asm:easm on page 214
                    describes how to incorporate functions written in assembly code into C programs.
                    3.75 ◆
                    ISO C99 includes extensions to support complex numbers. Any floating-point type
                    can be modified with the keyword complex. Here are some sample functions that
                    work with complex data and that call some of the associated library functions:
                     1      #include <complex.h>
                     2
                     3      double c_imag(double complex x) {
                     4          return cimag(x);
                     5      }
                     6
                     7      double c_real(double complex x) {
                     8          return creal(x);
                     9      }
                    10
                                                                     Solutions to Practice Problems   361

11     double complex c_sub(double complex x, double complex y) {
12         return x - y;
13     }

    When compiled, gcc generates the following assembly code for these func-
tions:

       double c_imag(double complex x)
 1     c_imag:
 2       movapd   %xmm1, %xmm0
3        ret

       double c_real(double complex x)
4      c_real:
5        rep; ret

       double complex c_sub(double complex x, double complex y)
6      c_sub:
7        subsd    %xmm2, %xmm0
8        subsd    %xmm3, %xmm1
9        ret

      Based on these examples, determine the following:
    A. How are complex arguments passed to a function?
    B. How are complex values returned from a function?

Solutions to Practice Problems
Solution to Problem 3.1 (page 218)
This exercise gives you practice with the different operand forms.

Operand               Value    Comment
%rax                 0x100     Register
0x104                0xAB      Absolute address
$0x108               0x108     Immediate
(%rax)               0xFF      Address 0x100
4(%rax)              0xAB      Address 0x104
9(%rax,%rdx)         0x11      Address 0x10C
260(%rcx,%rdx)       0x13      Address 0x108
0xFC(,%rcx,4)        0xFF      Address 0x100
(%rax,%rdx,4)        0x11      Address 0x10C

Solution to Problem 3.2 (page 221)
As we have seen, the assembly code generated by gcc includes suffixes on the
instructions, while the disassembler does not. Being able to switch between these

                    two forms is an important skill to learn. One important feature is that memory
                    references in x86-64 are always given with quad word registers, such as %rax, even
                    if the operand is a byte, single word, or double word.
                         Here is the code written with suffixes:

                      movl     %eax, (%rsp)
                      movw     (%rax), %dx
                      movb     $0xFF, %bl
                      movb     (%rsp,%rdx,4), %dl
                      movq    (%rdx), %rax
                      movw     %dx, (%rax)

                    Solution to Problem 3.3 (page 222)
                    Since we will rely on gcc to generate most of our assembly code, being able to
                    write correct assembly code is not a critical skill. Nonetheless, this exercise will
                    help you become more familiar with the different instruction and operand types.
                        Here is the code with explanations of the errors:

           movb $0xF, (%ebx)              Cannot use %ebx as address register
           movl %rax, (%rsp)              Mismatch between instruction suffix and register ID
           movw (%rax),4(%rsp)            Cannot have both source and destination be memory references
           movb %al,%sl                   No register named %sl
           movl %eax,$0x123               Cannot have immediate as destination
           movl %eax,%dx                  Destination operand incorrect size
           movb %si, 8(%rbp)              Mismatch between instruction suffix and register ID

                    Solution to Problem 3.4 (page 223)
                    This exercise gives you more experience with the different data movement in-
                    structions and how they relate to the data types and conversion rules of C. The
                    nuances of conversions of both signedness and size, as well as integral promotion,
                    add challenge to this problem.

                    src_t              dest_t        Instruction             Comments
                    long               long          movq (%rdi), %rax       Read 8 bytes
                                                     movq %rax, (%rsi)       Store 8 bytes

                    char               int           movsbl (%rdi), %eax     Convert char to int
                                                     movl %eax, (%rsi)       Store 4 bytes

                    char               unsigned      movsbl (%rdi), %eax     Convert char to int
                                                     movl %eax, (%rsi)       Store 4 bytes
                    unsigned char      long          movzbl (%rdi), %eax     Read byte and zero-extend
                                                     movq %rax, (%rsi)       Store 8 bytes
                                                                     Solutions to Practice Problems   363

int                char         movl (%rdi), %eax        Read 4 bytes
                                movb %al, (%rsi)         Store low-order byte

unsigned           unsigned     movl (%rdi), %eax        Read 4 bytes
                   char         movb %al, (%rsi)         Store low-order byte

char               short        movsbw (%rdi), %ax       Read byte and sign-extend
                                movw %ax, (%rsi)         Store 2 bytes

Solution to Problem 3.5 (page 225)
Reverse engineering is a good way to understand systems. In this case, we want
to reverse the effect of the C compiler to determine what C code gave rise to this
assembly code. The best way is to run a “simulation,” starting with values x, y, and
z at the locations designated by pointers xp, yp, and zp, respectively. We would
then get the following behavior:

    void decode1(long *xp, long *yp, long *zp)
    xp in %rdi, yp in %rsi, zp in %rdx
decode1:
  movq       (%rdi), %r8       Get x = *xp
  movq       (%rsi), %rcx      Get y = *yp
  movq       (%rdx), %rax      Get z = *zp
  movq       %r8, (%rsi)       Store x at yp
  movq       %rcx, (%rdx)      Store y at zp
  movq       %rax, (%rdi)      Store z at xp
  ret

From this, we can generate the following C code:

void decode1(long *xp, long *yp, long *zp)
{
    long x = *xp;
    long y = *yp;
    long z = *zp;

      *yp = x;
      *zp = y;
      *xp = z;
}

Solution to Problem 3.6 (page 228)
This exercise demonstrates the versatility of the leaq instruction and gives you
more practice in deciphering the different operand forms. Although the operand
forms are classified as type “Memory” in Figure 3.3, no memory access occurs.

                    Instruction                       Result
                    leaq 9(%rdx), %rax                9+q
                    leaq (%rdx,%rbx), %rax            q +p
                    leaq (%rdx,%rbx,3), %rax          q + 3p
                    leaq 2(%rbx,%rbx,7), %rax         2 + 8p
                    leaq 0xE(,%rdx,3), %rax           14 + 3q
                    leaq 6(%rbx,%rdx,7), %rdx         6 + p + 7q

                    Solution to Problem 3.7 (page 229)
                    Again, reverse engineering proves to be a useful way to learn the relationship
                    between C code and the generated assembly code.
                        The best way to solve problems of this type is to annotate the lines of assembly
                    code with information about the operations being performed. Here is a sample:

                      short scale3(short x, short y, short z)
                      x in %rdi, y in %rsi, z in %rdx
                    scale3:
                      leaq        (%rsi,%rsi,9), %rbx          10 * y
                      leaq        (%rbx,%rdx), %rbx            10 * y + z
                      leaq        (%rbx,%rdi,%rsi), %rbx       10 * y + z + y * x
                      ret

                    From this, it is easy to generate the missing expression:

                         short t = 10 * y + z + y * x;

                    Solution to Problem 3.8 (page 230)
                    This problem gives you a chance to test your understanding of operands and the
                    arithmetic instructions. The instruction sequence is designed so that the result of
                    each instruction does not affect the behavior of subsequent ones.

                    Instruction                     Destination     Value
                    addq %rcx,(%rax)                0x100           0x100
                    subq %rdx,8(%rax)               0x108           0xA8
                    imulq $16,(%rax,%rdx,8)         0x118           0x110
                    incq 16(%rax)                   0x110           0x14
                    decq %rcx                       %rcx            0x0
                    subq %rdx,%rax                  %rax            0xFD

                    Solution to Problem 3.9 (page 231)
                    This exercise gives you a chance to generate a little bit of assembly code. The
                    solution code was generated by gcc. By loading parameter n in register %ecx, it
                    can then use byte register %cl to specify the shift amount for the sarq instruction.
                    It might seem odd to use a movl instruction, given that n is eight bytes long, but
                    keep in mind that only the least significant byte is required to specify the shift
                    amount.
                                                                       Solutions to Practice Problems   365

    long shift_left4_rightn(long x, long n)
    x in %rdi, n in %rsi
shift_left4_rightn:
  movq    %rdi, %rax          Get x
  salq    $4, %rax            x <<= 4
  movl    %esi, %ecx          Get n (4 bytes)
  sarq    %cl, %rax           x >>= n

Solution to Problem 3.10 (page 232)
This problem is fairly straightforward, since the assembly code follows the struc-
ture of the C code closely.

      short p1 = y | z;
      short p2 = p1 >> 9;
      short p3 = ~p2;
      short p4 = y - p3;

Solution to Problem 3.11 (page 233)

    A. This instruction is used to set register %rcx to zero, exploiting the property
       that x ^ x = 0 for any x. It corresponds to the C statement x = 0.
 B. A more direct way of setting register %rcx to zero is with the instruction
    movq $0,%rcx.
 C. Assembling and disassembling this code, however, we find that the version
    with xorq requires only 3 bytes, while the version with movq requires 7. Other
    ways to set %rcx to zero rely on the property that any instruction that updates
    the lower 4 bytes will cause the high-order bytes to be set to zero. Thus, we
    could use either xorl %ecx,%ecx (2 bytes) or movl $0,%ecx (5 bytes).

Solution to Problem 3.12 (page 236)
We can simply replace the cqto instruction with one that sets register %rdx to
zero, and use divq rather than idivq as our division instruction, yielding the
following code:

       void uremdiv(unsigned long x, unsigned long y,
                    unsigned long *qp, unsigned long *rp)
       x in %rdi, y in %rsi, qp in %rdx, rp in %rcx
1      uremdiv:
2        movq      %rdx, %r8          Copy qp
3        movq      %rdi, %rax         Move x to lower 8 bytes of dividend
4        movl      $0, %edx           Set upper 8 bytes of dividend to 0
5        divq      %rsi               Divide by y
6        movq      %rax, (%r8)        Store quotient at qp
7        movq      %rdx, (%rcx)       Store remainder at rp
8        ret

                    Solution to Problem 3.13 (page 240)
                    It is important to understand that assembly code does not keep track of the type
                    of a program value. Instead, the different instructions determine the operand
                    sizes and whether they are signed or unsigned. When mapping from instruction
                    sequences back to C code, we must do a bit of detective work to infer the data
                    types of the program values.
                      A. The suffix ‘l’ and the register identifiers indicate 32-bit operands, while the
                         comparison is for a two’s-complement <. We can infer that data_t must be
                         int.
                      B. The suffix ‘w’ and the register identifiers indicate 16-bit operands, while the
                         comparison is for a two’s-complement >=. We can infer that data_t must be
                         short.
                      C. The suffix ‘b’ and the register identifiers indicate 8-bit operands, while
                         the comparison is for an unsigned <=. We can infer that data_t must be
                         unsigned char.
                      D. The suffix ‘q’ and the register identifiers indicate 64-bit operands, while
                         the comparison is for !=, which is the same whether the arguments are
                         signed, unsigned, or pointers. We can infer that data_t could be either long,
                         unsigned long, or some form of pointer.
                    Solution to Problem 3.14 (page 241)
                    This problem is similar to Problem 3.13, except that it involves test instructions
                    rather than cmp instructions.
                      A. The suffix ‘q’ and the register identifiers indicate a 64-bit operand, while the
                         comparison is for >=, which must be signed. We can infer that data_t must
                         be long.
                      B. The suffix ‘w’ and the register identifier indicate a 16-bit operand, while the
                         comparison is for ==, which is the same for signed or unsigned. We can infer
                         that data_t must be either short or unsigned short.
                      C. The suffix ‘b’ and the register identifier indicate an 8-bit operand, while the
                         comparison is for unsigned >. We can infer that data_t must be unsigned
                         char.
                      D. The suffix ‘l’ and the register identifier indicate 32-bit operands, while the
                         comparison is for <. We can infer that data_t must be int.
                    Solution to Problem 3.15 (page 245)
                    This exercise requires you to examine disassembled code in detail and reason
                    about the encodings for jump targets. It also gives you practice in hexadecimal
                    arithmetic.
                      A. The je instruction has as its target 0x4003fc + 0x02. As the original disas-
                         sembled code shows, this is 0x4003fe:
                            4003fa: 74 02                       je       4003fe
                            4003fc: ff d0                       callq    *%rax
                                                                         Solutions to Practice Problems   367

 B. The je instruction has as its target 0x0x400431 − 12 (since 0xf4 is the 1-
    byte two’s-complement representation of −12). As the original disassembled
    code shows, this is 0x400425:
        40042f: 74 f4                         je       400425
        400431: 5d                            pop      %rbp

 C. According to the annotation produced by the disassembler, the jump target
    is at absolute address 0x400547. According to the byte encoding, this must
    be at an address 0x2 bytes beyond that of the pop instruction. Subtracting
    these gives address 0x400545. Noting that the encoding of the ja instruction
    requires 2 bytes, it must be located at address 0x400543. These are confirmed
    by examining the original disassembly:
        400543: 77 02                         ja       400547
        400545: 5d                            pop      %rbp

 D. Reading the bytes in reverse order, we can see that the target offset is
    0xffffff73, or decimal −141. Adding this to 0x0x4005ed (the address of
    the nop instruction) gives address 0x400560:
        4005e8: e9 73 ff ff ff                jmpq     400560
        4005ed: 90                            nop

Solution to Problem 3.16 (page 248)
Annotating assembly code and writing C code that mimics its control flow are good
first steps in understanding assembly-language programs. This problem gives you
practice for an example with simple control flow. It also gives you a chance to
examine the implementation of logical operations.
 A. Here is the C code:
     void goto_cond(short a, short *p) {
          if (a == 0)
              goto done;
          if (a >= *p)
              goto done;
          *p = a;
       done:
          return;
     }

 B. The first conditional branch is part of the implementation of the && expres-
    sion. If the test for a being non-null fails, the code will skip the test of a >= *p.
Solution to Problem 3.17 (page 248)
This is an exercise to help you think about the idea of a general translation rule
and how to apply it.
 A. Converting to this alternate form involves only switching around a few lines
    of the code:

                          long gotodiff_se_alt(long x, long y) {
                               long result;
                               if (x < y)
                                    goto x_lt_y;
                               ge_cnt++;
                               result = x - y;
                               return result;
                            x_lt_y:
                               lt_cnt++;
                               result = y - x;
                               return result;
                          }

                      B. In most respects, the choice is arbitrary. But the original rule works better
                         for the common case where there is no else statement. For this case, we can
                         simply modify the translation rule to be as follows:

                              t = test-expr;
                              if (!t)
                                   goto done;
                              then-statement
                          done:

                          A translation based on the alternate rule is more cumbersome.

                    Solution to Problem 3.18 (page 249)
                    This problem requires that you work through a nested branch structure, where
                    you will see how our rule for translating if statements has been applied. On the
                    whole, the machine code is a straightforward translation of the C code.

                    short test(short x, short y, short z) {
                        short val = z+y-x;
                        if (z > 5) {
                            if (y > 2)
                                 val = x/z;
                            else
                                 val = x/y;
                        } else if (z < 3)
                            val = z/y;
                        return val;
                    }

                    Solution to Problem 3.19 (page 252)
                    This problem reinforces our method of computing the misprediction penalty.
                      A. We can apply our formula directly to get TMP = 2(45 − 25) = 40.
                                                                          Solutions to Practice Problems   369

  B. When misprediction occurs, the function will require around 25 + 40 = 65
     cycles.

Solution to Problem 3.20 (page 255)
This problem provides a chance to study the use of conditional moves.
  A. The operator is ‘/’. We see this is an example of dividing by a power of 4 by
     right shifting (see Section 2.3.7). Before shifting by k = 4, we must add a bias
     of 2k − 1 = 15 when the dividend is negative.
  B. Here is an annotated version of the assembly code:

        short arith(short x)
        x in %rdi
      arith:
        leaq      15(%rdi), %rbx         temp = x+15
        testq     %rdi, %rdi             Text x
        cmovns    %rdi, %rbx             If x>= 0, temp = x
        sarq      $4, %rbx               result = temp >> 4 (= x/16)
        ret

      The program creates a temporary value equal to x + 15, in anticipation
      of x being negative and therefore requiring biasing. The cmovns instruction
      conditionally changes this number to x when x ≥ 0, and then it is shifted by
      4 to generate x/16.

Solution to Problem 3.21 (page 255)
This problem is similar to Problem 3.18, except that some of the conditionals have
been implemented by conditional data transfers. Although it might seem daunting
to fit this code into the framework of the original C code, you will find that it follows
the translation rules fairly closely.

short test(short x, short y) {
    short val = y + 12;
    if (x < 0) {
        if (x < y)
             val = x * y;
        else
             val = x | y;
    } else if (y > 10)
        val = x / y;
    return val;
}

Solution to Problem 3.22 (page 257)

  A. The computation of 14! would overflow with a 32-bit int. As we learned
     in Problem 2.35, when we get value x while attempting to compute n!, we
     can test for overflow by computing x/n and seeing whether it equals (n − 1)!

                          (assuming that we have already ensured that the computation of (n − 1)!
                          did not overflow). In this case we get 1,278,945,280/14 = 91353234.286. As
                          a second test, we can see that any factorial beyond 10! must be a multiple of
                          100 and therefore have zeros for the last two digits. The correct value of 14!
                          is 87,178,291,200.
                               Further, we can build up a table of factorials computed through 14! with
                          data type int, as shown below:

                          n            n!          OK?
                           1                  1      Y
                           2                  2      Y
                           3                  6      Y
                           4                 24      Y
                           5                120      Y
                           6                720      Y
                           7              5,040      Y
                           8             40,320      Y
                           9            362,880      Y
                          10          3,628,800      Y
                          11         39,916,800      Y
                          12        479,001,600      Y
                          13      1,932,053,504      N
                          14      1,278,945,280      N

                      B. Doing the computation with data type long lets us go up to 20!, thus the 14!
                         computation does not overflow.

                    Solution to Problem 3.23 (page 258)
                    The code generated when compiling loops can be tricky to analyze, because the
                    compiler can perform many different optimizations on loop code, and because it
                    can be difficult to match program variables with registers. This particular example
                    demonstrates several places where the assembly code is not just a direct translation
                    of the C code.
                      A. Although parameter x is passed to the function in register %rdi, we can see
                         that the register is never referenced once the loop is entered. Instead, we
                         can see that registers %rbx, %rcx, and %rdx are initialized in lines 2–5 to x,
                         x/9, and 4*x. We can conclude, therefore, that these registers contain the
                         program variables.
                      B. The compiler determines that pointer p always points to x, and hence the
                         expression (*p)+=5 simply increments x. It combines this incrementing by
                         5 with the increment of y, via the leaq instruction of line 7.
                      C. The annotated code is as follows:
                                                                     Solutions to Practice Problems   371

           short dw_loop(short x)
           x initially in %rdi
      1    dw_loop:
      2      movq     %rdi, %rbx            Copy x to %rbx
      3      movq     %rdi, %rcx
      4      idivq    $9, %rcx              Compute y = x/9
      5      leaq     (,%rdi,4), %rdx       Compute n = 4*x
      6    .L2:                          loop:
      7      leaq     5(%rbx,%rcx), %rcx    Compute y += x + 5
      8      subq     $2, %rdx              Decrement n by 2
      9      testq    %rdx, %rdx            Test n
     10      jg       .L2                   If > 0, goto loop
     11      rep; ret                    Return

Solution to Problem 3.24 (page 260)
This assembly code is a fairly straightforward translation of the loop using the
jump-to-middle method. The full C code is as follows:

short loop_while(short a, short b)
{
    short result = 0;
    while (a > b) {
        result = result + (a*b);
        a = a-1;
    }
    return result;
}

Solution to Problem 3.25 (page 262)
While the generated code does not follow the exact pattern of the guarded-do
translation, we can see that it is equivalent to the following C code:

long loop_while2(long a, long b)
{
    long result = b;
    while (b > 0) {
        result = result * a;
        b = b-a;
    }
    return result;
}

    We will often see cases, especially when compiling with higher levels of opti-
mization, where gcc takes some liberties in the exact form of the code it generates,
while preserving the required functionality.

                    Solution to Problem 3.26 (page 264)
                    Being able to work backward from assembly code to C code is a prime example
                    of reverse engineering.
                      A. We can see that the code uses the jump-to-middle translation, using the jmp
                         instruction on line 3.
                      B. Here is the original C code:
                          short test_one(unsigned short x) {
                              short val = 1;
                              while (x) {
                                  val ^= x;
                                  x >>= 1;
                              }
                              return val & 0;
                          }

                      C. This code computes the parity of argument x. That is, it returns 1 if there is
                         an odd number of ones in x and 0 if there is an even number.
                    Solution to Problem 3.27 (page 267)
                    This exercise is intended to reinforce your understanding of how loops are imple-
                    mented.
                    long fibonacci_gd_goto(long n)
                    {
                         long i = 2;
                         long next, first = 0, second = 1;
                         if (n <= 1)
                              goto done;
                      loop:
                         next = first + second;
                         first = second; second = next;
                         i++;
                         if (i <= n)
                              goto loop;
                      done:
                         return n;
                    }

                    Solution to Problem 3.28 (page 267)
                    This problem is trickier than Problem 3.26, since the code within the loop is more
                    complex and the overall operation is less familiar.
                      A. Here is the original C code:
                          long fun_b(unsigned long x) {
                              long val = 0;
                              long i;
                                                                            Solutions to Practice Problems   373

          for (i = 64; i != 0; i--) {
              val = (val << 1) | (x & 0x1);
              x >>= 1;
          }
          return val;
     }

 B. The code was generated using the guarded-do transformation, but the com-
    piler detected that, since i is initialized to 64, it will satisfy the test i ? = 0, and
    therefore the initial test is not required.
 C. This code reverses the bits in x, creating a mirror image. It does this by
    shifting the bits of x from left to right, and then filling these bits in as it
    shifts val from right to left.
Solution to Problem 3.29 (page 268)
Our stated rule for translating a for loop into a while loop is just a bit too
simplistic—this is the only aspect that requires special consideration.
 A. Applying our translation rule would yield the following code:
          /* Naive translation of for loop into while loop */
          /* WARNING: This is buggy code */
          long sum = 0;
          long i = 0;
          while (i < 10) {
              if (i & 1)
                   /* This will cause an infinite loop */
                   continue;
              sum += i;
              i++;
          }

     This code has an infinite loop, since the continue statement would prevent
     index variable i from being updated.
 B. The general solution is to replace the continue statement with a goto
    statement that skips the rest of the loop body and goes directly to the update
    portion:
          /* Correct translation of for loop into while loop */
          long sum = 0;
          long i = 0;
          while (i < 10) {
              if (i & 1)
                   goto update;
              sum += i;
          update:
              i++;
          }

                    Solution to Problem 3.30 (page 272)
                    This problem gives you a chance to reason about the control flow of a switch
                    statement. Answering the questions requires you to combine information from
                    several places in the assembly code.
                      .
                          Line 2 of the assembly code adds 2 to x to set the lower range of the cases to
                          zero. That means that the minimum case label is −2.
                      .
                          Lines 3 and 4 cause the program to jump to the default case when the adjusted
                          case value is greater than 8. This implies that the maximum case label is
                          −2 + 8 = 6.
                      .
                          In the jump table, we see that the entry on lines 6 (case value 2) and 9 (case
                          value 5) have the same destination (.L2) as the jump instruction on line 4,
                          indicating the default case behavior. Thus, case labels 2 and 5 are missing in
                          the switch statement body.
                      .
                          In the jump table, we see that the entries on lines 3 and 10 have the same
                          destination. These correspond to cases −1 and 6.
                      .
                          In the jump table, we see that the entries on lines 5 and 7 have the same
                          destination. These correspond to cases 1 and 3.
                          From this reasoning, we draw the following conclusions:
                      A. The case labels in the switch statement body have values −2, −1, 0, 1, 3, 4,
                         and 6.
                      B. The case with destination .L5 has labels −1 and 6.
                      C. The case with destination .L7 has labels 1 and 3.

                    Solution to Problem 3.31 (page 273)
                    The key to reverse engineering compiled switch statements is to combine the
                    information from the assembly code and the jump table to sort out the different
                    cases. We can see from the ja instruction (line 3) that the code for the default case
                    has label .L2. We can see that the only other repeated label in the jump table is
                    .L5, and so this must be the code for the cases C and D. We can see that the code
                    falls through at line 8, and so label .L7 must match case A and label .L3 must
                    match case B. That leaves only label .L6 to match case E.
                         The original C code is as follows:

                    void switcher(long a, long b, long c, long *dest)
                    {
                        long val;
                        switch(a) {
                        case 5:
                            c = b ^ 15;
                            /* Fall through */
                        case 0:
                            val = c + 112;
                            break;
                                                                        Solutions to Practice Problems   375

     case 2:
     case 7:
         val = (c + b) << 2;
         break;
     case 4:
         val = a;
         break;
     default:
         val = b;
     }
     *dest = val;
}

Solution to Problem 3.32 (page 280)
Tracing through the program execution at this level of detail reinforces many
aspects of procedure call and return. We can see clearly how control is passed to
the function when it is called, and how the calling function resumes upon return.
We can also see how arguments get passed through registers %rdi and %rsi, and
how results are returned via register %rax.

         Instruction                          State values (at beginning)
Label PC           Instruction %rdi %rsi %rax                %rsp           *%rsp       Description
M1     0x400560 callq             10     —       —     0x7fffffffe820         —         Call first(10)

F1     0x400548 lea               10     —       —     0x7fffffffe818 0x400565 Entry of first
F2     0x40054c sub               10     11      —     0x7fffffffe818 0x400565
F3     0x400550 callq              9     11      —     0x7fffffffe818 0x400565 Call last(9, 11)

L1     0x400540 mov               9      11      —     0x7fffffffe810 0x400555 Entry of last
L2     0x400543 imul              9      11       9    0x7fffffffe810 0x400555
L3     0x400547 retq              9      11      99    0x7fffffffe810 0x400555 Return 99 from last
F4     0x400555 repz repq         9      11      99    0x7fffffffe818 0x400565 Return 99 from first

M2     0x400565 mov               9      11      99    0x7fffffffe820         —         Resume main

Solution to Problem 3.33 (page 282)
This problem is a bit tricky due to the mixing of different data sizes.
     Let us first describe one answer and then explain the second possibility. If
we assume the first addition (line 3) implements *u += a, while the second (line 4)
implements v += b, then we can see that a was passed as the first argument in %edi
and converted from 4 bytes to 8 before adding it to the 8 bytes pointed to by %rdx.
This implies that a must be of type int and u must be of type long *. We can also
see that the low-order byte of argument b is added to the byte pointed to by %rcx.
This implies that v must be of type char *, but the type of b is ambiguous—it could
be 1, 2, 4, or 8 bytes long. This ambiguity is resolved by noting the return value of

                    6, computed as the sum of the sizes of a and b. Since we know a is 4 bytes long,
                    we can deduce that b must be 2.
                         An annotated version of this function explains these details:
                          int procprobl(int a, short b, long *u, char *v)
                          a in %edi, b in %si, u in %rdx, v in %rcx
                     1    procprob:
                     2      movslq %edi, %rdi                Convert a to long
                     3      addq    %rdi, (%rdx)             Add to *u (long)
                     4      addb    %sil, (%rcx)             Add low-order byte of b to *v
                     5      movl    $6, %eax                 Return 4+2
                     6      ret

                         Alternatively, we can see that the same assembly code would be valid if the
                    two sums were computed in the assembly code in the opposite ordering as they are
                    in the C code. This would result in interchanging arguments a and b and arguments
                    u and v, yielding the following prototype:
                    int procprob(int b, short a, long *v, char *u);

                    Solution to Problem 3.34 (page 288)
                    This example demonstrates the use of callee-saved registers as well as the stack
                    for holding local data.
                      A. We can see that lines 9–14 save local values a0–a5 into callee-saved registers
                         %rbx, %r15, %r14, %r13, %r12, and %rbp, respectively.
                      B. Local values a6 and a7 are stored on the stack at offsets 0 and 8 relative to
                         the stack pointer (lines 16 and 18).
                      C. After storing six local variables, the program has used up the supply of callee-
                         saved registers. It stores the remaining two local values on the stack.
                    Solution to Problem 3.35 (page 290)
                    This problem provides a chance to examine the code for a recursive function. An
                    important lesson to learn is that recursive code has the exact same structure as the
                    other functions we have seen. The stack and register-saving disciplines suffice to
                    make recursive functions operate correctly.
                      A. Register %rbx holds the value of parameter x, so that it can be used to
                         compute the result expression.
                      B. The assembly code was generated from the following C code:
                          long rfun(unsigned long x) {
                              if (x == 0)
                                  return 0;
                              unsigned long nx = x>>2;
                              long rv = rfun(nx);
                              return x + rv;
                          }
                                                                         Solutions to Practice Problems   377

Solution to Problem 3.36 (page 292)
This exercise tests your understanding of data sizes and array indexing. Observe
that a pointer of any kind is 8 bytes long. Data type short requires 2 bytes, while
int requires 4.

Array       Element size    Total size     Start address     Element i
    P            4             20               xP            xP + 4i
    Q            2             4                xQ            xQ + 2i
    R            8             72               xR            xR + 8i
    S            8             80               xS            xS + 8i
    T            8             16               xT            xT + 8i

Solution to Problem 3.37 (page 294)
This problem is a variant of the one shown for integer array E. It is important to
understand the difference between a pointer and the object being pointed to. Since
data type short requires 2 bytes, all of the array indices are scaled by a factor of
2. Rather than using movl, as before, we now use movw.

Expression       Type       Value                    Assembly Code
P[1]             short      M[xP + 2]                movw 2(%rdx),%ax
P+3+i            short *    xP + 6 + 2i              leaq 6(%rdx,%rcx,2),%rax
P[i*6-5]         short      M[xP + 12i − 10]         movw -10(%rdx,%rcx,12),%ax
P[2]             short      M[xP + 4]                movw 4(%rdx),%ax
&P[i+2]          short *    xP + 2i + 4              leaq 4(%rdx,%rcx,2),%rax

Solution to Problem 3.38 (page 295)
This problem requires you to work through the scaling operations to determine
the address computations, and to apply Equation 3.1 for row-major indexing. The
first step is to annotate the assembly code to determine how the address references
are computed:

        long sum_element(long i, long j)
        i in %rdi, j in %rsi
1       sum_element:
2         leaq    0(,%rdi,8), %rdx                   Compute 8i
3         subq    %rdi, %rdx                         Compute 7i
4         addq    %rsi, %rdx                         Compute 7i + j
5         leaq    (%rsi,%rsi,4), %rax                Compute 5j
6         addq    %rax, %rdi                         Compute i + 5j
7         movq    Q(,%rdi,8), %rax                   Retrieve M[xQ + 8 (5j + i)]
8         addq    P(,%rdx,8), %rax                   Add M[xP + 8 (7i + j )]
9         ret

    We can see that the reference to matrix P is at byte offset 8 . (7i + j ), while
the reference to matrix Q is at byte offset 8 . (5j + i). From this, we can determine
that P has 7 columns, while Q has 5, giving M = 5 and N = 7.

                    Solution to Problem 3.39 (page 298)
                    These computations are direct applications of Equation 3.1:

                         .
                             For L = 4, C = 16, and j = 0, pointer Aptr is computed as xA + 4 . (16i + 0) =
                             xA + 64i.
                         .
                             For L = 4, C = 16, i = 0, and j = k, Bptr is computed as xB + 4 . (16 . 0 + k) =
                             xB + 4k.
                         .
                             For L = 4, C = 16, i = 16, and j = k, Bend is computed as xB + 4 .
                             (16 . 16 + k) = xB + 1,024 + 4k.

                    Solution to Problem 3.40 (page 298)
                    This exercise requires that you be able to study compiler-generated assembly code
                    to understand what optimizations have been performed. In this case, the compiler
                    was clever in its optimizations.
                        Let us first study the following C code, and then see how it is derived from the
                    assembly code generated for the original function.

                    /* Set all diagonal elements to val */
                    void fix_set_diag_opt(fix_matrix A, int val) {
                        int *Abase = &A[0][0];
                        long i = 0;
                        long iend = N*(N+1);
                        do {
                             Abase[i] = val;
                             i += (N+1);
                        } while (i != iend);
                    }

                    This function introduces a variable Abase, of type int *, pointing to the start
                    of array A. This pointer designates a sequence of 4-byte integers consisting of
                    elements of A in row-major order. We introduce an integer variable index that
                    steps through the diagonal elements of A, with the property that diagonal elements
                    i and i + 1 are spaced N + 1 elements apart in the sequence, and that once we reach
                    diagonal element N (index value N (N + 1)), we have gone beyond the end.
                        The actual assembly code follows this general form, but now the pointer
                    increments must be scaled by a factor of 4. We label register %rax as holding a value
                    index4 equal to index in our C version but scaled by a factor of 4. For N = 16, we
                    can see that our stopping point for index4 will be 4 . 16(16 + 1) = 1,088.

                     1        fix_set_diag:
                              void fix_set_diag(fix_matrix A, int val)
                              A in %rdi, val in %rsi
                     2          movl      $0, %eax                       Set index4 = 0
                     3        .L13:                                    loop:
                     4          movl      %esi, (%rdi,%rax)              Set Abase[index4/4] to val
                     5          addq      $68, %rax                      Increment index4 += 4(N+1)
                                                                         Solutions to Practice Problems   379

6           cmpq     $1088, %rax                    Compare index4: 4N(N+1)
7           jne      .L13                           If !=, goto loop
8           rep; ret                                Return

Solution to Problem 3.41 (page 304)
This problem gets you to think about structure layout and the code used to access
structure fields. The structure declaration is a variant of the example shown in
the text. It shows that nested structures are allocated by embedding the inner
structures within the outer ones.
    A. The layout of the structure is as follows:

            Offset   0                  8           10         12                   20
       Contents               p             s.x          s.y         next

    B. It uses 20 bytes.
    C. As always, we start by annotating the assembly code:

                void st_init(struct test *st)
                st in %rdi
        1       st_init:
        2         movl       8(%rdi), %eax        Get st->s.x
        3         movl       %eax, 10(%rdi)       Save in st->s.y
        4         leaq       10(%rdi), %rax       Compute &(st->s.y)
        5         movq       %rax, (%rdi)         Store in st->p
        6         movq       %rdi, 12(%rdi)       Store st in st->next
        7         ret

              From this, we can generate C code as follows:

       void st_init(struct test *st)
       {
           st->s.y   = st->s.x;
           st->p     = &(st->s.y);
           st->next = st;
       }

Solution to Problem 3.42 (page 305)
This problem demonstrates how a very common data structure and operation on
it is implemented in machine code. We solve the problem by first annotating the
assembly code, recognizing that the two fields of the structure are at offsets 0
(for v) and 2 (for p).

       short test(struct ACE *ptr)
       ptr in %rdi
1      test:
2        movl            $1, %eax             result = 1
3        jmp             .L2                  Goto middle

                     4     .L3:                               loop:
                     5       imulq    (%rdi), %rax              result *= ptr->v
                     6       movq     2(%rdi), %rdi             ptr = ptr->p
                     7     .L2:                               middle:
                     8       testq    %rdi, %rdi                Test ptr
                     9       jne      .L3                       If != NULL, goto loop
                    10       rep; ret

                      A. Based on the annotated code, we can generate a C version:

                           short test(struct ACE *ptr) {
                               short val = 1;
                               while (ptr) {
                                   val *= ptr->v;
                                   ptr = ptr->p;
                               }
                               return val;
                           }

                      B. We can see that each structure is an element in a singly linked list, with field
                         v being the value of the element and p being a pointer to the next element.
                         Function fun computes the sum of the element values in the list.

                    Solution to Problem 3.43 (page 308)
                    Structures and unions involve a simple set of concepts, but it takes practice to be
                    comfortable with the different referencing patterns and their implementations.

                    EXPR                       TYPE          Code
                    up->t1.u                   long          movq (%rdi), %rax
                                                             movq %rax, (%rsi)

                    up->t1.v                   short         movw 8(%rdi), %ax
                                                             movw %ax, (%rsi)
                    &up->t1.w                  char *        addq $10, %rdi
                                                             movq %rdi, (%rsi)
                    up->t2.a                   int *         movq %rdi, (%rsi)
                    up->t2.a[up->t1.u]         int           movq (%rdi), %rax
                                                             movl (%rdi,%rax,4), %eax
                                                             movl %eax, (%rsi)
                    *up->t2.p                  char          movq 8(%rdi), %rax
                                                             movb (%rax), %al
                                                             movb %al, (%rsi)
                                                                                  Solutions to Practice Problems   381

Solution to Problem 3.44 (page 311)
Understanding structure layout and alignment is very important for understand-
ing how much storage different data structures require and for understanding the
code generated by the compiler for accessing structures. This problem lets you
work out the details of some example structures.
 A. struct P1 { short i; int c; int *j; short *d; };

     i       c    j                d     Total          Alignment
     0       2    6            14            16               8

 B. struct P2 { int i[2]; char c[8]; short [4]; long *j; };

     i       c        d            j         Total      Alignment
     0       8    16               24         32               8

 C. struct P3 { long w[2]; int *c[2] };

     w       c        Total             Alignment
     0       16           32                  8

 D. struct P4 { char w[16]; char *c[2] };

     w       c        Total             Alignment
     0       16           32                  8

 E. struct P5 { struct P4 a[2]; struct P1 t };

     a       t        Total             Alignment
     0       24           40                  8

Solution to Problem 3.45 (page 311)
This is an exercise in understanding structure layout and alignment.
 A. Here are the object sizes and byte offsets:

     Field        a            b        c          d      e        f    g    h
     Size         8            4         1          2      8        8    4    8
     Offset       0            8        12         16     24       32   40   48

 B. The structure is a total of 56 bytes long. The end of the structure does not
    require padding to satisfy the 8-byte alignment requirement.
 C. One strategy that works, when all data elements have a length equal to a
    power of 2, is to order the structure elements in descending order of size.
    This leads to a declaration:

                          struct {
                              int    *a;
                              char   *h;
                              double f;
                              long   e;
                              float b;
                              int    g;
                              short d;
                              char   c;
                          } rec;

                          with the following offsets:

                                                             Field
                                    a     h      f      e        b    g    d    c
                          Size      8     8      8       8       4     4    2    1
                          Offset    0     8     16      24      32    36   40   42

                          The structure must be padded by 5 bytes to satisfy the 8-byte alignment
                          requirement, giving a total of 48 bytes.

                    Solution to Problem 3.46 (page 318)
                    This problem covers a wide range of topics, such as stack frames, string represen-
                    tations, ASCII code, and byte ordering. It demonstrates the dangers of out-of-
                    bounds memory references and the basic ideas behind buffer overflow.
                      A. Stack after line 3:

                           00 00 00 00 00 40 00 76 Return address
                           01 23 45 67 89 AB CD EF Saved %rbx

                                                              buf = %rsp

                      B. Stack after line 5:

                           00 00 00 00 00 40 00 34 Return address
                           33 32 31 30 39 38 37 36 Saved %rbx
                           35 34 33 32 31 30 39 38
                           37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30       buf = %rsp

                      C. The program is attempting to return to address 0x040034. The low-order 2
                         bytes were overwritten by the code for character ‘4’ and the terminating null
                         character.
                      D. The saved value of register %rbx was set to 0x3332313039383736. This value
                         will be loaded into the register before get_line returns.
                                                                     Solutions to Practice Problems   383

 E. The call to malloc should have had strlen(buf)+1 as its argument, and the
    code should also check that the returned value is not equal to NULL.
Solution to Problem 3.47 (page 322)

 A. This corresponds to a range of around 213 addresses.
 B. A 128-byte nop sled would cover 27 addresses with each test, and so we would
    only require around 26 = 64 attempts.
    This example clearly shows that the degree of randomization in this version
of Linux would provide only minimal deterrence against an overflow attack.
Solution to Problem 3.48 (page 324)
This problem gives you another chance to see how x86-64 code manages the stack,
and to also better understand how to defend against buffer overflow attacks.
 A. For the unprotected code, we can see that lines 4 and 5 compute the positions
    of v and buf to be at offsets 24 and 0 relative to %rsp. In the protected code,
    the canary is stored at offset 40 (line 4), while v and buf are at offsets 8 and
    16 (lines 7 and 8).
 B. In the protected code, local variable v is positioned closer to the top of the
    stack than buf, and so an overrun of buf will not corrupt the value of v.
Solution to Problem 3.49 (page 329)
This code combines many of the tricks we have seen for performing bit-level
arithmetic. It requires careful study to make any sense of it.
 A. The leaq instruction of line 5 computes the value 8n + 22, which is then
    rounded down to the nearest multiple of 16 by the andq instruction of line 6.
    The resulting value will be 8n + 8 when n is odd and 8n + 16 when n is even,
    and this value is subtracted from s1 to give s2 .
 B. The three instructions in this sequence round s2 up to the nearest multiple
    of 8. They make use of the combination of biasing and shifting that we saw
    for dividing by a power of 2 in Section 2.3.7.
 C. These two examples can be seen as the cases that minimize and maximize
    the values of e1 and e2 .
     n      s1       s2        p       e1    e2
     5     2,065    2,017    2,024      1     7
     6     2,064    2,000    2,000     16     0

 D. We can see that s2 is computed in a way that preserves whatever offset s1 has
    with the nearest multiple of 16. We can also see that p will be aligned on a
    multiple of 8, as is recommended for an array of 8-byte elements.
Solution to Problem 3.50 (page 336)
This exercise requires that you step through the code, paying careful attention to
which conversion and data movement instructions are used. We can see the values
being retrieved and converted as follows:

                         .
                             The value at dp is retrieved, converted to an int (line 4), and then stored at
                             ip. We can therefore infer that val1 is d.
                         .
                             The value at ip is retrieved, converted to a float (line 6), and then stored at
                             fp. We can therefore infer that val2 is i.
                         .
                             The value of l is converted to a double (line 8) and stored at dp. We can
                             therefore infer that val3 is l.
                         .
                             The value at fp is retrieved on line 3. The two instructions at lines 10–11
                             convert this to double precision as the value returned in register %xmm0. We
                             can therefore infer that val4 is f.

                    Solution to Problem 3.51 (page 336)
                    These cases can be handled by selecting the appropriate entries from the tables in
                    Figures 3.47 and 3.48, or using one of the code sequences for converting between
                    floating-point formats.

                    Tx              Ty         Instruction(s)
                    long            double     vcvtsi2sdq %rdi, %xmm0, %xmm0
                    double          int        vcvttsd2si %xmm0, %eax
                    float           double     vunpcklpd %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
                                               vcvtpd2ps %xmm0, %xmm0
                    long            float      vcvtsi2ssq %rdi, %xmm0, %xmm0
                    float           long       vcvttss2siq %xmm0, %rax

                    Solution to Problem 3.52 (page 337)
                    The basic rules for mapping arguments to registers are fairly simple (although they
                    become much more complex with more and other types of arguments [77]).
                      A. double g1(double a, long b, float c, int d);

                              Registers: a in %xmm0, b in %rdi c in %xmm1, d in %esi
                      B. double g2(int a, double *b, float *c, long d);

                              Registers: a in %edi, b in %rsi, c in %rdx, d in %rcx
                      C. double g3(double *a, double b, int c, float d);

                              Registers: a in %rdi, b in %xmm0, c in %esi, d in %xmm1
                      D. double g4(float a, int *b, float c, double d);

                              Registers: a in %xmm0, b in %rdi, c in %xmm1, d in %xmm2

                    Solution to Problem 3.53 (page 339)
                    We can see from the assembly code that there are two integer arguments, passed
                    in registers %rdi and %rsi. Let us name these i1 and i2. Similarly, there are two
                    floating-point arguments, passed in registers %xmm0 and %xmm1, which we name f1
                    and f2.
                         We can then annotate the assembly code:
                                                                     Solutions to Practice Problems   385

     Refer to arguments as i1 (%rdi), i2 (%esi)
                           f1 (%xmm0), and f2 (%xmm1)

     double funct1(arg1_t p, arg2_t q, arg3_t r, arg4_t s)
1    funct1:
2      vcvtsi2ssq     %rsi, %xmm2, %xmm2            Get i2 and convert from long to float
3      vaddss %xmm0, %xmm2, %xmm0                   Add f1 (type float)
4      vcvtsi2ss      %edi, %xmm2, %xmm2            Get i1 and convert from int to float
5      vdivss %xmm0, %xmm2, %xmm0                   Compute i1 / (i2 + f1)
6      vunpcklps      %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
7      vcvtps2pd      %xmm0, %xmm0                  Convert to double
8      vsubsd %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0                   Compute i1 / (i2 + f1) - f2 (double)
9      ret

From this we see that the code computes the value i1/(i2+f1)-f2. We can also
see that i1 has type int, i2 has type long, f1 has type float, and f2 has type
double. The only ambiguity in matching arguments to the named values stems
from the commutativity of multiplication—yielding two possible results:
double funct1a(int p, float q, long r, double s);
double funct1b(int p, long q, float r, double s);

Solution to Problem 3.54 (page 339)
This problem can readily be solved by stepping through the assembly code and
determining what is computed on each step, as shown with the annotations below:
     double funct2(double w, int x, float y, long z)
     w in %xmm0, x in %edi, y in %xmm1, z in %rsi
1    funct2:
2      vcvtsi2ss      %edi, %xmm2, %xmm2              Convert x to float
3      vmulss %xmm1, %xmm2, %xmm1                     Multiply by y
4      vunpcklps      %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1
5      vcvtps2pd      %xmm1, %xmm2                    Convert x*y to double
6      vcvtsi2sdq     %rsi, %xmm1, %xmm1              Convert z to double
7      vdivsd %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0                     Compute w/z
8      vsubsd %xmm0, %xmm2, %xmm0                     Subtract from x*y
9      ret                                            Return

We can conclude from this analysis that the function computes y ∗ x − w/z.
Solution to Problem 3.55 (page 341)
This problem involves the same reasoning as was required to see that numbers
declared at label .LC2 encode 1.8, but with a simpler example.
     We see that the two values are 0 and 1077936128 (0x40400000). From the
high-order bytes, we can extract an exponent field of 0x404 (1028), from which
we subtract a bias of 1023 to get an exponent of 5. Concatenating the fraction bits
of the two values, we get a fraction field of 0, but with the implied leading value
giving value 1.0. The constant is therefore 1.0 × 25 = 32.0.

                    Solution to Problem 3.56 (page 341)
                      A. We see here that the 16 bytes starting at address .LC1 form a mask, where
                         the low-order 8 bytes contain all ones, except for the most significant bit,
                         which is the sign bit of a double-precision value. When we compute the and
                         of this mask with %xmm0, it will clear the sign bit of x, yielding the absolute
                         value. In fact, we generated this code by defining EXPR(x) to be fabs(x),
                         where fabs is defined in <math.h>.
                      B. We see that the vxorpd instruction sets the entire register to zero, and so this
                         is a way to generate floating-point constant 0.0.
                      C. We see that the 16 bytes starting at address .LC2 form a mask with a single
                         1 bit, at the position of the sign bit for the low-order value in the XMM
                         register. When we compute the exclusive-or of this mask with %xmm0, we
                         change the sign of x, computing the expression -x.
                    Solution to Problem 3.57 (page 344)
                    Again, we annotate the code, including dealing with the conditional branch:
             double funct3(int *ap, double b, long c, float *dp)
             ap in %rdi, b in %xmm0, c in %rsi, dp in %rdx
         1   funct3:
         2     vmovss (%rdx), %xmm1                                   Get d = *dp
         3     vcvtsi2sd      (%rdi), %xmm2, %xmm2                    Get a = *ap and convert to double
         4     vucomisd       %xmm2, %xmm0                            Compare b:a
         5     jbe      .L8                                           If <=, goto lesseq
         6     vcvtsi2ssq     %rsi, %xmm0, %xmm0                      Convert c to float
         7     vmulss %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm1                             Multiply by d
         8     vunpcklps      %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1
         9     vcvtps2pd      %xmm1, %xmm0                           Convert to double
        10     ret                                                   Return
        11   .L8:                                                  lesseq:
        12     vaddss %xmm1, %xmm1, %xmm1                            Compute d+d = 2.0 * d
        13     vcvtsi2ssq     %rsi, %xmm0, %xmm0                     Convert c to float
        14     vaddss %xmm1, %xmm0, %xmm0                            Compute c + 2*d
        15     vunpcklps      %xmm0, %xmm0, %xmm0
        16     vcvtps2pd      %xmm0, %xmm0                            Convert to double
        17     ret                                                    Return

                    From this, we can write the following code for funct3:
                    double funct3(int *ap, double b, long c, float *dp) {
                        int a = *ap;
                        float d = *dp;
                        if (a < b)
                             return c*d;
                        else
                             return c+2*d;
                    }
