CHAPTER
                6
          The Memory Hierarchy

          6.1   Storage Technologies    617
          6.2   Locality   640
          6.3   The Memory Hierarchy     645
          6.4   Cache Memories    650
          6.5   Writing Cache-Friendly Code      669
          6.6   Putting It Together: The Impact of Caches on Program
                Performance 675
          6.7   Summary     684
                Bibliographic Notes    684
                Homework Problems       685
                Solutions to Practice Problems   696

                         o this point in our study of systems, we have relied on a simple model of a
                    T    computer system as a CPU that executes instructions and a memory system
                    that holds instructions and data for the CPU. In our simple model, the memory
                    system is a linear array of bytes, and the CPU can access each memory location in
                    a constant amount of time. While this is an effective model up to a point, it does
                    not reflect the way that modern systems really work.
                         In practice, a memory system is a hierarchy of storage devices with different
                    capacities, costs, and access times. CPU registers hold the most frequently used
                    data. Small, fast cache memories nearby the CPU act as staging areas for a subset
                    of the data and instructions stored in the relatively slow main memory. The main
                    memory stages data stored on large, slow disks, which in turn often serve as
                    staging areas for data stored on the disks or tapes of other machines connected by
                    networks.
                         Memory hierarchies work because well-written programs tend to access the
                    storage at any particular level more frequently than they access the storage at the
                    next lower level. So the storage at the next level can be slower, and thus larger
                    and cheaper per bit. The overall effect is a large pool of memory that costs as
                    much as the cheap storage near the bottom of the hierarchy but that serves data
                    to programs at the rate of the fast storage near the top of the hierarchy.
                         As a programmer, you need to understand the memory hierarchy because it
                    has a big impact on the performance of your applications. If the data your program
                    needs are stored in a CPU register, then they can be accessed in 0 cycles during
                    the execution of the instruction. If stored in a cache, 4 to 75 cycles. If stored in
                    main memory, hundreds of cycles. And if stored in disk, tens of millions of cycles!
                         Here, then, is a fundamental and enduring idea in computer systems: if you
                    understand how the system moves data up and down the memory hierarchy, then
                    you can write your application programs so that their data items are stored higher
                    in the hierarchy, where the CPU can access them more quickly.
                         This idea centers around a fundamental property of computer programs
                    known as locality. Programs with good locality tend to access the same set of
                    data items over and over again, or they tend to access sets of nearby data items.
                    Programs with good locality tend to access more data items from the upper levels
                    of the memory hierarchy than programs with poor locality, and thus run faster.
                    For example, on our Core i7 system, the running times of different matrix mul-
                    tiplication kernels that perform the same number of arithmetic operations, but
                    have different degrees of locality, can vary by a factor of almost 40!
                         In this chapter, we will look at the basic storage technologies—SRAM mem-
                    ory, DRAM memory, ROM memory, and rotating and solid state disks—and
                    describe how they are organized into hierarchies. In particular, we focus on the
                    cache memories that act as staging areas between the CPU and main memory, be-
                    cause they have the most impact on application program performance. We show
                    you how to analyze your C programs for locality, and we introduce techniques for
                    improving the locality in your programs. You will also learn an interesting way to
                    characterize the performance of the memory hierarchy on a particular machine
                    as a “memory mountain” that shows read access times as a function of locality.

6.1 Storage Technologies
Much of the success of computer technology stems from the tremendous progress
in storage technology. Early computers had a few kilobytes of random access
memory. The earliest IBM PCs didn’t even have a hard disk. That changed with
the introduction of the IBM PC-XT in 1982, with its 10-megabyte disk. By the year
2015, typical machines had 300,000 times as much disk storage, and the amount of
storage was increasing by a factor of 2 every couple of years.

6.1.1 Random Access Memory
Random access memory (RAM) comes in two varieties—static and dynamic. Static
RAM (SRAM) is faster and significantly more expensive than dynamic RAM
(DRAM). SRAM is used for cache memories, both on and off the CPU chip.
DRAM is used for the main memory plus the frame buffer of a graphics system.
Typically, a desktop system will have no more than a few tens of megabytes of
SRAM, but hundreds or thousands of megabytes of DRAM.

Static RAM
SRAM stores each bit in a bistable memory cell. Each cell is implemented with
a six-transistor circuit. This circuit has the property that it can stay indefinitely
in either of two different voltage configurations, or states. Any other state will
be unstable—starting from there, the circuit will quickly move toward one of the
stable states. Such a memory cell is analogous to the inverted pendulum illustrated
in Figure 6.1.
     The pendulum is stable when it is tilted either all the way to the left or all the
way to the right. From any other position, the pendulum will fall to one side or the
other. In principle, the pendulum could also remain balanced in a vertical position
indefinitely, but this state is metastable—the smallest disturbance would make it
start to fall, and once it fell it would never return to the vertical position.
     Due to its bistable nature, an SRAM memory cell will retain its value indef-
initely, as long as it is kept powered. Even when a disturbance, such as electrical
noise, perturbs the voltages, the circuit will return to the stable value when the
disturbance is removed.

Figure 6.1
Inverted pendulum.
Like an SRAM cell, the
pendulum has only two
                                    Stable left                    Unstable           Stable right
stable configurations, or
states.

         Transistors    Relative                                Relative
           per bit     access time   Persistent?   Sensitive?    cost      Applications
SRAM          6             1×           Yes          No        1,000×     Cache memory
DRAM          1            10×           No           Yes           1×     Main memory, frame buffers

Figure 6.2 Characteristics of DRAM and SRAM memory.

                    Dynamic RAM
                    DRAM stores each bit as charge on a capacitor. This capacitor is very small—
                    typically around 30 femtofarads—that is, 30 × 10−15 farads. Recall, however, that
                    a farad is a very large unit of measure. DRAM storage can be made very dense—
                    each cell consists of a capacitor and a single access transistor. Unlike SRAM,
                    however, a DRAM memory cell is very sensitive to any disturbance. When the
                    capacitor voltage is disturbed, it will never recover. Exposure to light rays will
                    cause the capacitor voltages to change. In fact, the sensors in digital cameras and
                    camcorders are essentially arrays of DRAM cells.
                         Various sources of leakage current cause a DRAM cell to lose its charge
                    within a time period of around 10 to 100 milliseconds. Fortunately, for computers
                    operating with clock cycle times measured in nanoseconds, this retention time is
                    quite long. The memory system must periodically refresh every bit of memory by
                    reading it out and then rewriting it. Some systems also use error-correcting codes,
                    where the computer words are encoded using a few more bits (e.g., a 64-bit word
                    might be encoded using 72 bits), such that circuitry can detect and correct any
                    single erroneous bit within a word.
                         Figure 6.2 summarizes the characteristics of SRAM and DRAM memory.
                    SRAM is persistent as long as power is applied. Unlike DRAM, no refresh is
                    necessary. SRAM can be accessed faster than DRAM. SRAM is not sensitive to
                    disturbances such as light and electrical noise. The trade-off is that SRAM cells
                    use more transistors than DRAM cells and thus have lower densities, are more
                    expensive, and consume more power.

                    Conventional DRAMs
                    The cells (bits) in a DRAM chip are partitioned into d supercells, each consisting
                    of w DRAM cells. A d × w DRAM stores a total of dw bits of information. The
                    supercells are organized as a rectangular array with r rows and c columns, where
                    rc = d. Each supercell has an address of the form (i, j ), where i denotes the row
                    and j denotes the column.
                        For example, Figure 6.3 shows the organization of a 16 × 8 DRAM chip with
                    d = 16 supercells, w = 8 bits per supercell, r = 4 rows, and c = 4 columns. The
                    shaded box denotes the supercell at address (2, 1). Information flows in and out
                    of the chip via external connectors called pins. Each pin carries a 1-bit signal.
                    Figure 6.3 shows two of these sets of pins: eight data pins that can transfer 1 byte

 Aside     A note on terminology
 The storage community has never settled on a standard name for a DRAM array element. Computer
 architects tend to refer to it as a “cell,” overloading the term with the DRAM storage cell. Circuit
 designers tend to refer to it as a “word,” overloading the term with a word of main memory. To avoid
 confusion, we have adopted the unambiguous term “supercell.”

Figure 6.3                                                      DRAM chip
High-level view of a                                                              Cols
128-bit 16 × 8 DRAM                                                        0     1    2     3
chip.                                                     2            0
                                                         addr          1
                                                                Rows
                                             Memory                    2
                                            controller                                            Supercell
                                 (to CPU)                              3
                                                          8                                         (2,1)

                                                         data

                                                                           Internal row buffer

in or out of the chip, and two addr pins that carry two-bit row and column supercell
addresses. Other pins that carry control information are not shown.
     Each DRAM chip is connected to some circuitry, known as the memory
controller, that can transfer w bits at a time to and from each DRAM chip. To read
the contents of supercell (i, j ), the memory controller sends the row address i to
the DRAM, followed by the column address j . The DRAM responds by sending
the contents of supercell (i, j ) back to the controller. The row address i is called
a RAS (row access strobe) request. The column address j is called a CAS (column
access strobe) request. Notice that the RAS and CAS requests share the same
DRAM address pins.
     For example, to read supercell (2, 1) from the 16 × 8 DRAM in Figure 6.3, the
memory controller sends row address 2, as shown in Figure 6.4(a). The DRAM
responds by copying the entire contents of row 2 into an internal row buffer. Next,
the memory controller sends column address 1, as shown in Figure 6.4(b). The
DRAM responds by copying the 8 bits in supercell (2, 1) from the row buffer and
sending them to the memory controller.
     One reason circuit designers organize DRAMs as two-dimensional arrays
instead of linear arrays is to reduce the number of address pins on the chip. For
example, if our example 128-bit DRAM were organized as a linear array of 16
supercells with addresses 0 to 15, then the chip would need four address pins
instead of two. The disadvantage of the two-dimensional array organization is
that addresses must be sent in two distinct steps, which increases the access time.

                       DRAM chip                                                DRAM chip
                                         Cols                                                     Cols
                                   0    1    2     3                                       0     1    2     3
             RAS = 2                                                CAS = 1
               2              0                                        2               0
             addr             1                                      addr              1
                       Rows                                                     Rows
 Memory                       2                           Memory                       2
                                                                    Supercell
controller                                               controller
                              3                                       (2,1)            3
               8                                                       8
             data                                                    data
                                        Row 2
                                  Internal row buffer                                      Internal row buffer

(a) Select row 2 (RAS request).                         (b) Select column 1 (CAS request).

Figure 6.4 Reading the contents of a DRAM supercell.

                         Memory Modules
                         DRAM chips are packaged in memory modules that plug into expansion slots on
                         the main system board (motherboard). Core i7 systems use the 240-pin dual inline
                         memory module (DIMM),which transfers data to and from the memory controller
                         in 64-bit chunks.
                             Figure 6.5 shows the basic idea of a memory module. The example module
                         stores a total of 64 MB (megabytes) using eight 64-Mbit 8M × 8 DRAM chips,
                         numbered 0 to 7. Each supercell stores 1 byte of main memory, and each 64-bit
                         word at byte address A in main memory is represented by the eight supercells
                         whose corresponding supercell address is (i, j ). In the example in Figure 6.5,
                         DRAM 0 stores the first (lower-order) byte, DRAM 1 stores the next byte, and
                         so on.
                             To retrieve the word at memory address A, the memory controller converts
                         A to a supercell address (i, j ) and sends it to the memory module, which then
                         broadcasts i and j to each DRAM. In response, each DRAM outputs the 8-bit
                         contents of its (i, j ) supercell. Circuitry in the module collects these outputs and
                         forms them into a 64-bit word, which it returns to the memory controller.
                             Main memory can be aggregated by connecting multiple memory modules to
                         the memory controller. In this case, when the controller receives an address A, the
                         controller selects the module k that contains A, converts A to its (i, j ) form, and
                         sends (i, j ) to module k.

                         Practice Problem 6.1 (solution page 696)
                         In the following, let r be the number of rows in a DRAM array, c the number of
                         columns, br the number of bits needed to address the rows, and bc the number of
                         bits needed to address the columns. For each of the following DRAMs, determine
                         the power-of-2 array dimensions that minimize max(br , bc ), the maximum number
                         of bits needed to address the rows or columns of the array.

Figure 6.5                                     addr (row = i, col = j)
Reading the contents of a                                                                                       : Supercell (i, j )
memory module.
                                                                                                 DRAM 0

                                                                                                              64 MB
                                                                                                              memory module
                                         DRAM 7                                                               consisting of
                                                                                                              eight 8M × 8 DRAMs

                                                                                                       data

                                                 Bits    Bits    Bits  Bits     Bits     Bits   Bits   Bits
                                                56-63   48-55   40-47 32-39    24-31    16-23   8-15   0-7

                                          63    56 55   48 47   40 39 32 31 24 23 16 15         8 7       0
                                                                                                              Memory
                                                                                                              controller
                                                  64-bit word at main memory address A

                                                                              64-bit word to CPU chip

Organization        r            c              br                  bc                 max(br , bc )
16 × 1
16 × 4
128 × 8
512 × 4
1,024 × 4

Enhanced DRAMs
There are many kinds of DRAM memories, and new kinds appear on the market
with regularity as manufacturers attempt to keep up with rapidly increasing pro-
cessor speeds. Each is based on the conventional DRAM cell, with optimizations
that improve the speed with which the basic DRAM cells can be accessed.

  Fast page mode DRAM (FPM DRAM). A conventional DRAM copies an
        entire row of supercells into its internal row buffer, uses one, and then
        discards the rest. FPM DRAM improves on this by allowing consecutive
        accesses to the same row to be served directly from the row buffer. For
        example, to read four supercells from row i of a conventional DRAM, the
        memory controller must send four RAS/CAS requests, even though the
        row address i is identical in each case. To read supercells from the same
        row of an FPM DRAM, the memory controller sends an initial RAS/CAS
        request, followed by three CAS requests. The initial RAS/CAS request
        copies row i into the row buffer and returns the supercell addressed by the

                            CAS. The next three supercells are served directly from the row buffer,
                            and thus are returned more quickly than the initial supercell.
                      Extended data out DRAM (EDO DRAM). An enhanced form of FPM
                           DRAM that allows the individual CAS signals to be spaced closer to-
                           gether in time.
                      Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM). Conventional, FPM, and EDO DRAMs are
                           asynchronous in the sense that they communicate with the memory con-
                           troller using a set of explicit control signals. SDRAM replaces many of
                           these control signals with the rising edges of the same external clock sig-
                           nal that drives the memory controller. Without going into detail, the net
                           effect is that an SDRAM can output the contents of its supercells at a
                           faster rate than its asynchronous counterparts.
                      Double Data-Rate Synchronous DRAM (DDR SDRAM). DDR SDRAM is an
                          enhancement of SDRAM that doubles the speed of the DRAM by using
                          both clock edges as control signals. Different types of DDR SDRAMs
                          are characterized by the size of a small prefetch buffer that increases the
                          effective bandwidth: DDR (2 bits), DDR2 (4 bits), and DDR3 (8 bits).
                      Video RAM (VRAM). Used in the frame buffers of graphics systems. VRAM
                           is similar in spirit to FPM DRAM. Two major differences are that (1)
                           VRAM output is produced by shifting the entire contents of the internal
                           buffer in sequence and (2) VRAM allows concurrent reads and writes to
                           the memory. Thus, the system can be painting the screen with the pixels
                           in the frame buffer (reads) while concurrently writing new values for the
                           next update (writes).

                    Nonvolatile Memory
                    DRAMs and SRAMs are volatile in the sense that they lose their information if the
                    supply voltage is turned off. Nonvolatile memories, on the other hand, retain their
                    information even when they are powered off. There are a variety of nonvolatile
                    memories. For historical reasons, they are referred to collectively as read-only
                    memories (ROMs), even though some types of ROMs can be written to as well as
                    read. ROMs are distinguished by the number of times they can be reprogrammed
                    (written to) and by the mechanism for reprogramming them.

 Aside    Historical popularity of DRAM technologies
 Until 1995, most PCs were built with FPM DRAMs. From 1996 to 1999, EDO DRAMs dominated the
 market, while FPM DRAMs all but disappeared. SDRAMs first appeared in 1995 in high-end systems,
 and by 2002 most PCs were built with SDRAMs and DDR SDRAMs. By 2010, most server and desktop
 systems were built with DDR3 SDRAMs. In fact, the Intel Core i7 supports only DDR3 SDRAM.

     A programmable ROM (PROM) can be programmed exactly once. PROMs
include a sort of fuse with each memory cell that can be blown once by zapping it
with a high current.
     An erasable programmable ROM (EPROM) has a transparent quartz window
that permits light to reach the storage cells. The EPROM cells are cleared to zeros
by shining ultraviolet light through the window. Programming an EPROM is done
by using a special device to write ones into the EPROM. An EPROM can be
erased and reprogrammed on the order of 1,000 times. An electrically erasable
PROM (EEPROM) is akin to an EPROM, but it does not require a physically
separate programming device, and thus can be reprogrammed in-place on printed
circuit cards. An EEPROM can be reprogrammed on the order of 105 times before
it wears out.
     Flash memory is a type of nonvolatile memory, based on EEPROMs, that
has become an important storage technology. Flash memories are everywhere,
providing fast and durable nonvolatile storage for a slew of electronic devices,
including digital cameras, cell phones, and music players, as well as laptop, desktop,
and server computer systems. In Section 6.1.3, we will look in detail at a new form
of flash-based disk drive, known as a solid state disk (SSD), that provides a faster,
sturdier, and less power-hungry alternative to conventional rotating disks.
     Programs stored in ROM devices are often referred to as firmware. When a
computer system is powered up, it runs firmware stored in a ROM. Some systems
provide a small set of primitive input and output functions in firmware—for
example, a PC’s BIOS (basic input/output system) routines. Complicated devices
such as graphics cards and disk drive controllers also rely on firmware to translate
I/O (input/output) requests from the CPU.

Accessing Main Memory
Data flows back and forth between the processor and the DRAM main memory
over shared electrical conduits called buses. Each transfer of data between the
CPU and memory is accomplished with a series of steps called a bus transaction.
A read transaction transfers data from the main memory to the CPU. A write
transaction transfers data from the CPU to the main memory.
     A bus is a collection of parallel wires that carry address, data, and control
signals. Depending on the particular bus design, data and address signals can share
the same set of wires or can use different sets. Also, more than two devices can
share the same bus. The control wires carry signals that synchronize the transaction
and identify what kind of transaction is currently being performed. For example,
is this transaction of interest to the main memory, or to some other I/O device
such as a disk controller? Is the transaction a read or a write? Is the information
on the bus an address or a data item?
     Figure 6.6 shows the configuration of an example computer system. The main
components are the CPU chip, a chipset that we will call an I/O bridge (which
includes the memory controller), and the DRAM memory modules that make up
main memory. These components are connected by a pair of buses: a system bus
that connects the CPU to the I/O bridge, and a memory bus that connects the I/O

 Aside     A note on bus designs
 Bus design is a complex and rapidly changing aspect of computer systems. Different vendors develop
 different bus architectures as a way to differentiate their products. For example, some Intel systems use
 chipsets known as the northbridge and the southbridge to connect the CPU to memory and I/O devices,
 respectively. In older Pentium and Core 2 systems, a front side bus (FSB) connects the CPU to the
 northbridge. Systems from AMD replace the FSB with the HyperTransport interconnect, while newer
 Intel Core i7 systems use the QuickPath interconnect. The details of these different bus architectures
 are beyond the scope of this text. Instead, we will use the high-level bus architecture from Figure 6.6
 as a running example throughout. It is a simple but useful abstraction that allows us to be concrete. It
 captures the main ideas without being tied too closely to the detail of any proprietary designs.

Figure 6.6                      CPU chip
Example bus structure                      Register file
that connects the CPU
and main memory.                                           ALU

                                                                 System bus   Memory bus

                                                                      I/O                   Main
                                    Bus interface                                          memory
                                                                     bridge

                    bridge to the main memory. The I/O bridge translates the electrical signals of the
                    system bus into the electrical signals of the memory bus. As we will see, the I/O
                    bridge also connects the system bus and memory bus to an I/O bus that is shared
                    by I/O devices such as disks and graphics cards. For now, though, we will focus on
                    the memory bus.
                        Consider what happens when the CPU performs a load operation such as

                         movq A,%rax

                    where the contents of address A are loaded into register %rax. Circuitry on the
                    CPU chip called the bus interface initiates a read transaction on the bus. The
                    read transaction consists of three steps. First, the CPU places the address A
                    on the system bus. The I/O bridge passes the signal along to the memory bus
                    (Figure 6.7(a)). Next, the main memory senses the address signal on the memory
                    bus, reads the address from the memory bus, fetches the data from the DRAM,
                    and writes the data to the memory bus. The I/O bridge translates the memory bus
                    signal into a system bus signal and passes it along to the system bus (Figure 6.7(b)).
                    Finally, the CPU senses the data on the system bus, reads the data from the bus,
                    and copies the data to register %rax (Figure 6.7(c)).
                        Conversely, when the CPU performs a store operation such as

                         movq %rax,A

Figure 6.7                            Register file
Memory read transaction
for a load operation: movq                             ALU
                                   %rax
A,%rax.
                                                                                               Main
                                                                    I/O                       memory
                                                                   bridge                              0
                                                                                    A
                                  Bus interface                                                  X     A

                               (a) CPU places address A on the memory bus.
                                       Register file

                                                       ALU
                                   %rax
                                                                                               Main
                                                                    I/O                       memory
                                                                   bridge                              0
                                                                                    x
                                  Bus interface                                                  X     A

                               (b) Main memory reads A from the bus, retrieves word x, and places it on the bus.
                                       Register file

                                                       ALU
                                   %rax     X

                                                                                               Main
                                                                    I/O                       memory
                                                                   bridge                              0

                                  Bus interface                                                  X     A

                               (c) CPU reads word x from the bus, and copies it into register %rax.

where the contents of register %rax are written to address A, the CPU initiates
a write transaction. Again, there are three basic steps. First, the CPU places the
address on the system bus. The memory reads the address from the memory bus
and waits for the data to arrive (Figure 6.8(a)). Next, the CPU copies the data in
%rax to the system bus (Figure 6.8(b)). Finally, the main memory reads the data
from the memory bus and stores the bits in the DRAM (Figure 6.8(c)).

6.1.2 Disk Storage
Disks are workhorse storage devices that hold enormous amounts of data, on
the order of hundreds to thousands of gigabytes, as opposed to the hundreds or
thousands of megabytes in a RAM-based memory. However, it takes on the order
of milliseconds to read information from a disk, a hundred thousand times longer
than from DRAM and a million times longer than from SRAM.

                            Register file

                                            ALU
                        %rax     y

                                                                                Main
                                                        I/O                    memory
                                                       bridge                            0
                                                                      A
                       Bus interface                                                     A

                    (a) CPU places address A on the memory bus. Main memory reads it and waits for the data word.

                            Register file

                                            ALU
                        %rax     y

                                                                                Main
                                                        I/O                    memory
                                                       bridge                            0
                                                                      y
                       Bus interface                                                     A

                    (b) CPU places data word y on the bus.

                            Register file

                                            ALU
                        %rax     y

                                                                                Main
                                                        I/O                    memory
                                                       bridge                            0

                       Bus interface                                               y     A

                    (c) Main memory reads data word y from the bus and stores it at address A.

Figure 6.8 Memory write transaction for a store operation: movq %rax,A.

                    Disk Geometry
                    Disks are constructed from platters. Each platter consists of two sides, or surfaces,
                    that are coated with magnetic recording material. A rotating spindle in the center
                    of the platter spins the platter at a fixed rotational rate, typically between 5,400 and
                    15,000 revolutions per minute (RPM). A disk will typically contain one or more of
                    these platters encased in a sealed container.
                         Figure 6.9(a) shows the geometry of a typical disk surface. Each surface
                    consists of a collection of concentric rings called tracks. Each track is partitioned
                    into a collection of sectors. Each sector contains an equal number of data bits
                    (typically 512 bytes) encoded in the magnetic material on the sector. Sectors are
                    separated by gaps where no data bits are stored. Gaps store formatting bits that
                    identify sectors.

                                                                                              Cylinder k
Tracks          Surface
                                             Track k      Gaps
                                                                  Surface 0
                                                                  Surface 1                                Platter 0
                                                                  Surface 2
                                                                  Surface 3                                Platter 1
                 Spindle                                          Surface 4
                                                                  Surface 5                                Platter 2

                                                                                        Spindle

                                                                  (b) Multiple-platter view
                                            Sectors

(a) Single-platter view

Figure 6.9 Disk geometry.

     A disk consists of one or more platters stacked on top of each other and
encased in a sealed package, as shown in Figure 6.9(b). The entire assembly is
often referred to as a disk drive, although we will usually refer to it as simply a
disk. We will sometimes refer to disks as rotating disks to distinguish them from
flash-based solid state disks (SSDs), which have no moving parts.
     Disk manufacturers describe the geometry of multiple-platter drives in terms
of cylinders, where a cylinder is the collection of tracks on all the surfaces that are
equidistant from the center of the spindle. For example, if a drive has three platters
and six surfaces, and the tracks on each surface are numbered consistently, then
cylinder k is the collection of the six instances of track k.

Disk Capacity
The maximum number of bits that can be recorded by a disk is known as its max-
imum capacity, or simply capacity. Disk capacity is determined by the following
technology factors:

   Recording density (bits/in). The number of bits that can be squeezed into a 1-
        inch segment of a track.
   Track density (tracks/in). The number of tracks that can be squeezed into a
        1-inch segment of the radius extending from the center of the platter.
   Areal density (bits/in2 ). The product of the recording density and the track
         density.

     Disk manufacturers work tirelessly to increase areal density (and thus capac-
ity), and this is doubling every couple of years. The original disks, designed in
an age of low areal density, partitioned every track into the same number of sec-
tors, which was determined by the number of sectors that could be recorded on
the innermost track. To maintain a fixed number of sectors per track, the sectors
were spaced farther apart on the outer tracks. This was a reasonable approach

 Aside     How much is a gigabyte?
 Unfortunately, the meanings of prefixes such as kilo (K), mega (M), giga (G), and tera (T) depend
 on the context. For measures that relate to the capacity of DRAMs and SRAMs, typically K = 210 ,
 M = 220 , G = 230 , and T = 240 . For measures related to the capacity of I/O devices such as disks and
 networks, typically K = 103, M = 106, G = 109, and T = 1012 . Rates and throughputs usually use these
 prefix values as well.
      Fortunately, for the back-of-the-envelope estimates that we typically rely on, either assumption
 works fine in practice. For example, the relative difference between 230 and 109 is not that large:
 (230 − 109)/109 ≈ 7%. Similarly, (240 − 1012 )/1012 ≈ 10%.

                    when areal densities were relatively low. However, as areal densities increased,
                    the gaps between sectors (where no data bits were stored) became unacceptably
                    large. Thus, modern high-capacity disks use a technique known as multiple zone
                    recording, where the set of cylinders is partitioned into disjoint subsets known as
                    recording zones. Each zone consists of a contiguous collection of cylinders. Each
                    track in each cylinder in a zone has the same number of sectors, which is deter-
                    mined by the number of sectors that can be packed into the innermost track of
                    the zone.
                        The capacity of a disk is given by the following formula:
                                  # bytes average # sectors # tracks # surfaces # platters
                     Capacity =          ×                 ×         ×         ×
                                  sector       track         surface   platter     disk
                    For example, suppose we have a disk with five platters, 512 bytes per sector, 20,000
                    tracks per surface, and an average of 300 sectors per track. Then the capacity of
                    the disk is
                                  512 bytes 300 sectors 20,000 tracks 2 surfaces 5 platters
                     Capacity =            ×           ×             ×          ×
                                   sector      track       surface      platter     disk
                               = 30,720,000,000 bytes
                               = 30.72 GB
                        Notice that manufacturers express disk capacity in units of gigabytes (GB) or
                    terabytes (TB), where 1 GB = 109 bytes and 1 TB = 1012 bytes.

                    Practice Problem 6.2 (solution page 697)
                    What is the capacity of a disk with 3 platters, 15,000 cylinders, an average of 500
                    sectors per track, and 1,024 bytes per sector?

                    Disk Operation
                    Disks read and write bits stored on the magnetic surface using a read/write head
                    connected to the end of an actuator arm, as shown in Figure 6.10(a). By moving

The disk surface                                                                                Read/write heads
spins at a fixed
rotational rate.                               The read/write head
                                               is attached to the end
                                               of the arm and flies over
                                               the disk surface on
                                               a thin cushion of air.                                      Arm

                          Spindle

                                                                                      Spindle
                                               By moving radially, the arm
                                               can position the read/write   (b) Multiple-platter view
                                               head over any track.

(a) Single-platter view

Figure 6.10 Disk dynamics.

the arm back and forth along its radial axis, the drive can position the head over
any track on the surface. This mechanical motion is known as a seek. Once the
head is positioned over the desired track, then, as each bit on the track passes
underneath, the head can either sense the value of the bit (read the bit) or alter
the value of the bit (write the bit). Disks with multiple platters have a separate
read/write head for each surface, as shown in Figure 6.10(b). The heads are lined
up vertically and move in unison. At any point in time, all heads are positioned
on the same cylinder.
     The read/write head at the end of the arm flies (literally) on a thin cushion of
air over the disk surface at a height of about 0.1 microns and a speed of about 80
km/h. This is analogous to placing a skyscraper on its side and flying it around the
world at a height of 2.5 cm (1 inch) above the ground, with each orbit of the earth
taking only 8 seconds! At these tolerances, a tiny piece of dust on the surface is like
a huge boulder. If the head were to strike one of these boulders, the head would
cease flying and crash into the surface (a so-called head crash). For this reason,
disks are always sealed in airtight packages.
     Disks read and write data in sector-size blocks. The access time for a sector
has three main components: seek time, rotational latency, and transfer time:

  Seek time. To read the contents of some target sector, the arm first positions the
        head over the track that contains the target sector. The time required to
        move the arm is called the seek time. The seek time, Tseek, depends on the
        previous position of the head and the speed that the arm moves across the
        surface. The average seek time in modern drives, Tavg seek, measured by
        taking the mean of several thousand seeks to random sectors, is typically
        on the order of 3 to 9 ms. The maximum time for a single seek, Tmax seek,
        can be as high as 20 ms.

                      Rotational latency. Once the head is in position over the track, the drive waits
                            for the first bit of the target sector to pass under the head. The perfor-
                            mance of this step depends on both the position of the surface when the
                            head arrives at the target track and the rotational speed of the disk. In the
                            worst case, the head just misses the target sector and waits for the disk to
                            make a full rotation. Thus, the maximum rotational latency, in seconds, is
                            given by
                                                                         1    60 secs
                                                      Tmax rotation =       ×
                                                                        RPM    1 min
                            The average rotational latency, Tavg rotation , is simply half of Tmax rotation .
                      Transfer time. When the first bit of the target sector is under the head, the drive
                            can begin to read or write the contents of the sector. The transfer time
                            for one sector depends on the rotational speed and the number of sectors
                            per track. Thus, we can roughly estimate the average transfer time for one
                            sector in seconds as
                                                       1              1               60 secs
                                    Tavg transfer =      ×                          ×
                                                      RPM (average # sectors/track)    1 min
                        We can estimate the average time to access the contents of a disk sector as
                    the sum of the average seek time, the average rotational latency, and the average
                    transfer time. For example, consider a disk with the following parameters:

                    Parameter                              Value
                    Rotational rate                        7,200 RPM
                    Tavg seek                              9 ms
                    Average number of sectors/track        400

                    For this disk, the average rotational latency (in ms) is
                                 Tavg rotation = 1/2 × Tmax rotation
                                              = 1/2 × (60 secs/7,200 RPM) × 1,000 ms/sec
                                              ≈ 4 ms
                    The average transfer time is
                            Tavg transfer = 60/7,200 RPM × 1/400 sectors/track × 1,000 ms/sec
                                         ≈ 0.02 ms
                    Putting it all together, the total estimated access time is
                                         Taccess = Tavg seek + Tavg rotation + Tavg transfer
                                                = 9 ms + 4 ms + 0.02 ms
                                                = 13.02 ms

This example illustrates some important points:
  .
      The time to access the 512 bytes in a disk sector is dominated by the seek time
      and the rotational latency. Accessing the first byte in the sector takes a long
      time, but the remaining bytes are essentially free.
  .
      Since the seek time and rotational latency are roughly the same, twice the
      seek time is a simple and reasonable rule for estimating disk access time.
  .
      The access time for a 64-bit word stored in SRAM is roughly 4 ns, and 60 ns
      for DRAM. Thus, the time to read a 512-byte sector-size block from memory
      is roughly 256 ns for SRAM and 4,000 ns for DRAM. The disk access time,
      roughly 10 ms, is about 40,000 times greater than SRAM, and about 2,500
      times greater than DRAM.

Practice Problem 6.3 (solution page 697)
Estimate the average time (in ms) to access a sector on the following disk:

Parameter                            Value
Rotational rate                      12,000 RPM
Tavg seek                            5 ms
Average number of sectors/track      300

Logical Disk Blocks
As we have seen, modern disks have complex geometries, with multiple surfaces
and different recording zones on those surfaces. To hide this complexity from
the operating system, modern disks present a simpler view of their geometry as
a sequence of B sector-size logical blocks, numbered 0, 1, . . . , B − 1. A small
hardware/firmware device in the disk package, called the disk controller, maintains
the mapping between logical block numbers and actual (physical) disk sectors.
     When the operating system wants to perform an I/O operation such as reading
a disk sector into main memory, it sends a command to the disk controller asking
it to read a particular logical block number. Firmware on the controller performs
a fast table lookup that translates the logical block number into a (surface, track,
sector) triple that uniquely identifies the corresponding physical sector. Hardware
on the controller interprets this triple to move the heads to the appropriate
cylinder, waits for the sector to pass under the head, gathers up the bits sensed
by the head into a small memory buffer on the controller, and copies them into
main memory.

Practice Problem 6.4 (solution page 697)
Suppose that a 1 MB file consisting of 512-byte logical blocks is stored on a disk
drive with the following characteristics:

 Aside     Formatted disk capacity
 Before a disk can be used to store data, it must be formatted by the disk controller. This involves filling
 in the gaps between sectors with information that identifies the sectors, identifying any cylinders with
 surface defects and taking them out of action, and setting aside a set of cylinders in each zone as spares
 that can be called into action if one or more cylinders in the zone goes bad during the lifetime of the
 disk. The formatted capacity quoted by disk manufacturers is less than the maximum capacity because
 of the existence of these spare cylinders.

                    Parameter                             Value
                    Rotational rate                       13,000 RPM
                    Tavg seek                             6 ms
                    Average number of sectors/track       5,000
                    Surfaces                              4
                    Sector size                           512 bytes

                         For each case below, suppose that a program reads the logical blocks of the
                    file sequentially, one after the other, and that the time to position the head over
                    the first block is Tavg seek + Tavg rotation .
                      A. Best case: Estimate the optimal time (in ms) required to read the file given
                         the best possible mapping of logical blocks to disk sectors (i.e., sequential).
                      B. Random case: Estimate the time (in ms) required to read the file if blocks
                         are mapped randomly to disk sectors.

                    Connecting I/O Devices
                    Input/output (I/O) devices such as graphics cards, monitors, mice, keyboards, and
                    disks are connected to the CPU and main memory using an I/O bus. Unlike the
                    system bus and memory buses, which are CPU-specific, I/O buses are designed
                    to be independent of the underlying CPU. Figure 6.11 shows a representative I/O
                    bus structure that connects the CPU, main memory, and I/O devices.
                        Although the I/O bus is slower than the system and memory buses, it can
                    accommodate a wide variety of third-party I/O devices. For example, the bus in
                    Figure 6.11 has three different types of devices attached to it.

                      .
                          A Universal Serial Bus (USB) controller is a conduit for devices attached to
                          a USB bus, which is a wildly popular standard for connecting a variety of
                          peripheral I/O devices, including keyboards, mice, modems, digital cameras,
                          game controllers, printers, external disk drives, and solid state disks. USB
                          3.0 buses have a maximum bandwidth of 625 MB/s. USB 3.1 buses have a
                          maximum bandwidth of 1,250 MB/s.

Figure 6.11                     CPU
Example bus structure                     Register file
that connects the CPU,
main memory, and I/O                                        ALU
devices.
                                                                  System bus      Memory bus

                                                                         I/O                     Main
                                      Bus interface                                             memory
                                                                        bridge

                                                                        I/O bus
                                                                                                 Expansion slots for
                                                                                                 other devices such
                                         USB                 Graphics               Host bus     as network adapters
                                       controller            adapter                adapter
                                                                                  (SCSI/SATA)
                                 Mouse    Solid     Key-     Monitor
                                          state     board
                                          disk                                       Disk
                                                                                   controller
                                                                                                Disk drive

  .
      A graphics card (or adapter) contains hardware and software logic that is re-
      sponsible for painting the pixels on the display monitor on behalf of the CPU.
  .
      A host bus adapter that connects one or more disks to the I/O bus using
      a communication protocol defined by a particular host bus interface. The
      two most popular such interfaces for disks are SCSI (pronounced “scuzzy”)
      and SATA (pronounced “sat-uh”). SCSI disks are typically faster and more
      expensive than SATA drives. A SCSI host bus adapter (often called a SCSI
      controller) can support multiple disk drives, as opposed to SATA adapters,
      which can only support one drive.

     Additional devices such as network adapters can be attached to the I/O bus by
plugging the adapter into empty expansion slots on the motherboard that provide
a direct electrical connection to the bus.

Accessing Disks
While a detailed description of how I/O devices work and how they are pro-
grammed is outside our scope here, we can give you a general idea. For example,
Figure 6.12 summarizes the steps that take place when a CPU reads data from a
disk.

 Aside     Advances in I/O bus designs
 The I/O bus in Figure 6.11 is a simple abstraction that allows us to be concrete, without being tied too
 closely to the details of any specific system. It is based on the peripheral component interconnect (PCI)
 bus, which was popular until around 2010. In the PCI model, each device in the system shares the bus,
 and only one device at a time can access these wires. In modern systems, the shared PCI bus has been
 replaced by a PCI express (PCIe) bus, which is a set of high-speed serial, point-to-point links connected
 by switches, akin to the switched Ethernets that you will learn about in Chapter 11. A PCIe bus, with a
 maximum throughput of 16 GB/s, is an order of magnitude faster than a PCI bus, which has a maximum
 throughput of 533 MB/s. Except for measured I/O performance, the differences between the different
 bus designs are not visible to application programs, so we will use the simple shared bus abstraction
 throughout the text.

                        The CPU issues commands to I/O devices using a technique called memory-
                    mapped I/O (Figure 6.12(a)). In a system with memory-mapped I/O, a block of
                    addresses in the address space is reserved for communicating with I/O devices.
                    Each of these addresses is known as an I/O port. Each device is associated with
                    (or mapped to) one or more ports when it is attached to the bus.
                        As a simple example, suppose that the disk controller is mapped to port 0xa0.
                    Then the CPU might initiate a disk read by executing three store instructions to
                    address 0xa0: The first of these instructions sends a command word that tells the
                    disk to initiate a read, along with other parameters such as whether to interrupt
                    the CPU when the read is finished. (We will discuss interrupts in Section 8.1.) The
                    second instruction indicates the logical block number that should be read.
                    The third instruction indicates the main memory address where the contents of
                    the disk sector should be stored.
                        After it issues the request, the CPU will typically do other work while the
                    disk is performing the read. Recall that a 1 GHz processor with a 1 ns clock cycle
                    can potentially execute 16 million instructions in the 16 ms it takes to read the
                    disk. Simply waiting and doing nothing while the transfer is taking place would be
                    enormously wasteful.
                        After the disk controller receives the read command from the CPU, it trans-
                    lates the logical block number to a sector address, reads the contents of the sector,
                    and transfers the contents directly to main memory, without any intervention from
                    the CPU (Figure 6.12(b)). This process, whereby a device performs a read or write
                    bus transaction on its own, without any involvement of the CPU, is known as direct
                    memory access (DMA). The transfer of data is known as a DMA transfer.
                        After the DMA transfer is complete and the contents of the disk sector are
                    safely stored in main memory, the disk controller notifies the CPU by sending an
                    interrupt signal to the CPU (Figure 6.12(c)). The basic idea is that an interrupt
                    signals an external pin on the CPU chip. This causes the CPU to stop what it is
                    currently working on and jump to an operating system routine. The routine records
                    the fact that the I/O has finished and then returns control to the point where the
                    CPU was interrupted.
Figure 6.12              CPU chip
Reading a disk sector.          Register file

                                                ALU

                                                                                      Main
                            Bus interface
                                                                                     memory

                                                                                I/O bus

                                USB             Graphics                 Disk
                              controller        adapter                controller

                            Mouse   Keyboard     Monitor
                                                                         Disk

                         (a) The CPU initiates a disk read by writing a command, logical block number, and
                         destination memory address to the memory-mapped address associated with the disk.
                         CPU chip
                                Register file

                                                ALU

                                                                                      Main
                            Bus interface
                                                                                     memory

                                                                                I/O bus

                                 USB            Graphics                 Disk
                               controller       adapter                controller

                            Mouse    Keyboard    Monitor
                                                                         Disk

                         (b) The disk controller reads the sector and performs a DMA transfer into main memory.
                         CPU chip
                                Register file

                                                ALU

                                                           Interrupt

                                                                                      Main
                            Bus interface
                                                                                     memory

                                                                                I/O bus

                                USB             Graphics                 Disk
                              controller        adapter                controller

                            Mouse   Keyboard     Monitor
                                                                         Disk

                         (c) When the DMA transfer is complete, the disk controller notifies the CPU with an interrupt.

 Aside      Characteristics of a commercial disk drive
 Disk manufacturers publish a lot of useful high-level technical information on their Web sites. For
 example, the Seagate Web site contains the following information (and much more!) about one of
 their popular drives, the Barracuda 7400. (Seagate.com)

 Geometry characteristic      Value                       Geometry characteristic                         Value
 Surface diameter             3.5 in                      Rotational rate                                 7,200 RPM
 Formatted capacity           3 TB                        Average rotational latency                      4.16 ms
 Platters                     3                           Average seek time                               8.5 ms
 Surfaces                     6                           Track-to-track seek time                        1.0 ms
 Logical blocks               5,860,533,168               Average transfer rate                           156 MB/s
 Logical block size           512 bytes                   Maximum sustained transfer rate                 210 MB/s

Figure 6.13                                                        I/O bus
Solid state disk (SSD).
                                                                                   Requests to read and
                                Solid state disk (SSD)                             write logical disk blocks

                                                                          Flash
                                                                     translation layer
                                  Flash memory

                                   Block 0                                         Block B-1
                                      Page 0     Page 1    . . . Page P-1    ...     Page 0     Page 1    . . . Page P-1

                     6.1.3 Solid State Disks
                     A solid state disk (SSD) is a storage technology, based on flash memory (Sec-
                     tion 6.1.1), that in some situations is an attractive alternative to the conventional
                     rotating disk. Figure 6.13 shows the basic idea. An SSD package plugs into a stan-
                     dard disk slot on the I/O bus (typically USB or SATA) and behaves like any other
                     disk, processing requests from the CPU to read and write logical disk blocks. An
                     SSD package consists of one or more flash memory chips, which replace the me-
                     chanical drive in a conventional rotating disk, and a flash translation layer, which
                     is a hardware/firmware device that plays the same role as a disk controller, trans-
                     lating requests for logical blocks into accesses of the underlying physical device.
                          Figure 6.14 shows the performance characteristics of a typical SSD. Notice that
                     reading from SSDs is faster than writing. The difference between random reading
                     and writing performance is caused by a fundamental property of the underlying
                     flash memory. As shown in Figure 6.13, a flash memory consists of a sequence of B
                     blocks, where each block consists of P pages. Typically, pages are 512 bytes to 4 KB
                     in size, and a block consists of 32–128 pages, with total block sizes ranging from 16

                     Reads                                                       Writes
Sequential read throughput           550 MB/s           Sequential write throughput              470 MB/s
Random read throughput (IOPS)        89,000 IOPS        Random write throughput (IOPS)           74,000 IOPS
Random read throughput (MB/s)        365 MB/s           Random write throughput (MB/s)           303 MB/s
Avg. sequential read access time     50 μs              Avg. sequential write access time        60 μs

Figure 6.14 Performance characteristics of a commercial solid state disk. Source: Intel SSD 730 product
specification [53]. IOPS is I/O operations per second. Throughput numbers are based on reads and writes of
4 KB blocks. (Intel SSD 730 product specification. Intel Corporation. 52.)

KB to 512 KB. Data are read and written in units of pages. A page can be written
only after the entire block to which it belongs has been erased (typically, this means
that all bits in the block are set to 1). However, once a block is erased, each page
in the block can be written once with no further erasing. A block wears out after
roughly 100,000 repeated writes. Once a block wears out, it can no longer be used.
     Random writes are slower for two reasons. First, erasing a block takes a
relatively long time, on the order of 1 ms, which is more than an order of magnitude
longer than it takes to access a page. Second, if a write operation attempts to
modify a page p that contains existing data (i.e., not all ones), then any pages in
the same block with useful data must be copied to a new (erased) block before
the write to page p can occur. Manufacturers have developed sophisticated logic
in the flash translation layer that attempts to amortize the high cost of erasing
blocks and to minimize the number of internal copies on writes, but it is unlikely
that random writing will ever perform as well as reading.
     SSDs have a number of advantages over rotating disks. They are built of
semiconductor memory, with no moving parts, and thus have much faster random
access times than rotating disks, use less power, and are more rugged. However,
there are some disadvantages. First, because flash blocks wear out after repeated
writes, SSDs have the potential to wear out as well. Wear-leveling logic in the flash
translation layer attempts to maximize the lifetime of each block by spreading
erasures evenly across all blocks. In practice, the wear-leveling logic is so good
that it takes many years for SSDs to wear out (see Practice Problem 6.5). Second,
SSDs are about 30 times more expensive per byte than rotating disks, and thus the
typical storage capacities are significantly less than rotating disks. However, SSD
prices are decreasing rapidly as they become more popular, and the gap between
the two is decreasing.
     SSDs have completely replaced rotating disks in portable music devices, are
popular as disk replacements in laptops, and have even begun to appear in desk-
tops and servers. While rotating disks are here to stay, it is clear that SSDs are an
important alternative.

Practice Problem 6.5 (solution page 698)
As we have seen, a potential drawback of SSDs is that the underlying flash memory
can wear out. For example, for the SSD in Figure 6.14, Intel guarantees about

                    128 petabytes (128 × 1015 bytes) of writes before the drive wears out. Given
                    this assumption, estimate the lifetime (in years) of this SSD for the following
                    workloads:
                     A. Worst case for sequential writes: The SSD is written to continuously at a rate
                        of 470 MB/s (the average sequential write throughput of the device).
                     B. Worst case for random writes: The SSD is written to continuously at a rate
                        of 303 MB/s (the average random write throughput of the device).
                     C. Average case: The SSD is written to at a rate of 20 GB/day (the average
                        daily write rate assumed by some computer manufacturers in their mobile
                        computer workload simulations).

                    6.1.4 Storage Technology Trends
                    There are several important concepts to take away from our discussion of storage
                    technologies.
                         Different storage technologies have different price and performance trade-offs.
                    SRAM is somewhat faster than DRAM, and DRAM is much faster than disk. On
                    the other hand, fast storage is always more expensive than slower storage. SRAM
                    costs more per byte than DRAM. DRAM costs much more than disk. SSDs split
                    the difference between DRAM and rotating disk.
                         The price and performance properties of different storage technologies are
                    changing at dramatically different rates. Figure 6.15 summarizes the price and per-
                    formance properties of storage technologies since 1985, shortly after the first PCs
                    were introduced. The numbers were culled from back issues of trade magazines
                    and the Web. Although they were collected in an informal survey, the numbers
                    reveal some interesting trends.
                         Since 1985, both the cost and performance of SRAM technology have im-
                    proved at roughly the same rate. Access times and cost per megabyte have de-
                    creased by a factor of about 100 (Figure 6.15(a)). However, the trends for DRAM
                    and disk are much more dramatic and divergent. While the cost per megabyte of
                    DRAM has decreased by a factor of 44,000 (more than four orders of magnitude!),
                    DRAM access times have decreased by only a factor of 10 (Figure 6.15(b)). Disk
                    technology has followed the same trend as DRAM and in even more dramatic
                    fashion. While the cost of a megabyte of disk storage has plummeted by a factor
                    of more than 3,000,000 (more than six orders of magnitude!) since 1980, access
                    times have improved much more slowly, by only a factor of 25 (Figure 6.15(c)).
                    These startling long-term trends highlight a basic truth of memory and disk tech-
                    nology: it is much easier to increase density (and thereby reduce cost) than to
                    decrease access time.
                         DRAM and disk performance are lagging behind CPU performance.As we see
                    in Figure 6.15(d), CPU cycle times improved by a factor of 500 between 1985 and
                    2010. If we look at the effective cycle time —which we define to be the cycle time
                    of an individual CPU (processor) divided by the number of its processor cores—
                    then the improvement between 1985 and 2010 is even greater, a factor of 2,000.

Metric         1985          1990       1995        2000          2005        2010          2015         2015:1985
$/MB           2,900          320       256             100          75        60            25             116
Access (ns)     150           35        15               3           2         1.5           1.3            115

(a) SRAM trends

Metric                 1985         1990       1995             2000        2005          2010          2015        2015:1985
$/MB                    880         100            30            1           0.1          0.06           0.02        44,000
Access (ns)             200         100            70           60           50            40             20           10
Typical size (MB)      0.256         4             16           64          2,000         8,000         16,000       62,500

(b) DRAM trends

Metric                       1985          1990          1995          2000        2005       2010          2015         2015:1985
$/GB                     100,000           8,000          300          10            5         0.3          0.03         3,333,333
Min. seek time (ms)         75               28            10           8            5          3             3             25
Typical size (GB)          0.01             0.16            1          20           160       1,500         3,000         300,000

(c) Rotating disk trends

Metric                1985      1990       1995         2000      2003         2005              2010             2015        2015:1985
Intel CPU             80286     80386      Pent.        P-III    Pent. 4      Core 2       Core i7 (n)         Core i7 (h)       —
Clock rate (MHz)        6         20        150          600      3,300       2,000          2,500               3,000           500
Cycle time (ns)        166       50          6           1.6       0.3         0.5            0.4                 0.33           500
Cores                   1          1         1            1         1           2              4                   4              4
Effective cycle        166       50          6           1.6      0.30         0.25           0.10                0.08          2,075
  time (ns)

(d) CPU trends
Figure 6.15 Storage and processing technology trends. The Core i7 circa 2010 uses the Nehalem processor
core. The Core i7 circa 2015 uses the Haswell core.

The split in the CPU performance curve around 2003 reflects the introduction
of multi-core processors (see aside on page 641). After this split, cycle times of
individual cores actually increased a bit before starting to decrease again, albeit
at a slower rate than before.
     Note that while SRAM performance lags, it is roughly keeping up. However,
the gap between DRAM and disk performance and CPU performance is actually
widening. Until the advent of multi-core processors around 2003, this performance
gap was a function of latency, with DRAM and disk access times decreasing
more slowly than the cycle time of an individual processor. However, with the
introduction of multiple cores, this performance gap is increasingly a function of

      100,000,000.0
            10,000,000.0
             1,000,000.0
              100,000.0                                                       Disk seek time
                                                                              SSD access time
               10,000.0                                                       DRAM access time
Time (ns)

                 1,000.0                                                      SRAM access time
                                                                              CPU cycle time
                  100.0
                                                                              Effective CPU cycle time
                   10.0
                     1.0
                     0.1
                     0.0
                            1985 1990 1995 2000 2003 2005 2010 2015
                                               Year

Figure 6.16 The gap between disk, DRAM, and CPU speeds.

                               throughput, with multiple processor cores issuing requests to the DRAM and disk
                               in parallel.
                                   The various trends are shown quite clearly in Figure 6.16, which plots the
                               access and cycle times from Figure 6.15 on a semi-log scale.
                                   As we will see in Section 6.4, modern computers make heavy use of SRAM-
                               based caches to try to bridge the processor–memory gap. This approach works
                               because of a fundamental property of application programs known as locality,
                               which we discuss next.

                               Practice Problem 6.6 (solution page 698)
                               Using the data from the years 2005 to 2015 in Figure 6.15(c), estimate the year
                               when you will be able to buy a petabyte (1015 bytes) of rotating disk storage for
                               $200. Assume actual dollars (no inflation).

                               6.2    Locality
                               Well-written computer programs tend to exhibit good locality. That is, they tend
                               to reference data items that are near other recently referenced data items or
                               that were recently referenced themselves. This tendency, known as the principle
                               of locality, is an enduring concept that has enormous impact on the design and
                               performance of hardware and software systems.
                                    Locality is typically described as having two distinct forms: temporal locality
                               and spatial locality. In a program with good temporal locality, a memory location
                               that is referenced once is likely to be referenced again multiple times in the near
                               future. In a program with good spatial locality, if a memory location is referenced
                                                                                 Section 6.2   Locality   641

 Aside      When cycle time stood still: The advent of multi-core processors
 The history of computers is marked by some singular events that caused profound changes in the
 industry and the world. Interestingly, these inflection points tend to occur about once per decade: the
 development of Fortran in the 1950s, the introduction of the IBM 360 in the early 1960s, the dawn of
 the Internet (then called ARPANET) in the early 1970s, the introduction of the IBM PC in the early
 1980s, and the creation of the World Wide Web in the early 1990s.
      The most recent such event occurred early in the 21st century, when computer manufacturers
 ran headlong into the so-called power wall, discovering that they could no longer increase CPU clock
 frequencies as quickly because the chips would then consume too much power. The solution was to
 improve performance by replacing a single large processor with multiple smaller processor cores, each
 a complete processor capable of executing programs independently and in parallel with the other cores.
 This multi-core approach works in part because the power consumed by a processor is proportional to
 P = f CV 2 , where f is the clock frequency, C is the capacitance, and V is the voltage. The capacitance
 C is roughly proportional to the area, so the power drawn by multiple cores can be held constant as long
 as the total area of the cores is constant. As long as feature sizes continue to shrink at the exponential
 Moore’s Law rate, the number of cores in each processor, and thus its effective performance, will
 continue to increase.
      From this point forward, computers will get faster not because the clock frequency increases but
 because the number of cores in each processor increases, and because architectural innovations increase
 the efficiency of programs running on those cores. We can see this trend clearly in Figure 6.16. CPU
 cycle time reached its lowest point in 2003 and then actually started to rise before leveling off and
 starting to decline again at a slower rate than before. However, because of the advent of multi-core
 processors (dual-core in 2004 and quad-core in 2007), the effective cycle time continues to decrease at
 close to its previous rate.

once, then the program is likely to reference a nearby memory location in the near
future.
     Programmers should understand the principle of locality because, in general,
programs with good locality run faster than programs with poor locality. All levels
of modern computer systems, from the hardware, to the operating system, to
application programs, are designed to exploit locality. At the hardware level, the
principle of locality allows computer designers to speed up main memory accesses
by introducing small fast memories known as cache memories that hold blocks of
the most recently referenced instructions and data items. At the operating system
level, the principle of locality allows the system to use the main memory as a cache
of the most recently referenced chunks of the virtual address space. Similarly, the
operating system uses main memory to cache the most recently used disk blocks in
the disk file system. The principle of locality also plays a crucial role in the design
of application programs. For example, Web browsers exploit temporal locality by
caching recently referenced documents on a local disk. High-volume Web servers
hold recently requested documents in front-end disk caches that satisfy requests
for these documents without requiring any intervention from the server.

1     int sumvec(int v[N])
2     {                                         Address           0     4     8     12    16    20    24     28
3         int i, sum = 0;                       Contents          v0    v1    v2    v3    v4    v5    v6     v7
4
                                                Access order      1     2     3     4      5     6     7     8
5            for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
6                sum += v[i];                   (b)
7            return sum;
8     }
(a)
Figure 6.17 (a) A function with good locality. (b) Reference pattern for vector v (N = 8). Notice how
the vector elements are accessed in the same order that they are stored in memory.

                        6.2.1 Locality of References to Program Data
                        Consider the simple function in Figure 6.17(a) that sums the elements of a vector.
                        Does this function have good locality? To answer this question, we look at the
                        reference pattern for each variable. In this example, the sum variable is referenced
                        once in each loop iteration, and thus there is good temporal locality with respect
                        to sum. On the other hand, since sum is a scalar, there is no spatial locality with
                        respect to sum.
                             As we see in Figure 6.17(b), the elements of vector v are read sequentially, one
                        after the other, in the order they are stored in memory (we assume for convenience
                        that the array starts at address 0). Thus, with respect to variable v, the function
                        has good spatial locality but poor temporal locality since each vector element
                        is accessed exactly once. Since the function has either good spatial or temporal
                        locality with respect to each variable in the loop body, we can conclude that the
                        sumvec function enjoys good locality.
                             A function such as sumvec that visits each element of a vector sequentially
                        is said to have a stride-1 reference pattern (with respect to the element size).
                        We will sometimes refer to stride-1 reference patterns as sequential reference
                        patterns. Visiting every kth element of a contiguous vector is called a stride-k
                        reference pattern. Stride-1 reference patterns are a common and important source
                        of spatial locality in programs. In general, as the stride increases, the spatial locality
                        decreases.
                             Stride is also an important issue for programs that reference multidimensional
                        arrays. For example, consider the sumarrayrows function in Figure 6.18(a) that
                        sums the elements of a two-dimensional array.
                             The doubly nested loop reads the elements of the array in row-major order.
                        That is, the inner loop reads the elements of the first row, then the second row,
                        and so on. The sumarrayrows function enjoys good spatial locality because it
                        references the array in the same row-major order that the array is stored (Fig-
                        ure 6.18(b)). The result is a nice stride-1 reference pattern with excellent spatial
                        locality.
                                                                                  Section 6.2   Locality       643

 1    int sumarrayrows(int a[M][N])
 2    {                                             Address           0      4     8     12      16        20
 3        int i, j, sum = 0;                        Contents         a00    a01   a02    a10     a11       a12
 4
 5         for (i = 0; i < M; i++)                  Access order      1      2     3      4       5        6
 6             for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
                                                    (b)
 7                 sum += a[i][j];
 8         return sum;
 9    }
(a)
Figure 6.18 (a) Another function with good locality. (b) Reference pattern for array a (M = 2, N = 3).
There is good spatial locality because the array is accessed in the same row-major order in which it is stored
in memory.

 1    int sumarraycols(int a[M][N])
 2    {                                             Address           0      4     8     12      16        20
 3        int i, j, sum = 0;                        Contents         a00    a01   a02    a10     a11       a12
 4
 5         for (j = 0; j < N; j++)                  Access order      1      3     5      2       4        6
 6             for (i = 0; i < M; i++)
                                                    (b)
 7                 sum += a[i][j];
 8         return sum;
 9    }
(a)
Figure 6.19 (a) A function with poor spatial locality. (b) Reference pattern for array a (M = 2, N = 3).
The function has poor spatial locality because it scans memory with a stride-N reference pattern.

    Seemingly trivial changes to a program can have a big impact on its locality.
For example, the sumarraycols function in Figure 6.19(a) computes the same
result as the sumarrayrows function in Figure 6.18(a). The only difference is that
we have interchanged the i and j loops. What impact does interchanging the loops
have on its locality?
    The sumarraycols function suffers from poor spatial locality because it scans
the array column-wise instead of row-wise. Since C arrays are laid out in memory
row-wise, the result is a stride-N reference pattern, as shown in Figure 6.19(b).

6.2.2 Locality of Instruction Fetches
Since program instructions are stored in memory and must be fetched (read)
by the CPU, we can also evaluate the locality of a program with respect to its
instruction fetches. For example, in Figure 6.17 the instructions in the body of the

                    for loop are executed in sequential memory order, and thus the loop enjoys good
                    spatial locality. Since the loop body is executed multiple times, it also enjoys good
                    temporal locality.
                         An important property of code that distinguishes it from program data is
                    that it is rarely modified at run time. While a program is executing, the CPU
                    reads its instructions from memory. The CPU rarely overwrites or modifies these
                    instructions.

                    6.2.3 Summary of Locality
                    In this section, we have introduced the fundamental idea of locality and have
                    identified some simple rules for qualitatively evaluating the locality in a program:
                         .
                             Programs that repeatedly reference the same variables enjoy good temporal
                             locality.
                         .
                             For programs with stride-k reference patterns, the smaller the stride, the
                             better the spatial locality. Programs with stride-1 reference patterns have good
                             spatial locality. Programs that hop around memory with large strides have
                             poor spatial locality.
                         .
                             Loops have good temporal and spatial locality with respect to instruction
                             fetches. The smaller the loop body and the greater the number of loop it-
                             erations, the better the locality.

                         Later in this chapter, after we have learned about cache memories and how
                    they work, we will show you how to quantify the idea of locality in terms of cache
                    hits and misses. It will also become clear to you why programs with good locality
                    typically run faster than programs with poor locality. Nonetheless, knowing how to
                    glance at a source code and getting a high-level feel for the locality in the program
                    is a useful and important skill for a programmer to master.

                    Practice Problem 6.7 (solution page 698)
                    Permute the loops in the following function so that it scans the three-dimensional
                    array a with a stride-1 reference pattern.

                     1        int productarray3d(int a[N][N][N])
                     2        {
                     3            int i, j, k, product = 1;
                     4
                     5            for (i = N-1; i >= 0; i--) {
                     6                for (j = N-1; j >= 0; j--) {
                     7                    for (k = N-1; k >= 0; k--) {
                     8                        product *= a[j][k][i];
                     9                    }
                    10                }
                    11            }
                    12            return product;
                    13        }
                                                                  Section 6.3   The Memory Hierarchy   645

(a) An array of structs                                 (b) The clear1 function
 1      #define N 1000                                   1    void clear1(point *p, int n)
 2                                                       2    {
 3      typedef struct {                                 3        int i, j;
 4          int vel[3];                                  4
 5          int acc[3];                                  5         for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
 6      } point;                                         6             for (j = 0; j < 3; j++)
 7                                                       7                 p[i].vel[j] = 0;
 8      point p[N];                                      8             for (j = 0; j < 3; j++)
                                                         9                 p[i].acc[j] = 0;
                                                        10         }
                                                        11    }

(c) The clear2 function                                 (d) The clear3 function
 1      void clear2(point *p, int n)                     1    void clear3(point *p, int n)
 2      {                                                2    {
 3          int i, j;                                    3        int i, j;
 4                                                       4
 5          for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {                    5         for (j = 0; j < 3; j++) {
 6              for (j = 0; j < 3; j++) {                6             for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
 7                  p[i].vel[j] = 0;                     7                 p[i].vel[j] = 0;
 8                  p[i].acc[j] = 0;                     8             for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
 9              }                                        9                 p[i].acc[j] = 0;
10          }                                           10         }
11      }                                               11    }
Figure 6.20 Code examples for Practice Problem 6.8.

Practice Problem 6.8 (solution page 699)
The three functions in Figure 6.20 perform the same operation with varying de-
grees of spatial locality. Rank-order the functions with respect to the spatial local-
ity enjoyed by each. Explain how you arrived at your ranking.

6.3 The Memory Hierarchy
Sections 6.1 and 6.2 described some fundamental and enduring properties of
storage technology and computer software:

     Storage technology. Different storage technologies have widely different access
           times. Faster technologies cost more per byte than slower ones and have
           less capacity. The gap between CPU and main memory speed is widening.
     Computer software. Well-written programs tend to exhibit good locality.

                                                                      L0:
                       Smaller,                                             Regs    CPU registers hold words
                        faster,                                                     retrieved from cache memory.
                         and                                    L1:    L1 cache
                       costlier                                        (SRAM)
                                                                                       L1 cache holds cache lines
                      (per byte)                                                       retrieved from L2 cache.
                       storage                            L2:          L2 cache
                       devices                                         (SRAM)
                                                                                           L2 cache holds cache lines
                                                                                           retrieved from L3 cache.
                                                    L3:                L3 cache
                                                                       (SRAM)
                      Larger,                                                                   L3 cache holds cache lines
                       slower,                                                                  retrieved from memory.
                         and                  L4:                     Main memory
                      cheaper                                           (DRAM)
                                                                                                    Main memory holds disk blocks
                     (per byte)                                                                     retrieved from local disks.
                      storage           L5:                 Local secondary storage
                      devices                                     (local disks)                          Local disks hold files
                                                                                                         retrieved from disks on
                                  L6:                      Remote secondary storage                      remote network servers.
                                                    (distributed file systems, Web servers)

Figure 6.21 The memory hierarchy.

                    In one of the happier coincidences of computing, these fundamental properties of
                    hardware and software complement each other beautifully. Their complementary
                    nature suggests an approach for organizing memory systems, known as the mem-
                    ory hierarchy, that is used in all modern computer systems. Figure 6.21 shows a
                    typical memory hierarchy.
                         In general, the storage devices get slower, cheaper, and larger as we move
                    from higher to lower levels. At the highest level (L0) are a small number of fast
                    CPU registers that the CPU can access in a single clock cycle. Next are one or
                    more small to moderate-size SRAM-based cache memories that can be accessed
                    in a few CPU clock cycles. These are followed by a large DRAM-based main
                    memory that can be accessed in tens to hundreds of clock cycles. Next are slow
                    but enormous local disks. Finally, some systems even include an additional level
                    of disks on remote servers that can be accessed over a network. For example,
                    distributed file systems such as the Andrew File System (AFS) or the Network
                    File System (NFS) allow a program to access files that are stored on remote
                    network-connected servers. Similarly, the World Wide Web allows programs to
                    access remote files stored on Web servers anywhere in the world.

                    6.3.1 Caching in the Memory Hierarchy
                    In general, a cache (pronounced “cash”) is a small, fast storage device that acts as
                    a staging area for the data objects stored in a larger, slower device. The process of
                    using a cache is known as caching (pronounced “cashing”).
                         The central idea of a memory hierarchy is that for each k, the faster and smaller
                    storage device at level k serves as a cache for the larger and slower storage device
                                                                           Section 6.3        The Memory Hierarchy   647

  Aside        Other memory hierarchies
  We have shown you one example of a memory hierarchy, but other combinations are possible, and
  indeed common. For example, many sites, including Google datacenters, back up local disks onto
  archival magnetic tapes. At some of these sites, human operators manually mount the tapes onto tape
  drives as needed. At other sites, tape robots handle this task automatically. In either case, the collection
  of tapes represents a level in the memory hierarchy, below the local disk level, and the same general
  principles apply. Tapes are cheaper per byte than disks, which allows sites to archive multiple snapshots
  of their local disks. The trade-off is that tapes take longer to access than disks. As another example,
  solid state disks are playing an increasingly important role in the memory hierarchy, bridging the gulf
  between DRAM and rotating disk.

                                                       Smaller, faster, more expensive
      Level k:     4      9      14        3           device at level k caches a
                                                       subset of the blocks from level k + 1.

                                Data are copied between
                                levels in block-size transfer units.

                   0     1       2        3

                   4     5       6        7            Larger, slower, cheaper storage
Level k + 1:                                           device at level k + 1 is partitioned
                   8     9       10       11           into blocks.
                  12     13      14       15

Figure 6.22 The basic principle of caching in a memory hierarchy.

at level k + 1. In other words, each level in the hierarchy caches data objects from
the next lower level. For example, the local disk serves as a cache for files (such
as Web pages) retrieved from remote disks over the network, the main memory
serves as a cache for data on the local disks, and so on, until we get to the smallest
cache of all, the set of CPU registers.
     Figure 6.22 shows the general concept of caching in a memory hierarchy. The
storage at level k + 1 is partitioned into contiguous chunks of data objects called
blocks. Each block has a unique address or name that distinguishes it from other
blocks. Blocks can be either fixed size (the usual case) or variable size (e.g., the
remote HTML files stored on Web servers). For example, the level k + 1 storage
in Figure 6.22 is partitioned into 16 fixed-size blocks, numbered 0 to 15.
     Similarly, the storage at level k is partitioned into a smaller set of blocks that
are the same size as the blocks at level k + 1. At any point in time, the cache at
level k contains copies of a subset of the blocks from level k + 1. For example, in

                    Figure 6.22, the cache at level k has room for four blocks and currently contains
                    copies of blocks 4, 9, 14, and 3.
                         Data are always copied back and forth between level k and level k + 1 in
                    block-size transfer units. It is important to realize that while the block size is fixed
                    between any particular pair of adjacent levels in the hierarchy, other pairs of levels
                    can have different block sizes. For example, in Figure 6.21, transfers between L1
                    and L0 typically use word-size blocks. Transfers between L2 and L1 (and L3 and
                    L2, and L4 and L3) typically use blocks of tens of bytes. And transfers between L5
                    and L4 use blocks with hundreds or thousands of bytes. In general, devices lower
                    in the hierarchy (further from the CPU) have longer access times, and thus tend
                    to use larger block sizes in order to amortize these longer access times.

                    Cache Hits
                    When a program needs a particular data object d from level k + 1, it first looks
                    for d in one of the blocks currently stored at level k. If d happens to be cached
                    at level k, then we have what is called a cache hit. The program reads d directly
                    from level k, which by the nature of the memory hierarchy is faster than reading
                    d from level k + 1. For example, a program with good temporal locality might read
                    a data object from block 14, resulting in a cache hit from level k.

                    Cache Misses
                    If, on the other hand, the data object d is not cached at level k, then we have what
                    is called a cache miss. When there is a miss, the cache at level k fetches the block
                    containing d from the cache at level k + 1, possibly overwriting an existing block
                    if the level k cache is already full.
                         This process of overwriting an existing block is known as replacing or evicting
                    the block. The block that is evicted is sometimes referred to as a victim block.
                    The decision about which block to replace is governed by the cache’s replacement
                    policy. For example, a cache with a random replacement policy would choose a
                    random victim block. A cache with a least recently used (LRU) replacement policy
                    would choose the block that was last accessed the furthest in the past.
                         After the cache at level k has fetched the block from level k + 1, the program
                    can read d from level k as before. For example, in Figure 6.22, reading a data object
                    from block 12 in the level k cache would result in a cache miss because block 12 is
                    not currently stored in the level k cache. Once it has been copied from level k + 1
                    to level k, block 12 will remain there in expectation of later accesses.

                    Kinds of Cache Misses
                    It is sometimes helpful to distinguish between different kinds of cache misses. If
                    the cache at level k is empty, then any access of any data object will miss. An
                    empty cache is sometimes referred to as a cold cache, and misses of this kind are
                    called compulsory misses or cold misses. Cold misses are important because they
                    are often transient events that might not occur in steady state, after the cache has
                    been warmed up by repeated memory accesses.
                                                                Section 6.3   The Memory Hierarchy   649

     Whenever there is a miss, the cache at level k must implement some placement
policy that determines where to place the block it has retrieved from level k + 1.
The most flexible placement policy is to allow any block from level k + 1 to be
stored in any block at level k. For caches high in the memory hierarchy (close to
the CPU) that are implemented in hardware and where speed is at a premium,
this policy is usually too expensive to implement because randomly placed blocks
are expensive to locate.
     Thus, hardware caches typically implement a simpler placement policy that
restricts a particular block at level k + 1 to a small subset (sometimes a singleton)
of the blocks at level k. For example, in Figure 6.22, we might decide that a block
i at level k + 1 must be placed in block (i mod 4) at level k. For example, blocks
0, 4, 8, and 12 at level k + 1 would map to block 0 at level k; blocks 1, 5, 9, and
13 would map to block 1; and so on. Notice that our example cache in Figure 6.22
uses this policy.
     Restrictive placement policies of this kind lead to a type of miss known as
a conflict miss, in which the cache is large enough to hold the referenced data
objects, but because they map to the same cache block, the cache keeps missing.
For example, in Figure 6.22, if the program requests block 0, then block 8, then
block 0, then block 8, and so on, each of the references to these two blocks would
miss in the cache at level k, even though this cache can hold a total of four blocks.
     Programs often run as a sequence of phases (e.g., loops) where each phase
accesses some reasonably constant set of cache blocks. For example, a nested loop
might access the elements of the same array over and over again. This set of blocks
is called the working set of the phase. When the size of the working set exceeds
the size of the cache, the cache will experience what are known as capacity misses.
In other words, the cache is just too small to handle this particular working set.

Cache Management
As we have noted, the essence of the memory hierarchy is that the storage device
at each level is a cache for the next lower level. At each level, some form of logic
must manage the cache. By this we mean that something has to partition the cache
storage into blocks, transfer blocks between different levels, decide when there are
hits and misses, and then deal with them. The logic that manages the cache can be
hardware, software, or a combination of the two.
     For example, the compiler manages the register file, the highest level of
the cache hierarchy. It decides when to issue loads when there are misses, and
determines which register to store the data in. The caches at levels L1, L2, and
L3 are managed entirely by hardware logic built into the caches. In a system
with virtual memory, the DRAM main memory serves as a cache for data blocks
stored on disk, and is managed by a combination of operating system software
and address translation hardware on the CPU. For a machine with a distributed
file system such as AFS, the local disk serves as a cache that is managed by the
AFS client process running on the local machine. In most cases, caches operate
automatically and do not require any specific or explicit actions from the program.

Type               What cached              Where cached            Latency (cycles)   Managed by
CPU registers      4-byte or 8-byte words   On-chip CPU registers                 0    Compiler
TLB                Address translations     On-chip TLB                           0    Hardware MMU
L1 cache           64-byte blocks           On-chip L1 cache                      4    Hardware
L2 cache           64-byte blocks           On-chip L2 cache                     10    Hardware
L3 cache           64-byte blocks           On-chip L3 cache                     50    Hardware
Virtual memory     4-KB pages               Main memory                         200    Hardware + OS
Buffer cache       Parts of files           Main memory                         200    OS
Disk cache         Disk sectors             Disk controller                 100,000    Controller firmware
Network cache      Parts of files           Local disk                   10,000,000    NFS client
Browser cache      Web pages                Local disk                   10,000,000    Web browser
Web cache          Web pages                Remote server disks       1,000,000,000    Web proxy server

Figure 6.23 The ubiquity of caching in modern computer systems. Acronyms: TLB: translation lookaside
buffer; MMU: memory management unit; OS: operating system; NFS: network file system.

                     6.3.2 Summary of Memory Hierarchy Concepts
                     To summarize, memory hierarchies based on caching work because slower storage
                     is cheaper than faster storage and because programs tend to exhibit locality:

                       Exploiting temporal locality. Because of temporal locality, the same data objects
                            are likely to be reused multiple times. Once a data object has been copied
                            into the cache on the first miss, we can expect a number of subsequent
                            hits on that object. Since the cache is faster than the storage at the next
                            lower level, these subsequent hits can be served much faster than the
                            original miss.
                       Exploiting spatial locality. Blocks usually contain multiple data objects. Because
                            of spatial locality, we can expect that the cost of copying a block after a
                            miss will be amortized by subsequent references to other objects within
                            that block.

                         Caches are used everywhere in modern systems. As you can see from Fig-
                     ure 6.23, caches are used in CPU chips, operating systems, distributed file systems,
                     and on the World Wide Web. They are built from and managed by various com-
                     binations of hardware and software. Note that there are a number of terms and
                     acronyms in Figure 6.23 that we haven’t covered yet. We include them here to
                     demonstrate how common caches are.

                     6.4    Cache Memories
                     The memory hierarchies of early computer systems consisted of only three levels:
                     CPU registers, main memory, and disk storage. However, because of the increasing
                     gap between CPU and main memory, system designers were compelled to insert

Figure 6.24                     CPU chip
Typical bus structure for
                                              Register file
cache memories.
                                    Cache                     ALU
                                   memories

                                                                    System bus    Memory bus

                                                                          I/O                   Main
                                       Bus interface                                           memory
                                                                         bridge

a small SRAM cache memory, called an L1 cache (level 1 cache) between the
CPU register file and main memory, as shown in Figure 6.24. The L1 cache can be
accessed nearly as fast as the registers, typically in about 4 clock cycles.
     As the performance gap between the CPU and main memory continued
to increase, system designers responded by inserting an additional larger cache,
called an L2 cache, between the L1 cache and main memory, that can be accessed
in about 10 clock cycles. Many modern systems include an even larger cache, called
an L3 cache, which sits between the L2 cache and main memory in the memory
hierarchy and can be accessed in about 50 cycles. While there is considerable
variety in the arrangements, the general principles are the same. For our discussion
in the next section, we will assume a simple memory hierarchy with a single L1
cache between the CPU and main memory.

6.4.1 Generic Cache Memory Organization
Consider a computer system where each memory address has m bits that form
M = 2m unique addresses. As illustrated in Figure 6.25(a), a cache for such a
machine is organized as an array of S = 2s cache sets. Each set consists of E cache
lines. Each line consists of a data block of B = 2b bytes, a valid bit that indicates
whether or not the line contains meaningful information, and t = m − (b + s) tag
bits (a subset of the bits from the current block’s memory address) that uniquely
identify the block stored in the cache line.
     In general, a cache’s organization can be characterized by the tuple (S, E,
B, m). The size (or capacity) of a cache, C, is stated in terms of the aggregate size
of all the blocks. The tag bits and valid bit are not included. Thus, C = S × E × B.
     When the CPU is instructed by a load instruction to read a word from address
A of main memory, it sends address A to the cache. If the cache is holding a copy
of the word at address A, it sends the word immediately back to the CPU. So how
does the cache know whether it contains a copy of the word at address A? The
cache is organized so that it can find the requested word by simply inspecting the
bits of the address, similar to a hash table with an extremely simple hash function.
Here is how it works:
     The parameters S and B induce a partitioning of the m address bits into the
three fields shown in Figure 6.25(b). The s set index bits in A form an index into

Figure 6.25                                                      1 valid bit t tag bits       B = 2 b bytes
General organization                                              per line per line          per cache block
of cache (S, E, B, m).
                                                                   Valid       Tag          0        1       ...   B–1
(a) A cache is an array

                                                                                           ...
of sets. Each set contains                              Set 0:                                                               E lines per set
                                                                   Valid       Tag          0        1       ...   B–1
one or more lines. Each
line contains a valid bit,
some tag bits, and a block                                         Valid       Tag          0        1       ...   B–1

                                                                                           ...
of data. (b) The cache                                  Set 1:
                                 S = 2 s sets                                                                ...
organization induces a                                             Valid       Tag          0        1             B–1
partition of the m address

                                                                                           ...
bits into t tag bits, s set
index bits, and b block                                            Valid       Tag          0        1       ...   B–1
offset bits.

                                                                                           ...
                                                  Set S–1:
                                                                   Valid       Tag          0        1       ...   B–1

                                                                     Cache size: C = B × E × S data bytes
                                                                                     (a)
                                                      t bits         s bits        b bits
                                 Address:
                                                m–1                                              0

                                                      Tag          Set index Block offset
                                                               (b)

                     the array of S sets. The first set is set 0, the second set is set 1, and so on. When
                     interpreted as an unsigned integer, the set index bits tell us which set the word
                     must be stored in. Once we know which set the word must be contained in, the t
                     tag bits in A tell us which line (if any) in the set contains the word. A line in the
                     set contains the word if and only if the valid bit is set and the tag bits in the line
                     match the tag bits in the address A. Once we have located the line identified by
                     the tag in the set identified by the set index, then the b block offset bits give us the
                     offset of the word in the B-byte data block.
                          As you may have noticed, descriptions of caches use a lot of symbols. Fig-
                     ure 6.26 summarizes these symbols for your reference.

                     Practice Problem 6.9 (solution page 699)
                     The following table gives the parameters for a number of different caches. For
                     each cache, determine the number of cache sets (S), tag bits (t), set index bits (s),
                     and block offset bits (b).

                     Cache      m         C              B           E             S                     t               s            b
                       1.      32       1,024             4           1
                       2.      32       1,024             8           4
                       3.      32       1,024            32          32

Parameter            Description
Fundamental parameters
S = 2s               Number of sets
E                    Number of lines per set
B = 2b               Block size (bytes)
m = log2 (M)         Number of physical (main memory) address bits

Derived quantities
M = 2m               Maximum number of unique memory addresses
s = log2 (S)         Number of set index bits
b = log2 (B)         Number of block offset bits
t = m − (s + b)      Number of tag bits
C=B ×E×S             Cache size (bytes), not including overhead such as the valid and tag bits

Figure 6.26 Summary of cache parameters.

Figure 6.27                                   Valid   Tag          Cache block           E = 1 line per set
                                     Set 0:
Direct-mapped cache
(E = 1). There is exactly
                                     Set 1:   Valid   Tag          Cache block
one line per set.
                                                             ...

                                   Set S–1:   Valid   Tag          Cache block

6.4.2 Direct-Mapped Caches
Caches are grouped into different classes based on E, the number of cache lines
per set. A cache with exactly one line per set (E = 1) is known as a direct-mapped
cache (see Figure 6.27). Direct-mapped caches are the simplest both to implement
and to understand, so we will use them to illustrate some general concepts about
how caches work.
     Suppose we have a system with a CPU, a register file, an L1 cache, and a main
memory. When the CPU executes an instruction that reads a memory word w,
it requests the word from the L1 cache. If the L1 cache has a cached copy of w,
then we have an L1 cache hit, and the cache quickly extracts w and returns it to
the CPU. Otherwise, we have a cache miss, and the CPU must wait while the L1
cache requests a copy of the block containing w from the main memory. When
the requested block finally arrives from memory, the L1 cache stores the block in
one of its cache lines, extracts word w from the stored block, and returns it to the
CPU. The process that a cache goes through of determining whether a request is a
hit or a miss and then extracting the requested word consists of three steps: (1) set
selection, (2) line matching, and (3) word extraction.

Figure 6.28                                                                         Set 0:         Valid       Tag                     Cache block
Set selection in a direct-
mapped cache.                                              Selected set
                                                                                    Set 1:         Valid       Tag                     Cache block

                                                                                                                             ...
                                   t bits      s bits         b bits
                                                                                  Set S–1:         Valid       Tag                     Cache block
                                              00001
                             m–1                                         0
                                   Tag       Set index Block offset

Figure 6.29                                                  = 1? (1) The valid bit must be set.
Line matching and word                                                                 0       1      2    3    4        5         6     7
selection in a direct-
                                      Selected set (i ):       1         0110                                   w0 w1 w2 w3
mapped cache. Within the
cache block, w0 denotes                                                                                                      (3) If (1) and (2), then
the low-order byte of the              (2) The tag bits in the            =?                                                     cache hit, and
word w, w1 the next byte,                   cache line must                                                                   block offset selects
                                           match the tag bits                                                                     starting byte.
and so on.                                  in the address.              t bits            s bits          b bits
                                                                         0110                i              100
                                                                   m–1                                               0
                                                                         Tag          Set index Block offset

                     Set Selection in Direct-Mapped Caches
                     In this step, the cache extracts the s set index bits from the middle of the address
                     for w. These bits are interpreted as an unsigned integer that corresponds to a set
                     number. In other words, if we think of the cache as a one-dimensional array of
                     sets, then the set index bits form an index into this array. Figure 6.28 shows how
                     set selection works for a direct-mapped cache. In this example, the set index bits
                     000012 are interpreted as an integer index that selects set 1.

                     Line Matching in Direct-Mapped Caches
                     Now that we have selected some set i in the previous step, the next step is to
                     determine if a copy of the word w is stored in one of the cache lines contained in
                     set i. In a direct-mapped cache, this is easy and fast because there is exactly one
                     line per set. A copy of w is contained in the line if and only if the valid bit is set
                     and the tag in the cache line matches the tag in the address of w.
                          Figure 6.29 shows how line matching works in a direct-mapped cache. In this
                     example, there is exactly one cache line in the selected set. The valid bit for this
                     line is set, so we know that the bits in the tag and block are meaningful. Since the
                     tag bits in the cache line match the tag bits in the address, we know that a copy of
                     the word we want is indeed stored in the line. In other words, we have a cache hit.
                     On the other hand, if either the valid bit were not set or the tags did not match,
                     then we would have had a cache miss.

Word Selection in Direct-Mapped Caches
Once we have a hit, we know that w is somewhere in the block. This last step
determines where the desired word starts in the block. As shown in Figure 6.29,
the block offset bits provide us with the offset of the first byte in the desired word.
Similar to our view of a cache as an array of lines, we can think of a block as an
array of bytes, and the byte offset as an index into that array. In the example, the
block offset bits of 1002 indicate that the copy of w starts at byte 4 in the block.
(We are assuming that words are 4 bytes long.)

Line Replacement on Misses in Direct-Mapped Caches
If the cache misses, then it needs to retrieve the requested block from the next
level in the memory hierarchy and store the new block in one of the cache lines of
the set indicated by the set index bits. In general, if the set is full of valid cache lines,
then one of the existing lines must be evicted. For a direct-mapped cache, where
each set contains exactly one line, the replacement policy is trivial: the current line
is replaced by the newly fetched line.

Putting It Together: A Direct-Mapped Cache in Action
The mechanisms that a cache uses to select sets and identify lines are extremely
simple. They have to be, because the hardware must perform them in a few
nanoseconds. However, manipulating bits in this way can be confusing to us
humans. A concrete example will help clarify the process. Suppose we have a
direct-mapped cache described by

                               (S, E, B, m) = (4, 1, 2, 4)

In other words, the cache has four sets, one line per set, 2 bytes per block, and 4-
bit addresses. We will also assume that each word is a single byte. Of course, these
assumptions are totally unrealistic, but they will help us keep the example simple.
     When you are first learning about caches, it can be very instructive to enumer-
ate the entire address space and partition the bits, as we’ve done in Figure 6.30 for
our 4-bit example. There are some interesting things to notice about this enumer-
ated space:

  .
      The concatenation of the tag and index bits uniquely identifies each block in
      memory. For example, block 0 consists of addresses 0 and 1, block 1 consists
      of addresses 2 and 3, block 2 consists of addresses 4 and 5, and so on.
  .
      Since there are eight memory blocks but only four cache sets, multiple blocks
      map to the same cache set (i.e., they have the same set index). For example,
      blocks 0 and 4 both map to set 0, blocks 1 and 5 both map to set 1, and so on.
  .
      Blocks that map to the same cache set are uniquely identified by the tag. For
      example, block 0 has a tag bit of 0 while block 4 has a tag bit of 1, block 1 has
      a tag bit of 0 while block 5 has a tag bit of 1, and so on.

                                                  Address bits
                     Address           Tag bits   Index bits     Offset bits   Block number
                    (decimal)          (t = 1)      (s = 2)       (b = 1)        (decimal)
                           0              0           00              0             0
                           1              0           00              1             0
                           2              0           01              0             1
                           3              0           01              1             1
                           4              0           10              0             2
                           5              0           10              1             2
                           6              0           11              0             3
                           7              0           11              1             3
                           8              1           00              0             4
                           9              1           00              1             4
                          10              1           01              0             5
                          11              1           01              1             5
                          12              1           10              0             6
                          13              1           10              1             6
                          14              1           11              0             7
                          15              1           11              1             7

Figure 6.30 4-bit address space for example direct-mapped cache.

                        Let us simulate the cache in action as the CPU performs a sequence of reads.
                    Remember that for this example we are assuming that the CPU reads 1-byte
                    words. While this kind of manual simulation is tedious and you may be tempted
                    to skip it, in our experience students do not really understand how caches work
                    until they work their way through a few of them.
                        Initially, the cache is empty (i.e., each valid bit is 0):

                    Set        Valid      Tag     block[0]     block[1]
                    0           0
                    1           0
                    2           0
                    3           0

                    Each row in the table represents a cache line. The first column indicates the set
                    that the line belongs to, but keep in mind that this is provided for convenience and
                    is not really part of the cache. The next four columns represent the actual bits in
                    each cache line. Now, let’s see what happens when the CPU performs a sequence
                    of reads:

                     1. Read word at address 0. Since the valid bit for set 0 is 0, this is a cache miss.
                        The cache fetches block 0 from memory (or a lower-level cache) and stores the

   block in set 0. Then the cache returns m[0] (the contents of memory location
   0) from block[0] of the newly fetched cache line.

   Set    Valid    Tag     block[0]     block[1]
    0       1        0       m[0]        m[1]
    1       0
    2       0
    3       0

2. Read word at address 1. This is a cache hit. The cache immediately returns
   m[1] from block[1] of the cache line. The state of the cache does not change.
3. Read word at address 13. Since the cache line in set 2 is not valid, this is a
   cache miss. The cache loads block 6 into set 2 and returns m[13] from block[1]
   of the new cache line.

   Set    Valid    Tag     block[0]     block[1]
    0       1        0       m[0]        m[1]
    1       0
    2       1        1       m[12]       m[13]
    3       0

4. Read word at address 8. This is a miss. The cache line in set 0 is indeed valid,
   but the tags do not match. The cache loads block 4 into set 0 (replacing the
   line that was there from the read of address 0) and returns m[8] from block[0]
   of the new cache line.

   Set    Valid    Tag     block[0]     block[1]
    0       1        1       m[8]        m[9]
    1       0
    2       1        1       m[12]       m[13]
    3       0

5. Read word at address 0. This is another miss, due to the unfortunate fact
   that we just replaced block 0 during the previous reference to address 8. This
   kind of miss, where we have plenty of room in the cache but keep alternating
   references to blocks that map to the same set, is an example of a conflict miss.

   Set    Valid    Tag     block[0]     block[1]
    0       1        0       m[0]        m[1]
    1       0
    2       1        1       m[12]       m[13]
    3       0

                    Conflict Misses in Direct-Mapped Caches
                    Conflict misses are common in real programs and can cause baffling performance
                    problems. Conflict misses in direct-mapped caches typically occur when programs
                    access arrays whose sizes are a power of 2. For example, consider a function that
                    computes the dot product of two vectors:
                    1    float dotprod(float x[8], float y[8])
                    2    {
                    3        float sum = 0.0;
                    4        int i;
                    5
                    6         for (i = 0; i < 8; i++)
                    7             sum += x[i] * y[i];
                    8         return sum;
                    9    }

                    This function has good spatial locality with respect to x and y, and so we might ex-
                    pect it to enjoy a good number of cache hits. Unfortunately, this is not always true.
                        Suppose that floats are 4 bytes, that x is loaded into the 32 bytes of contiguous
                    memory starting at address 0, and that y starts immediately after x at address 32.
                    For simplicity, suppose that a block is 16 bytes (big enough to hold four floats)
                    and that the cache consists of two sets, for a total cache size of 32 bytes. We will
                    assume that the variable sum is actually stored in a CPU register and thus does not
                    require a memory reference. Given these assumptions, each x[i] and y[i] will
                    map to the identical cache set:
                    Element     Address      Set index       Element      Address      Set index
                     x[0]           0            0             y[0]          32            0
                     x[1]           4            0             y[1]          36            0
                     x[2]           8            0             y[2]          40            0
                     x[3]          12            0             y[3]          44            0
                     x[4]          16            1             y[4]          48            1
                     x[5]          20            1             y[5]          52            1
                     x[6]          24            1             y[6]          56            1
                     x[7]          28            1             y[7]          60            1

                         At run time, the first iteration of the loop references x[0], a miss that causes
                    the block containing x[0]–x[3] to be loaded into set 0. The next reference is to
                    y[0], another miss that causes the block containing y[0]–y[3] to be copied into
                    set 0, overwriting the values of x that were copied in by the previous reference.
                    During the next iteration, the reference to x[1] misses, which causes the x[0]–
                    x[3] block to be loaded back into set 0, overwriting the y[0]–y[3] block. So now
                    we have a conflict miss, and in fact each subsequent reference to x and y will result
                    in a conflict miss as we thrash back and forth between blocks of x and y. The term
                    thrashing describes any situation where a cache is repeatedly loading and evicting
                    the same sets of cache blocks.

  Aside       Why index with the middle bits?
  You may be wondering why caches use the middle bits for the set index instead of the high-order bits.
  There is a good reason why the middle bits are better. Figure 6.31 shows why. If the high-order bits are
  used as an index, then some contiguous memory blocks will map to the same cache set. For example, in
  the figure, the first four blocks map to the first cache set, the second four blocks map to the second set,
  and so on. If a program has good spatial locality and scans the elements of an array sequentially, then
  the cache can only hold a block-size chunk of the array at any point in time. This is an inefficient use of
  the cache. Contrast this with middle-bit indexing, where adjacent blocks always map to different cache
  sets. In this case, the cache can hold an entire C-size chunk of the array, where C is the cache size.

                                         High-order                            Middle-order
                                         bit indexing                          bit indexing

                                  0000                               0000
                                  0001                               0001
                                  0010                               0010
                                  0011                               0011
                                  0100                               0100
     Four-set cache               0101                               0101
00                                0110                               0110
01                                0111                               0111
10                                1000                               1000
11                                1001                               1001
                                  1010                               1010
                                  1011                               1011
                                  1100                               1100
                                  1101                               1101
                                  1110                               1110
                                  1111                                1111

                                                Set index bits

Figure 6.31 Why caches index with the middle bits.

     The bottom line is that even though the program has good spatial locality
and we have room in the cache to hold the blocks for both x[i] and y[i], each
reference results in a conflict miss because the blocks map to the same cache set. It
is not unusual for this kind of thrashing to result in a slowdown by a factor of 2 or 3.
Also, be aware that even though our example is extremely simple, the problem is
real for larger and more realistic direct-mapped caches.
     Luckily, thrashing is easy for programmers to fix once they recognize what is
going on. One easy solution is to put B bytes of padding at the end of each array.

                    For example, instead of defining x to be float x[8], we define it to be float
                    x[12]. Assuming y starts immediately after x in memory, we have the following
                    mapping of array elements to sets:

                    Element     Address      Set index       Element     Address      Set index
                     x[0]           0            0             y[0]         48            1
                     x[1]           4            0             y[1]         52            1
                     x[2]           8            0             y[2]         56            1
                     x[3]          12            0             y[3]         60            1
                     x[4]          16            1             y[4]         64            0
                     x[5]          20            1             y[5]         68            0
                     x[6]          24            1             y[6]         72            0
                     x[7]          28            1             y[7]         76            0

                    With the padding at the end of x, x[i] and y[i] now map to different sets, which
                    eliminates the thrashing conflict misses.

                    Practice Problem 6.10 (solution page 699)
                    In the previous dotprod example, what fraction of the total references to x and y
                    will be hits once we have padded array x?

                    Practice Problem 6.11 (solution page 699)
                    Imagine a hypothetical cache that uses the high-order s bits of an address as the
                    set index. For such a cache, contiguous chunks of memory blocks are mapped to
                    the same cache set.
                     A. How many blocks are in each of these contiguous array chunks?
                     B. Consider the following code that runs on a system with a cache of the form
                        (S, E, B, m) = (512, 1, 32, 32):

                         int array[4096];

                         for (i = 0; i < 4096; i++)
                             sum += array[i];

                         What is the maximum number of array blocks that are stored in the cache
                         at any point in time?

                    6.4.3 Set Associative Caches
                    The problem with conflict misses in direct-mapped caches stems from the con-
                    straint that each set has exactly one line (or in our terminology, E = 1). A set
                    associative cache relaxes this constraint so that each set holds more than one cache
                    line. A cache with 1 < E < C/B is often called an E-way set associative cache. We

Figure 6.32
                                                    Valid      Tag             Cache block
Set associative cache                      Set 0:                                                     E = 2 lines per set
(1 < E < C/B). In a set                             Valid      Tag             Cache block
associative cache, each
set contains more than                              Valid      Tag             Cache block
one line. This particular                  Set 1:
                                                    Valid      Tag             Cache block
example shows a two-way

                                                                         ...
set associative cache.
                                                    Valid      Tag             Cache block
                                     Set S – 1:
                                                    Valid      Tag             Cache block

Figure 6.33
                                                                                        Valid   Tag             Cache block
Set selection in a set                                                         Set 0:
                                                                                        Valid   Tag             Cache block
associative cache.

                                                        Selected set                    Valid   Tag             Cache block
                                                                               Set 1:
                                                                                        Valid   Tag             Cache block

                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                        Valid   Tag             Cache block
                                  t bits       s bits       b bits         Set S–1:
                                                                                        Valid   Tag             Cache block
                                              00001
                            m–1                                      0
                                  Tag        Set index Block offset

will discuss the special case, where E = C/B, in the next section. Figure 6.32 shows
the organization of a two-way set associative cache.

Set Selection in Set Associative Caches
Set selection is identical to a direct-mapped cache, with the set index bits identi-
fying the set. Figure 6.33 summarizes this principle.

Line Matching and Word Selection in Set Associative Caches
Line matching is more involved in a set associative cache than in a direct-mapped
cache because it must check the tags and valid bits of multiple lines in order to
determine if the requested word is in the set. A conventional memory is an array of
values that takes an address as input and returns the value stored at that address.
An associative memory, on the other hand, is an array of (key, value) pairs that
takes as input the key and returns a value from one of the (key, value) pairs that
matches the input key. Thus, we can think of each set in a set associative cache as
a small associative memory where the keys are the concatenation of the tag and
valid bits, and the values are the contents of a block.

Figure 6.34                                          = 1? (1) The valid bit must be set.
Line matching and                                                          0       1    2   3    4       5      6    7
word selection in a set
                                                       1         1001
associative cache.              Selected set (i ):
                                                       1         0110                            w0 w1 w2 w3

                                                                                                             (3) If (1) and (2), then
                                (2) The tag bits in one
                                                                  =?                                              cache hit, and
                                   of the cache lines
                                                                                                              block offset selects
                                 must match the tag
                                                                                                                   starting byte.
                                  bits in the address.
                                                                 t bits        s bits       b bits
                                                                 0110            i           100
                                                           m–1                                       0
                                                                 Tag      Set index Block offset

                        Figure 6.34 shows the basic idea of line matching in an associative cache. An
                    important idea here is that any line in the set can contain any of the memory blocks
                    that map to that set. So the cache must search each line in the set for a valid line
                    whose tag matches the tag in the address. If the cache finds such a line, then we
                    have a hit and the block offset selects a word from the block, as before.

                    Line Replacement on Misses in Set Associative Caches
                    If the word requested by the CPU is not stored in any of the lines in the set, then
                    we have a cache miss, and the cache must fetch the block that contains the word
                    from memory. However, once the cache has retrieved the block, which line should
                    it replace? Of course, if there is an empty line, then it would be a good candidate.
                    But if there are no empty lines in the set, then we must choose one of the nonempty
                    lines and hope that the CPU does not reference the replaced line anytime soon.
                         It is very difficult for programmers to exploit knowledge of the cache replace-
                    ment policy in their codes, so we will not go into much detail about it here. The
                    simplest replacement policy is to choose the line to replace at random. Other more
                    sophisticated policies draw on the principle of locality to try to minimize the prob-
                    ability that the replaced line will be referenced in the near future. For example, a
                    least frequently used (LFU) policy will replace the line that has been referenced
                    the fewest times over some past time window. A least recently used (LRU) policy
                    will replace the line that was last accessed the furthest in the past. All of these
                    policies require additional time and hardware. But as we move further down the
                    memory hierarchy, away from the CPU, the cost of a miss becomes more expen-
                    sive and it becomes more worthwhile to minimize misses with good replacement
                    policies.

                    6.4.4 Fully Associative Caches
                    A fully associative cache consists of a single set (i.e., E = C/B) that contains all of
                    the cache lines. Figure 6.35 shows the basic organization.

Figure 6.35
                                                   Valid   Tag               Cache block
Fully associative cache
(E = C/B). In a fully                              Valid   Tag               Cache block                   E = C/B lines in
                                       Set 0:
                                                                                                           the one and only set

                                                                       ...
associative cache, a single
set contains all of the lines.                     Valid   Tag               Cache block

Figure 6.36
                                                                                               Valid       Tag                     Cache block
Set selection in a fully
                                   The entire cache is one set, so                             Valid       Tag                     Cache block
associative cache. Notice        by default set 0 is always selected.             Set 0:

                                                                                                                         ...
that there are no set index
bits.                                           t bits           b bits                        Valid       Tag                     Cache block
                                 m–1                                         0
                                                Tag          Block offset

Figure 6.37                                                = 1? (1) The valid bit must be set.
Line matching and                                                                      0   1      2    3    4        5         6     7
word selection in a fully
                                                             1         1001
associative cache.
                                                             0         0110
                                         Entire cache
                                                             1         0110                                 w0 w1 w2 w3
                                                             0         1110

                                                                                                                         (3) If (1) and (2), then
                                       (2) The tag bits in one
                                                                        =?                                                    cache hit, and
                                          of the cache lines
                                                                                                                          block offset selects
                                        must match the tag
                                                                                                                               starting byte.
                                         bits in the address.
                                                                       t bits                          b bits
                                                                                 0110                   100
                                                                 m–1                                             0
                                                                                 Tag              Block offset

Set Selection in Fully Associative Caches
Set selection in a fully associative cache is trivial because there is only one set,
summarized in Figure 6.36. Notice that there are no set index bits in the address,
which is partitioned into only a tag and a block offset.

Line Matching and Word Selection in Fully Associative Caches
Line matching and word selection in a fully associative cache work the same as
with a set associative cache, as we show in Figure 6.37. The difference is mainly a
question of scale.
     Because the cache circuitry must search for many matching tags in parallel, it
is difficult and expensive to build an associative cache that is both large and fast.
As a result, fully associative caches are only appropriate for small caches, such

                     as the translation lookaside buffers (TLBs) in virtual memory systems that cache
                     page table entries (Section 9.6.2).

                     Practice Problem 6.12 (solution page 699)
                     The problems that follow will help reinforce your understanding of how caches
                     work. Assume the following:
                         .
                              The memory is byte addressable.
                         .
                              Memory accesses are to 1-byte words (not to 4-byte words).
                         .
                              Addresses are 13 bits wide.
                         .
                              The cache is two-way set associative (E = 2), with a 4-byte block size (B = 4)
                              and eight sets (S = 8).

                     The contents of the cache are as follows, with all numbers given in hexadecimal
                     notation.

                                                 2-way set associative cache
                                      Line 0                                                    Line 1
Set index   Tag Valid Byte 0 Byte 1 Byte 2 Byte 3                       Tag Valid Byte 0 Byte 1 Byte 2 Byte 3
   0        09       1          86          30       3F        10       00         0       —       —         —    —
   1        45       1          60          4F       E0        23       38         1       00      BC        0B   37
   2        EB       0          —           —        —         —        0B         0       —       —         —    —
   3        06       0          —           —        —         —        32         1       12      08        7B   AD
   4        C7       1          06          78       07        C5       05         1       40      67        C2   3B
   5        71       1          0B          DE       18        4B       6E         0       —       —         —    —
   6        91       1          A0          B7       26        2D       F0         0       —       —         —    —
   7        46       0          —           —        —         —        DE         1       12      C0        88   37

                          The following figure shows the format of an address (1 bit per box). Indicate
                     (by labeling the diagram) the fields that would be used to determine the following:

                         CO. The cache block offset
                         CI. The cache set index
                         CT. The cache tag

                         12      11    10        9    8    7        6   5      4       3    2      1     0

                     Practice Problem 6.13 (solution page 700)
                     Suppose a program running on the machine in Problem 6.12 references the 1-byte
                     word at address 0x0D53. Indicate the cache entry accessed and the cache byte

value returned in hexadecimal notation. Indicate whether a cache miss occurs. If
there is a cache miss, enter “—” for “Cache byte returned.”
 A. Address format (1 bit per box):

       12   11   10    9       8    7       6   5   4   3   2     1    0

 B. Memory reference:

     Parameter                      Value
     Cache block offset (CO)       0x
     Cache set index (CI)          0x
     Cache tag (CT)                0x
     Cache hit? (Y/N)
     Cache byte returned           0x

Practice Problem 6.14 (solution page 700)
Repeat Problem 6.13 for memory address 0x0CB4.
 A. Address format (1 bit per box):

       12   11   10    9       8    7       6   5   4   3   2     1    0

 B. Memory reference:

     Parameter                      Value
     Cache block offset (CO)       0x
     Cache set index (CI)          0x
     Cache tag (CT)                0x
     Cache hit? (Y/N)
     Cache byte returned           0x

Practice Problem 6.15 (solution page 700)
Repeat Problem 6.13 for memory address 0x0A31.
 A. Address format (1 bit per box):

       12   11   10    9       8    7       6   5   4   3   2     1    0

                     B. Memory reference:

                         Parameter                      Value
                         Cache block offset (CO)      0x
                         Cache set index (CI)         0x
                         Cache tag (CT)               0x
                         Cache hit? (Y/N)
                         Cache byte returned          0x

                    Practice Problem 6.16 (solution page 701)
                    For the cache in Problem 6.12, list all of the hexadecimal memory addresses that
                    will hit in set 3.

                    6.4.5 Issues with Writes
                    As we have seen, the operation of a cache with respect to reads is straightforward.
                    First, look for a copy of the desired word w in the cache. If there is a hit, return
                    w immediately. If there is a miss, fetch the block that contains w from the next
                    lower level of the memory hierarchy, store the block in some cache line (possibly
                    evicting a valid line), and then return w.
                         The situation for writes is a little more complicated. Suppose we write a word
                    w that is already cached (a write hit). After the cache updates its copy of w, what
                    does it do about updating the copy of w in the next lower level of the hierarchy?
                    The simplest approach, known as write-through, is to immediately write w’s cache
                    block to the next lower level. While simple, write-through has the disadvantage
                    of causing bus traffic with every write. Another approach, known as write-back,
                    defers the update as long as possible by writing the updated block to the next lower
                    level only when it is evicted from the cache by the replacement algorithm. Because
                    of locality, write-back can significantly reduce the amount of bus traffic, but it has
                    the disadvantage of additional complexity. The cache must maintain an additional
                    dirty bit for each cache line that indicates whether or not the cache block has been
                    modified.
                         Another issue is how to deal with write misses. One approach, known as write-
                    allocate, loads the corresponding block from the next lower level into the cache
                    and then updates the cache block. Write-allocate tries to exploit spatial locality
                    of writes, but it has the disadvantage that every miss results in a block transfer
                    from the next lower level to the cache. The alternative, known as no-write-allocate,
                    bypasses the cache and writes the word directly to the next lower level. Write-
                    through caches are typically no-write-allocate. Write-back caches are typically
                    write-allocate.
                         Optimizing caches for writes is a subtle and difficult issue, and we are only
                    scratching the surface here. The details vary from system to system and are often
                    proprietary and poorly documented. To the programmer trying to write reason-

ably cache-friendly programs, we suggest adopting a mental model that assumes
write-back, write-allocate caches. There are several reasons for this suggestion: As
a rule, caches at lower levels of the memory hierarchy are more likely to use write-
back instead of write-through because of the larger transfer times. For example,
virtual memory systems (which use main memory as a cache for the blocks stored
on disk) use write-back exclusively. But as logic densities increase, the increased
complexity of write-back is becoming less of an impediment and we are seeing
write-back caches at all levels of modern systems. So this assumption matches cur-
rent trends. Another reason for assuming a write-back, write-allocate approach is
that it is symmetric to the way reads are handled, in that write-back write-allocate
tries to exploit locality. Thus, we can develop our programs at a high level to exhibit
good spatial and temporal locality rather than trying to optimize for a particular
memory system.

6.4.6 Anatomy of a Real Cache Hierarchy
So far, we have assumed that caches hold only program data. But, in fact, caches
can hold instructions as well as data. A cache that holds instructions only is called
an i-cache. A cache that holds program data only is called a d-cache. A cache that
holds both instructions and data is known as a unified cache. Modern processors
include separate i-caches and d-caches. There are a number of reasons for this.
With two separate caches, the processor can read an instruction word and a data
word at the same time. I-caches are typically read-only, and thus simpler. The
two caches are often optimized to different access patterns and can have different
block sizes, associativities, and capacities. Also, having separate caches ensures
that data accesses do not create conflict misses with instruction accesses, and vice
versa, at the cost of a potential increase in capacity misses.
     Figure 6.38 shows the cache hierarchy for the Intel Core i7 processor. Each
CPU chip has four cores. Each core has its own private L1 i-cache, L1 d-cache, and
L2 unified cache. All of the cores share an on-chip L3 unified cache. An interesting
feature of this hierarchy is that all of the SRAM cache memories are contained in
the CPU chip.
     Figure 6.39 summarizes the basic characteristics of the Core i7 caches.

6.4.7 Performance Impact of Cache Parameters
Cache performance is evaluated with a number of metrics:
  Miss rate. The fraction of memory references during the execution of a pro-
        gram, or a part of a program, that miss. It is computed as # misses/
        # references.
  Hit rate. The fraction of memory references that hit. It is computed as
       1 − miss rate.
  Hit time. The time to deliver a word in the cache to the CPU, including the time
         for set selection, line identification, and word selection. Hit time is on the
         order of several clock cycles for L1 caches.

Figure 6.38                       Processor package
Intel Core i7 cache                  Core 0                                        Core 3
hierarchy.
                                          Regs                                           Regs

                                           L1            L1                                L1           L1
                                        d-cache       i-cache           ...             d-cache      i-cache

                                          L2 unified cache                                L2 unified cache

                                                                  L3 unified cache
                                                                (shared by all cores)

                                                                   Main memory

Cache type            Access time (cycles)        Cache size (C)        Assoc. (E)          Block size (B)     Sets (S)
L1 i-cache                       4                    32 KB                    8                  64 B             64
L1 d-cache                       4                    32 KB                    8                  64 B             64
L2 unified cache                10                   256 KB                    8                  64 B            512
L3 unified cache             40–75                     8 MB                   16                  64 B          8,192

Figure 6.39 Characteristics of the Intel Core i7 cache hierarchy.

                        Miss penalty. Any additional time required because of a miss. The penalty for
                              L1 misses served from L2 is on the order of 10 cycles; from L3, 50 cycles;
                              and from main memory, 200 cycles.

                          Optimizing the cost and performance trade-offs of cache memories is a subtle
                      exercise that requires extensive simulation on realistic benchmark codes and thus
                      is beyond our scope. However, it is possible to identify some of the qualitative
                      trade-offs.

                      Impact of Cache Size
                      On the one hand, a larger cache will tend to increase the hit rate. On the other
                      hand, it is always harder to make large memories run faster. As a result, larger
                      caches tend to increase the hit time. This explains why an L1 cache is smaller than
                      an L2 cache, and an L2 cache is smaller than an L3 cache.
                                                             Section 6.5   Writing Cache-Friendly Code   669

Impact of Block Size
Large blocks are a mixed blessing. On the one hand, larger blocks can help
increase the hit rate by exploiting any spatial locality that might exist in a program.
However, for a given cache size, larger blocks imply a smaller number of cache
lines, which can hurt the hit rate in programs with more temporal locality than
spatial locality. Larger blocks also have a negative impact on the miss penalty,
since larger blocks cause larger transfer times. Modern systems such as the Core
i7 compromise with cache blocks that contain 64 bytes.

Impact of Associativity
The issue here is the impact of the choice of the parameter E, the number of
cache lines per set. The advantage of higher associativity (i.e., larger values of E)
is that it decreases the vulnerability of the cache to thrashing due to conflict misses.
However, higher associativity comes at a significant cost. Higher associativity is
expensive to implement and hard to make fast. It requires more tag bits per
line, additional LRU state bits per line, and additional control logic. Higher
associativity can increase hit time, because of the increased complexity, and it can
also increase the miss penalty because of the increased complexity of choosing a
victim line.
     The choice of associativity ultimately boils down to a trade-off between the
hit time and the miss penalty. Traditionally, high-performance systems that pushed
the clock rates would opt for smaller associativity for L1 caches (where the miss
penalty is only a few cycles) and a higher degree of associativity for the lower
levels, where the miss penalty is higher. For example, in Intel Core i7 systems, the
L1 and L2 caches are 8-way associative, and the L3 cache is 16-way.

Impact of Write Strategy
Write-through caches are simpler to implement and can use a write buffer that
works independently of the cache to update memory. Furthermore, read misses
are less expensive because they do not trigger a memory write. On the other
hand, write-back caches result in fewer transfers, which allows more bandwidth
to memory for I/O devices that perform DMA. Further, reducing the number of
transfers becomes increasingly important as we move down the hierarchy and the
transfer times increase. In general, caches further down the hierarchy are more
likely to use write-back than write-through.

6.5 Writing Cache-Friendly Code
In Section 6.2, we introduced the idea of locality and talked in qualitative terms
about what constitutes good locality. Now that we understand how cache memo-
ries work, we can be more precise. Programs with better locality will tend to have
lower miss rates, and programs with lower miss rates will tend to run faster than
programs with higher miss rates. Thus, good programmers should always try to

 Aside         Cache lines, sets, and blocks: What’s the difference?
 It is easy to confuse the distinction between cache lines, sets, and blocks. Let’s review these ideas and
 make sure they are clear:

      .   A block is a fixed-size packet of information that moves back and forth between a cache and main
          memory (or a lower-level cache).
      .   A line is a container in a cache that stores a block, as well as other information such as the valid
          bit and the tag bits.
      .   A set is a collection of one or more lines. Sets in direct-mapped caches consist of a single line. Sets
          in set associative and fully associative caches consist of multiple lines.

 In direct-mapped caches, sets and lines are indeed equivalent. However, in associative caches, sets and
 lines are very different things and the terms cannot be used interchangeably.
      Since a line always stores a single block, the terms “line” and “block” are often used interchange-
 ably. For example, systems professionals usually refer to the “line size” of a cache, when what they
 really mean is the block size. This usage is very common and shouldn’t cause any confusion as long as
 you understand the distinction between blocks and lines.

                         write code that is cache friendly, in the sense that it has good locality. Here is the
                         basic approach we use to try to ensure that our code is cache friendly.

                          1. Make the common case go fast. Programs often spend most of their time in a
                             few core functions. These functions often spend most of their time in a few
                             loops. So focus on the inner loops of the core functions and ignore the rest.
                          2. Minimize the number of cache misses in each inner loop. All other things being
                             equal, such as the total number of loads and stores, loops with better miss rates
                             will run faster.

                             To see how this works in practice, consider the sumvec function from Sec-
                         tion 6.2:

                          1    int sumvec(int v[N])
                          2    {
                          3        int i, sum = 0;
                          4
                          5         for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
                          6             sum += v[i];
                          7         return sum;
                          8    }

                         Is this function cache friendly? First, notice that there is good temporal locality in
                         the loop body with respect to the local variables i and sum. In fact, because these
                         are local variables, any reasonable optimizing compiler will cache them in the
                         register file, the highest level of the memory hierarchy. Now consider the stride-
                         1 references to vector v. In general, if a cache has a block size of B bytes, then a
                                                                      Section 6.5   Writing Cache-Friendly Code     671

stride-k reference pattern (where k is expressed in words) results in an average of
min (1, (word size × k)/B) misses per loop iteration. This is minimized for k = 1,
so the stride-1 references to v are indeed cache friendly. For example, suppose
that v is block aligned, words are 4 bytes, cache blocks are 4 words, and the cache
is initially empty (a cold cache). Then, regardless of the cache organization, the
references to v will result in the following pattern of hits and misses:
v[i]                                 i=0        i=1        i=2     i=3         i=4        i=5       i=6     i=7
Access order, [h]it or [m]iss        1 [m]      2 [h]      3 [h]   4 [h]       5 [m]      6 [h]     7 [h]   8 [h]

    In this example, the reference to v[0] misses and the corresponding block,
which contains v[0]–v[3], is loaded into the cache from memory. Thus, the next
three references are all hits. The reference to v[4] causes another miss as a new
block is loaded into the cache, the next three references are hits, and so on. In
general, three out of four references will hit, which is the best we can do in this
case with a cold cache.
    To summarize, our simple sumvec example illustrates two important points
about writing cache-friendly code:
     .
         Repeated references to local variables are good because the compiler can
         cache them in the register file (temporal locality).
     .
         Stride-1 reference patterns are good because caches at all levels of the memory
         hierarchy store data as contiguous blocks (spatial locality).
    Spatial locality is especially important in programs that operate on multi-
dimensional arrays. For example, consider the sumarrayrows function from Sec-
tion 6.2, which sums the elements of a two-dimensional array in row-major order:
 1        int sumarrayrows(int a[M][N])
 2        {
 3            int i, j, sum = 0;
 4
 5             for (i = 0; i < M; i++)
 6                 for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
 7                     sum += a[i][j];
 8             return sum;
 9        }

     Since C stores arrays in row-major order, the inner loop of this function has
the same desirable stride-1 access pattern as sumvec. For example, suppose we
make the same assumptions about the cache as for sumvec. Then the references
to the array a will result in the following pattern of hits and misses:
a[i][j]           j =0      j =1       j =2        j =3        j =4        j =5        j =6       j =7
i=0               1 [m]      2 [h]      3 [h]      4 [h]       5 [m]        6 [h]       7 [h]      8 [h]
i=1               9 [m]     10 [h]     11 [h]     12 [h]      13 [m]       14 [h]      15 [h]     16 [h]
i=2              17 [m]     18 [h]     19 [h]     20 [h]      21 [m]       22 [h]      23 [h]     24 [h]
i=3              25 [m]     26 [h]     27 [h]     28 [h]      29 [m]       30 [h]      31 [h]     32 [h]

                       But consider what happens if we make the seemingly innocuous change of
                    permuting the loops:
                     1     int sumarraycols(int a[M][N])
                     2     {
                     3         int i, j, sum = 0;
                     4
                     5           for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
                     6               for (i = 0; i < M; i++)
                     7                   sum += a[i][j];
                     8           return sum;
                     9     }

                    In this case, we are scanning the array column by column instead of row by row.
                    If we are lucky and the entire array fits in the cache, then we will enjoy the same
                    miss rate of 1/4. However, if the array is larger than the cache (the more likely
                    case), then each and every access of a[i][j] will miss!
          a[i][j]        j =0      j =1     j =2       j =3       j =4       j =5       j =6      j =7
          i=0            1 [m]     5 [m]   9 [m]      13 [m]     17 [m]     21 [m]     25 [m]     29 [m]
          i=1            2 [m]     6 [m]   10 [m]     14 [m]     18 [m]     22 [m]     26 [m]     30 [m]
          i=2            3 [m]     7 [m]   11 [m]     15 [m]     19 [m]     23 [m]     27 [m]     31 [m]
          i=3            4 [m]     8 [m]   12 [m]     16 [m]     20 [m]     24 [m]     28 [m]     32 [m]

                         Higher miss rates can have a significant impact on running time. For example,
                    on our desktop machine, sumarrayrows runs 25 times faster than sumarraycols
                    for large array sizes. To summarize, programmers should be aware of locality in
                    their programs and try to write programs that exploit it.

                    Practice Problem 6.17 (solution page 701)
                    Transposing the rows and columns of a matrix is an important problem in signal
                    processing and scientific computing applications. It is also interesting from a local-
                    ity point of view because its reference pattern is both row-wise and column-wise.
                    For example, consider the following transpose routine:
                     1     typedef int array[2][2];
                     2
                     3     void transpose1(array dst, array src)
                     4     {
                     5         int i, j;
                     6
                     7           for (i = 0; i < 2; i++) {
                     8               for (j = 0; j < 2; j++) {
                     9                   dst[j][i] = src[i][j];
                    10               }
                    11           }
                    12     }
                                                              Section 6.5    Writing Cache-Friendly Code   673

        Assume this code runs on a machine with the following properties:
    .
        sizeof(int) = 4.
    .
        The src array starts at address 0 and the dst array starts at address 16
        (decimal).
    .
        There is a single L1 data cache that is direct-mapped, write-through, and write-
        allocate, with a block size of 8 bytes.
    .
        The cache has a total size of 16 data bytes and the cache is initially empty.
    .
        Accesses to the src and dst arrays are the only sources of read and write
        misses, respectively.

    A. For each row and col, indicate whether the access to src[row][col] and
       dst[row][col] is a hit (h) or a miss (m). For example, reading src[0][0]
       is a miss and writing dst[0][0] is also a miss.

                     dst array                              src array
                     Col. 0        Col. 1                   Col. 0          Col. 1
         Row 0         m                        Row0          m
         Row 1                                  Row 1

    B. Repeat the problem for a cache with 32 data bytes.

Practice Problem 6.18 (solution page 702)
The heart of the recent hit game SimAquarium is a tight loop that calculates the
average position of 512 algae. You are evaluating its cache performance on a
machine with a 2,048-byte direct-mapped data cache with 32-byte blocks (B = 32).
You are given the following definitions:

1        struct algae_position {
2            int x;
3            int y;
4        };
5
6        struct algae_position grid[32][32];
7        int total_x = 0, total_y = 0;
8        int i, j;

        You should also assume the following:
    .
        sizeof(int) = 4.
    .
        grid begins at memory address 0.
    .
        The cache is initially empty.
    .
        The only memory accesses are to the entries of the array grid. Variables i, j,
        total_x, and total_y are stored in registers.

                         Determine the cache performance for the following code:
                     1        for (i = 31; i >= 0; i--) {
                     2            for (j = 31; j >= 0; j--) {
                     3                total_x += grid[i][j].x;
                     4            }
                     5        }
                     6
                     7        for (i = 31; i >= 0; i--) {
                     8            for (j = 31; j >= 0; j--) {
                     9                total_y += grid[i][j].y;
                    10            }
                    11        }

                     A. What is the total number of reads?
                     B. What is the total number of reads that miss in the cache?
                     C. What is the miss rate?

                    Practice Problem 6.19 (solution page 702)
                    Given the assumptions of Practice Problem 6.18, determine the cache perfor-
                    mance of the following code:
                     1        for (i = 31; i >= 0; i--){
                     2            for (j = 31; j >= 0; j--) {
                     3                total_x += grid[j][i].x;
                     4                total_y += grid[j][i].y;
                     5            }
                     6        }

                     A. What is the total number of reads?
                     B. What is the total number of reads that hit in the cache?
                     C. What is the hit rate?
                     D. What would the miss hit be if the cache were twice as big?

                    Practice Problem 6.20 (solution page 702)
                    Given the assumptions of Practice Problem 6.18, determine the cache perfor-
                    mance of the following code:
                     1        for (i = 31; i >= 0; i--){
                     2            for (j = 31; j >= 0; j--) {
                     3                total_x += grid[i][j].x;
                     4                total_y += grid[i][j].y;
                     5            }
                     6        }

  A. What is the total number of reads?
  B. What is the total number of reads that hit in the cache?
  C. What is the hit rate?
  D. What would the hit rate be if the cache were twice as big?

6.6 Putting It Together: The Impact of Caches
    on Program Performance
This section wraps up our discussion of the memory hierarchy by studying the im-
pact that caches have on the performance of programs running on real machines.

6.6.1 The Memory Mountain
The rate that a program reads data from the memory system is called the read
throughput, or sometimes the read bandwidth. If a program reads n bytes over a
period of s seconds, then the read throughput over that period is n/s, typically
expressed in units of megabytes per second (MB/s).
     If we were to write a program that issued a sequence of read requests from
a tight program loop, then the measured read throughput would give us some
insight into the performance of the memory system for that particular sequence
of reads. Figure 6.40 shows a pair of functions that measure the read throughput
for a particular read sequence.
     The test function generates the read sequence by scanning the first elems
elements of an array with a stride of stride. To increase the available parallelism
in the inner loop, it uses 4 × 4 unrolling (Section 5.9). The run function is a wrapper
that calls the test function and returns the measured read throughput. The call
to the test function in line 37 warms the cache. The fcyc2 function in line 38 calls
the test function with arguments elems and estimates the running time of the
test function in CPU cycles. Notice that the size argument to the run function is
in units of bytes, while the corresponding elems argument to the test function is
in units of array elements. Also, notice that line 39 computes MB/s as 106 bytes/s,
as opposed to 220 bytes/s.
     The size and stride arguments to the run function allow us to control the
degree of temporal and spatial locality in the resulting read sequence. Smaller
values of size result in a smaller working set size, and thus better temporal
locality. Smaller values of stride result in better spatial locality. If we call the run
function repeatedly with different values of size and stride, then we can recover
a fascinating two-dimensional function of read throughput versus temporal and
spatial locality. This function is called a memory mountain [112].
     Every computer has a unique memory mountain that characterizes the ca-
pabilities of its memory system. For example, Figure 6.41 shows the memory
mountain for an Intel Core i7 Haswell system. In this example, the size varies
from 16 KB to 128 MB, and the stride varies from 1 to 12 elements, where each
element is an 8-byte long int.

                                                                          code/mem/mountain/mountain.c
 1    long data[MAXELEMS];           /* The global array we’ll be traversing */
 2
 3    /* test - Iterate over first "elems" elements of array "data" with
 4      *        stride of "stride", using 4 x 4 loop unrolling.
 5      */
 6    int test(int elems, int stride)
 7    {
 8         long i, sx2 = stride*2, sx3 = stride*3, sx4 = stride*4;
 9         long acc0 = 0, acc1 = 0, acc2 = 0, acc3 = 0;
10         long length = elems;
11         long limit = length - sx4;
12
13           /* Combine 4 elements at a time */
14           for (i = 0; i < limit; i += sx4) {
15               acc0 = acc0 + data[i];
16               acc1 = acc1 + data[i+stride];
17               acc2 = acc2 + data[i+sx2];
18               acc3 = acc3 + data[i+sx3];
19           }
20
21           /* Finish any remaining elements */
22           for (; i < length; i++) {
23               acc0 = acc0 + data[i];
24           }
25           return ((acc0 + acc1) + (acc2 + acc3));
26    }
27
28    /* run - Run test(elems, stride) and return read throughput (MB/s).
29      *       "size" is in bytes, "stride" is in array elements, and Mhz is
30      *       CPU clock frequency in Mhz.
31      */
32    double run(int size, int stride, double Mhz)
33    {
34         double cycles;
35         int elems = size / sizeof(double);
36
37           test(elems, stride);                     /* Warm up the cache */
38           cycles = fcyc2(test, elems, stride, 0); /* Call test(elems,stride) */
39           return (size / stride) / (cycles / Mhz); /* Convert cycles to MB/s */
40    }
                                                                          code/mem/mountain/mountain.c

Figure 6.40 Functions that measure and compute read throughput. We can generate a memory mountain
for a particular computer by calling the run function with different values of size (which corresponds to
temporal locality) and stride (which corresponds to spatial locality).

                                       Slopes
                                       of spatial
                                       locality
                                                                                                                                 Core i7 Haswell
                         16,000                                                                                                  2.1 GHz
                                                                                                                                 32 KB L1 d-cache
                         14,000                                                                              L1                  256 KB L2 cache
                                                                                                                                 8 MB L3 cache
Read throughput (MB/s)

                         12,000                                                                                                  64 B block size

                         10,000

                          8,000

                           6,000                                                                   L2                               Ridges of
                                                                                                                                    temporal
                                                                                                                                    locality
                           4,000

                           2,000
                               0                                                         L3
                                  0
                                      s1                                                                                  32 K
                                            s3                             Mem                                    128 K
                                                    s5                                                    512 K
                                                                                                    2M
                                                          s7
                                      Stride (x8 bytes)            s9                         8M
                                                                                                         Size (bytes)
                                                                                       32 M
                                                                         s11
                                                                               128 M

Figure 6.41 A memory mountain. Shows read throughput as a function of temporal and spatial locality.

     The geography of the Core i7 mountain reveals a rich structure. Perpendicular
to the size axis are four ridges that correspond to the regions of temporal locality
where the working set fits entirely in the L1 cache, L2 cache, L3 cache, and
main memory, respectively. Notice that there is more than an order of magnitude
difference between the highest peak of the L1 ridge, where the CPU reads at a
rate of over 14 GB/s, and the lowest point of the main memory ridge, where the
CPU reads at a rate of 900 MB/s.
     On each of the L2, L3, and main memory ridges, there is a slope of spatial
locality that falls downhill as the stride increases and spatial locality decreases.
Notice that even when the working set is too large to fit in any of the caches, the
highest point on the main memory ridge is a factor of 8 higher than its lowest point.
So even when a program has poor temporal locality, spatial locality can still come
to the rescue and make a significant difference.
     There is a particularly interesting flat ridge line that extends perpendicular
to the stride axis for a stride of 1, where the read throughput is a relatively flat
12 GB/s, even though the working set exceeds the capacities of L1 and L2. This
is apparently due to a hardware prefetching mechanism in the Core i7 memory
system that automatically identifies sequential stride-1 reference patterns and
attempts to fetch those blocks into the cache before they are accessed. While the

                                                          Main memory                        L3 cache                         L2 cache         L1 cache
                                                             region                           region                           region           region
                                             14,000

                                             12,000
                    Read throughput (MB/s)

                                             10,000

                                              8,000

                                              6,000

                                              4,000

                                              2,000

                                                 0
                                                      128 M

                                                              64 M

                                                                     32 M

                                                                            16 M

                                                                                   8M

                                                                                        4M

                                                                                               2M

                                                                                                    1,024 K

                                                                                                              512 K

                                                                                                                      256 K

                                                                                                                                128 K

                                                                                                                                        64 K

                                                                                                                                               32 K

                                                                                                                                                      16 K
                                                                                        Working set size (bytes)

Figure 6.42 Ridges of temporal locality in the memory mountain. The graph shows
                    a slice through Figure 6.41 with stride = 8.

                    details of the particular prefetching algorithm are not documented, it is clear from
                    the memory mountain that the algorithm works best for small strides—yet another
                    reason to favor sequential stride-1 accesses in your code.
                         If we take a slice through the mountain, holding the stride constant as in Fig-
                    ure 6.42, we can see the impact of cache size and temporal locality on performance.
                    For sizes up to 32 KB, the working set fits entirely in the L1 d-cache, and thus
                    reads are served from L1 at throughput of about 12 GB/s. For sizes up to 256 KB,
                    the working set fits entirely in the unified L2 cache, and for sizes up to 8 MB, the
                    working set fits entirely in the unified L3 cache. Larger working set sizes are served
                    primarily from main memory.
                         The dips in read throughputs at the leftmost edges of the L2 and L3 cache
                    regions—where the working set sizes of 256 KB and 8 MB are equal to their
                    respective cache sizes—are interesting. It is not entirely clear why these dips occur.
                    The only way to be sure is to perform a detailed cache simulation, but it is likely
                    that the drops are caused by conflicts with other code and data lines.
                         Slicing through the memory mountain in the opposite direction, holding the
                    working set size constant, gives us some insight into the impact of spatial locality on
                    the read throughput. For example, Figure 6.43 shows the slice for a fixed working
                    set size of 4 MB. This slice cuts along the L3 ridge in Figure 6.41, where the working
                    set fits entirely in the L3 cache but is too large for the L2 cache.
                         Notice how the read throughput decreases steadily as the stride increases from
                    one to eight words. In this region of the mountain, a read miss in L2 causes a
                    block to be transferred from L3 to L2. This is followed by some number of hits

                         12,000

                         10,000
Read throughput (MB/s)

                          8,000

                          6,000

                                                                                  One access
                          4,000
                                                                                 per cache line

                          2,000

                             0
                                  s1   s2   s3     s4    s5    s6   s7      s8      s9   s10 s11
                                                        Stride (x8 bytes)

Figure 6.43 A slope of spatial locality. The graph shows a slice through Figure 6.41
with size = 4 MB.

on the block in L2, depending on the stride. As the stride increases, the ratio of
L2 misses to L2 hits increases. Since misses are served more slowly than hits, the
read throughput decreases. Once the stride reaches eight 8-byte words, which on
this system equals the block size of 64 bytes, every read request misses in L2 and
must be served from L3. Thus, the read throughput for strides of at least eight is
a constant rate determined by the rate that cache blocks can be transferred from
L3 into L2.
     To summarize our discussion of the memory mountain, the performance of the
memory system is not characterized by a single number. Instead, it is a mountain
of temporal and spatial locality whose elevations can vary by over an order of
magnitude. Wise programmers try to structure their programs so that they run in
the peaks instead of the valleys. The aim is to exploit temporal locality so that
heavily used words are fetched from the L1 cache, and to exploit spatial locality
so that as many words as possible are accessed from a single L1 cache line.

Practice Problem 6.21 (solution page 702)
Use the memory mountain in Figure 6.41 to estimate the time, in CPU cycles, to
read a 16-byte word from the L1 d-cache.

6.6.2 Rearranging Loops to Increase Spatial Locality
Consider the problem of multiplying a pair of n × n matrices: C = AB. For exam-
ple, if n = 2, then
                                                           
                      c11 c12       a11 a12      b11 b12
                                =
                      c21 c22       a21 a22      b21 b22

                    where
                                                          c11 = a11b11 + a12 b21
                                                          c12 = a11b12 + a12 b22
                                                          c21 = a21b11 + a22 b21
                                                          c22 = a21b12 + a22 b22
                    A matrix multiply function is usually implemented using three nested loops, which
                    are identified by their indices i, j , and k. If we permute the loops and make some
                    other minor code changes, we can create the six functionally equivalent versions
                    of matrix multiply shown in Figure 6.44. Each version is uniquely identified by the
                    ordering of its loops.
                         At a high level, the six versions are quite similar. If addition is associative,
                    then each version computes an identical result.1 Each version performs O(n3) total
                    operations and an identical number of adds and multiplies. Each of the n2 elements
                    of A and B is read n times. Each of the n2 elements of C is computed by summing
                    n values. However, if we analyze the behavior of the innermost loop iterations, we
                    find that there are differences in the number of accesses and the locality. For the
                    purposes of this analysis, we make the following assumptions:
                      .
                          Each array is an n × n array of double, with sizeof(double) = 8.
                      .
                          There is a single cache with a 32-byte block size (B = 32).
                      .
                          The array size n is so large that a single matrix row does not fit in the L1 cache.
                      .
                          The compiler stores local variables in registers, and thus references to local
                          variables inside loops do not require any load or store instructions.

                         Figure 6.45 summarizes the results of our inner-loop analysis. Notice that the
                    six versions pair up into three equivalence classes, which we denote by the pair of
                    matrices that are accessed in the inner loop. For example, versions ij k and j ik are
                    members of class AB because they reference arrays A and B (but not C) in their
                    innermost loop. For each class, we have counted the number of loads (reads) and
                    stores (writes) in each inner-loop iteration, the number of references to A, B, and
                    C that will miss in the cache in each loop iteration, and the total number of cache
                    misses per iteration.
                         The inner loops of the class AB routines (Figure 6.44(a) and (b)) scan a row
                    of array A with a stride of 1. Since each cache block holds four 8-byte words, the
                    miss rate for A is 0.25 misses per iteration. On the other hand, the inner loop scans
                    a column of B with a stride of n. Since n is large, each access of array B results in
                    a miss, for a total of 1.25 misses per iteration.
                         The inner loops in the class AC routines (Figure 6.44(c) and (d)) have some
                    problems. Each iteration performs two loads and a store (as opposed to the

                    1. As we learned in Chapter 2, floating-point addition is commutative, but in general not associative.
                    In practice, if the matrices do not mix extremely large values with extremely small ones, as often is
                    true when the matrices store physical properties, then the assumption of associativity is reasonable.

(a) Version ij k                                          (b) Version j ik
                           code/mem/matmult/mm.c                                        code/mem/matmult/mm.c
 1    for (i = 0; i < n; i++)                                 1   for (j = 0; j < n; j++)
 2        for (j = 0; j < n; j++) {                           2       for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
 3            sum = 0.0;                                      3           sum = 0.0;
 4            for (k = 0; k < n; k++)                         4           for (k = 0; k < n; k++)
 5                sum += A[i][k]*B[k][j];                     5               sum += A[i][k]*B[k][j];
 6            C[i][j] += sum;                                 6           C[i][j] += sum;
 7        }                                                   7       }
                           code/mem/matmult/mm.c                                        code/mem/matmult/mm.c

(c) Version j ki                                          (d) Version kj i
                           code/mem/matmult/mm.c                                        code/mem/matmult/mm.c
 1    for (j = 0; j < n; j++)                                 1   for (k = 0; k < n; k++)
 2        for (k = 0; k < n; k++) {                           2       for (j = 0; j < n; j++) {
 3            r = B[k][j];                                    3           r = B[k][j];
 4            for (i = 0; i < n; i++)                         4           for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
 5                C[i][j] += A[i][k]*r;                       5               C[i][j] += A[i][k]*r;
 6        }                                                   6       }
                           code/mem/matmult/mm.c                                        code/mem/matmult/mm.c

(e) Version kij                                           (f) Version ikj
                           code/mem/matmult/mm.c                                        code/mem/matmult/mm.c
 1    for (k = 0; k < n; k++)                                 1   for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
 2        for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {                           2       for (k = 0; k < n; k++) {
 3            r = A[i][k];                                    3           r = A[i][k];
 4            for (j = 0; j < n; j++)                         4           for (j = 0; j < n; j++)
 5                C[i][j] += r*B[k][j];                       5               C[i][j] += r*B[k][j];
 6        }                                                   6       }
                           code/mem/matmult/mm.c                                        code/mem/matmult/mm.c

Figure 6.44 Six versions of matrix multiply. Each version is uniquely identified by the ordering of its loops.

Matrix multiply                                  Per iteration
version (class)    Loads     Stores    A misses     B misses      C misses   Total misses
ij k & j ik (AB)     2         0          0.25         1.00         0.00         1.25
j ki & kj i (AC)     2         1          1.00         0.00         1.00         2.00
kij & ikj (BC)       2         1          0.00         0.25         0.25         0.50

Figure 6.45 Analysis of matrix multiply inner loops. The six versions partition into
three equivalence classes, denoted by the pair of arrays that are accessed in the inner
loop.

                                                      100

                    Cycles per inner-loop iteration

                                                                                                                           jki
                                                                                                                           kji
                                                                                                                           ijk
                                                       10
                                                                                                                           jik
                                                                                                                           kij
                                                                                                                           ikj

                                                          1
                                                              50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700
                                                                                   Array size (n)

Figure 6.46 Core i7 matrix multiply performance.

                    class AB routines, which perform two loads and no stores). Second, the inner
                    loop scans the columns of A and C with a stride of n. The result is a miss on each
                    load, for a total of two misses per iteration. Notice that interchanging the loops
                    has decreased the amount of spatial locality compared to the class AB routines.
                         The BC routines (Figure 6.44(e) and (f)) present an interesting trade-off: With
                    two loads and a store, they require one more memory operation than the AB
                    routines. On the other hand, since the inner loop scans both B and C row-wise
                    with a stride-1 access pattern, the miss rate on each array is only 0.25 misses per
                    iteration, for a total of 0.50 misses per iteration.
                         Figure 6.46 summarizes the performance of different versions of matrix mul-
                    tiply on a Core i7 system. The graph plots the measured number of CPU cycles
                    per inner-loop iteration as a function of array size (n).
                         There are a number of interesting points to notice about this graph:

                                                      .
                                                          For large values of n, the fastest version runs almost 40 times faster than the
                                                          slowest version, even though each performs the same number of floating-point
                                                          arithmetic operations.
                                                      .
                                                          Pairs of versions with the same number of memory references and misses per
                                                          iteration have almost identical measured performance.
                                                      .
                                                          The two versions with the worst memory behavior, in terms of the number of
                                                          accesses and misses per iteration, run significantly slower than the other four
                                                          versions, which have fewer misses or fewer accesses, or both.
                                                      .
                                                          Miss rate, in this case, is a better predictor of performance than the total
                                                          number of memory accesses. For example, the class BC routines, with 0.5
                                                          misses per iteration, perform much better than the class AB routines, with
                                                          1.25 misses per iteration, even though the class BC routines perform more

 Web Aside MEM:BLOCKING                   Using blocking to increase temporal locality
 There is an interesting technique called blocking that can improve the temporal locality of inner loops.
 The general idea of blocking is to organize the data structures in a program into large chunks called
 blocks. (In this context, “block” refers to an application-level chunk of data, not to a cache block.) The
 program is structured so that it loads a chunk into the L1 cache, does all the reads and writes that it
 needs to on that chunk, then discards the chunk, loads in the next chunk, and so on.
      Unlike the simple loop transformations for improving spatial locality, blocking makes the code
 harder to read and understand. For this reason, it is best suited for optimizing compilers or frequently
 executed library routines. Blocking does not improve the performance of matrix multiply on the Core
 i7, because of its sophisticated prefetching hardware. Still, the technique is interesting to study and
 understand because it is a general concept that can produce big performance gains on systems that
 don’t prefetch.

      memory references in the inner loop (two loads and one store) than the class
      AB routines (two loads).
  .
      For large values of n, the performance of the fastest pair of versions (kij and
      ikj ) is constant. Even though the array is much larger than any of the SRAM
      cache memories, the prefetching hardware is smart enough to recognize the
      stride-1 access pattern, and fast enough to keep up with memory accesses
      in the tight inner loop. This is a stunning accomplishment by the Intel engi-
      neers who designed this memory system, providing even more incentive for
      programmers to develop programs with good spatial locality.

6.6.3 Exploiting Locality in Your Programs
As we have seen, the memory system is organized as a hierarchy of storage
devices, with smaller, faster devices toward the top and larger, slower devices
toward the bottom. Because of this hierarchy, the effective rate that a program
can access memory locations is not characterized by a single number. Rather, it is
a wildly varying function of program locality (what we have dubbed the memory
mountain) that can vary by orders of magnitude. Programs with good locality
access most of their data from fast cache memories. Programs with poor locality
access most of their data from the relatively slow DRAM main memory.
    Programmers who understand the nature of the memory hierarchy can ex-
ploit this understanding to write more efficient programs, regardless of the specific
memory system organization. In particular, we recommend the following tech-
niques:
  .
      Focus your attention on the inner loops, where the bulk of the computations
      and memory accesses occur.
  .
      Try to maximize the spatial locality in your programs by reading data objects
      sequentially, with stride 1, in the order they are stored in memory.
  .
      Try to maximize the temporal locality in your programs by using a data object
      as often as possible once it has been read from memory.

                    6.7    Summary
                    The basic storage technologies are random access memories (RAMs), nonvolatile
                    memories (ROMs), and disks. RAM comes in two basic forms. Static RAM
                    (SRAM) is faster and more expensive and is used for cache memories. Dynamic
                    RAM (DRAM) is slower and less expensive and is used for the main memory and
                    graphics frame buffers. ROMs retain their information even if the supply voltage
                    is turned off. They are used to store firmware. Rotating disks are mechanical non-
                    volatile storage devices that hold enormous amounts of data at a low cost per bit,
                    but with much longer access times than DRAM. Solid state disks (SSDs) based
                    on nonvolatile flash memory are becoming increasingly attractive alternatives to
                    rotating disks for some applications.
                         In general, faster storage technologies are more expensive per bit and have
                    smaller capacities. The price and performance properties of these technologies
                    are changing at dramatically different rates. In particular, DRAM and disk access
                    times are much larger than CPU cycle times. Systems bridge these gaps by orga-
                    nizing memory as a hierarchy of storage devices, with smaller, faster devices at
                    the top and larger, slower devices at the bottom. Because well-written programs
                    have good locality, most data are served from the higher levels, and the effect is
                    a memory system that runs at the rate of the higher levels, but at the cost and
                    capacity of the lower levels.
                         Programmers can dramatically improve the running times of their programs
                    by writing programs with good spatial and temporal locality. Exploiting SRAM-
                    based cache memories is especially important. Programs that fetch data primarily
                    from cache memories can run much faster than programs that fetch data primarily
                    from memory.

                    Bibliographic Notes
                    Memory and disk technologies change rapidly. In our experience, the best sources
                    of technical information are the Web pages maintained by the manufacturers.
                    Companies such as Micron, Toshiba, and Samsung provide a wealth of current
                    technical information on memory devices. The pages for Seagate and Western
                    Digital provide similarly useful information about disks.
                         Textbooks on circuit and logic design provide detailed information about
                    memory technology [58, 89]. IEEE Spectrum published a series of survey arti-
                    cles on DRAM [55]. The International Symposiums on Computer Architecture
                    (ISCA) and High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) are common fo-
                    rums for characterizations of DRAM memory performance [28, 29, 18].
                         Wilkes wrote the first paper on cache memories [117]. Smith wrote a clas-
                    sic survey [104]. Przybylski wrote an authoritative book on cache design [86].
                    Hennessy and Patterson provide a comprehensive discussion of cache design is-
                    sues [46]. Levinthal wrote a comprehensive performance guide for the Intel Core
                    i7 [70].
                         Stricker introduced the idea of the memory mountain as a comprehensive
                    characterization of the memory system in [112] and suggested the term “memory
                    mountain” informally in later presentations of the work. Compiler researchers
                                                                               Homework Problems   685

work to increase locality by automatically performing the kinds of manual code
transformations we discussed in Section 6.6 [22, 32, 66, 72, 79, 87, 119]. Carter
and colleagues have proposed a cache-aware memory controller [17]. Other re-
searchers have developed cache-oblivious algorithms that are designed to run well
without any explicit knowledge of the structure of the underlying cache mem-
ory [30, 38, 39, 9].
    There is a large body of literature on building and using disk storage. Many
storage researchers look for ways to aggregate individual disks into larger, more
robust, and more secure storage pools [20, 40, 41, 83, 121]. Others look for ways
to use caches and locality to improve the performance of disk accesses [12, 21].
Systems such as Exokernel provide increased user-level control of disk and mem-
ory resources [57]. Systems such as the Andrew File System [78] and Coda [94]
extend the memory hierarchy across computer networks and mobile notebook
computers. Schindler and Ganger developed an interesting tool that automatically
characterizes the geometry and performance of SCSI disk drives [95]. Researchers
have investigated techniques for building and using flash-based SSDs [8, 81].

Homework Problems
6.22 ◆◆
Suppose you are asked to design a rotating disk where the number of bits per
track is constant. You know that the number of bits per track is determined
by the circumference of the innermost track, which you can assume is also the
circumference of the hole. Thus, if you make the hole in the center of the disk
larger, the number of bits per track increases, but the total number of tracks
decreases. If you let r denote the radius of the platter, and x . r the radius of the
hole, what value of x maximizes the capacity of the disk?

6.23 ◆
Estimate the average time (in ms) to access a sector on the following disk:

Parameter                              Value
Rotational rate                     12,000 RPM
Tavg seek                               3 ms
Average number of sectors/track         500

6.24 ◆◆
Suppose that a 2 MB file consisting of 512-byte logical blocks is stored on a disk
drive with the following characteristics:

Parameter                              Value
Rotational rate                     18,000 RPM
Tavg seek                               8 ms
Average number of sectors/track         2,000
Surfaces                                  4
Sector size                          512 bytes

                         For each case below, suppose that a program reads the logical blocks of the
                    file sequentially, one after the other, and that the time to position the head over
                    the first block is Tavg seek + Tavg rotation .
                         A. Best case: Estimate the optimal time (in ms) required to read the file given
                            the best possible mapping of logical blocks to disk sectors (i.e., sequential).
                         B. Random case: Estimate the time (in ms) required to read the file if blocks
                            are mapped randomly to disk sectors.

                    6.25 ◆
                    The following table gives the parameters for a number of different caches. For
                    each cache, fill in the missing fields in the table. Recall that m is the number of
                    physical address bits, C is the cache size (number of data bytes), B is the block
                    size in bytes, E is the associativity, S is the number of cache sets, t is the number of
                    tag bits, s is the number of set index bits, and b is the number of block offset bits.

                    Cache        m       C       B       E          S            t           s          b
                    1.           32     1,024     4        4
                    2.           32     1,024     4      256
                    3.           32     1,024     8        1
                    4.           32     1,024     8      128
                    5.           32     1,024    32        1
                    6.           32     1,024    32        4

                    6.26 ◆
                    The following table gives the parameters for a number of different caches. Your
                    task is to fill in the missing fields in the table. Recall that m is the number of physical
                    address bits, C is the cache size (number of data bytes), B is the block size in bytes,
                    E is the associativity, S is the number of cache sets, t is the number of tag bits, s is
                    the number of set index bits, and b is the number of block offset bits.

                    Cache       m       C          B           E           S          t          s          b
                    1.          32                   8         1                     21          8          3
                    2.          32     2,048                              128        23          7          2
                    3.          32     1,024         2         8           64                               1
                    4.          32     1,024                   2          16         23          4

                    6.27 ◆
                    This problem concerns the cache in Practice Problem 6.12.
                         A. List all of the hex memory addresses that will hit in set 1.
                         B. List all of the hex memory addresses that will hit in set 6.

                    6.28 ◆◆
                    This problem concerns the cache in Practice Problem 6.12.
                         A. List all of the hex memory addresses that will hit in set 2.
                                                                                            Homework Problems   687

 B. List all of the hex memory addresses that will hit in set 4.
 C. List all of the hex memory addresses that will hit in set 5.
 D. List all of the hex memory addresses that will hit in set 7.

6.29 ◆◆
Suppose we have a system with the following properties:
  .
      The memory is byte addressable.
  .
      Memory accesses are to 1-byte words (not to 4-byte words).
  .
      Addresses are 12 bits wide.
  .
      The cache is two-way set associative (E = 2), with a 4-byte block size (B = 4)
      and four sets (S = 4).

The contents of the cache are as follows, with all addresses, tags, and values given
in hexadecimal notation:

Set index       Tag        Valid    Byte 0       Byte 1       Byte 2       Byte 3
      0          00         1           40           41        42           43
                 83         1           FE           97        CC           D0
      1          00         1           44           45        46           47
                 83         0           —            —         —            —
      2          00         1           48           49        4A           4B
                 40         0           —            —         —            —
      3          FF         1           9A           C0        03           FF
                 00         0           —            —         —            —

 A. The following diagram shows the format of an address (1 bit per box).
    Indicate (by labeling the diagram) the fields that would be used to determine
    the following:
            CO. The cache block offset
            CI. The cache set index
            CT. The cache tag

           12   11    10        9   8        7   6        5   4        3    2       1   0

 B. For each of the following memory accesses, indicate if it will be a cache hit
    or miss when carried out in sequence as listed. Also give the value of a read
    if it can be inferred from the information in the cache.

          Operation    Address           Hit?        Read value (or unknown)
           Read         0x834
           Write        0x836
           Read        0xFFD

                      6.30 ◆
                      Suppose we have a system with the following properties:
                         .
                             The memory is byte addressable.
                         .
                             Memory accesses are to 1-byte words (not to 4-byte words).
                         .
                             Addresses are 13 bits wide.
                         .
                             The cache is 4-way set associative (E = 4), with a 4-byte block size (B = 4)
                             and eight sets (S = 8).

                           Consider the following cache state. All addresses, tags, and values are given in
                      hexadecimal format. The Index column contains the set index for each set of four
                      lines. The Tag columns contain the tag value for each line. The V columns contain
                      the valid bit for each line. The Bytes 0–3 columns contain the data for each line,
                      numbered left to right starting with byte 0 on the left.

                                                4-way set associative cache
Index    Tag   V    Bytes 0–3         Tag   V     Bytes 0–3           Tag       V   Bytes 0–3         Tag   V   Bytes 0–3

  0       F0   1    ED 32 0A A2       8A    1     BF 80 1D FC         14        1   EF 09 86 2A       BC    0   25 44 6F 1A
  1      BC    0    03 3E CD 38       A0    0     16 7B ED 5A         BC        1   8E 4C DF 18       E4    1   FB B7 12 02
  2      BC    1    54 9E 1E FA        B6   1     DC 81 B2 14         00        0   B6 1F 7B 44       74    0   10 F5 B8 2E
  3      BE    0    2F 7E 3D A8        C0   1     27 95 A4 74         C4        0   07 11 6B D8       BC    0   C7 B7 AF C2
  4      7E    1    32 21 1C 2C       8A    1     22 C2 DC 34         BC        1   BA DD 37 D8       DC    0   E7 A2 39 BA
  5       98   0    A9 76 2B EE        54   0     BC 91 D5 92         98        1   80 BA 9B F6       BC    1   48 16 81 0A
  6       38   0    5D 4D F7 DA       BC    1     69 C2 8C 74         8A        1   A8 CE 7F DA       38    1   FA 93 EB 48
  7      8A    1    04 2A 32 6A        9E   0     B1 86 56 0E         CC        1   96 30 47 F2       BC    1   F8 1D 42 30

                        A. What is the size (C) of this cache in bytes?
                        B. The box that follows shows the format of an address (1 bit per box). Indicate
                           (by labeling the diagram) the fields that would be used to determine the
                           following:
                                  CO. The cache block offset
                                  CI. The cache set index
                                  CT. The cache tag

                                12    11    10       9     8      7         6       5     4       3   2     1     0

                      6.31 ◆◆
                      Suppose that a program using the cache in Problem 6.30 references the 1-byte
                      word at address 0x071A. Indicate the cache entry accessed and the cache byte
                      value returned in hex. Indicate whether a cache miss occurs. If there is a cache
                      miss, enter “—” for “Cache byte returned.” Hint: Pay attention to those valid
                      bits!
                                                                            Homework Problems   689

    A. Address format (1 bit per box):

         12   11   10    9    8       7   6   5    4    3    2    1     0

    B. Memory reference:

       Parameter              Value
       Block offset (CO)      0x
       Index (CI)             0x
       Cache tag (CT)         0x
       Cache hit? (Y/N)
       Cache byte returned    0x

6.32 ◆◆
Repeat Problem 6.31 for memory address 0x16E8.
 A. Address format (1 bit per box):

         12   11   10    9    8       7   6   5    4    3    2    1     0

    B. Memory reference:

       Parameter              Value
       Cache offset (CO)      0x
       Cache index (CI)       0x
       Cache tag (CT)         0x
       Cache hit? (Y/N)
       Cache byte returned    0x

6.33 ◆◆
For the cache in Problem 6.30, list the eight memory addresses (in hex) that will
hit in set 2.

6.34 ◆◆
Consider the following matrix transpose routine:

1      typedef int array[4][4];
2
3      void transpose2(array dst, array src)
4      {
5          int i, j;
6

                       7             for (i = 0; i < 4; i++) {
                       8                 for (j = 0; j < 4; j++) {
                       9                     dst[j][i] = src[i][j];
                      10                 }
                      11             }
                      12        }

                               Assume this code runs on a machine with the following properties:
                           .
                               sizeof(int) = 4.
                           .
                               The src array starts at address 0 and the dst array starts at address 64
                               (decimal).
                           .
                               There is a single L1 data cache that is direct-mapped, write-through, write-
                               allocate, with a block size of 16 bytes.
                           .
                               The cache has a total size of 32 data bytes, and the cache is initially empty.
                           .
                               Accesses to the src and dst arrays are the only sources of read and write
                               misses, respectively.

                           A. For each row and col, indicate whether the access to src[row][col] and
                              dst[row][col] is a hit (h) or a miss (m). For example, reading src[0][0]
                              is a miss and writing dst[0][0] is also a miss.

                     dst array                                                  src array
           Col. 0     Col. 1          Col. 2    Col. 3                 Col. 0     Col. 1     Col. 2    Col. 3
Row 0        m                                               Row 0       m
Row 1                                                        Row 1
Row 2                                                        Row 2
Row 3                                                        Row 3

                      6.35 ◆◆
                      Repeat Problem 6.34 for a cache with a total size of 128 data bytes.

                     dst array                                                  src array
           Col. 0     Col. 1          Col. 2    Col. 3                 Col. 0     Col. 1     Col. 2    Col. 3
Row 0                                                        Row 0
Row 1                                                        Row 1
Row 2                                                        Row 2
Row 3                                                        Row 3

                      6.36 ◆◆
                      This problem tests your ability to predict the cache behavior of C code. You are
                      given the following code to analyze:

                       1             int x[2][128];
                       2             int i;
                                                                                 Homework Problems   691

3             int sum = 0;
4
5             for (i = 0; i < 128; i++) {
6                 sum += x[0][i] * x[1][i];
7             }

        Assume we execute this under the following conditions:
    .
        sizeof(int) = 4.
    .
        Array x begins at memory address 0x0 and is stored in row-major order.
    .
        In each case below, the cache is initially empty.
    .
        The only memory accesses are to the entries of the array x. All other variables
        are stored in registers.

Given these assumptions, estimate the miss rates for the following cases:
 A. Case 1: Assume the cache is 512 bytes, direct-mapped, with 16-byte cache
    blocks. What is the miss rate?
 B. Case 2: What is the miss rate if we double the cache size to 1,024 bytes?
 C. Case 3: Now assume the cache is 512 bytes, two-way set associative using
    an LRU replacement policy, with 16-byte cache blocks. What is the cache
    miss rate?
 D. For case 3, will a larger cache size help to reduce the miss rate? Why or
    why not?
 E. For case 3, will a larger block size help to reduce the miss rate? Why or why
    not?

6.37 ◆◆
This is another problem that tests your ability to analyze the cache behavior of C
code. Assume we execute the three summation functions in Figure 6.47 under the
following conditions:
    .
        sizeof(int) = 4.
    .
        The machine has a 4 KB direct-mapped cache with a 16-byte block size.
    .
        Within the two loops, the code uses memory accesses only for the array data.
        The loop indices and the value sum are held in registers.
    .
        Array a is stored starting at memory address 0x08000000.

    Fill in the table for the approximate cache miss rate for the two cases N = 64
and N = 60.

Function        N = 64     N = 60
sumA
sumB
sumC

                     1   typedef int array_t[N][N];
                     2
                     3   int sumA(array_t a)
                     4   {
                     5       int i, j;
                     6       int sum = 0;
                     7       for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
                     8           for (j = 0; j < N; j++) {
                     9               sum += a[i][j];
                    10           }
                    11       return sum;
                    12   }
                    13
                    14   int sumB(array_t a)
                    15   {
                    16       int i, j;
                    17       int sum = 0;
                    18       for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
                    19           for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {
                    20               sum += a[i][j];
                    21           }
                    22       return sum;
                    23   }
                    24
                    25   int sumC(array_t a)
                    26   {
                    27       int i, j;
                    28       int sum = 0;
                    29       for (j = 0; j < N; j+=2)
                    30           for (i = 0; i < N; i+=2) {
                    31               sum += (a[i][j] + a[i+1][j]
                    32                       + a[i][j+1] + a[i+1][j+1]);
                    33           }
                    34       return sum;
                    35   }

Figure 6.47 Functions referenced in Problem 6.37.

                    6.38 ◆
                    3M decides to make Post-its by printing yellow squares on white pieces of paper.
                    As part of the printing process, they need to set the CMYK (cyan, magenta, yellow,
                    black) value for every point in the square. 3M hires you to determine the efficiency
                    of the following algorithms on a machine with a 1,024-byte direct-mapped data
                    cache with 16-byte blocks. You are given the following definitions:
                                                                              Homework Problems   693

1        struct point_color {
2            int c;
3            int m;
4            int y;
5            int k;
6        };
7
8        struct point_color square[16][16];
9        int i, j;

        Assume the following:
    .
        sizeof(int) = 4.
    .
        square begins at memory address 0.
    .
        The cache is initially empty.
    .
        The only memory accesses are to the entries of the array square. Variables i
        and j are stored in registers.

Determine the cache performance of the following code:

1             for (i = 15; i >= 0; i--){
2                 for (j = 15; j >= 0; j--) {
3                     square[i][j].c = 0;
4                     square[i][j].m = 0;
5                     square[i][j].y = 1;
6                     square[i][j].k = 0;
7                 }
8             }

    A. What is the total number of writes?
    B. What is the total number of writes that hit in the cache?
    C. What is the hit rate?

6.39 ◆
Given the assumptions in Problem 6.38, determine the cache performance of the
following code:

1             for (i = 15; i >= 0; i--){
2                 for (j = 15; j >= 0; j--) {
3                     square[j][i].c = 0;
4                     square[j][i].m = 0;
5                     square[j][i].y = 1;
6                     square[j][i].k = 0;
7                 }
8             }

                     A. What is the total number of writes?
                     B. What is the total number of writes that hit in the cache?
                     C. What is the hit rate?

                    6.40 ◆
                    Given the assumptions in Problem 6.38, determine the cache performance of the
                    following code:

                     1            for (i = 15; i >= 0; i--) {
                     2                for (j = 15; j >= 0; j--) {
                     3                    square[i][j].y = 1;
                     4                }
                     5            }
                     6            for (i = 15; i >= 0; i--) {
                     7                for (j = 15; j >= 0; j--) {
                     8                    square[i][j].c = 0;
                     9                    square[i][j].m = 0;
                    10                    square[i][j].k = 0;
                    11                }
                    12            }

                     A. What is the total number of writes?
                     B. What is the total number of writes that hit in the cache?
                     C. What is the hit rate?

                    6.41 ◆◆
                    You are writing a new 3D game that you hope will earn you fame and fortune. You
                    are currently working on a function to blank the screen buffer before drawing the
                    next frame. The screen you are working with is a 640 × 480 array of pixels. The
                    machine you are working on has a 32 KB direct-mapped cache with 8-byte lines.
                    The C structures you are using are as follows:

                     1        struct pixel {
                     2            char r;
                     3            char g;
                     4            char b;
                     5            char a;
                     6        };
                     7
                     8        struct pixel buffer[480][640];
                     9        int i, j;
                    10        char *cptr;
                    11        int *iptr;

                             Assume the following:
                         .
                             sizeof(char) = 1 and sizeof(int) = 4.
                                                                                 Homework Problems   695

    .
        buffer begins at memory address 0.
    .
        The cache is initially empty.
    .
        The only memory accesses are to the entries of the array buffer. Variables i,
        j, cptr, and iptr are stored in registers.

        What percentage of writes in the following code will hit in the cache?

1             for (j = 639; j >= 0; j--) {
2                 for (i = 479; i >= 0; i--){
3                     buffer[i][j].r = 0;
4                     buffer[i][j].g = 0;
5                     buffer[i][j].b = 0;
6                     buffer[i][j].a = 0;
7                 }
8             }

6.42 ◆◆
Given the assumptions in Problem 6.41, what percentage of writes in the following
code will hit in the cache?

1             char *cptr = (char *) buffer;
2             for (; cptr < (((char *) buffer) + 640 * 480 * 4); cptr++)
3                 *cptr = 0;

6.43 ◆◆
Given the assumptions in Problem 6.41, what percentage of writes in the following
code will hit in the cache?

1             int *iptr = (int *)buffer;
2             for (; iptr < ((int *)buffer + 640*480); iptr++)
3                 *iptr = 0;

6.44 ◆◆◆
Download the mountain program from the CS:APP Web site and run it on your
favorite PC/Linux system. Use the results to estimate the sizes of the caches on
your system.

6.45 ◆◆◆◆
In this assignment, you will apply the concepts you learned in Chapters 5 and 6
to the problem of optimizing code for a memory-intensive application. Consider
a procedure to copy and transpose the elements of an N × N matrix of type int.
That is, for source matrix S and destination matrix D, we want to copy each
element si,j to dj,i . This code can be written with a simple loop,

1        void transpose(int *dst, int *src, int dim)
2        {
3            int i, j;
4

                     5          for (i = 0; i < dim; i++)
                     6              for (j = 0; j < dim; j++)
                     7                  dst[j*dim + i] = src[i*dim + j];
                     8    }

                    where the arguments to the procedure are pointers to the destination (dst) and
                    source (src) matrices, as well as the matrix size N (dim). Your job is to devise a
                    transpose routine that runs as fast as possible.

                    6.46 ◆◆◆◆
                    This assignment is an intriguing variation of Problem 6.45. Consider the problem
                    of converting a directed graph g into its undirected counterpart g ?. The graph
                    g ? has an edge from vertex u to vertex v if and only if there is an edge from u
                    to v or from v to u in the original graph g. The graph g is represented by its
                    adjacency matrix G as follows. If N is the number of vertices in g, then G is an
                    N × N matrix and its entries are all either 0 or 1. Suppose the vertices of g are
                    named v0, v1, v2 , . . . , vN −1. Then G[i][j ] is 1 if there is an edge from vi to vj and
                    is 0 otherwise. Observe that the elements on the diagonal of an adjacency matrix
                    are always 1 and that the adjacency matrix of an undirected graph is symmetric.
                    This code can be written with a simple loop:

                     1    void col_convert(int *G, int dim) {
                     2         int i, j;
                     3
                     4          for (i = 0; i < dim; i++)
                     5              for (j = 0; j < dim; j++)
                     6                  G[j*dim + i] = G[j*dim + i] || G[i*dim + j];
                     7    }

                        Your job is to devise a conversion routine that runs as fast as possible. As
                    before, you will need to apply concepts you learned in Chapters 5 and 6 to come
                    up with a good solution.

                    Solutions to Practice Problems
                    Solution to Problem 6.1 (page 620)
                    The idea here is to minimize the number of address bits by minimizing the aspect
                    ratio max(r, c)/ min(r, c). In other words, the squarer the array, the fewer the
                    address bits.

                    Organization       r      c     br     bc     max(br , bc )
                    16 × 1             4      4      2      2          2
                    16 × 4             4      4      2      2          2
                    128 × 8           16      8      4      3          4
                    512 × 4           32     16      5      4          5
                    1,024 × 4         32     32      5      5          5
                                                                          Solutions to Practice Problems   697

Solution to Problem 6.2 (page 628)
The point of this little drill is to make sure you understand the relationship between
cylinders and tracks. Once you have that straight, just plug and chug:

                  1,024 bytes 500 sectors 15,000 tracks 2 surfaces 3 platters
Disk capacity =              ×           ×             ×          ×
                     sector      track       surface      platter     disk
               = 46,080,000,000 bytes
               = 46.08 GB
Solution to Problem 6.3 (page 631)
The solution to this problem is a straightforward application of the formula for
disk access time. The average rotational latency (in ms) is

            Tavg rotation = 1/2 × Tmax rotation
                        = 1/2 × (60 secs/12,000 RPM) × 1,000 ms/sec
                        ≈ 2.5 ms
The average transfer time is

    Tavg transfer = (60 secs/12,000 RPM) × 1/300 sectors/track × 1,000 ms/sec
               ≈ 0.016 ms
Putting it all together, the total estimated access time is
                    Taccess = Tavg seek + Tavg rotation + Tavg transfer
                           = 5 ms + 2.5 ms + 0.016 ms
                           ≈ 7.516 ms
Solution to Problem 6.4 (page 631)
This is a good check of your understanding of the factors that affect disk perfor-
mance. First we need to determine a few basic properties of the file and the disk.
The file consists of 10,000 512-byte logical blocks. For the disk, Tavg seek = 6 ms,
Tmax rotation = 4.61 ms, and Tavg rotation = 2.30 ms.
 A. Best case: In the optimal case, the blocks are mapped to contiguous sectors,
    on the same cylinder, that can be read one after the other without moving
    the head. Once the head is positioned over the first sector it takes two full
    rotations (5,000 sectors per rotation) of the disk to read all 10,000 blocks.
    So the total time to read the file is Tavg seek + Tavg rotation + 2 × Tmax rotation =
    6 + 2.30 + 9.22 = 17.52 ms.
 B. Random case: In this case, where blocks are mapped randomly to sectors,
    reading each of the 10,000 blocks requires Tavg seek + Tavg rotation ms, so the
    total time to read the file is (Tavg seek + Tavg rotation ) × 10,000 = 83,000 ms
    (83 seconds!).
You can see now why it’s often a good idea to defragment your disk drive!

                    Solution to Problem 6.5 (page 637)
                    This is a simple problem that will give you some interesting insights into the feasi-
                    bility of SSDs. Recall that for disks, 1 PB = 109 MB. Then the following straight-
                    forward translation of units yields the following predicted times for each case:
                         A. Worst-case sequential writes (520 MB/s):

                                       (109 × 128) × (1/520) × (1/(86,400 × 365)) ≈ 7 years

                     B. Worst-case random writes (205 MB/s):

                                      (109 × 128) × (1/205) × (1/(86,400 × 365)) ≈ 19 years

                     C. Average case (50 GB/day):

                                         (109 × 128) × (1/50,000) × (1/365) ≈ 6,912 years

                    So even if the SSD operates continuously, it should last for at least 7 years, which
                    is longer than the expected lifetime of most computers.

                    Solution to Problem 6.6 (page 640)
                    In the 10-year period between 2005 and 2015, the unit price of rotating disks
                    dropped by a factor of 166, which means the price is dropping by roughly a factor
                    of 2 every 18 months or so. Assuming this trend continues, a petabyte of storage,
                    which costs about $30,000 in 2015, will drop below $200 after about eight of these
                    factor-of-2 reductions. Since these are occurring every 18 months, we might expect
                    a petabyte of storage to be available for $200 around the year 2027.

                    Solution to Problem 6.7 (page 644)
                    To create a stride-1 reference pattern, the loops must be permuted so that the
                    rightmost indices change most rapidly.

                     1      int productarray3d(int a[N][N][N])
                     2      {
                     3          int i, j, k, product = 1;
                     4
                     5           for (j = N-1; j >= 0; j--) {
                     6               for (k = N-1; k >= 0; k--) {
                     7                   for (i = N-1; i >= 0; i--) {
                     8                       product *= a[j][k][i];
                     9                   }
                    10               }
                    11           }
                    12           return product;
                    13      }

                    This is an important idea. Make sure you understand why this particular loop
                    permutation results in a stride-1 access pattern.
                                                                          Solutions to Practice Problems   699

Solution to Problem 6.8 (page 645)
The key to solving this problem is to visualize how the array is laid out in memory
and then analyze the reference patterns. Function clear1 accesses the array using
a stride-1 reference pattern and thus clearly has the best spatial locality. Function
clear2 scans each of the N structs in order, which is good, but within each struct it
hops around in a non-stride-1 pattern at the following offsets from the beginning
of the struct: 0, 12, 4, 16, 8, 20. So clear2 has worse spatial locality than clear1.
Function clear3 not only hops around within each struct, but also hops from struct
to struct. So clear3 exhibits worse spatial locality than clear2 and clear1.

Solution to Problem 6.9 (page 652)
The solution is a straightforward application of the definitions of the various cache
parameters in Figure 6.26. Not very exciting, but you need to understand how
the cache organization induces these partitions in the address bits before you can
really understand how caches work.

Cache        m        C       B      E        S       t     s    b
1.           32     1,024      4      1      256     22     8    2
2.           32     1,024      8      4       32     24     5    3
3.           32     1,024     32     32        1     27     0    5

Solution to Problem 6.10 (page 660)
The padding eliminates the conflict misses. Thus, three-fourths of the references
are hits.

Solution to Problem 6.11 (page 660)
Sometimes, understanding why something is a bad idea helps you understand why
the alternative is a good idea. Here, the bad idea we are looking at is indexing the
cache with the high-order bits instead of the middle bits.
     A. With high-order bit indexing, each contiguous array chunk consists of 2t
        blocks, where t is the number of tag bits. Thus, the first 2t contiguous blocks
        of the array would map to set 0, the next 2t blocks would map to set 1, and
        so on.
     B. For a direct-mapped cache where (S, E, B, m) = (512, 1, 32, 32), the cache
        capacity is 512 32-byte blocks with t = 18 tag bits in each cache line. Thus, the
        first 218 blocks in the array would map to set 0, the next 218 blocks to set 1.
        Since our array consists of only (4,096 × 4)/32 = 512 blocks, all of the blocks
        in the array map to set 0. Thus, the cache will hold at most 1 array block at
        any point in time, even though the array is small enough to fit entirely in the
        cache. Clearly, using high-order bit indexing makes poor use of the cache.

Solution to Problem 6.12 (page 664)
The 2 low-order bits are the block offset (CO), followed by 3 bits of set index (CI),
with the remaining bits serving as the tag (CT):

                     CT    CT   CT    CT      CT    CT    CT     CT   CI   CI   CI   CO   CO
                     12    11    10      9    8     7     6      5    4    3    2    1    0

                    Solution to Problem 6.13 (page 664)
                    Address: 0x0D53
                     A. Address format (1 bit per box):
                           CT    CT   CT      CT    CT    CT     CT   CT   CI   CI   CI   CO   CO

                            0    1       1    0     1     0      1    0    1    0    0    1    1
                           12    11      10   9     8     7      6    5    4    3    2    1    0

                     B. Memory reference:
                          Parameter                      Value
                          Cache block offset (CO)         0x3
                          Cache set index (CI)            0x4
                          Cache tag (CT)                 0x6A
                          Cache hit? (Y/N)                 N
                          Cache byte returned              —

                    Solution to Problem 6.14 (page 665)
                    Address: 0x0CB4
                     A. Address format (1 bit per box):
                           CT    CT   CT      CT    CT    CT     CT   CT   CI   CI   CI   CO   CO

                            0    1       1    0     0     1      0    1    1    0    1    0    0
                           12    11      10   9     8     7      6    5    4    3    2    1    0

                     B. Memory reference:
                          Parameter                      Value
                          Cache block offset (CO)         0x0
                          Cache set index (CI)            0x5
                          Cache tag (CT)                 0x65
                          Cache hit? (Y/N)                 N
                          Cache byte returned              —

                    Solution to Problem 6.15 (page 665)
                    Address: 0x0A31
                     A. Address format (1 bit per box):
                           CT    CT   CT      CT    CT    CT     CT   CT   CI   CI   CI   CO   CO

                            0    1       0    1     0     0      0    1    1    0    0    0    1
                           12    11      10   9     8     7      6    5    4    3    2    1    0

                     B. Memory reference:
                                                                         Solutions to Practice Problems   701

     Parameter                     Value
     Cache block offset            0x1
     Cache set index               0x4
     Cache tag                     0x51
     Cache hit? (Y/N)               N
     Cache byte returned            —-

Solution to Problem 6.16 (page 666)
This problem is a sort of inverse version of Practice Problems 6.12–6.15 that
requires you to work backward from the contents of the cache to derive the
addresses that will hit in a particular set. In this case, set 3 contains one valid
line with a tag of 0x32. Since there is only one valid line in the set, four addresses
will hit. These addresses have the binary form 0 0110 0100 11xx. Thus, the four
hex addresses that hit in set 3 are

                          0x064C, 0x064D, 0x064E, and 0x064F

Solution to Problem 6.17 (page 672)

 A. The key to solving this problem is to visualize the picture in Figure 6.48.
    Notice that each cache line holds exactly one row of the array, that the cache
    is exactly large enough to hold one array, and that for all i, row i of src and
    dst maps to the same cache line. Because the cache is too small to hold both
    arrays, references to one array keep evicting useful lines from the other array.
    For example, the write to dst[0][0] evicts the line that was loaded when
    we read src[0][0]. So when we next read src[0][1], we have a miss.

              dst array                             src array
                 Col. 0      Col. 1                   Col. 0    Col. 1
     Row 0         m           m           Row 0        m         m
     Row 1         m           m           Row 1        m         h

 B. When the cache is 32 bytes, it is large enough to hold both arrays. Thus, the
    only misses are the initial cold misses.

              dst array                             src array
                 Col. 0      Col. 1                   Col. 0    Col. 1
     Row 0         m           h           Row 0        m         h
     Row 1         m           h           Row 1        m         h

Figure 6.48                                     Main memory
                                            0
Figure for solution to              src
                                                                          Cache
Problem 6.17.                                                                         Line 0
                                           16
                                                                                      Line 1
                                    dst

                    Solution to Problem 6.18 (page 673)
                    Each 32-byte cache line holds two contiguous algae_position structures. Each
                    loop visits these structures in memory order, reading one integer element each
                    time. So the pattern for each loop is miss, hit, miss, hit, and so on. Notice that for
                    this problem we could have predicted the miss rate without actually enumerating
                    the total number of reads and misses.
                     A. What is the total number of read accesses? 2,048 reads.
                     B. What is the total number of read accesses that miss in the cache? 1,024 misses.
                     C. What is the miss rate? 1024/2048 = 50%.

                    Solution to Problem 6.19 (page 674)
                    The key to this problem is noticing that the cache can only hold 1/2 of the ar-
                    ray. So the column-wise scan of the second half of the array evicts the lines that
                    were loaded during the scan of the first half. For example, reading the first ele-
                    ment of grid[8][0] evicts the line that was loaded when we read elements from
                    grid[0][0]. This line also contained grid[0][1]. So when we begin scanning the
                    next column, the reference to the first element of grid[0][1] misses.
                     A. What is the total number of read accesses? 2,048 reads.
                     B. What is the total number of read accesses that hit in the cache? 1,024 misses.
                     C. What is the hit rate? 1024/2048 = 50%.
                     D. What would the hit rate be if the cache were twice as big? If the cache were
                        twice as big, it could hold the entire grid array. The only misses would be
                        the initial cold misses, and the hit rate would be 3/4 = 75%.

                    Solution to Problem 6.20 (page 674)
                    This loop has a nice stride-1 reference pattern, and thus the only misses are the
                    initial cold misses.
                     A. What is the total number of read accesses? 2,048 reads.
                     B. What is the total number of read accesses that hit in the cache? 1,536 misses.
                     C. What is the hit rate? 1536/2048 = 75%.
                     D. What would the hit rate be if the cache were twice as big? Increasing the
                        cache size by any amount would not change the miss rate, since cold misses
                        are unavoidable.

                    Solution to Problem 6.21 (page 679)
                    The sustained throughput using large strides from L1 is about 12,000 MB/s, the
                    clock frequency is 2,100 MHz, and the individual read accesses are in units
                    of 16-byte longs. Thus, from this graph we can estimate that it takes roughly
                    2,100/12,000 × 16 = 2.8 ≈ 3.0 cycles to access a word from L1 on this machine,
                    which is roughly 1.25 times faster than the nominal 4-cycle latency from L1. This
                    is due to the parallelism of the 4 × 4 unrolled loop, which allows multiple loads to
                    be in flight at the same time.
