CHAPTER
                 11
          Network Programming

          11.1   The Client-Server Programming Model     954
          11.2   Networks   955
          11.3   The Global IP Internet    960
          11.4   The Sockets Interface     968
          11.5   Web Servers   984
          11.6   Putting It Together: The Tiny Web Server   992
          11.7   Summary    1000
                 Bibliographic Notes      1001
                 Homework Problems        1001
                 Solutions to Practice Problems   1002

                        etwork applications are everywhere. Any time you browse the Web, send an
                   N    email message, or play an online game, you are using a network application.
                   Interestingly, all network applications are based on the same basic programming
                   model, have similar overall logical structures, and rely on the same programming
                   interface.
                       Network applications rely on many of the concepts that you have already
                   learned in our study of systems. For example, processes, signals, byte ordering,
                   memory mapping, and dynamic storage allocation all play important roles. There
                   are new concepts to master as well. You will need to understand the basic client-
                   server programming model and how to write client-server programs that use the
                   services provided by the Internet. At the end, we will tie all of these ideas together
                   by developing a tiny but functional Web server that can serve both static and
                   dynamic content with text and graphics to real Web browsers.

                   11.1         The Client-Server Programming Model
                   Every network application is based on the client-server model. With this model, an
                   application consists of a server process and one or more client processes. A server
                   manages some resource, and it provides some service for its clients by manipulating
                   that resource. For example, a Web server manages a set of disk files that it retrieves
                   and executes on behalf of clients. An FTP server manages a set of disk files that it
                   stores and retrieves for clients. Similarly, an email server manages a spool file that
                   it reads and updates for clients.
                        The fundamental operation in the client-server model is the transaction (Fig-
                   ure 11.1). A client-server transaction consists of four steps:

                     1. When a client needs service, it initiates a transaction by sending a request to
                        the server. For example, when a Web browser needs a file, it sends a request
                        to a Web server.
                     2. The server receives the request, interprets it, and manipulates its resources in
                        the appropriate way. For example, when a Web server receives a request from
                        a browser, it reads a disk file.
                     3. The server sends a response to the client and then waits for the next request.
                        For example, a Web server sends the file back to a client.

                                          1. Client sends request
                                 Client                               Server
                                process                              process               Resource
                    4. Client             3. Server sends response             2. Server
                   processes                                                   processes
                   response                                                     request

Figure 11.1 A client-server transaction.
                                                                               Section 11.2    Networks   955

 Aside     Client-server transactions versus database transactions
 Client-server transactions are not database transactions and do not share any of their properties, such
 as atomicity. In our context, a transaction is simply a sequence of steps carried out by a client and a
 server.

 4. The client receives the response and manipulates it. For example, after a Web
    browser receives a page from the server, it displays it on the screen.

     It is important to realize that clients and servers are processes and not ma-
chines, or hosts as they are often called in this context. A single host can run many
different clients and servers concurrently, and a client and server transaction can
be on the same or different hosts. The client-server model is the same, regardless
of the mapping of clients and servers to hosts.

11.2     Networks
Clients and servers often run on separate hosts and communicate using the hard-
ware and software resources of a computer network. Networks are sophisticated
systems, and we can only hope to scratch the surface here. Our aim is to give you
a workable mental model from a programmer’s perspective.
    To a host, a network is just another I/O device that serves as a source and sink
for data, as shown in Figure 11.2.

Figure 11.2                     CPU chip
Hardware organization                  Register file
of a network host.
                                                       ALU

                                                             System bus     Memory bus

                                                                   I/O                      Main
                                    Bus interface
                                                                  bridge                   memory

                                                                                     Expansion slots

                                                                  I/O bus

                                       USB             Graphics               Disk            Network
                                     controller        adapter              controller        adapter

                                  Mouse Keyboard       Monitor
                                                                                              Network
                                                                              Disk

Figure 11.3                      Host          Host         Host
Ethernet segment.
                               100 Mb/s                   100 Mb/s
                                               Hub

                         An adapter plugged into an expansion slot on the I/O bus provides the physical
                    interface to the network. Data received from the network are copied from the
                    adapter across the I/O and memory buses into memory, typically by a DMA
                    transfer. Similarly, data can also be copied from memory to the network.
                         Physically, a network is a hierarchical system that is organized by geographical
                    proximity. At the lowest level is a LAN (local area network) that spans a building
                    or a campus. The most popular LAN technology by far is Ethernet, which was de-
                    veloped in the mid-1970s at Xerox PARC. Ethernet has proven to be remarkably
                    resilient, evolving from 3 Mb/s to 10 Gb/s.
                         An Ethernet segment consists of some wires (usually twisted pairs of wires)
                    and a small box called a hub, as shown in Figure 11.3. Ethernet segments typically
                    span small areas, such as a room or a floor in a building. Each wire has the same
                    maximum bit bandwidth, typically 100 Mb/s or 1 Gb/s. One end is attached to
                    an adapter on a host, and the other end is attached to a port on the hub. A hub
                    slavishly copies every bit that it receives on each port to every other port. Thus,
                    every host sees every bit.
                         Each Ethernet adapter has a globally unique 48-bit address that is stored in
                    a nonvolatile memory on the adapter. A host can send a chunk of bits called a
                    frame to any other host on the segment. Each frame includes some fixed number
                    of header bits that identify the source and destination of the frame and the frame
                    length, followed by a payload of data bits. Every host adapter sees the frame, but
                    only the destination host actually reads it.
                         Multiple Ethernet segments can be connected into larger LANs, called
                    bridged Ethernets, using a set of wires and small boxes called bridges, as shown
                    in Figure 11.4. Bridged Ethernets can span entire buildings or campuses. In a
                    bridged Ethernet, some wires connect bridges to bridges, and others connect
                    bridges to hubs. The bandwidths of the wires can be different. In our example,
                    the bridge–bridge wire has a 1 Gb/s bandwidth, while the four hub–bridge wires
                    have bandwidths of 100 Mb/s.
                         Bridges make better use of the available wire bandwidth than hubs. Using a
                    clever distributed algorithm, they automatically learn over time which hosts are
                    reachable from which ports and then selectively copy frames from one port to
                    another only when it is necessary. For example, if host A sends a frame to host B,
                    which is on the segment, then bridge X will throw away the frame when it arrives
                    at its input port, thus saving bandwidth on the other segments. However, if host A
                    sends a frame to host C on a different segment, then bridge X will copy the frame
                    only to the port connected to bridge Y, which will copy the frame only to the port
                    connected to host C’s segment.
                                                                                   Section 11.2   Networks   957

 Aside     Internet versus internet
 We will always use lowercase internet to denote the general concept, and uppercase Internet to denote
 a specific implementation—namely, the global IP Internet.

   A                        B

  Host        Host         Host                                             Host    Host

                                            X
               Hub                        Bridge                            Hub
                        100 Mb/s                          100 Mb/s

                                                1 Gb/s
                                                                            Host    Host

                        100 Mb/s                          100 Mb/s
               Hub                        Bridge                            Hub

                                            Y
  Host        Host                                        Host              Host    Host

                                                                                      C

Figure 11.4 Bridged Ethernet segments.

Figure 11.5
                                   Host            Host    ...       Host
Conceptual view of a
LAN.

     To simplify our pictures of LANs, we will draw the hubs and bridges and the
wires that connect them as a single horizontal line, as shown in Figure 11.5.
     At a higher level in the hierarchy, multiple incompatible LANs can be con-
nected by specialized computers called routers to form an internet (interconnected
network). Each router has an adapter (port) for each network that it is connected
to. Routers can also connect high-speed point-to-point phone connections, which
are examples of networks known as WANs (wide area networks), so called be-
cause they span larger geographical areas than LANs. In general, routers can be
used to build internets from arbitrary collections of LANs and WANs. For ex-
ample, Figure 11.6 shows an example internet with a pair of LANs and WANs
connected by three routers.

                     Host       Host    ...     Host                       Host       Host   ...   Host

                   LAN                                                                               LAN
                                       Router                Router               Router
                                                       WAN             WAN

Figure 11.6 A small internet. Two LANs and two WANs are connected by three routers.

                       The crucial property of an internet is that it can consist of different LANs
                   and WANs with radically different and incompatible technologies. Each host is
                   physically connected to every other host, but how is it possible for some source
                   host to send data bits to another destination host across all of these incompatible
                   networks?
                       The solution is a layer of protocol software running on each host and router
                   that smoothes out the differences between the different networks. This software
                   implements a protocol that governs how hosts and routers cooperate in order to
                   transfer data. The protocol must provide two basic capabilities:

                      Naming scheme. Different LAN technologies have different and incompatible
                          ways of assigning addresses to hosts. The internet protocol smoothes these
                          differences by defining a uniform format for host addresses. Each host
                          is then assigned at least one of these internet addresses that uniquely
                          identifies it.
                      Delivery mechanism. Different networking technologies have different and
                            incompatible ways of encoding bits on wires and of packaging these bits
                            into frames. The internet protocol smoothes these differences by defining
                            a uniform way to bundle up data bits into discrete chunks called packets. A
                            packet consists of a header, which contains the packet size and addresses
                            of the source and destination hosts, and a payload, which contains data
                            bits sent from the source host.

                        Figure 11.7 shows an example of how hosts and routers use the internet
                   protocol to transfer data across incompatible LANs. The example internet consists
                   of two LANs connected by a router. A client running on host A, which is attached
                   to LAN1, sends a sequence of data bytes to a server running on host B, which is
                   attached to LAN2. There are eight basic steps:

                     1. The client on host A invokes a system call that copies the data from the client’s
                        virtual address space into a kernel buffer.
                     2. The protocol software on host A creates a LAN1 frame by appending an
                        internet header and a LAN1 frame header to the data. The internet header
                        is addressed to internet host B. The LAN1 frame header is addressed to the
                        router. It then passes the frame to the adapter. Notice that the payload of the
                        LAN1 frame is an internet packet, whose payload is the actual user data. This
                        kind of encapsulation is one of the fundamental insights of internetworking.
                                                                                           Section 11.2   Networks   959

                              Host A                               Host B

                               Client                              Server

(1)     Data                                                                  (8)   Data

                              Protocol                             Protocol
      Internet packet         software                             software
(2)     Data    PH FH1                                                        (7)   Data    PH FH2

          LAN1 frame           LAN1                                 LAN2
                              adapter                              adapter
                                                   Router
(3)     Data    PH FH1                                                        (6)   Data    PH FH2
                                               LAN1       LAN2
                                              adapter    adapter
         LAN1                                                         LAN2 frame            LAN2
                        (4)    Data      PH FH1                      Data     PH FH2 (5)

                                                   Protocol
                                                   software

Figure 11.7 How data travel from one host to another on an internet. PH: internet
packet header; FH1: frame header for LAN1; FH2: frame header for LAN2.

 3. The LAN1 adapter copies the frame to the network.
 4. When the frame reaches the router, the router’s LAN1 adapter reads it from
    the wire and passes it to the protocol software.
 5. The router fetches the destination internet address from the internet packet
    header and uses this as an index into a routing table to determine where to
    forward the packet, which in this case is LAN2. The router then strips off the
    old LAN1 frame header, prepends a new LAN2 frame header addressed to
    host B, and passes the resulting frame to the adapter.
 6. The router’s LAN2 adapter copies the frame to the network.
 7. When the frame reaches host B, its adapter reads the frame from the wire and
    passes it to the protocol software.
 8. Finally, the protocol software on host B strips off the packet header and frame
    header. The protocol software will eventually copy the resulting data into the
    server’s virtual address space when the server invokes a system call that reads
    the data.

    Of course, we are glossing over many difficult issues here. What if different
networks have different maximum frame sizes? How do routers know where to
forward frames? How are routers informed when the network topology changes?
What if a packet gets lost? Nonetheless, our example captures the essence of the
internet idea, and encapsulation is the key.

Figure 11.8                                          Internet client host                        Internet server host
Hardware and software
organization of an                                         Client       User code                      Server
Internet application.            Sockets interface
                                    (system calls)
                                                          TCP/IP        Kernel code                    TCP/IP
                                Hardware interface
                                      (interrupts)
                                                          Network       Hardware                      Network
                                                          adapter                                     adapter

                                                                            Global IP Internet

                   11.3       The Global IP Internet
                   The global IP Internet is the most famous and successful implementation of an
                   internet. It has existed in one form or another since 1969. While the internal
                   architecture of the Internet is complex and constantly changing, the organization
                   of client-server applications has remained remarkably stable since the early 1980s.
                   Figure 11.8 shows the basic hardware and software organization of an Internet
                   client-server application.
                        Each Internet host runs software that implements the TCP/IP protocol
                   (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol), which is supported by almost
                   every modern computer system. Internet clients and servers communicate using
                   a mix of sockets interface functions and Unix I/O functions. (We will describe the
                   sockets interface in Section 11.4.) The sockets functions are typically implemented
                   as system calls that trap into the kernel and call various kernel-mode functions in
                   TCP/IP.
                        TCP/IP is actually a family of protocols, each of which contributes different
                   capabilities. For example, IP provides the basic naming scheme and a delivery
                   mechanism that can send packets, known as datagrams, from one Internet host to
                   any other host. The IP mechanism is unreliable in the sense that it makes no effort
                   to recover if datagrams are lost or duplicated in the network. UDP (Unreliable
                   Datagram Protocol) extends IP slightly, so that datagrams can be transferred
                   from process to process, rather than host to host. TCP is a complex protocol that
                   builds on IP to provide reliable full duplex (bidirectional) connections between
                   processes. To simplify our discussion, we will treat TCP/IP as a single monolithic
                   protocol. We will not discuss its inner workings, and we will only discuss some of
                   the basic capabilities that TCP and IP provide to application programs. We will
                   not discuss UDP.
                        From a programmer’s perspective, we can think of the Internet as a worldwide
                   collection of hosts with the following properties:

                     .
                         The set of hosts is mapped to a set of 32-bit IP addresses.

 Aside       IPv4 and IPv6
 The original Internet protocol, with its 32-bit addresses, is known as Internet Protocol Version 4 (IPv4).
 In 1996, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) proposed a new version of IP, called Internet
 Protocol Version 6 (IPv6), that uses 128-bit addresses and that was intended as the successor to IPv4.
 However, as of 2015, almost 20 years later, the vast majority of Internet traffic is still carried by IPv4
 networks. For example, only 4 percent of users access Google services using IPv6 [42].
      Because of its low adoption rate, we will not discuss IPv6 in any detail in this book and will focus
 exclusively on the concepts behind IPv4. When we talk about the Internet, what we mean is the Internet
 based on IPv4. Nonetheless, the techniques for writing clients and servers that we will teach you later
 in this chapter are based on modern interfaces that are independent of any particular protocol.

  .
      The set of IP addresses is mapped to a set of identifiers called Internet domain
      names.
  .
      A process on one Internet host can communicate with a process on any other
      Internet host over a connection.

The following sections discuss these fundamental Internet ideas in more detail.

11.3.1 IP Addresses
An IP address is an unsigned 32-bit integer. Network programs store IP addresses
in the IP address structure shown in Figure 11.9.
     Storing a scalar address in a structure is an unfortunate artifact from the early
implementations of the sockets interface. It would make more sense to define
a scalar type for IP addresses, but it is too late to change now because of the
enormous installed base of applications.
     Because Internet hosts can have different host byte orders, TCP/IP defines a
uniform network byte order (big-endian byte order) for any integer data item, such
as an IP address, that is carried across the network in a packet header. Addresses in
IP address structures are always stored in (big-endian) network byte order, even
if the host byte order is little-endian. Unix provides the following functions for
converting between network and host byte order.

                                                                                    code/netp/netpfragments.c
      /* IP address structure */
      struct in_addr {
          uint32_t s_addr; /* Address in network byte order (big-endian) */
      };
                                                                                    code/netp/netpfragments.c

Figure 11.9 IP address structure.

                     #include <arpa/inet.h>
                     uint32_t htonl(uint32_t hostlong);
                     uint16_t htons(uint16_t hostshort);
                                                                      Returns: value in network byte order

                     uint32_t ntohl(uint32_t netlong);
                     uint16_t ntohs(unit16_t netshort);
                                                                           Returns: value in host byte order

                   The htonl function converts an unsigned 32-bit integer from host byte order to
                   network byte order. The ntohl function converts an unsigned 32-bit integer from
                   network byte order to host byte order. The htons and ntohs functions perform
                   corresponding conversions for unsigned 16-bit integers. Note that there are no
                   equivalent functions for manipulating 64-bit values.
                       IP addresses are typically presented to humans in a form known as dotted-
                   decimal notation, where each byte is represented by its decimal value and sep-
                   arated from the other bytes by a period. For example, 128.2.194.242 is the
                   dotted-decimal representation of the address 0x8002c2f2. On Linux systems, you
                   can use the hostname command to determine the dotted-decimal address of your
                   own host:

                   linux> hostname -i
                   128.2.210.175

                       Application programs can convert back and forth between IP addresses and
                   dotted-decimal strings using the functions inet_pton and inet_ntop.

                     #include <arpa/inet.h>
                     int inet_pton(AF_INET, const char *src, void *dst);
                                            Returns: 1 if OK, 0 if src is invalid dotted decimal, −1 on error

                     const char *inet_ntop(AF_INET, const void *src, char *dst,
                                           socklen_t size);
                                          Returns: pointer to a dotted-decimal string if OK, NULL on error

                   In these function names, the “n” stands for network and the “p” stands for pre-
                   sentation. They can manipulate either 32-bit IPv4 addresses (AF_INET), as shown
                   here, or 128-bit IPv6 addresses (AF_INET6), which we do not cover.
                        The inet_pton function converts a dotted-decimal string (src) to a binary IP
                   address in network byte order (dst). If src does not point to a valid dotted-decimal
                   string, then it returns 0. Any other error returns −1 and sets errno. Similarly, the
                   inet_ntop function converts a binary IP address in network byte order (src) to
                   the corresponding dotted-decimal representation and copies at most size bytes
                   of the resulting null-terminated string to dst.

Practice Problem 11.1 (solution page 1002)
Complete the following table:

Dotted-decimal address     Hex address
107.212.122.205
64.12.149.13
107.212.96.29
                           0x00000080
                           0xFFFFFF00
                           0x0A010140

Practice Problem 11.2 (solution page 1003)
Write a program hex2dd.c that converts its 16-bit hex argument to a 16-bit
network byte order and prints the result. For example

linux> ./hex2dd 0x400
1024

Practice Problem 11.3 (solution page 1003)
Write a program dd2hex.c that converts its 16-bit network byte order to a 16-bit
hex number and prints the result. For example,

linux> ./dd2hex 1024
0x400

11.3.2 Internet Domain Names
Internet clients and servers use IP addresses when they communicate with each
other. However, large integers are difficult for people to remember, so the Internet
also defines a separate set of more human-friendly domain names, as well as a
mechanism that maps the set of domain names to the set of IP addresses. A domain
name is a sequence of words (letters, numbers, and dashes) separated by periods,
such as whaleshark.ics.cs.cmu.edu.
     The set of domain names forms a hierarchy, and each domain name encodes
its position in the hierarchy. An example is the easiest way to understand this.
Figure 11.10 shows a portion of the domain name hierarchy.
     The hierarchy is represented as a tree. The nodes of the tree represent domain
names that are formed by the path back to the root. Subtrees are referred to as sub-
domains. The first level in the hierarchy is an unnamed root node. The next level
is a collection of first-level domain names that are defined by a nonprofit organi-
zation called ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers).
Common first-level domains include com, edu, gov, org, and net.

                                             Unnamed root

                              mil             edu        gov   com                 First-level domain names

                                    mit      cmu berkeley         amazon           Second-level domain names

                                    cs               ece           www             Third-level domain names
                                                               176.32.98.166

                        ics                   pdl

                    whaleshark                www
                   128.2.210.175          128.2.131.66

Figure 11.10 Subset of the Internet domain name hierarchy.

                        At the next level are second-level domain names such as cmu.edu, which are
                   assigned on a first-come first-serve basis by various authorized agents of ICANN.
                   Once an organization has received a second-level domain name, then it is free to
                   create any other new domain name within its subdomain, such as cs.cmu.edu.
                        The Internet defines a mapping between the set of domain names and the
                   set of IP addresses. Until 1988, this mapping was maintained manually in a sin-
                   gle text file called HOSTS.TXT. Since then, the mapping has been maintained in a
                   distributed worldwide database known as DNS (Domain Name System). Concep-
                   tually, the DNS database consists of millions of host entries, each of which defines
                   the mapping between a set of domain names and a set of IP addresses. In a math-
                   ematical sense, think of each host entry as an equivalence class of domain names
                   and IP addresses. We can explore some of the properties of the DNS mappings
                   with the Linux nslookup program, which displays the IP addresses associated with
                   a domain name.1
                        Each Internet host has the locally defined domain name localhost, which
                   always maps to the loopback address 127.0.0.1:

                   linux> nslookup localhost
                   Address: 127.0.0.1

                   The localhost name provides a convenient and portable way to reference clients
                   and servers that are running on the same machine, which can be especially useful

                   1. We’ve reformatted the output of nslookup to improve readability.

for debugging. We can use hostname to determine the real domain name of our
local host:

linux> hostname
whaleshark.ics.cs.cmu.edu

    In the simplest case, there is a one-to-one mapping between a domain name
and an IP address:

linux> nslookup whaleshark.ics.cs.cmu.edu
Address: 128.2.210.175

However, in some cases, multiple domain names are mapped to the same IP
address:

linux> nslookup cs.mit.edu
Address: 18.62.1.6

linux> nslookup eecs.mit.edu
Address: 18.62.1.6

In the most general case, multiple domain names are mapped to the same set of
multiple IP addresses:

linux> nslookup www.twitter.com
Address: 199.16.156.6
Address: 199.16.156.70
Address: 199.16.156.102
Address: 199.16.156.230

linux> nslookup twitter.com
Address: 199.16.156.102
Address: 199.16.156.230
Address: 199.16.156.6
Address: 199.16.156.70

   Finally, we notice that some valid domain names are not mapped to any IP
address:

linux> nslookup edu
*** Can’t find edu: No answer
linux> nslookup ics.cs.cmu.edu
*** Can’t find ics.cs.cmu.edu: No answer

11.3.3 Internet Connections
Internet clients and servers communicate by sending and receiving streams of
bytes over connections. A connection is point-to-point in the sense that it connects
a pair of processes. It is full duplex in the sense that data can flow in both directions

 Aside    How many Internet hosts are there?
 Twice a year since 1987, the Internet Systems Consortium conducts the Internet Domain Survey. The
 survey, which estimates the number of Internet hosts by counting the number of IP addresses that
 have been assigned a domain name, reveals an amazing trend. Since 1987, when there were about
 20,000 Internet hosts, the number of hosts has been increasing exponentially. By 2015, there were over
 1,000,000,000 Internet hosts!

                   at the same time. And it is reliable in the sense that—barring some catastrophic
                   failure such as a cable cut by the proverbial careless backhoe operator—the stream
                   of bytes sent by the source process is eventually received by the destination process
                   in the same order it was sent.
                        A socket is an end point of a connection. Each socket has a corresponding
                   socket address that consists of an Internet address and a 16-bit integer port 2 and
                   is denoted by the notation address:port.
                        The port in the client’s socket address is assigned automatically by the kernel
                   when the client makes a connection request and is known as an ephemeral port.
                   However, the port in the server’s socket address is typically some well-known
                   port that is permanently associated with the service. For example, Web servers
                   typically use port 80, and email servers use port 25. Associated with each service
                   with a well-known port is a corresponding well-known service name. For example,
                   the well-known name for the Web service is http, and the well-known name for
                   email is smtp. The mapping between well-known names and well-known ports is
                   contained in a file called /etc/services.
                        A connection is uniquely identified by the socket addresses of its two end
                   points. This pair of socket addresses is known as a socket pair and is denoted by
                   the tuple

                   (cliaddr:cliport, servaddr:servport)

                   where cliaddr is the client’s IP address, cliport is the client’s port, servaddr is the
                   server’s IP address, and servport is the server’s port. For example, Figure 11.11
                   shows a connection between a Web client and a Web server.
                       In this example, the Web client’s socket address is

                   128.2.194.242:51213

                   where port 51213 is an ephemeral port assigned by the kernel. The Web server’s
                   socket address is

                   208.216.181.15:80

                   2. These software ports have no relation to the hardware ports in network switches and routers.

 Aside     Origins of the Internet
 The Internet is one of the most successful examples of government, university, and industry partnership.
 Many factors contributed to its success, but we think two are particularly important: a sustained 30-
 year investment by the United States government and a commitment by passionate researchers to what
 Dave Clarke at MIT has dubbed “rough consensus and working code.”
      The seeds of the Internet were sown in 1957, when, at the height of the Cold War, the Soviet
 Union shocked the world by launching Sputnik, the first artificial earth satellite. In response, the United
 States government created the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), whose charter was to
 reestablish the US lead in science and technology. In 1967, Lawrence Roberts at ARPA published
 plans for a new network called the ARPANET. The first ARPANET nodes were up and running by
 1969. By 1971, there were 13 ARPANET nodes, and email had emerged as the first important network
 application.
      In 1972, Robert Kahn outlined the general principles of internetworking: a collection of intercon-
 nected networks, with communication between the networks handled independently on a “best-effort
 basis” by black boxes called “routers.” In 1974, Kahn and Vinton Cerf published the first details of
 TCP/IP, which by 1982 had become the standard internetworking protocol for ARPANET. On January
 1, 1983, every node on the ARPANET switched to TCP/IP, marking the birth of the global IP Internet.
      In 1985, Paul Mockapetris invented DNS, and there were over 1,000 Internet hosts. The next year,
 the National Science Foundation (NSF) built the NSFNET backbone connecting 13 sites with 56 Kb/s
 phone lines. It was upgraded to 1.5 Mb/s T1 links in 1988 and 45 Mb/s T3 links in 1991. By 1988, there
 were more than 50,000 hosts. In 1989, the original ARPANET was officially retired. In 1995, when there
 were almost 10,000,000 Internet hosts, NSF retired NSFNET and replaced it with the modern Internet
 architecture based on private commercial backbones connected by public network access points.

Figure 11.11                                    Client socket address              Server socket address
Anatomy of an Internet                          128.2.194.242:51213                 208.216.181.15:80
connection.
                                                                                                        Server
                                       Client                                                          (port 80)
                                                                Connection socket pair
                                                       (128.2.194.242:51213, 208.216.181.15:80)
                                Client host address                                               Server host address
                                   128.2.194.242                                                    208.216.181.15

where port 80 is the well-known port associated with Web services. Given these
client and server socket addresses, the connection between the client and server
is uniquely identified by the socket pair

(128.2.194.242:51213, 208.216.181.15:80)

 Aside     Origins of the sockets interface
 The original sockets interface was developed by researchers at University of California, Berkeley, in
 the early 1980s. For this reason, it is often referred to as Berkeley sockets. The Berkeley researchers
 developed the sockets interface to work with any underlying protocol. The first implementation was
 for TCP/IP, which they included in the Unix 4.2BSD kernel and distributed to numerous universities
 and labs. This was an important event in Internet history. Almost overnight, thousands of people had
 access to TCP/IP and its source codes. It generated tremendous excitement and sparked a flurry of new
 research in networking and internetworking.

                   11.4      The Sockets Interface
                   The sockets interface is a set of functions that are used in conjunction with the Unix
                   I/O functions to build network applications. It has been implemented on most
                   modern systems, including all Unix variants as well as Windows and Macintosh
                   systems. Figure 11.12 gives an overview of the sockets interface in the context of a
                   typical client-server transaction. You should use this picture as a road map when
                   we discuss the individual functions.

                                          Client                        Server
                                       getaddrinfo                   getaddrinfo

                                          socket                        socket
                                                                                       open_listenfd
                   open_clientfd                                         bind

                                                                        listen
                                                       Connection
                                                        request
                                         connect                        accept

                                        rio_writen                  rio_readlineb

                                                                                          Await connection
                                      rio_readlineb                  rio_writen           request from
                                                                                          next client
                                                          EOF
                                          close                     rio_readlineb

                                                                        close

Figure 11.12 Overview of network applications based on the sockets interface.

 Aside     What does the _in suffix mean?
 The _in suffix is short for internet, not input.

                                                                                  code/netp/netpfragments.c
    /* IP socket address structure */
    struct sockaddr_in {
        uint16_t        sin_family; /* Protocol family (always AF_INET) */
        uint16_t        sin_port;     /* Port number in network byte order */
        struct in_addr sin_addr;      /* IP address in network byte order */
        unsigned char   sin_zero[8]; /* Pad to sizeof(struct sockaddr) */
    };

    /* Generic socket address structure (for connect, bind, and accept) */
    struct sockaddr {
        uint16_t sa_family;     /* Protocol family */
        char      sa_data[14]; /* Address data */
    };
                                                                                  code/netp/netpfragments.c

Figure 11.13 Socket address structures.

11.4.1 Socket Address Structures
From the perspective of the Linux kernel, a socket is an end point for communi-
cation. From the perspective of a Linux program, a socket is an open file with a
corresponding descriptor.
     Internet socket addresses are stored in 16-byte structures having the type
sockaddr_in, shown in Figure 11.13. For Internet applications, the sin_family
field is AF_INET, the sin_port field is a 16-bit port number, and the sin_addr
field contains a 32-bit IP address. The IP address and port number are always
stored in network (big-endian) byte order.
     The connect, bind, and accept functions require a pointer to a protocol-
specific socket address structure. The problem faced by the designers of the sockets
interface was how to define these functions to accept any kind of socket address
structure. Today, we would use the generic void * pointer, which did not exist in
C at that time. Their solution was to define sockets functions to expect a pointer to
a generic sockaddr structure (Figure 11.13) and then require applications to cast
any pointers to protocol-specific structures to this generic structure. To simplify
our code examples, we follow Stevens’s lead and define the following type:

typedef struct sockaddr SA;

                   We then use this type whenever we need to cast a sockaddr_in structure to a
                   generic sockaddr structure.

                   11.4.2 The socket Function
                   Clients and servers use the socket function to create a socket descriptor.

                     #include <sys/types.h>
                     #include <sys/socket.h>

                     int socket(int domain, int type, int protocol);
                                                       Returns: nonnegative descriptor if OK, −1 on error

                   If we wanted the socket to be the end point for a connection, then we could call
                   socket with the following hardcoded arguments:

                        clientfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

                   where AF_INET indicates that we are using 32-bit IP addresses and SOCK_
                   STREAM indicates that the socket will be an end point for a connection. However,
                   the best practice is to use the getaddrinfo function (Section 11.4.7) to generate
                   these parameters automatically, so that the code is protocol-independent. We will
                   show you how to use getaddrinfo with the socket function in Section 11.4.8.
                       The clientfd descriptor returned by socket is only partially opened and
                   cannot yet be used for reading and writing. How we finish opening the socket
                   depends on whether we are a client or a server. The next section describes how
                   we finish opening the socket if we are a client.

                   11.4.3 The connect Function
                   A client establishes a connection with a server by calling the connect function.

                     #include <sys/socket.h>
                     int connect(int clientfd, const struct sockaddr *addr,
                                 socklen_t addrlen);
                                                                            Returns: 0 if OK, −1 on error

                   The connect function attempts to establish an Internet connection with the server
                   at socket address addr, where addrlen is sizeof(sockaddr_in). The connect
                   function blocks until either the connection is successfully established or an error
                   occurs. If successful, the clientfd descriptor is now ready for reading and writing,
                   and the resulting connection is characterized by the socket pair

                   (x:y, addr.sin_addr:addr.sin_port)

where x is the client’s IP address and y is the ephemeral port that uniquely
identifies the client process on the client host. As with socket, the best practice is
to use getaddrinfo to supply the arguments to connect (see Section 11.4.8).

11.4.4 The bind Function
The remaining sockets functions—bind, listen, and accept—are used by servers
to establish connections with clients.

 #include <sys/socket.h>
 int bind(int sockfd, const struct sockaddr *addr,
          socklen_t addrlen);
                                                        Returns: 0 if OK, −1 on error

The bind function asks the kernel to associate the server’s socket address in addr
with the socket descriptor sockfd. The addrlen argument is sizeof(sockaddr_
in). As with socket and connect, the best practice is to use getaddrinfo to
supply the arguments to bind (see Section 11.4.8).

11.4.5 The listen Function
Clients are active entities that initiate connection requests. Servers are passive
entities that wait for connection requests from clients. By default, the kernel
assumes that a descriptor created by the socket function corresponds to an active
socket that will live on the client end of a connection. A server calls the listen
function to tell the kernel that the descriptor will be used by a server instead of a
client.

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 int listen(int sockfd, int backlog);
                                                        Returns: 0 if OK, −1 on error

The listen function converts sockfd from an active socket to a listening socket
that can accept connection requests from clients. The backlog argument is a hint
about the number of outstanding connection requests that the kernel should queue
up before it starts to refuse requests. The exact meaning of the backlog argument
requires an understanding of TCP/IP that is beyond our scope. We will typically
set it to a large value, such as 1,024.

                                            listenfd(3)
                                                                 1. Server blocks in accept,
                      Client                      Server         waiting for connection request on
                                                                 listening descriptor listenfd.
                         clientfd

                               Connection
                                            listenfd(3)
                                request
                      Client                      Server          2. Client makes connection request by
                                                                  calling and blocking in connect.
                         clientfd

                                            listenfd(3)           3. Server returns connfd from accept.
                                                                  Client returns from connect. Connection
                      Client                      Server          is now established between clientfd
                                                                  and connfd.
                         clientfd           connfd(4)

Figure 11.14 The roles of the listening and connected descriptors.

                   11.4.6 The accept Function
                   Servers wait for connection requests from clients by calling the accept function.

                     #include <sys/socket.h>

                     int accept(int listenfd, struct sockaddr *addr, int *addrlen);
                                              Returns: nonnegative connected descriptor if OK, −1 on error

                        The accept function waits for a connection request from a client to arrive on
                   the listening descriptor listenfd, then fills in the client’s socket address in addr,
                   and returns a connected descriptor that can be used to communicate with the client
                   using Unix I/O functions.
                        The distinction between a listening descriptor and a connected descriptor
                   confuses many students. The listening descriptor serves as an end point for client
                   connection requests. It is typically created once and exists for the lifetime of
                   the server. The connected descriptor is the end point of the connection that is
                   established between the client and the server. It is created each time the server
                   accepts a connection request and exists only as long as it takes the server to service
                   a client.
                        Figure 11.14 outlines the roles of the listening and connected descriptors. In
                   step 1, the server calls accept, which waits for a connection request to arrive on
                   the listening descriptor, which for concreteness we will assume is descriptor 3.
                   Recall that descriptors 0–2 are reserved for the standard files.
                        In step 2, the client calls the connect function, which sends a connection
                   request to listenfd. In step 3, the accept function opens a new connected de-
                   scriptor connfd (which we will assume is descriptor 4), establishes the connection
                   between clientfd and connfd, and then returns connfd to the application. The

 Aside     Why the distinction between listening and connected descriptors?
 You might wonder why the sockets interface makes a distinction between listening and connected
 descriptors. At first glance, it appears to be an unnecessary complication. However, distinguishing
 between the two turns out to be quite useful, because it allows us to build concurrent servers that can
 process many client connections simultaneously. For example, each time a connection request arrives
 on the listening descriptor, we might fork a new process that communicates with the client over its
 connected descriptor. You’ll learn more about concurrent servers in Chapter 12.

client also returns from the connect, and from this point, the client and server
can pass data back and forth by reading and writing clientfd and connfd, re-
spectively.

11.4.7 Host and Service Conversion
Linux provides some powerful functions, called getaddrinfo and getnameinfo,
for converting back and forth between binary socket address structures and the
string representations of hostnames, host addresses, service names, and port
numbers. When used in conjunction with the sockets interface, they allow us to
write network programs that are independent of any particular version of the IP
protocol.

The getaddrinfo Function
The getaddrinfo function converts string representations of hostnames, host
addresses, service names, and port numbers into socket address structures. It is
the modern replacement for the obsolete gethostbyname and getservbyname
functions. Unlike these functions, it is reentrant (see Section 12.7.2) and works
with any protocol.

 #include <sys/types.h>
 #include <sys/socket.h>
 #include <netdb.h>

 int getaddrinfo(const char *host, const char *service,
                 const struct addrinfo *hints,
                 struct addrinfo **result);
                                         Returns: 0 if OK, nonzero error code on error

 void freeaddrinfo(struct addrinfo *result);
                                                                     Returns: nothing

 const char *gai_strerror(int errcode);
                                                               Returns: error message

Figure 11.15                                            addrinfo structs
                                     result
Data structure returned
by getaddrinfo.
                                                         ai_canonname        Socket address structs

                                                           ai_addr
                                                           ai_next

                                                             NULL
                                                           ai_addr
                                                           ai_next

                                                             NULL
                                                           ai_addr
                                                             NULL

                   Given host and service (the two components of a socket address), getaddrinfo
                   returns a result that points to a linked list of addrinfo structures, each of
                   which points to a socket address structure that corresponds to host and service
                   (Figure 11.15).
                        After a client calls getaddrinfo, it walks this list, trying each socket address
                   in turn until the calls to socket and connect succeed and the connection is
                   established. Similarly, a server tries each socket address on the list until the calls
                   to socket and bind succeed and the descriptor is bound to a valid socket address.
                   To avoid memory leaks, the application must eventually free the list by calling
                   freeaddrinfo. If getaddrinfo returns a nonzero error code, the application can
                   call gai_strerror to convert the code to a message string.
                        The host argument to getaddrinfo can be either a domain name or a numeric
                   address (e.g., a dotted-decimal IP address). The service argument can be either
                   a service name (e.g., http) or a decimal port number. If we are not interested in
                   converting the hostname to an address, we can set host to NULL. The same holds
                   for service. However, at least one of them must be specified.
                        The optional hints argument is an addrinfo structure (Figure 11.16) that
                   provides finer control over the list of socket addresses that getaddrinfo re-
                   turns. When passed as a hints argument, only the ai_family, ai_socktype,
                   ai_protocol, and ai_flags fields can be set. The other fields must be set to zero
                   (or NULL). In practice, we use memset to zero the entire structure and then set a
                   few selected fields:

                     .
                          By default, getaddrinfo can return both IPv4 and IPv6 socket addresses.
                          Setting ai_family to AF_INET restricts the list to IPv4 addresses. Setting it
                          to AF_INET6 restricts the list to IPv6 addresses.

                                                                                     code/netp/netpfragments.c
      struct addrinfo {
          int              ai_flags;     /* Hints argument flags */
          int              ai_family;    /* First arg to socket function */
          int              ai_socktype; /* Second arg to socket function */
          int              ai_protocol; /* Third arg to socket function */
          char            *ai_canonname; /* Canonical hostname */
          size_t           ai_addrlen;   /* Size of ai_addr struct */
          struct sockaddr *ai_addr;      /* Ptr to socket address structure */
          struct addrinfo *ai_next;      /* Ptr to next item in linked list */
      };
                                                                                     code/netp/netpfragments.c

Figure 11.16 The addrinfo structure used by getaddrinfo.

  .
      By default, for each unique address associated with host, the getaddrinfo
      function can return up to three addrinfo structures, each with a different ai_
      socktype field: one for connections, one for datagrams (not covered), and
      one for raw sockets (not covered). Setting ai_socktype to SOCK_STREAM
      restricts the list to at most one addrinfo structure for each unique address,
      one whose socket address can be used as the end point of a connection. This
      is the desired behavior for all of our example programs.
  .
      The ai_flags field is a bit mask that further modifies the default behavior.
      You create it by oring combinations of various values. Here are some that we
      find useful:
         AI_ADDRCONFIG. This flag is recommended if you are using connec-
               tions [34]. It asks getaddrinfo to return IPv4 addresses only if the
               local host is configured for IPv4. Similarly for IPv6.
         AI_CANONNAME. By default, the ai_canonname field is NULL. If this
               flag is set, it instructs getaddrinfo to point the ai_canonname field in
               the first addrinfo structure in the list to the canonical (official) name
               of host (see Figure 11.15).
         AI_NUMERICSERV. By default, the service argument can be a service
               name or a port number. This flag forces the service argument to be
               a port number.
         AI_PASSIVE. By default, getaddrinfo returns socket addresses that can
               be used by clients as active sockets in calls to connect. This flag
               instructs it to return socket addresses that can be used by servers as
               listening sockets. In this case, the host argument should be NULL.
               The address field in the resulting socket address structure(s) will be
               the wildcard address, which tells the kernel that this server will accept
               requests to any of the IP addresses for this host. This is the desired
               behavior for all of our example servers.

                        When getaddrinfo creates an addrinfo structure in the output list, it fills
                   in each field except for ai_flags. The ai_addr field points to a socket address
                   structure, the ai_addrlen field gives the size of this socket address structure, and
                   the ai_next field points to the next addrinfo structure in the list. The other fields
                   describe various attributes of the socket address.
                        One of the elegant aspects of getaddrinfo is that the fields in an addrinfo
                   structure are opaque, in the sense that they can be passed directly to the functions
                   in the sockets interface without any further manipulation by the application code.
                   For example, ai_family, ai_socktype, and ai_protocol can be passed directly
                   to socket. Similarly, ai_addr and ai_addrlen can be passed directly to connect
                   and bind. This powerful property allows us to write clients and servers that are
                   independent of any particular version of the IP protocol.

                   The getnameinfo Function
                   The getnameinfo function is the inverse of getaddrinfo. It converts a socket ad-
                   dress structure to the corresponding host and service name strings. It is the modern
                   replacement for the obsolete gethostbyaddr and getservbyport functions, and
                   unlike those functions, it is reentrant and protocol-independent.

                     #include <sys/socket.h>
                     #include <netdb.h>
                     int getnameinfo(const struct sockaddr *sa, socklen_t salen,
                                     char *host, size_t hostlen,
                                     char *service, size_t servlen, int flags);
                                                            Returns: 0 if OK, nonzero error code on error

                   The sa argument points to a socket address structure of size salen bytes, host
                   to a buffer of size hostlen bytes, and service to a buffer of size servlen bytes.
                   The getnameinfo function converts the socket address structure sa to the corre-
                   sponding host and service name strings and copies them to the host and service
                   buffers. If getnameinfo returns a nonzero error code, the application can convert
                   it to a string by calling gai_strerror.
                        If we don’t want the hostname, we can set host to NULL and hostlen to zero.
                   The same holds for the service fields. However, one or the other must be set.
                        The flags argument is a bit mask that modifies the default behavior. You
                   create it by oring combinations of various values. Here are a couple of useful
                   ones:
                      NI_NUMERICHOST. By default, getnameinfo tries to return a domain name
                          in host. Setting this flag will cause it to return a numeric address string
                          instead.
                      NI_NUMERICSERV. By default, getnameinfo will look in /etc/services
                          and if possible, return a service name instead of a port number. Setting
                          this flag forces it to skip the lookup and simply return the port number.

                                                                                    code/netp/hostinfo.c
 1   #include "csapp.h"
 2
 3   int main(int argc, char **argv)
 4   {
 5       struct addrinfo *p, *listp, hints;
 6       char buf[MAXLINE];
 7       int rc, flags;
 8
 9        if (argc != 2) {
10            fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <domain name>\n", argv[0]);
11            exit(0);
12        }
13
14        /* Get a list of addrinfo records */
15        memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(struct addrinfo));
16        hints.ai_family = AF_INET;       /* IPv4 only */
17        hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM; /* Connections only */
18        if ((rc = getaddrinfo(argv[1], NULL, &hints, &listp)) != 0) {
19            fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo error: %s\n", gai_strerror(rc));
20            exit(1);
21        }
22
23        /* Walk the list and display each IP address */
24        flags = NI_NUMERICHOST; /* Display address string instead of domain name */
25        for (p = listp; p; p = p->ai_next) {
26            Getnameinfo(p->ai_addr, p->ai_addrlen, buf, MAXLINE, NULL, 0, flags);
27            printf("%s\n", buf);
28        }
29
30        /* Clean up */
31        Freeaddrinfo(listp);
32
33        exit(0);
34   }
                                                                                    code/netp/hostinfo.c

Figure 11.17 Hostinfo displays the mapping of a domain name to its associated IP addresses.

    Figure 11.17 shows a simple program, called hostinfo, that uses getaddrinfo
and getnameinfo to display the mapping of a domain name to its associated IP
addresses. It is similar to the nslookup program from Section 11.3.2.
    First, we initialize the hints structure so that getaddrinfo returns the ad-
dresses we want. In this case, we are looking for 32-bit IP addresses (line 16)

                   that can be used as end points of connections (line 17). Since we are only asking
                   getaddrinfo to convert domain names, we call it with a NULL service argument.
                        After the call to getaddrinfo, we walk the list of addrinfo structures, using
                   getnameinfo to convert each socket address to a dotted-decimal address string.
                   After walking the list, we are careful to free it by calling freeaddrinfo (although
                   for this simple program it is not strictly necessary).
                        When we run hostinfo, we see that twitter.com maps to four IP addresses,
                   which is what we saw using nslookup in Section 11.3.2.

                   linux> ./hostinfo twitter.com
                   199.16.156.102
                   199.16.156.230
                   199.16.156.6
                   199.16.156.70

                   Practice Problem 11.4 (solution page 1004)
                   The getaddrinfo and getnameinfo functions subsume the functionality of inet_
                   pton and inet_ntop, respectively, and they provide a higher-level of abstraction
                   that is independent of any particular address format. To convince yourself how
                   handy this is, write a version of hostinfo (Figure 11.17) that uses inet_ntop in-
                   stead of getnameinfo to convert each socket address to a dotted-decimal address
                   string.

                   11.4.8 Helper Functions for the Sockets Interface
                   The getaddrinfo function and the sockets interface can seem somewhat daunting
                   when you first learn about them. We find it convenient to wrap them with higher-
                   level helper functions, called open_clientfd and open_listenfd, that clients and
                   servers can use when they want to communicate with each other.

                   The open_clientfd Function
                   A client establishes a connection with a server by calling open_clientfd.

                     #include "csapp.h"
                     int open_clientfd(char *hostname, char *port);
                                                                  Returns: descriptor if OK, −1 on error

                   The open_clientfd function establishes a connection with a server running on
                   host hostname and listening for connection requests on port number port. It
                   returns an open socket descriptor that is ready for input and output using the
                   Unix I/O functions. Figure 11.18 shows the code for open_clientfd.
                       We call getaddrinfo, which returns a list of addrinfo structures, each of
                   which points to a socket address structure that is suitable for establishing a con-

                                                                                           code/src/csapp.c
 1   int open_clientfd(char *hostname, char *port) {
 2       int clientfd;
 3       struct addrinfo hints, *listp, *p;
 4
 5        /* Get a list of potential server addresses */
 6        memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(struct addrinfo));
 7        hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM; /* Open a connection */
 8        hints.ai_flags = AI_NUMERICSERV; /* ... using a numeric port arg. */
 9        hints.ai_flags |= AI_ADDRCONFIG; /* Recommended for connections */
10        Getaddrinfo(hostname, port, &hints, &listp);
11
12        /* Walk the list for one that we can successfully connect to */
13        for (p = listp; p; p = p->ai_next) {
14            /* Create a socket descriptor */
15            if ((clientfd = socket(p->ai_family, p->ai_socktype, p->ai_protocol)) < 0)
16                continue; /* Socket failed, try the next */
17
18             /* Connect to the server */
19             if (connect(clientfd, p->ai_addr, p->ai_addrlen) != -1)
20                 break; /* Success */
21             Close(clientfd); /* Connect failed, try another */
22        }
23
24        /* Clean up */
25        Freeaddrinfo(listp);
26        if (!p) /* All connects failed */
27             return -1;
28        else     /* The last connect succeeded */
29             return clientfd;
30   }
                                                                                           code/src/csapp.c

Figure 11.18 open_clientfd: Helper function that establishes a connection with a server. It is reentrant
and protocol-independent.

nection with a server running on hostname and listening on port. We then walk
the list, trying each list entry in turn, until the calls to socket and connect suc-
ceed. If the connect fails, we are careful to close the socket descriptor before
trying the next entry. If the connect succeeds, we free the list memory and return
the socket descriptor to the client, which can immediately begin using Unix I/O
to communicate with the server.
     Notice how there is no dependence on any particular version of IP anywhere
in the code. The arguments to socket and connect are generated for us automat-
ically by getaddrinfo, which allows our code to be clean and portable.

                   The open_listenfd Function
                   A server creates a listening descriptor that is ready to receive connection requests
                   by calling the open_listenfd function.

                     #include "csapp.h"
                     int open_listenfd(char *port);
                                                                    Returns: descriptor if OK, −1 on error

                   The open_listenfd function returns a listening descriptor that is ready to receive
                   connection requests on port port. Figure 11.19 shows the code for open_listenfd.
                        The style is similar to open_clientfd. We call getaddrinfo and then walk
                   the resulting list until the calls to socket and bind succeed. Note that in line 20
                   we use the setsockopt function (not described here) to configure the server so
                   that it can be terminated, be restarted, and begin accepting connection requests
                   immediately. By default, a restarted server will deny connection requests from
                   clients for approximately 30 seconds, which seriously hinders debugging.
                        Since we have called getaddrinfo with the AI_PASSIVE flag and a NULL
                   host argument, the address field in each socket address structure is set to the
                   wildcard address, which tells the kernel that this server will accept requests to any
                   of the IP addresses for this host.
                        Finally, we call the listen function to convert listenfd to a listening descrip-
                   tor and return it to the caller. If the listen fails, we are careful to avoid a memory
                   leak by closing the descriptor before returning.

                   11.4.9 Example Echo Client and Server
                   The best way to learn the sockets interface is to study example code. Figure 11.20
                   shows the code for an echo client. After establishing a connection with the server,
                   the client enters a loop that repeatedly reads a text line from standard input, sends
                   the text line to the server, reads the echo line from the server, and prints the result
                   to standard output. The loop terminates when fgets encounters EOF on standard
                   input, either because the user typed Ctrl+D at the keyboard or because it has
                   exhausted the text lines in a redirected input file.
                        After the loop terminates, the client closes the descriptor. This results in an
                   EOF notification being sent to the server, which it detects when it receives a return
                   code of zero from its rio_readlineb function. After closing its descriptor, the
                   client terminates. Since the client’s kernel automatically closes all open descriptors
                   when a process terminates, the close in line 24 is not necessary. However, it is good
                   programming practice to explicitly close any descriptors that you have opened.
                        Figure 11.21 shows the main routine for the echo server. After opening the
                   listening descriptor, it enters an infinite loop. Each iteration waits for a connection
                   request from a client, prints the domain name and port of the connected client, and
                   then calls the echo function that services the client. After the echo routine returns,

                                                                                       code/src/csapp.c
 1   int open_listenfd(char *port)
 2   {
 3       struct addrinfo hints, *listp, *p;
 4       int listenfd, optval=1;
 5
 6       /* Get a list of potential server addresses */
 7       memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(struct addrinfo));
 8       hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;             /* Accept connections */
 9       hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE | AI_ADDRCONFIG; /* ... on any IP address */
10       hints.ai_flags |= AI_NUMERICSERV;            /* ... using port number */
11       Getaddrinfo(NULL, port, &hints, &listp);
12
13       /* Walk the list for one that we can bind to */
14       for (p = listp; p; p = p->ai_next) {
15           /* Create a socket descriptor */
16           if ((listenfd = socket(p->ai_family, p->ai_socktype, p->ai_protocol)) < 0)
17               continue; /* Socket failed, try the next */
18
19            /* Eliminates "Address already in use" error from bind */
20            Setsockopt(listenfd, SOL_SOCKET, SO_REUSEADDR,
21                       (const void *)&optval , sizeof(int));
22
23            /* Bind the descriptor to the address */
24            if (bind(listenfd, p->ai_addr, p->ai_addrlen) == 0)
25                break; /* Success */
26            Close(listenfd); /* Bind failed, try the next */
27       }
28
29       /* Clean up */
30       Freeaddrinfo(listp);
31       if (!p) /* No address worked */
32           return -1;
33
34       /* Make it a listening socket ready to accept connection requests */
35       if (listen(listenfd, LISTENQ) < 0) {
36           Close(listenfd);
37           return -1;
38       }
39       return listenfd;
40   }
                                                                                       code/src/csapp.c

Figure 11.19 open_listenfd: Helper function that opens and returns a listening descriptor. It is
reentrant and protocol-independent.

                                                                                       code/netp/echoclient.c
                    1    #include "csapp.h"
                    2
                    3    int main(int argc, char **argv)
                    4    {
                    5        int clientfd;
                    6        char *host, *port, buf[MAXLINE];
                    7        rio_t rio;
                    8
                    9        if (argc != 3) {
                   10            fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <host> <port>\n", argv[0]);
                   11            exit(0);
                   12        }
                   13        host = argv[1];
                   14        port = argv[2];
                   15
                   16        clientfd = Open_clientfd(host, port);
                   17        Rio_readinitb(&rio, clientfd);
                   18
                   19        while (Fgets(buf, MAXLINE, stdin) != NULL) {
                   20            Rio_writen(clientfd, buf, strlen(buf));
                   21            Rio_readlineb(&rio, buf, MAXLINE);
                   22            Fputs(buf, stdout);
                   23        }
                   24        Close(clientfd);
                   25        exit(0);
                   26    }
                                                                                       code/netp/echoclient.c

Figure 11.20 Echo client main routine.

                   the main routine closes the connected descriptor. Once the client and server have
                   closed their respective descriptors, the connection is terminated.
                        The clientaddr variable in line 9 is a socket address structure that is passed
                   to accept. Before accept returns, it fills in clientaddr with the socket address of
                   the client on the other end of the connection. Notice how we declare clientaddr
                   as type struct sockaddr_storage rather than struct sockaddr_in. By defini-
                   tion, the sockaddr_storage structure is large enough to hold any type of socket
                   address, which keeps the code protocol-independent.
                        Notice that our simple echo server can only handle one client at a time.
                   A server of this type that iterates through clients, one at a time, is called an iterative
                   server. In Chapter 12, we will learn how to build more sophisticated concurrent
                   servers that can handle multiple clients simultaneously.
                        Finally, Figure 11.22 shows the code for the echo routine, which repeatedly
                   reads and writes lines of text until the rio_readlineb function encounters EOF
                   in line 10.

                                                                                   code/netp/echoserveri.c
 1   #include "csapp.h"
 2
 3   void echo(int connfd);
 4
 5   int main(int argc, char **argv)
 6   {
 7       int listenfd, connfd;
 8       socklen_t clientlen;
 9       struct sockaddr_storage clientaddr; /* Enough space for any address */
10       char client_hostname[MAXLINE], client_port[MAXLINE];
11
12       if (argc != 2) {
13           fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <port>\n", argv[0]);
14           exit(0);
15       }
16
17       listenfd = Open_listenfd(argv[1]);
18       while (1) {
19           clientlen = sizeof(struct sockaddr_storage);
20           connfd = Accept(listenfd, (SA *)&clientaddr, &clientlen);
21           Getnameinfo((SA *) &clientaddr, clientlen, client_hostname, MAXLINE,
22                       client_port, MAXLINE, 0);
23           printf("Connected to (%s, %s)\n", client_hostname, client_port);
24           echo(connfd);
25           Close(connfd);
26       }
27       exit(0);
28   }
                                                                                   code/netp/echoserveri.c

Figure 11.21 Iterative echo server main routine.

                                                                   code/netp/echo.c
 1   #include "csapp.h"
 2
 3   void echo(int connfd)
 4   {
 5       size_t n;
 6       char buf[MAXLINE];
 7       rio_t rio;
 8
 9       Rio_readinitb(&rio, connfd);
10       while((n = Rio_readlineb(&rio, buf, MAXLINE)) != 0) {
11           printf("server received %d bytes\n", (int)n);
12           Rio_writen(connfd, buf, n);
13       }
14   }
                                                                   code/netp/echo.c

Figure 11.22 echo function that reads and echoes text lines.

 Aside     What does EOF on a connection mean?
 The idea of EOF is often confusing to students, especially in the context of Internet connections. First,
 we need to understand that there is no such thing as an EOF character. Rather, EOF is a condition that
 is detected by the kernel. An application finds out about the EOF condition when it receives a zero
 return code from the read function. For disk files, EOF occurs when the current file position exceeds
 the file length. For Internet connections, EOF occurs when a process closes its end of the connection.
 The process at the other end of the connection detects the EOF when it attempts to read past the last
 byte in the stream.

                    11.5      Web Servers
                    So far we have discussed network programming in the context of a simple echo
                    server. In this section, we will show you how to use the basic ideas of network
                    programming to build your own small, but quite functional, Web server.

                    11.5.1 Web Basics
                    Web clients and servers interact using a text-based application-level protocol
                    known as HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol). HTTP is a simple protocol. A Web
                    client (known as a browser) opens an Internet connection to a server and requests
                    some content. The server responds with the requested content and then closes the
                    connection. The browser reads the content and displays it on the screen.
                         What distinguishes Web services from conventional file retrieval services such
                    as FTP? The main difference is that Web content can be written in a language
                    known as HTML (hypertext markup language). An HTML program (page) con-
                    tains instructions (tags) that tell the browser how to display various text and
                    graphical objects in the page. For example, the code

                    <b> Make me bold! </b>

                    tells the browser to print the text between the <b> and </b> tags in boldface type.
                    However, the real power of HTML is that a page can contain pointers (hyperlinks)
                    to content stored on any Internet host. For example, an HTML line of the form

                    <a href="http://www.cmu.edu/index.html">Carnegie Mellon</a>

                    tells the browser to highlight the text object Carnegie Mellon and to create a
                    hyperlink to an HTML file called index.html that is stored on the CMU Web
                    server. If the user clicks on the highlighted text object, the browser requests the
                    corresponding HTML file from the CMU server and displays it.

 Aside       Origins of the World Wide Web
 The World Wide Web was invented by Tim Berners-Lee, a software engineer working at CERN, a Swiss
 physics lab. In 1989, Berners-Lee wrote an internal memo proposing a distributed hypertext system
 that would connect a “web of notes with links.” The intent of the proposed system was to help CERN
 scientists share and manage information. Over the next two years, after Berners-Lee implemented
 the first Web server and Web browser, the Web developed a small following within CERN and a few
 other sites. A pivotal event occurred in 1993, when Marc Andreesen (who later founded Netscape and
 Andreessen Horowitz) and his colleagues at NCSA released a graphical browser called mosaic for all
 three major platforms: Linux, Windows, and Macintosh. After the release of mosaic, interest in the
 Web exploded, with the number of Web sites increasing at an exponential rate. By 2015, there were
 over 975,000,000 sites worldwide. (Source: Netcraft Web Survey)

MIME type                       Description
text/html                       HTML page
text/plain                      Unformatted text
application/postscript          Postscript document
image/gif                       Binary image encoded in GIF format
image/png                       Binary image encoded in PNG format
image/jpeg                      Binary image encoded in JPEG format

Figure 11.23 Example MIME types.

11.5.2 Web Content
To Web clients and servers, content is a sequence of bytes with an associated MIME
(multipurpose internet mail extensions) type. Figure 11.23 shows some common
MIME types.
    Web servers provide content to clients in two different ways:

  .
      Fetch a disk file and return its contents to the client. The disk file is known
      as static content and the process of returning the file to the client is known as
      serving static content.
  .
      Run an executable file and return its output to the client. The output produced
      by the executable at run time is known as dynamic content, and the process of
      running the program and returning its output to the client is known as serving
      dynamic content.

    Every piece of content returned by a Web server is associated with some file
that it manages. Each of these files has a unique name known as a URL (universal
resource locator). For example, the URL

http://www.google.com:80/index.html

                   identifies an HTML file called /index.html on Internet host www.google.com
                   that is managed by a Web server listening on port 80. The port number is op-
                   tional and defaults to the well-known HTTP port 80. URLs for executable files
                   can include program arguments after the filename. A ‘?’ character separates the
                   filename from the arguments, and each argument is separated by an ‘&’ character.
                   For example, the URL

                   http://bluefish.ics.cs.cmu.edu:8000/cgi-bin/adder?15000&213

                   identifies an executable called /cgi-bin/adder that will be called with two argu-
                   ment strings: 15000 and 213. Clients and servers use different parts of the URL
                   during a transaction. For instance, a client uses the prefix

                   http://www.google.com:80

                   to determine what kind of server to contact, where the server is, and what port it
                   is listening on. The server uses the suffix

                   /index.html

                   to find the file on its filesystem and to determine whether the request is for static
                   or dynamic content.
                        There are several points to understand about how servers interpret the suffix
                   of a URL:
                     .
                         There are no standard rules for determining whether a URL refers to static
                         or dynamic content. Each server has its own rules for the files it manages.
                         A classic (old-fashioned) approach is to identify a set of directories, such as
                         cgi-bin, where all executables must reside.
                     .
                         The initial ‘/’ in the suffix does not denote the Linux root directory. Rather, it
                         denotes the home directory for whatever kind of content is being requested.
                         For example, a server might be configured so that all static content is stored
                         in directory /usr/httpd/html and all dynamic content is stored in directory
                         /usr/httpd/cgi-bin.
                     .
                         The minimal URL suffix is the ‘/’ character, which all servers expand to some
                         default home page such as /index.html. This explains why it is possible to
                         fetch the home page of a site by simply typing a domain name to the browser.
                         The browser appends the missing ‘/’ to the URL and passes it to the server,
                         which expands the ‘/’ to some default filename.

                   11.5.3 HTTP Transactions
                   Since HTTP is based on text lines transmitted over Internet connections, we can
                   use the Linux telnet program to conduct transactions with any Web server on
                   the Internet. The telnet program has been largely supplanted by ssh as a remote
                   login tool, but it is very handy for debugging servers that talk to clients with text
                   lines over connections. For example, Figure 11.24 uses telnet to request the home
                   page from the AOL Web server.

 1   linux> telnet www.aol.com 80              Client: open connection to server
 2   Trying 205.188.146.23...                  Telnet prints 3 lines to the terminal
 3   Connected to aol.com.
 4   Escape character is ’^]’.
 5   GET / HTTP/1.1                            Client: request line
 6   Host: www.aol.com                         Client: required HTTP/1.1 header
 7                                             Client: empty line terminates headers
 8   HTTP/1.0 200 OK                           Server: response line
 9   MIME-Version: 1.0                         Server: followed by five response headers
10   Date: Mon, 8 Jan 2010 4:59:42 GMT
11   Server: Apache-Coyote/1.1
12   Content-Type: text/html           Server: expect HTML in the response body
13   Content-Length: 42092             Server: expect 42,092 bytes in the response body
14                                             Server: empty line terminates response headers
15   <html>                             Server: first HTML line in response body
16   ...                                Server: 766 lines of HTML not shown
17   </html>                            Server: last HTML line in response body
18   Connection closed by foreign host. Server: closes connection
19   linux>                             Client: closes connection and terminates

Figure 11.24 Example of an HTTP transaction that serves static content.

     In line 1, we run telnet from a Linux shell and ask it to open a connection to
the AOL Web server. Telnet prints three lines of output to the terminal, opens
the connection, and then waits for us to enter text (line 5). Each time we enter
a text line and hit the enter key, telnet reads the line, appends carriage return
and line feed characters (‘\r\n’ in C notation), and sends the line to the server.
This is consistent with the HTTP standard, which requires every text line to be
terminated by a carriage return and line feed pair. To initiate the transaction, we
enter an HTTP request (lines 5–7). The server replies with an HTTP response
(lines 8–17) and then closes the connection (line 18).

HTTP Requests
An HTTP request consists of a request line (line 5), followed by zero or more
request headers (line 6), followed by an empty text line that terminates the list of
headers (line 7). A request line has the form

method URI version

HTTP supports a number of different methods, including GET, POST, OPTIONS,
HEAD, PUT, DELETE, and TRACE. We will only discuss the workhorse GET
method, which accounts for a majority of HTTP requests. The GET method
instructs the server to generate and return the content identified by the URI

                   (uniform resource identifier). The URI is the suffix of the corresponding URL
                   that includes the filename and optional arguments.3
                       The version field in the request line indicates the HTTP version to which the
                   request conforms. The most recent HTTP version is HTTP/1.1 [37]. HTTP/1.0 is an
                   earlier, much simpler version from 1996 [6]. HTTP/1.1 defines additional headers
                   that provide support for advanced features such as caching and security, as well
                   as a mechanism that allows a client and server to perform multiple transactions
                   over the same persistent connection. In practice, the two versions are compatible
                   because HTTP/1.0 clients and servers simply ignore unknown HTTP/1.1 headers.
                       To summarize, the request line in line 5 asks the server to fetch and return
                   the HTML file /index.html. It also informs the server that the remainder of the
                   request will be in HTTP/1.1 format.
                       Request headers provide additional information to the server, such as the
                   brand name of the browser or the MIME types that the browser understands.
                   Request headers have the form

                   header-name: header-data

                   For our purposes, the only header to be concerned with is the Host header (line 6),
                   which is required in HTTP/1.1 requests, but not in HTTP/1.0 requests. The Host
                   header is used by proxy caches, which sometimes serve as intermediaries between
                   a browser and the origin server that manages the requested file. Multiple proxies
                   can exist between a client and an origin server in a so-called proxy chain. The data
                   in the Host header, which identifies the domain name of the origin server, allow a
                   proxy in the middle of a proxy chain to determine if it might have a locally cached
                   copy of the requested content.
                        Continuing with our example in Figure 11.24, the empty text line in line 7
                   (generated by hitting enter on our keyboard) terminates the headers and instructs
                   the server to send the requested HTML file.

                   HTTP Responses
                   HTTP responses are similar to HTTP requests. An HTTP response consists of
                   a response line (line 8), followed by zero or more response headers (lines 9–13),
                   followed by an empty line that terminates the headers (line 14), followed by the
                   response body (lines 15–17). A response line has the form

                   version status-code status-message

                   The version field describes the HTTP version that the response conforms to.
                   The status-code is a three-digit positive integer that indicates the disposition of
                   the request. The status-message gives the English equivalent of the error code.
                   Figure 11.25 lists some common status codes and their corresponding messages.

                   3. Actually, this is only true when a browser requests content. If a proxy server requests content, then
                   the URI must be the complete URL.

 Aside        Passing arguments in HTTP POST requests
 Arguments for HTTP POST requests are passed in the request body rather than in the URI.

Status code      Status message                Description
   200           OK                            Request was handled without error.
   301           Moved permanently             Content has moved to the hostname in the Location header.
   400           Bad request                   Request could not be understood by the server.
   403           Forbidden                     Server lacks permission to access the requested file.
   404           Not found                     Server could not find the requested file.
   501           Not implemented               Server does not support the request method.
   505           HTTP version not supported    Server does not support version in request.

Figure 11.25 Some HTTP status codes.

     The response headers in lines 9–13 provide additional information about the
response. For our purposes, the two most important headers are Content-Type
(line 12), which tells the client the MIME type of the content in the response body,
and Content-Length (line 13), which indicates its size in bytes.
     The empty text line in line 14 that terminates the response headers is followed
by the response body, which contains the requested content.

11.5.4 Serving Dynamic Content
If we stop to think for a moment how a server might provide dynamic content
to a client, certain questions arise. For example, how does the client pass any
program arguments to the server? How does the server pass these arguments
to the child process that it creates? How does the server pass other information
to the child that it might need to generate the content? Where does the child
send its output? These questions are addressed by a de facto standard called CGI
(common gateway interface).

How Does the Client Pass Program Arguments to the Server?
Arguments for GET requests are passed in the URI. As we have seen, a ‘?’ char-
acter separates the filename from the arguments, and each argument is separated
by an ‘&’ character. Spaces are not allowed in arguments and must be represented
with the %20 string. Similar encodings exist for other special characters.

How Does the Server Pass Arguments to the Child?
After a server receives a request such as

GET /cgi-bin/adder?15000&213 HTTP/1.1

                   Environment variable       Description
                   QUERY_STRING               Program arguments
                   SERVER_PORT                Port that the parent is listening on
                   REQUEST_METHOD             GET or POST
                   REMOTE_HOST                Domain name of client
                   REMOTE_ADDR                Dotted-decimal IP address of client
                   CONTENT_TYPE               POST only: MIME type of the request body
                   CONTENT_LENGTH             POST only: Size in bytes of the request body

Figure 11.26 Examples of CGI environment variables.

                   it calls fork to create a child process and calls execve to run the /cgi-bin/adder
                   program in the context of the child. Programs like the adder program are often
                   referred to as CGI programs because they obey the rules of the CGI standard.
                   Before the call to execve, the child process sets the CGI environment variable
                   QUERY_STRING to 15000&213, which the adder program can reference at run
                   time using the Linux getenv function.

                   How Does the Server Pass Other Information to the Child?
                   CGI defines a number of other environment variables that a CGI program can
                   expect to be set when it runs. Figure 11.26 shows a subset.

                   Where Does the Child Send Its Output?
                   A CGI program sends its dynamic content to the standard output. Before the
                   child process loads and runs the CGI program, it uses the Linux dup2 function
                   to redirect standard output to the connected descriptor that is associated with
                   the client. Thus, anything that the CGI program writes to standard output goes
                   directly to the client.
                       Notice that since the parent does not know the type or size of the content that
                   the child generates, the child is responsible for generating the Content-type and
                   Content-length response headers, as well as the empty line that terminates the
                   headers.
                       Figure 11.27 shows a simple CGI program that sums its two arguments and
                   returns an HTML file with the result to the client. Figure 11.28 shows an HTTP
                   transaction that serves dynamic content from the adder program.

                   Practice Problem 11.5 (solution page 1005)
                   Assume that a CGI program needs to send dynamic content to the client. This is
                   typically done by making the CGI program send its content to the standard output.
                   Explain how this content is sent to the client.

     Aside    Passing arguments in HTTP POST requests to CGI programs
     For POST requests, the child would also need to redirect standard input to the connected descriptor.
     The CGI program would then read the arguments in the request body from standard input.

                                                                               code/netp/tiny/cgi-bin/adder.c
 1      #include "csapp.h"
 2
 3      int main(void) {
 4          char *buf, *p;
 5          char arg1[MAXLINE], arg2[MAXLINE], content[MAXLINE];
 6          int n1=0, n2=0;
 7
 8           /* Extract the two arguments */
 9           if ((buf = getenv("QUERY_STRING")) != NULL) {
10               p = strchr(buf, ’&’);
11               *p = ’\0’;
12               strcpy(arg1, buf);
13               strcpy(arg2, p+1);
14               n1 = atoi(arg1);
15               n2 = atoi(arg2);
16           }
17
18           /* Make the response body */
19           sprintf(content, "QUERY_STRING=%s", buf);
20           sprintf(content, "Welcome to add.com: ");
21           sprintf(content, "%sTHE Internet addition portal.\r\n<p>", content);
22           sprintf(content, "%sThe answer is: %d + %d = %d\r\n<p>",
23                   content, n1, n2, n1 + n2);
24           sprintf(content, "%sThanks for visiting!\r\n", content);
25
26           /* Generate the HTTP response */
27           printf("Connection: close\r\n");
28           printf("Content-length: %d\r\n", (int)strlen(content));
29           printf("Content-type: text/html\r\n\r\n");
30           printf("%s", content);
31           fflush(stdout);
32
33           exit(0);
34      }
                                                                               code/netp/tiny/cgi-bin/adder.c

Figure 11.27 CGI program that sums two integers.

 1    linux> telnet kittyhawk.cmcl.cs.cmu.edu 8000 Client: open connection
 2    Trying 128.2.194.242...
 3    Connected to kittyhawk.cmcl.cs.cmu.edu.
 4    Escape character is ’^]’.
 5    GET /cgi-bin/adder?15000&213 HTTP/1.0 Client: request line
 6                                           Client: empty line terminates headers
 7    HTTP/1.0 200 OK                        Server: response line
 8    Server: Tiny Web Server                Server: identify server
 9    Content-length: 115                    Adder: expect 115 bytes in response body
10    Content-type: text/html                Adder: expect HTML in response body
11                                           Adder: empty line terminates headers
12    Welcome to add.com: THE Internet addition portal. Adder: first HTML line
13    <p>The answer is: 15000 + 213 = 15213 Adder: second HTML line in response body
14    <p>Thanks for visiting!                Adder: third HTML line in response body
15    Connection closed by foreign host.     Server: closes connection
16    linux>                                 Client: closes connection and terminates

Figure 11.28 An HTTP transaction that serves dynamic HTML content.

                    11.6     Putting It Together: The Tiny Web Server
                    We conclude our discussion of network programming by developing a small but
                    functioning Web server called Tiny. Tiny is an interesting program. It combines
                    many of the ideas that we have learned about, such as process control, Unix I/O,
                    the sockets interface, and HTTP, in only 250 lines of code. While it lacks the
                    functionality, robustness, and security of a real server, it is powerful enough to
                    serve both static and dynamic content to real Web browsers. We encourage you
                    to study it and implement it yourself. It is quite exciting (even for the authors!) to
                    point a real browser at your own server and watch it display a complicated Web
                    page with text and graphics.

                    The Tiny main Routine
                    Figure 11.29 shows Tiny’s main routine. Tiny is an iterative server that listens
                    for connection requests on the port that is passed in the command line. After
                    opening a listening socket by calling the open_listenfd function, Tiny executes
                    the typical infinite server loop, repeatedly accepting a connection request (line 32),
                    performing a transaction (line 36), and closing its end of the connection (line 37).

                    The doit Function
                    The doit function in Figure 11.30 handles one HTTP transaction. First, we
                    read and parse the request line (lines 11–14). Notice that we are using the rio_
                    readlineb function from Figure 10.8 to read the request line.
                        Tiny supports only the GET method. If the client requests another method
                    (such as POST), we send it an error message and return to the main routine

                                                                                code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
 1   /*
 2    * tiny.c - A simple, iterative HTTP/1.0 Web server that uses the
 3    *     GET method to serve static and dynamic content
 4    */
 5   #include "csapp.h"
 6
 7   void doit(int fd);
 8   void read_requesthdrs(rio_t *rp);
 9   int parse_uri(char *uri, char *filename, char *cgiargs);
10   void serve_static(int fd, char *filename, int filesize);
11   void get_filetype(char *filename, char *filetype);
12   void serve_dynamic(int fd, char *filename, char *cgiargs);
13   void clienterror(int fd, char *cause, char *errnum,
14                    char *shortmsg, char *longmsg);
15
16   int main(int argc, char **argv)
17   {
18       int listenfd, connfd;
19       char hostname[MAXLINE], port[MAXLINE];
20       socklen_t clientlen;
21       struct sockaddr_storage clientaddr;
22
23       /* Check command-line args */
24       if (argc != 2) {
25           fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <port>\n", argv[0]);
26           exit(1);
27       }
28
29       listenfd = Open_listenfd(argv[1]);
30       while (1) {
31           clientlen = sizeof(clientaddr);
32           connfd = Accept(listenfd, (SA *)&clientaddr, &clientlen);
33           Getnameinfo((SA *) &clientaddr, clientlen, hostname, MAXLINE,
34                       port, MAXLINE, 0);
35           printf("Accepted connection from (%s, %s)\n", hostname, port);
36           doit(connfd);
37           Close(connfd);
38       }
39   }
                                                                                code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.29 The Tiny Web server.

                                                                                code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
 1    void doit(int fd)
 2    {
 3        int is_static;
 4        struct stat sbuf;
 5        char buf[MAXLINE], method[MAXLINE], uri[MAXLINE], version[MAXLINE];
 6        char filename[MAXLINE], cgiargs[MAXLINE];
 7        rio_t rio;
 8
 9           /* Read request line and headers */
10           Rio_readinitb(&rio, fd);
11           Rio_readlineb(&rio, buf, MAXLINE);
12           printf("Request headers:\n");
13           printf("%s", buf);
14           sscanf(buf, "%s %s %s", method, uri, version);
15           if (strcasecmp(method, "GET")) {
16              clienterror(fd, method, "501", "Not implemented",
17                       "Tiny does not implement this method");
18               return;
19           }
20           read_requesthdrs(&rio);
21
22           /* Parse URI from GET request */
23           is_static = parse_uri(uri, filename, cgiargs);
24           if (stat(filename, &sbuf) < 0) {
25               clienterror(fd, filename, "404", "Not found",
26                           "Tiny couldn’t find this file");
27               return;
28           }
29
30           if (is_static) { /* Serve static content */
31               if (!(S_ISREG(sbuf.st_mode)) || !(S_IRUSR & sbuf.st_mode)) {
32                   clienterror(fd, filename, "403", "Forbidden",
33                               "Tiny couldn’t read the file");
34                   return;
35               }
36               serve_static(fd, filename, sbuf.st_size);
37           }
38           else { /* Serve dynamic content */
39               if (!(S_ISREG(sbuf.st_mode)) || !(S_IXUSR & sbuf.st_mode)) {
40                   clienterror(fd, filename, "403", "Forbidden",
41                               "Tiny couldn’t run the CGI program");
42                   return;
43               }
44               serve_dynamic(fd, filename, cgiargs);
45           }
46    }
                                                                                code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.30 Tiny doit handles one HTTP transaction.

(lines 15–19), which then closes the connection and awaits the next connection
request. Otherwise, we read and (as we shall see) ignore any request headers
(line 20).
     Next, we parse the URI into a filename and a possibly empty CGI argument
string, and we set a flag that indicates whether the request is for static or dynamic
content (line 23). If the file does not exist on disk, we immediately send an error
message to the client and return.
     Finally, if the request is for static content, we verify that the file is a regular
file and that we have read permission (line 31). If so, we serve the static content
(line 36) to the client. Similarly, if the request is for dynamic content, we verify
that the file is executable (line 39), and, if so, we go ahead and serve the dynamic
content (line 44).

The clienterror Function
Tiny lacks many of the error-handling features of a real server. However, it does
check for some obvious errors and reports them to the client. The clienterror
function in Figure 11.31 sends an HTTP response to the client with the appropriate

                                                                                           code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
 1    void clienterror(int fd, char *cause, char *errnum,
 2                     char *shortmsg, char *longmsg)
 3    {
 4        char buf[MAXLINE], body[MAXBUF];
 5
 6         /* Build the HTTP response body */
 7         sprintf(body, "<html><title>Tiny Error</title>");
 8         sprintf(body, "%s<body bgcolor=""ffffff"">\r\n", body);
 9         sprintf(body, "%s%s: %s\r\n", body, errnum, shortmsg);
10         sprintf(body, "%s<p>%s: %s\r\n", body, longmsg, cause);
11         sprintf(body, "%s<hr><em>The Tiny Web server</em>\r\n", body);
12
13         /* Print the HTTP response */
14         sprintf(buf, "HTTP/1.0 %s %s\r\n", errnum, shortmsg);
15         Rio_writen(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
16         sprintf(buf, "Content-type: text/html\r\n");
17         Rio_writen(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
18         sprintf(buf, "Content-length: %d\r\n\r\n", (int)strlen(body));
19         Rio_writen(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
20         Rio_writen(fd, body, strlen(body));
21    }
                                                                                           code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.31 Tiny clienterror sends an error message to the client.

                                                                                    code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
                    1    void read_requesthdrs(rio_t *rp)
                    2    {
                    3        char buf[MAXLINE];
                    4
                    5        Rio_readlineb(rp, buf, MAXLINE);
                    6        while(strcmp(buf, "\r\n")) {
                    7            Rio_readlineb(rp, buf, MAXLINE);
                    8            printf("%s", buf);
                    9        }
                   10        return;
                   11    }
                                                                                    code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.32 Tiny read_requesthdrs reads and ignores request headers.

                   status code and status message in the response line, along with an HTML file in
                   the response body that explains the error to the browser’s user.
                        Recall that an HTML response should indicate the size and type of the content
                   in the body. Thus, we have opted to build the HTML content as a single string so
                   that we can easily determine its size. Also, notice that we are using the robust
                   rio_writen function from Figure 10.4 for all output.

                   The read_requesthdrs Function
                   Tiny does not use any of the information in the request headers. It simply reads and
                   ignores them by calling the read_requesthdrs function in Figure 11.32. Notice
                   that the empty text line that terminates the request headers consists of a carriage
                   return and line feed pair, which we check for in line 6.

                   The parse_uri Function
                   Tiny assumes that the home directory for static content is its current directory and
                   that the home directory for executables is ./cgi-bin. Any URI that contains the
                   string cgi-bin is assumed to denote a request for dynamic content. The default
                   filename is ./home.html.
                        The parse_uri function in Figure 11.33 implements these policies. It parses
                   the URI into a filename and an optional CGI argument string. If the request is
                   for static content (line 5), we clear the CGI argument string (line 6) and then
                   convert the URI into a relative Linux pathname such as ./index.html (lines 7–8).
                   If the URI ends with a ‘/’ character (line 9), then we append the default filename
                   (line 10). On the other hand, if the request is for dynamic content (line 13), we
                   extract any CGI arguments (lines 14–20) and convert the remaining portion of the
                   URI to a relative Linux filename (lines 21–22).

                                                                  code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
 1   int parse_uri(char *uri, char *filename, char *cgiargs)
 2   {
 3       char *ptr;
 4
 5        if (!strstr(uri, "cgi-bin")) { /* Static content */
 6            strcpy(cgiargs, "");
 7            strcpy(filename, ".");
 8            strcat(filename, uri);
 9            if (uri[strlen(uri)-1] == ’/’)
10                strcat(filename, "home.html");
11            return 1;
12        }
13        else { /* Dynamic content */
14            ptr = index(uri, ’?’);
15            if (ptr) {
16                strcpy(cgiargs, ptr+1);
17                *ptr = ’\0’;
18            }
19            else
20                strcpy(cgiargs, "");
21            strcpy(filename, ".");
22            strcat(filename, uri);
23            return 0;
24        }
25   }
                                                                  code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.33 Tiny parse_uri parses an HTTP URI.

The serve_static Function
Tiny serves five common types of static content: HTML files, unformatted text
files, and images encoded in GIF, PNG, and JPEG formats.
      The serve_static function in Figure 11.34 sends an HTTP response whose
body contains the contents of a local file. First, we determine the file type by
inspecting the suffix in the filename (line 7) and then send the response line and
response headers to the client (lines 8–13). Notice that a blank line terminates the
headers.
      Next, we send the response body by copying the contents of the requested file
to the connected descriptor fd. The code here is somewhat subtle and needs to be
studied carefully. Line 18 opens filename for reading and gets its descriptor. In
line 19, the Linux mmap function maps the requested file to a virtual memory area.
Recall from our discussion of mmap in Section 9.8 that the call to mmap maps the

                                                                                  code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
                    1    void serve_static(int fd, char *filename, int filesize)
                    2    {
                    3        int srcfd;
                    4        char *srcp, filetype[MAXLINE], buf[MAXBUF];
                    5
                    6        /* Send response headers to client */
                    7        get_filetype(filename, filetype);
                    8        sprintf(buf, "HTTP/1.0 200 OK\r\n");
                    9        sprintf(buf, "%sServer: Tiny Web Server\r\n", buf);
                   10        sprintf(buf, "%sConnection: close\r\n", buf);
                   11        sprintf(buf, "%sContent-length: %d\r\n", buf, filesize);
                   12        sprintf(buf, "%sContent-type: %s\r\n\r\n", buf, filetype);
                   13        Rio_writen(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
                   14        printf("Response headers:\n");
                   15        printf("%s", buf);
                   16
                   17        /* Send response body to client */
                   18        srcfd = Open(filename, O_RDONLY, 0);
                   19        srcp = Mmap(0, filesize, PROT_READ, MAP_PRIVATE, srcfd, 0);
                   20        Close(srcfd);
                   21        Rio_writen(fd, srcp, filesize);
                   22        Munmap(srcp, filesize);
                   23    }
                   24
                   25    /*
                   26     * get_filetype - Derive file type from filename
                   27     */
                   28    void get_filetype(char *filename, char *filetype)
                   29    {
                   30        if (strstr(filename, ".html"))
                   31            strcpy(filetype, "text/html");
                   32        else if (strstr(filename, ".gif"))
                   33            strcpy(filetype, "image/gif");
                   34        else if (strstr(filename, ".png"))
                   35            strcpy(filetype, "image/png");
                   36        else if (strstr(filename, ".jpg"))
                   37            strcpy(filetype, "image/jpeg");
                   38        else
                   39            strcpy(filetype, "text/plain");
                   40    }
                                                                                  code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.34 Tiny serve_static serves static content to a client.

first filesize bytes of file srcfd to a private read-only area of virtual memory
that starts at address srcp.
     Once we have mapped the file to memory, we no longer need its descriptor,
so we close the file (line 20). Failing to do this would introduce a potentially fatal
memory leak. Line 21 performs the actual transfer of the file to the client. The
rio_writen function copies the filesize bytes starting at location srcp (which
of course is mapped to the requested file) to the client’s connected descriptor.
Finally, line 22 frees the mapped virtual memory area. This is important to avoid
a potentially fatal memory leak.

The serve_dynamic Function
Tiny serves any type of dynamic content by forking a child process and then
running a CGI program in the context of the child.
     The serve_dynamic function in Figure 11.35 begins by sending a response line
indicating success to the client, along with an informational Server header. The
CGI program is responsible for sending the rest of the response. Notice that this
is not as robust as we might wish, since it doesn’t allow for the possibility that the
CGI program might encounter some error.
     After sending the first part of the response, we fork a new child process
(line 11). The child initializes the QUERY_STRING environment variable with
the CGI arguments from the request URI (line 13). Notice that a real server would

                                                                                         code/netp/tiny/tiny.c
 1   void serve_dynamic(int fd, char *filename, char *cgiargs)
 2   {
 3       char buf[MAXLINE], *emptylist[] = { NULL };
 4
 5        /* Return first part of HTTP response */
 6        sprintf(buf, "HTTP/1.0 200 OK\r\n");
 7        Rio_writen(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
 8        sprintf(buf, "Server: Tiny Web Server\r\n");
 9        Rio_writen(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
10
11        if (Fork() == 0) { /* Child */
12            /* Real server would set all CGI vars here */
13            setenv("QUERY_STRING", cgiargs, 1);
14            Dup2(fd, STDOUT_FILENO);         /* Redirect stdout to client */
15            Execve(filename, emptylist, environ); /* Run CGI program */
16        }
17        Wait(NULL); /* Parent waits for and reaps child */
18   }
                                                                                         code/netp/tiny/tiny.c

Figure 11.35 Tiny serve_dynamic serves dynamic content to a client.

 Aside     Dealing with prematurely closed connections
 Although the basic functions of a Web server are quite simple, we don’t want to give you the false
 impression that writing a real Web server is easy. Building a robust Web server that runs for extended
 periods without crashing is a difficult task that requires a deeper understanding of Linux systems
 programming than we’ve learned here. For example, if a server writes to a connection that has already
 been closed by the client (say, because you clicked the “Stop” button on your browser), then the first
 such write returns normally, but the second write causes the delivery of a SIGPIPE signal whose default
 behavior is to terminate the process. If the SIGPIPE signal is caught or ignored, then the second write
 operation returns −1 with errno set to EPIPE. The strerr and perror functions report the EPIPE
 error as a “Broken pipe,” a nonintuitive message that has confused generations of students. The bottom
 line is that a robust server must catch these SIGPIPE signals and check write function calls for EPIPE
 errors.

                    set the other CGI environment variables here as well. For brevity, we have omitted
                    this step.
                         Next, the child redirects the child’s standard output to the connected file
                    descriptor (line 14) and then loads and runs the CGI program (line 15). Since
                    the CGI program runs in the context of the child, it has access to the same open
                    files and environment variables that existed before the call to the execve function.
                    Thus, everything that the CGI program writes to standard output goes directly to
                    the client process, without any intervention from the parent process. Meanwhile,
                    the parent blocks in a call to wait, waiting to reap the child when it terminates
                    (line 17).

                    11.7     Summary
                    Every network application is based on the client-server model. With this model,
                    an application consists of a server and one or more clients. The server manages
                    resources, providing a service for its clients by manipulating the resources in some
                    way. The basic operation in the client-server model is a client-server transaction,
                    which consists of a request from a client, followed by a response from the server.
                        Clients and servers communicate over a global network known as the Internet.
                    From a programmer’s point of view, we can think of the Internet as a worldwide
                    collection of hosts with the following properties: (1) Each Internet host has a
                    unique 32-bit name called its IP address. (2) The set of IP addresses is mapped
                    to a set of Internet domain names. (3) Processes on different Internet hosts can
                    communicate with each other over connections.
                        Clients and servers establish connections by using the sockets interface. A
                    socket is an end point of a connection that is presented to applications in the
                    form of a file descriptor. The sockets interface provides functions for opening and
                    closing socket descriptors. Clients and servers communicate with each other by
                    reading and writing these descriptors.
                                                                             Homework Problems   1001

     Web servers and their clients (such as browsers) communicate with each other
using the HTTP protocol. A browser requests either static or dynamic content
from the server. A request for static content is served by fetching a file from the
server’s disk and returning it to the client. A request for dynamic content is served
by running a program in the context of a child process on the server and returning
its output to the client. The CGI standard provides a set of rules that govern how
the client passes program arguments to the server, how the server passes these
arguments and other information to the child process, and how the child sends
its output back to the client. A simple but functioning Web server that serves
both static and dynamic content can be implemented in a few hundred lines of
C code.

Bibliographic Notes
The official source of information for the Internet is contained in a set of freely
available numbered documents known as RFCs (requests for comments). A
searchable index of RFCs is available on the Web at

        http://rfc-editor.org

RFCs are typically written for developers of Internet infrastructure, and thus
they are usually too detailed for the casual reader. However, for authoritative
information, there is no better source. The HTTP/1.1 protocol is documented in
RFC 2616. The authoritative list of MIME types is maintained at

        http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types

     Kerrisk is the bible for all aspects of Linux programming and provides a de-
tailed discussion of modern network programming [62]. There are a number of
good general texts on computer networking [65, 84, 114]. The great technical
writer W. Richard Stevens developed a series of classic texts on such topics as ad-
vanced Unix programming [111], the Internet protocols [109, 120, 107], and Unix
network programming [108, 110]. Serious students of Unix systems programming
will want to study all of them. Tragically, Stevens died on September 1, 1999. His
contributions are greatly missed.

Homework Problems
11.6 ◆◆
 A. Modify Tiny so that it echoes every request line and request header.
 B. Use your favorite browser to make a request to Tiny for static content.
    Capture the output from Tiny in a file.
 C. Inspect the output from Tiny to determine the version of HTTP your
    browser uses.

                     D. Consult the HTTP/1.1 standard in RFC 2616 to determine the meaning of
                        each header in the HTTP request from your browser. You can obtain RFC
                        2616 from www.rfc-editor.org/rfc.html.

                    11.7 ◆◆
                    Extend Tiny so that it serves MPG video files. Check your work using a real
                    browser.

                    11.8 ◆◆
                    Modify Tiny so that it reaps CGI children inside a SIGCHLD handler instead of
                    explicitly waiting for them to terminate.

                    11.9 ◆◆
                    Modify Tiny so that when it serves static content, it copies the requested file to the
                    connected descriptor using malloc, rio_readn, and rio_writen, instead of mmap
                    and rio_writen.

                    11.10 ◆◆
                     A. Write an HTML form for the CGI adder function in Figure 11.27. Your form
                        should include two text boxes that users fill in with the two numbers to be
                        added together. Your form should request content using the GET method.
                     B. Check your work by using a real browser to request the form from Tiny,
                        submit the filled-in form to Tiny, and then display the dynamic content
                        generated by adder.

                    11.11 ◆◆
                    Extend Tiny to support the HTTP HEAD method. Check your work using telnet
                    as a Web client.

                    11.12 ◆◆◆
                    Extend Tiny so that it serves dynamic content requested by the HTTP POST
                    method. Check your work using your favorite Web browser.

                    11.13 ◆◆◆
                    Modify Tiny so that it deals cleanly (without terminating) with the SIGPIPE
                    signals and EPIPE errors that occur when the write function attempts to write to
                    a prematurely closed connection.

                    Solutions to Practice Problems
                    Solution to Problem 11.1 (page 963)

                    Dotted-decimal address      Hex address
                    107.212.122.205             0x6BD47ACD
                    64.12.149.13                0x400C950D
                    107.212.96.29               0x6BD4601D
                    [0.0].[0.128]               0x00000080
                                                           Solutions to Practice Problems   1003

Dotted-decimal address    Hex address
[255.255].[255.0]         0xFFFFFF00
[10.1].[1.64]             0x0A010140

Solution to Problem 11.2 (page 963)
                                                  code/netp/global-hex2dd.c
 1   #include "csapp.h"
 2
 3   int main(int argc, char **argv)
 4   {
 5       struct in_addr inaddr; /* Address in network byte order */
 6       uint16_t addr;          /* Address in host byte order */
 7       char buf[MAXBUF];       /* Buffer for dotted-decimal string */
 8
 9        if (argc != 2) {
10            fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <hex number>\n", argv[0]);
11            exit(0);
12        }
13        sscanf(argv[1], "%x", &addr);
14        inaddr.s_addr = htons(addr);
15
16        if (!inet_ntop(AF_INET, &inaddr, buf, MAXBUF))
17            unix_error("inet_ntop");
18        printf("%s\n", buf);
19
20        exit(0);
21   }
                                                   code/net/global-hex2dd.c
Solution to Problem 11.3 (page 963)
                                                  code/netp/global-dd2hex.c
 1   #include "csapp.h"
 2
 3   int main(int argc, char **argv)
 4   {
 5       struct in_addr inaddr; /* Address in network byte order */
 6       int rc;
 7
 8        if (argc != 2) {
 9            fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <network byte order>\n", argv[0]);
10            exit(0);
11        }
12
13        rc = inet_pton(AF_INET, argv[1], &inaddr);
14        if (rc == 0)
15            app_error("inet_pton error: invalid network byte order");

                    16           else if (rc < 0)
                    17               unix_error("inet_pton error");
                    18
                    19           printf("0x%x\n", ntohs(inaddr.s_addr));
                    20           exit(0);
                    21     }
                                                                            code/netp/global-dd2hex.c

                    Solution to Problem 11.4 (page 978)
                    Here’s a solution. Notice how much more difficult it is to use inet_ntop, which
                    requires messy casting and deep structure references. The getnameinfo function
                    is much simpler because it does all of that work for us.

                                                                            code/netp/hostinfo-ntop.c
                1        #include "csapp.h"
                2
                3        int main(int argc, char **argv)
                4        {
                5            struct addrinfo *p, *listp, hints;
                6            struct sockaddr_in *sockp;
                7            char buf[MAXLINE];
                8            int rc;
                9
               10              if (argc != 2) {
               11                  fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <domain name>\n", argv[0]);
               12                  exit(0);
               13              }
               14
               15              /* Get a list of addrinfo records */
               16              memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(struct addrinfo));
               17              hints.ai_family = AF_INET;       /* IPv4 only */
               18              hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM; /* Connections only */
               19              if ((rc = getaddrinfo(argv[1], NULL, &hints, &listp)) != 0) {
               20                  fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo error: %s\n", gai_strerror(rc));
               21                  exit(1);
               22              }
               23
               24              /* Walk the list and display each associated IP address */
               25              for (p = listp; p; p = p->ai_next) {
               26                  sockp = (struct sockaddr_in *)p->ai_addr;
               27                  Inet_ntop(AF_INET, &(sockp->sin_addr), buf, MAXLINE);
               28                  printf("%s\n", buf);
               29              }
               30
                                                                        Solutions to Practice Problems   1005

31          /* Clean up */
32          Freeaddrinfo(listp);
33
34          exit(0);
35     }
                                                                code/netp/hostinfo-ntop.c

     Solution to Problem 11.5 (page 990)
     Before the process that runs the CGI program is loaded, a Linux dup2 function
     is used to redirect standard output to the connected descriptor that is associated
     with the client. Thus, anything that the CGI program writes to standard output
     goes directly to the client.
This page is intentionally left blank.
