                Cambridge Books Online
                 http://ebooks.cambridge.org/

                      Lisp in Small Pieces

     Christian Queinnec, Translated by Kathleen Callaway

   Book DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139172974

                 Online ISBN: 9781139172974

               Hardback ISBN: 9780521562478

              Paperback ISBN: 9780521545662

                            Chapter

            1 - The Basics of Interpretation pp. 1-30

Chapter DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139172974.002

                  Cambridge University Press
                                                            1
The Basics of Interpretation

4HpP       HIS chapter introduces a basic interpreter that will serve as the foundation
 M         for most of this book. Deliberately simple, it's more closely related to
m          Scheme than to Lisp, so we'll be able to explain Lisp in terms of Scheme
           that way. In this preliminary chapter, we'll broach a number of topics in
succession: the articulations of this interpreter; the well known pair of functions,
eval and apply; the qualities expected in environments and in functions. In short,
we'll start various explorations here to pursue in later chapters, hoping that the
intrepid reader will not be frightened away by the gaping abyss on either side of
the trail.
    The interpreter and its variations are written in native Scheme without any
particular linguistic restrictions.
    Literature about Lisp rarely resists that narcissistic pleasure of describing Lisp
in Lisp. This habit began with the first reference manual for Lisp 1.5 [MAE+62] and
has been widely imitated ever since. We'll mention only the following examples
of that practice: (There are many others.) [Rib69], [Gre77], [Que82], [Cay83],
[Cha80], [SJ93], [Rey72], [Gor75], [SS75], [A1178], [McC78b], [Lak80], [Hen80],
[BM82], [Cli84], [FW84], [dRS84], [AS85], [R3R86], [Mas86], [Dyb87], [WH88],
[Kes88], [LF88], [Dil88], [Kam90].
    Those evaluators are quite varied, both in the languages that they define and
in what they use to do so, but most of all in the goals they pursue. The evaluator
defined in [Lak80], for example, shows how graphic objects and concepts can emerge
naturally from Lisp, while the evaluator in [BM82] focuses on the size of evaluation.
    The language used for the definition is important as well. If assignment and
surgical tools (such as set-car!, set-cdr!, and so forth) are allowed in the defi-
nition language, they enrich it and thus minimize the size (in number of lines) of
descriptions; indeed, with them, we can precisely simulate the language being de-
fined in terms that remind us of the lowest level machine instructions. Conversely,
the description uses more concepts. Restricting the definition language in that way
complicates our task, but lowers the risk of semantic divergence. Even if the size
of the description grows, the language being defined will be more precise and, to
that degree, better understood.
    Figure 1.1 shows a few representative interpreters in terms of the complexity

                                          CHAPTER 1. THE BASICS OF INTERPRETATION

Richness of the language being defined

         Lisp -f Objects - -                                                • [LF88]
                                       • [MP80]

                 Scheme 4-             • [R3R86]
                                                                • [Dyb87]
                                                   • [SJ93]
               pure Lisp - -                    • [McC78b]
                                                • [Gor75]                   • tKes88]
              A-calculus --                [Sto77]

                                   -h           -h           Richness of the defining language
                               A-calculus     Scheme
                                                  Lis
                                      pure Lisp       P + Objects

                                                          Figure 1.1

      of their definition language (along the x-axis) and the complexity of the language
      being defined (along the y-axis). The knowledge progression shows up very well
      in that graph: more and more complicated problems are attacked by more and
      more restricted means. This book corresponds to the vector taking off from a
      very rich version of Lisp to implement Scheme in order to arrive at the A-calculus
      implementing a very rich Lisp.

      1*1      Evaluation
      The most essential part of a Lisp interpreter is concentrated in a single function
      around which more useful functions are organized. That function, known as eval,
      takes a program as its argument and returns the value as output. The presence of
      an explicit evaluator is a characteristic trait of Lisp, not an accident, but actually
      the result of deliberate design.
          We say that a language is universal if it is as powerful as a Turing machine.
      Since a Turing machine is fairly rudimentary (with its mobile read-write head and
      its memory composed of binary cells), it's not too difficult to design a language
      that powerful; indeed, it's probably more difficult to design a useful language that
      is not universal.
          Church's thesis says that any function that can be computed can be written
      in any universal language. A Lisp system can be compared to a function taking
      programs as input and returning their value as output. The very existence of such
      systems proves that they are computable: thus a Lisp system can be written in a
      universal language. Consequently, the function eval itself can be written in Lisp,
      and more generally, the behavior of Fortran can be described in Fortran, and so
      forth.
          What makes Lisp unique—and thus what makes an explication of eval non-
      trivial—is its reasonable size, normally from one to twenty pages, depending on the

1.2. BASIC EVALUATOR                                                                                               3

level of detail.1 This property is the result of a significant effort in design to make
the language more regular, to suppress special cases, and above all to establish a
syntax that's both simple and abstract.
    Many interesting properties result from the existence of eval and from the fact
that it can be defined in Lisp itself.
    • You can learn Lisp by reading a reference manual (one that explains functions
      thematically) or by studying the eval function itself. The difficulty with that
      second approach is that you have to know Lisp in order to read the definition
      of eval—though knowing Lisp, of course, is the result we're hoping for, rather
      than the prerequisite. In fact, it's sufficient for you to know only the subset
      of Lisp used by eval. The language that defines eval is a pared-down one in
      the sense that it procures only the essence of the language, reduced to special
      forms and primitive functions.
      It's an undeniable advantage of Lisp that it brings you these two intertwined
      approaches for learning it.
    • The fact that the definition of eval is available in Lisp means that the pro-
      gramming environment is part of the language, too, and costs little. By
      programming environment, we mean such things as a tracer, a debugger, or
      even a reversible evaluator [Lie87]. In practice, writing these tools to control
      evaluation is just a matter of elaborating the code for eval, for example, to
      print function calls, to store intermediate results, to ask the end-user whether
      he or she wants to go on with the evaluation, and so forth.
      For a long time, these qualities have insured that Lisp offers a superior pro-
      gramming environment. Even today, the fact that eval can be defined in
      Lisp means that it's easy to experiment with new models of implementation
      and debugging.
    • Finally, eval itself is a programming tool. This tool is controversial since
      it implies that an application written in Lisp and using eval must include
      an entire interpreter or compiler, but more seriously, it must give up the
      possibility of many optimizations. In other words, using eval is not without
      consequences. In certain cases, its use is justified, notably when Lisp serves
      as the definition and the implementation of an incremental programming
      language.
      Even apart from that important cost, the semantics of eval is not clear, a
      fact that justifies its being separated from the official definition of Scheme in
      [CR91b]. [see p. 271]

1.2       Basic Evaluator
Within a program, we distinguish free variables from bound variables. A variable
is free as long as no binding form (such as lambda, l e t , and so forth) qualifies it;
otherwise, we say that a variable is bound. As the term indicates, a free variable
is unbound by any constraint; its value could be anything. Consequently, in order
1. In this chapter, we define a Lisp of about 150 lines.

to know the value of a fragment of a program containing free variables, we must
know the values of those free variables themselves. The data structure associating
variables and values is known as an environment. The function evaluate 2 is thus
binary; it takes a program accompanied by an environment and returns a value.
    (define (evaluate exp env) ...)

1.3       Evaluating Atoms
An important characteristic of Lisp is that programs are represented by expressions
of the language. However, since any representation assumes a degree of encoding,
we have to explain more about how programs are represented. The principal con-
ventions of representation are that a variable is represented by a symbol (its name)
and that a functional application is represented by a list where the first term of
the list represents the function to apply and the other terms represent arguments
submitted to that function.
    Like any other compiler, evaluate begins its work by syntactically analyzing the
expression to evaluate in order to deduce what it represents. In that sense, the title
of this section is inappropriate since this section does not literally involve evaluating
atoms but rather evaluating programs where the representation is atomic. It's
important, in this context, to distinguish the program from its representation (or,
the message from its medium, if you will). The function evaluate works on the
representation; from the representation, it deduces the expected intention; finally,
it executes what's requested.
    (define (evaluate exp env)
      (if (atom? exp) ; (atom? exp) = (not (pair? exp))

            (case (car exp)

              (else      ...))))
   If an expression is not a list, perhaps it's a symbol or actual data, such as a
number or a character string. When the expression is a symbol, the expression
represents a variable and its value is the one attributed by the environment.
    (define (evaluate exp env)
      (if (atom? exp)
          (if (symbol? exp) (lookup exp env) exp)
          (case (car exp)

              (else      . . . ) ) ) )

   The function lookup (which we'll explain later on page 13) knows how to find
the value of a variable in an environment. Here's the signature of lookup:
    (lookup variable environment) —> value
2. There is a possibility of confusion here. We've already mentioned the evaluator defined by the
function eval; it's widely present in any implementation of Scheme, even if not standardized; it's
often unary—accepting only one argument. To avoid confusion, we'll call the function eval that
we are denning by the name evaluate and the associated function apply by the name invoke.
These new names will also make your life easier if you want to experiment with these programs.

1.3. EVALUATING ATOMS                                                                                                       5

   In consequence, an implicit conversion takes place between a symbol and a
variable. If we were more meticulous about how we write, then in place of (lookup
exp env), we should have written:
    ... (lookup (symbol->variable exp) env) ...
    That more scrupulous way of writing emphasizes that the symbol—the value
of exp—must be changed into a variable. It also underscores the fact that the
function symbol->variable3 is not at all an identity; rather, it converts a syntac-
tic entity (the symbol) into a semantic entity (the variable). In practice, then, a
variable is nothing other than an imaginary object to which the language and the
programmer attach a certain sense but which, for practical reasons, is handled only
by means of its representation. The representation was chosen for its convenience:
symbol->variable works like the identity because Lisp exploits the idea of a sym-
bol as one of its basic types. In fact, other representations could have been adopted;
for example, a variable could have appeared in the form of a group of characters,
prefixed by a dollar sign. In that case, the conversion function symbol->variable
would have been less simple.
    If a variable were an imaginary concept, the function lookup would not know
how to accept it as a first argument, since lookup knows how to work only on
tangible objects. For that reason, once again, we have to encode the variable
in a representation, this time, a key, to enable lookup to find its value in the
environment. A precise way of writing it would thus be:
    ...   ( l o o k u p ( v a r i a b l e - > k e y ( s y m b o l - > v a r i a b l e e x p ) ) env)                  ...
     But the natural laziness of Lisp-users inclines them to use the symbol of the
same name as the key associated with a variable. In that context, then, variable-
>key is merely the inverse of symbol->variable and the composition of those two
functions is simply the identity.
     When an expression is atomic (that is, when it does not involve a dotted pair)
and when that expression is not a symbol, we have the habit of considering it as
the representation of a constant that is its own value. This idempotence is known
as the autoquote facility. An autoquoted object does not need to be quoted, and it
is its own value. See [Cha94] for an example.
     Here again, this choice is not obvious for several reasons. Not all atomic objects
naturally denote themselves. The value of the character string Ma?b:cM might be
to call the C compiler for this string, then to execute the resulting program, and
to insert the results back in Lisp.
     Other types of objects (functions, for example) seem stubbornly resistant to the
idea of evaluation. Consider the variable car, one that we all know the utility of;
its value is the function that extracts the left child from a pair; but that function
car itself—what is its value? Evaluating a function usually proves to be an error
that should have been detected and prevented earlier.
     Another example of a problematic value is the empty list (). From the way it
is written, it might suggest that it is an empty application, that is, a functional
application without any arguments where we've even forgotten to mention the
3. Personally, I don't like names formed like this x->y to indicate a conversion because this order
makes it difficult to understand compositions; for example, (y->z(x->y...)) is less straightforward
than (z<-y(y<-x...)). In contrast, x->y is much easier to read than y<-x. You can see here one
of the many difficulties that language designers come up against.

6                                      CHAPTER!.                     THE BASICS OF INTERPRETATION

function. That syntax is forbidden in Scheme and consequently is not defined as
having a value.
   For those kinds of reasons, we have to analyze expressions very carefully, and
we should autoquote only those data that deserve it, namely, numbers, characters,
and strings of characters, [see p. 7] We could thus write:
    (define ( e v a l u a t e e env)
      ( i f (atom? e)
            (cond ((symbol? e) (lookup e env))
                    ( ( o r (number? e ) ( s t r i n g ? e ) ( c h a r ? e)(boolean? e ) ( v e c t o r ? e ) )
                      e )
                    ( e l s e (wrong "Cannot e v a l u a t e " e ) ) )
            ... ) )
    In that fragment of code, you can see the first case of possible errors. Most
Lisp systems have their own exception mechanism; it, too, is difficult to write
in portable code. In an error situation, we could call wrong4 with a character
string as its first argument. That character string would describe the kind of error,
and the following arguments could be the objects explaining the reason for the
anomaly. We should mention, however, that more rudimentary systems send out
cryptic messages, like Bus error: core dump when errors occur. Others stop the
current computation and return to the basic interaction loop. Still others associate
an exception handler with a computation, and that exception handler catches the
object representing the error or exception and decides how to behave from there,
[see p . 255] Some systems even offer exception handlers that are quasi-expert
systems themselves, analyzing the error and the corresponding code to offer the
end-user choices about appropriate corrections. In short, there is wide variation in
this area.

1*4       Evaluating Forms
Every language has a number of syntactic forms that are "untouchable": they
cannot be redefined adequately, and they must not be tampered with. In Lisp,
such a form is known as a special form. It is represented by a list where the first
term is a particular symbol belonging to the set of special operators ?
    A dialect of Lisp is characterized by its set of special forms and by its library
of primitive functions (those functions that cannot be written in the language
itself and that have profound semantic repercussions, as, for example, call/cc in
Scheme).
    In some respects, Lisp is simply an ordinary version of applied A-calculus, aug-
mented by a set of special forms. However, the special genius of a given Lisp is
expressed in just this set. Scheme has chosen to minimize the number of special
operators (quote, if, set!, and lambda). In contrast, COMMON LISP (CLtL2
4. Notice that we did not say "the function wrong." We'll see more about error recovery on
page 255.
5. We will follow the usual lax habit of considering a special operator, say if, as being a "special
form" although if is not even a form. Scheme treats them as "syntactic keywords" whereas
COMMON LlSP recognizes them with the special-form-p predicate.

1.4. EVALUATING FORMS                                                                                              7

[Ste90]) has more than thirty or so, thus circumscribing the number of cases where
it's possible to generate highly efficient code.
     Because special forms are coded as they are, their syntactic analysis is simple: it
is based on the first term of each such form, so one case statement suffices. When
a special form does not begin with a keyword, we say that is it is a functional
application or more simply an application. For the moment, we're looking at only
a small subset of the general special forms: quote, if, begin, set!, and lambda.
(Later chapters introduce new, more specialized forms.)
     (define (evaluate e env)
       (if (atom? e)
            (cond ((symbol? e) (lookup e env))
                 ((or (number? e)(string? e)(char? e)(boolean? e)(vector? e))
                   e )
                 (else (wrong "Cannot evaluate" e)) )
           (case (car e)
             ((quote) (cadr e))
             ((if)     (if (evaluate (cadr e) env)
                           (evaluate (caddr e) env)
                           (evaluate (cadddr e) env) ))
             ((begin) (eprogn (cdr e) env))
             ((set!)   (update! (cadr e) env (evaluate (caddr e) env)))
             ((lambda) (make-function (cadr e) (cddr e) env))
             (else     (invoke (evaluate (car e) env)
                               (evlis (cdr e) env) )) ) ) )

    In order to lighten that definition, we've reduced the syntactic analysis to
its minimum, and we haven't bothered to verify whether the quotations are well
formed, whether if is really ternary6 (accepting three parameters) each time, and
so forth. We'll assume that the programs that we're analyzing are syntactically
correct.

1.4.1      Quoting
The special form quote makes it possible to introduce a value that, without its
quotation, would have been confused with a legal expression. The decision to rep-
resent a program as a value of the language makes it necessary, when we want to
speak about a particular value, to find a means for discriminating between data
and programs that usurp the same space. A different syntactic choice could have
avoided that problem. For example, M-expressions, originally planned in [McC60]
as the normal syntax for programs written in Lisp, would have eliminated this par-
ticular problem, but they would have forbidden macros—a marvelously useful tool
for extending syntax; however, M-expressions disappeared rapidly [McC78a]. The
special form quote is consequently the principal discriminator between program
and data.
6. As a form, if is not necessarily ternary. That is, it does not have to have three parameters.
Scheme and COMMON LlSP, for example, support both binary and ternary if, whereas EuLlSP
and IS-Lisp accept only ternary if; Le-Lisp supports at least binary if with a progn implicit in
the alternative, (progn corresponds to Scheme begin.)

   Quotation consists of returning, as a value, that term following the keyword.
That practice is clearly articulated in this fragment of code:
    ... (case ( c a r e)
          ((quote) (cadr e ) ) . . . ) ...
    You might well ask whether there is a difference between implicit and explicit
quotation, for example, between 33 and '33 or even between #(fa do sol) and
 '#(fa do sol). 7 The first comparison—between 33 and '33—impinges on im-
mediate objects although the second one—between #(fa do sol) and '#(fa do
sol)—impinges on composite objects (though they are atomic objects in Lisp ter-
minology). It is possible to imagine divergent meanings for those two fragments.
Explicit quotation simply returns its quotation as its value whereas #(f a do sol)
could return a new instance of the vector for every evaluation—a new instance of a
vector of three components initialized by three particular symbols. In other words,
#(fa do sol) may be nothing other than the abbreviation of (vector 'fa 'do
 'sol) (that's one of the possibilities in Scheme, though not the right one), and its
behavior is quite different from '#(fa do sol) and from (vector fa do sol),
for that matter. We'll be returning later [see p. 140] to the question of what
meaning to give to quotation, since, as you can see, the subject is far from simple.

1.4.2      Alternatives
As we look at alternatives, we'll consider the special form if as ternary, a control
structure that evaluates its first argument (the condition), then according to the
value it gets from that evaluation, chooses to return the value of its second argument
(the consequence) or its third argument (the alternate). That idea is expressed in
this fragment of code:
    ... (case (car e) . . .
          ((if) (if (evaluate (cadr e) env)
                    (evaluate (caddr e) env)
                    (evaluate (cadddr e) env) )) . . . ) . . .
    This program does not do full justice to the representation of Booleans. As
you have no doubt noticed, we're mixing two languages here: the first is Scheme
(or at least, a close enough approximation that it's indistinguishable from Scheme)
whereas the second is also Scheme (or at least something quite close). The first
language implements the second. As a consequence, there is the same relation
between them as, for example, between Pascal (the language of the first implemen-
tation of Tf}X) and TgX itself [Knu84]. Consequently, there is no reason to identify
the representation of Booleans of these two languages.
    The function evaluate returns a value belonging to the language that is being
defined. That value maintains no a priori relation to the Boolean values of the
defining language. Since we follow the convention that any object different from
the Boolean false must be considered as Boolean true, a more carefully written
program would look like this:
    ... (case (car e) ...
7. In Scheme, the notation #( . . . ) represents a quoted vector.

1.4. EVALUATING FORMS                                                                                                9

           ((if)    ( i f (not (eq? (evaluate (cadr e) env) t h e - f a l s e - v a l u e ) )
                          (evaluate (caddr e) env)
                          (evaluate (cadddr e) env) ) ) . . . ) . . .
    Of course, we assume that the variable the-f alse-value has as its value the
representation in the defining language of the Boolean false in the language being
defined. There's a wide choice available to us for this value; for example,
    (define the-false-value (cons "false" "boolean"))
    The comparison of any value to the Boolean false is carried out by the physical
comparer eq?, so a dotted pair handles the issue very well and can't be confused
with any other possible value in the language being defined.
    This discussion is not really trivial. In fact, Lisp chronicles are full of disputes
about the differences between the Boolean value false, the empty list (), and the
symbol NIL. The cleanest position to take in this controversy, quite independent
of whether or not to preserve existing practice, is that false is different from () —
which is, after all, simply an empty list—and that those two have nothing to do
with the symbol spelled N, I, L.
    That is, in fact, the position that Scheme takes; the position was adopted several
weeks before being standardized by IEEE (the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers) [IEE91].
    Where things get worse is that () is pronounced nil\ In "traditional" Lisp,
false, ( ) , and NIL are all one and same symbol. In Le-Lisp, NIL is a variable, its
value is (), and the empty list has been assimilated with the Boolean false and
with the empty symbol I I.

1.4.3      Sequence
A sequence makes it possible to use a single syntactic form for a group of forms to
evaluate sequentially. Like the well known begin . . . end of the family of languages
related to Algol, Scheme prefixes this special form by begin whereas other Lisps
use progn, a generalization of progl, prog2, etc. The sequential evaluation of a
group of forms is "subcontracted" to a particular function: eprogn.
   ...   ( c a s e ( c a r e ) ...
            ( ( b e g i n ) ( e p r o g n ( c d r e ) e n v ) ) ... ) ...
    (define (eprogn exps env)
      (if (pair? exps)
          (if (pair? (cdr exps))
                 (begin (evaluate (car exps) env)
                        (eprogn (cdr exps) env) )
                 (evaluate (car exps) env) )
             '() ) )
    With that definition, the meaning of the sequence is now canonical. Neverthe-
less, we should note that in the middle of the definition of eprogn, there is a tail
recursive call to evaluate to handle the final term of the sequence. That com-
putation of the final term of a sequence is carried out as though it, and it alone,
replaced the entire sequence. (We'll talk more about tail recursion later, [see p.
104])

     We should also note the meaning we have to attribute to (begin). Here, we've
defined (begin) to return the empty list ( ) , but why should we choose the empty
list? Why not something else, anything else, like bruce or brian 8 ? This choice
is part of our heritage from Lisp, where the prevailing custom returns n i l when
nothing better seems to be obligatory. However, in a world where false, ( ) , and
n i l are distinct, what should we return? We're going to specialize our language as
it's defined in this chapter so that (begin) returns the value empty-begin, which
will be the (almost) arbitrary number 813 9 [LebO5].
     (define (eprogn exps env)
       (if (pair? exps)
            (if (pair? (cdr exps))
                (begin (evaluate (car exps) env)
                       (eprogn (cdr exps) env) )
                (evaluate (car exps) env) )
           empty-begin ) )
     (define empty-begin 813)
     Our problem comes from the fact that the implementation that we are defin-
ing must necessarily return a value. Like Scheme, the language could attribute
no particular meaning to (begin); that choice could be interpreted in at least two
different ways: either this way of writing is permitted within a particular implemen-
tation, in which case it is an extension that must return a value freely chosen by the
implementation in question; or this way of writing is not allowed and thus an error.
In light of the consequences, it's better to avoid using this form when no guarantee
exists about its value. Some implementations have an object, #<unspecif ied>,
that lends itself to this use, as well as more generally to any situation where we
don't know what we should return because nothing seems appropriate. That ob-
ject is usually printable; it should not be confused with the undefined pseudo-value,
 [see p . 60]
     Sequences are of no particular interest if a language is purely functional (that is,
if it has no side effects). What is the point of evaluating a program if we don't care
about the results? Well, in fact there are situations in which we use a computation
simply for its side effects. Consider, for example, a video game programmed in a
purely functional language; computations take time, whether we are interested in
their results or not; it may be just this very side effect—slowing things down—
rather than the result that interests us. Provided that the compiler is not smart
enough to notice and remove any useless computation, we can use such side effects
to slow the program down sufficiently to accomodate a player's reflexes, say.
     In the presence of conventional read or write operations, which have side effects
on data flow, sequencing becomes very interesting because it is obviously clearer
to pose a question (by means of display), then wait for the response (by means
of read) than to do the reverse. Sequencing is, in that sense, the explicit form for
putting a series of evaluations in order. Other special forms could also introduce a
certain kind of order. For example, alternatives could do so, like this:
     (if a 0 0) = (begin a p)
8. For the Monty Python fans in the audience
9. Fans of the gentleman thief Arsene Lupin will recognize the appropriateness of this choice.

1.4. EVALUATING              FORMS                                                                                  11

    That rule, 10 however, could also be simulated by this:
    (begin a /?) = ((lambda (void) fi) a)
    That last rule shows—in case you weren't convinced yet—that begin is not
really a necessary special form in Scheme since it can be simulated by the functional
application that forces arguments to be computed before the body of the invoked
function (the call by value evaluation rule).

1.4.4      Assignment
As in many other languages, the value of a variable can be modified; we say then
that we assign the variable. Since this assignment involves modifying the value in
the environment of the variable, we leave this problem to the function update! . n
We'll explain that function later, on page 129.
    ... (case (car e)
          ( ( s e t ! ) (update! (cadr e) env (evaluate (caddr e) env))) . . . ) ...
    Assignment is carried out in two steps: first, the new value is calculated; then
it becomes the value of the variable. Notice that the variable is not the result of a
calculation. Many semantic variations exist for assignment, and we'll discuss them
later, [see p . 11] For the moment, it's important to bear in mind that the value
of an assignment is not specified in Scheme.

1.4.5      Abstraction
Functions (also known as procedures in the jargon of Scheme) are the result of
evaluating the special form, lambda, a name that refers to A-calculus and indi-
cates an abstraction. We delegate the chore of actually creating the function to
make-function, and we furnish all the available parameters that make-function
might need, namely, the list of variables, the body of the function, and the current
environment.
    ... (case (car e) ...
          ((lambda) (make-function (cadr e) (cddr e) env)) . . . ) ...

1.4.6      Functional Application
When a list has no special operator as its first term, it's known as a functional
application, or, referring to A-calculus again, a combination. The function we get
by evaluating the first term is applied to its arguments, which we get by evaluating
the following terms. The following code reflects that very idea.
    ... (case (car e) ...
               (else (invoke (evaluate (car e) env)
                             (evlis (cdr e) env) )) ) ...

10. The variable void must not be free in (3. That condition is trivially satisfied if void does not
appear in (3. For that reason, we usually use gensym to create new variables that are certain to
have not yet been used. See Exercise 1.11.
11. According to current practice in Scheme, functions with side effects have a name suffixed by
an exclamation point.

   The utility function evlis takes a list of expressions and returns the corre-
sponding list of values of those expressions. It is defined like this:
     (define (evlis exps env)
       (if (pair? exps)
            (cons (evaluate (car exps) env)
                  (evlis (cdr exps) env) )
            '() ) )
    The function invoke is in charge of applying its first argument (a function,
unless an error occurs) to its second argument (the list of arguments of the function
indicated by the first argument); it then returns the value of that application as its
result. In order to clarify the various uses of the word "argument" in that sentence,
notice that invoke is similar to the more conventional apply, outside the explicit
eruption of the environment. (We'll return later in Section 1.6 [see p. 15] to the
exact representation of functions and environments.)

More about evaluate
The explanation we just walked through is more or less precise. A few utility func-
tions, such as lookup and update! (that handle environments) or make-function
and invoke (that handle functions) have not yet been fully explained. Even so,
we can already answer many questions about evaluate. For example, it is already
apparent that the dialect we are defining has only one unique name-space; that it is
mono-valued (like Lispi) [see p. 31]; and that there are functional objects present
in the dialect. However, we don't yet know the order of evaluation of arguments.
    The order in which arguments are evaluated in the Lisp that we are defining
is similar to the order of evaluation of arguments to cons as it appears in evlis.
We could, however, impose any order that we want (for example, left to right) by
using an explicit sequence, like this:
     (define (evlis exps env)
       (if (pair? exps)
            (let ((argumentl (evaluate (car exps) env)))
               (cons argumentl (evlis (cdr exps) env)) )
            '() ) )
   Without enlarging the arsenal12 that we're using in the defining language, we
have increased the precision of the description of the Lisp we've defined. This first
part of this book tends to define a certain dialect more and more precisely, all the
while restricting more and more the dialect serving for the definition.

1.5        Representing the Environment
The environment associates values with variables. The conventional data structure
in Lisp for representing such associations is the association list, also known as the
A-list. We're going to represent the environment as an A-list associating values
12. As you know, l e t is a macro that expands into a functional application: ( l e t ( (x TTI ) )TT2) =
((lambda (x) ^2) TTI).

1.5. REPRESENTING THE ENVIRONMENT                                                                                  13

and variables. To simplify, we'll represent the variables by symbols of the same
name.
    In this way, we can define the functions lookup and update! very easily, like
this:
    (define (lookup id env)
      (if (pair? env)
          (if (eq? (caar env) id)
              (cdar env)
               (lookup i d (cdr env)) )
           (wrong MNo such binding" id) ) )
     We see a second13 kind of error appear when we want to know the value of an
unknown variable. Here again, we'll just use a call to wrong to express the problem
that the interpreter confronts.
     Back in the dark ages, when interpreters had very little memory14 to work with,
implementors often favored a generalized mode of autoquote. A variable without
a value still had one, and that value was the symbol of the same name. It's
disheartening to see things that we attached so much importance to separating—
like symbol and variable—already getting back together and re-introducing so much
confusion.
     Even if it were practical for implementers never to provoke an error and thus
to provide an idyllic world from which error had been banished, that design would
still have a major drawback because the goal of a program is not so much to avoid
committing errors but rather to fulfil its duty. In that sense, an error is a kind of
crude guard rail: when we encounter it, it shows us that the program is not going
as we intended. Errors and erroneous contexts need to be pointed out as early as
possible so that their source can be corrected as soon as possible. The autoquote
mode is consequently a poor design-choice because it lets certain situations worsen
without our being able to see them in time to repair them.
     The function update! modifies the environment and is thus likely to provoke
the same error: the value of an unknown variable can't be modified. We'll come
back to this point when we talk about the global environment.
    (define (update! id env value)
      (if (pair? env)
          (if (eq? (caar env) id)
              (begin (set-cdr! (car env) value)
                      value )
              (update! id (cdr env) value) )
          (wrong "No such binding" id) ) )
    The contract that the function update! abides by foresees that the function
returns a value which will become that final special form of assignment. The
value of an assignment is not defined in Scheme. That fact means that a portable
program cannot expect a precise value, so there are many possible return values.
For example,
13. The first kind of error appeared on page 6.
14. Memory, along with input/output facilities, still remains the most expensive part of a com-
puter, even though the price keeps falling.

     1. the value that has just been assigned; (That's what we saw earlier with
        update!.)
     2. the former contents of the variable; (This possibility poses a slight problem
        with respect to initialization when we give the first value to a variable.)
     3. an object representing whatever has not been specified, with which we can
        do very little—something like #<UFO>;
     4. the value of a form with a non-specified value, such as the form s e t - c d r ! in
        Scheme.
   The environment can be seen as a composite abstract type. We can then extract
or modify subparts of the environment with selection and modification functions.
We then still have to define how to construct and enrich an environment.
   Let's start with an empty initial environment. We can represent that idea
simply, like this:
     (define env.init '())
    (Later, in Section 1.6, we'll make the effort to produce a standard environment
a little richer than that.)
    When a function is applied, a new environment is built, and that new environ-
ment binds variables of that function to their values. The function extend extends
an environment env with a list of variables and a list of values.
     (define (extend env variables values)
       (cond ((pair? variables)
              (if (pair? values)
                  (cons (cons (car variables) (car values))
                        (extend env (cdr variables) (cdr values)) )
                  (wrong "Too less values") ) )
             ((null? variables)
                  (if (null? values)
                      env
                      (wrong "Too much values") ) )
             ((symbol? variables) (cons (cons variables values) env)) ) )
    The main difficulty is that we have to analyze syntactically all the possible
forms that a <lisi-of-variables> can have within an abstraction in Scheme.15 A
list of variables is represented by a list of symbols, possibly a dotted list, that
is, terminated not by () but by a symbol, which we call a dotted variable. More
formally, a list of variables corresponds to the following pseudo-grammar:
          <list-of-variables>               :=       ()
                                             |       <variable>
                                             |       ( <variable> .                     <list-of-variables> )
                  <variable>                G        Symbol
   When we extend an environment, there must be agreement between the names
and values. Usually, there must be as many values as there are variables, unless
15. Certain Lisp sytems, such as COMMON LlSP, have succombed to the temptation to enrich the
list of variables with various keywords, such as ftaux, ftkey, ftrest, and so forth. This practice
greatly complicates the binding mechanism. Other systems generalize the binding of variables
with pattern matching [SJ93].

the list of variables ends with a dotted variable or an n-ary variable that can take
all the superfluous values in a list. Two errors can thus be raised, depending on
whether there are too many or too few values.

1*6      Representing Functions
Perhaps the easiest way to represent functions is to use functions. Of course,
the two instances of the word "function" in that sentence refer to different entities.
More precisely, we should say, "The way to represent functions in the language that
is being defined is to use functions of the defining language, that is, functions of the
implementation language." The representation that we've chosen here minimizes
the calling protocol in this way: the function invoke will have to verify only that
its first argument really is a function, that is, an object that can be applied.
     (define (invoke fn args)
       (if (procedure? fn)
            (fn args)
            (wrong "Not a function" fn) ) )
    We really can't get any simpler than that. You might ask why we have spe-
cialized the function invoke, already a simple definition and merely called once
from evaluate. The reason is that here we're setting the general structure of the
interpreters that we're going to stuff you with later, and we will see other ways
of coding that are simpler but more efficient and that require a more complicated
form of invoke. You could also tackle Exercises 1.7 and 1.8 now.
    A new kind of error appears here when we try to apply an object that is not a
function. This kind of error can be detected at the moment of application, that is,
after the evaluation of all the arguments. Other strategies would also be possible;
for example, to attempt to warn the user as early as possible. In that case, we
could impose an order in the evaluation of function applications, like this:
   1. evaluate the term in the functional position;
   2. if that value is not applicable, then raise an error;
   3. evaluate the arguments from left to right;
   4. compare the number of arguments to the arity of the function to apply and
      raise an error if they do not agree.
    Evaluating arguments in order from left to right is useful for those who read
left to right. It is also easy to implement since the order of evaluation is then
obvious, but it complicates the task of the compiler. If the compiler tries to evaluate
the arguments in a different order (for example, to improve register allocations),
the compiler must prove that the new order of expressions does not change the
semantics of the program.
    Of course, we could attempt to do even better, by checking the arity sooner,
like this:
   1. evaluate the term in the functional position;
   2. if that value is not applicable, then raise an error; otherwise, check its arity;

     3. evaluate the arguments from left to right as long as their number still agrees
        with the arity; otherwise, raise an error;
     4. apply the function to its arguments.16
    COMMON LISP insists that arguments must be evaluated from left to right, but
for reasons of efficiency, it allows the term in the function position to be evaluated
either before or after the others.
    Scheme, in contrast, does not impose an order of evaluation for the terms of
a functional application, and Scheme does not distinguish the function position in
any particular way. Since there is no imposed order, the evaluator is free to choose
whatever order it prefers; the compiler can then re-order terms without worrying,
[see p. 164] The user no longer knows which order will be chosen, and so must
use begin when certain effects must be kept in sequence.
    As a matter of style, it's not very elegant to use a functional application to put
side effects in sequence. For that reason, you should avoid writing such things as
(f (set! f TT) (set! f TT')) where the function that will actually be applied
can't be seen. Errors arising from that kind of practice, that is, errors due to the
fact that the order of evaluation cannot be known, are extremely hard to detect.

The Execution Environment of the Body of a Function
Applying a function comes down to evaluating its body in an environment where
its variables are bound to values that they have assumed during the application.
Remember that during the call to make-function, we provided it with the param-
eters that were made available by evaluate. Throughout the rest of this section,
we'll highlight the various environments that come into play by mentioning them
in italic.

Minimal Environment
Let's first try a definition of a stripped down, minimal environment.
     (define (make-function variables body env)
       (lambda (values)
           (eprogn body (extend env.init variables values)) ) )
    In conformity with the contract that we explained earlier, the body of the func-
tion is evaluated in an environment where the variables are bound to their values.
For example, the combinator K defined as (lambda (a b) a) can be applied like
this:
     (K 1 2) -4 1
    The nuisance here is that the means available to a function are rather minimal.
The body of a function can utilize nothing other than its own variables since the
initial environment, env.init, is empty. It does not even have access to the global
environment where the usual functions, such as car, cons, and so forth, are defined.

16. The function could then examine the types of its arguments, but that task does not have to
do with the function call protocol.

Patched Environment
Let's try again with an enriched environment patched like this:
   (define (make-function variables body env)
     (lambda (values)
         (eprogn body (extend env.global variables values)) ) )
    This new version lets the body of the function use the global environment and all
its usual functions. Now how do we globally define two functions that are mutually
recursive? Also, what is the value of the expression on the left (macroexpanded on
the right)?
   ( l e t ((a 1))                                               ((lambda (a)
        ( l e t ((b (+ 2 a ) ) )            =                        ((lambda (b)
               ( l i s t a b) ) )                                        ( l i s t a b) )
                                                                         (+ 2 a) ) )
                                                                   1 )
   Let's look in detail at how that expression is evaluated:
   ((lambda (a) ((lambda (b) ( l i s t a b)) (+ 2 a ) ) ) 1)
                                                                                                       env.global
      ((lambda (b) ( l i s t a b)) (+ 2 a))
                                                                         a-> 1
                                                                         env.global
   = ( l i s t a b)
                          b^ 3
                          env.global
   The body of the internal function (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b)) is evaluated in
an environment that we get by extending the global environment with the variable
b. That environment lacks the variable a because it is not visible, so this try fails,
too!

Improving the Patch
Since we need to see the variable a within the internal function, it suffices to provide
the current environment to invoke, which in turn will transmit that environment
to the functions that are called. In consequence, we now have an idea of a current
environment kept up to date by evaluate and invoke, so let's modify these func-
tions. However, let's modify them in such a way that we don't confuse these new
definitions with the previous ones; we'll use a prefix, d. to avoid confusion, like
this:
    (define (d.evaluate e env)
      (if (atom? e) . . .
          (case (car e)

            ((lambda) (d.make-function (cadr e) (cddr e) env))
            (else (d.invoke (d.evaluate (car e) env)
                            (evlis (cdr e) env)
                            env )) ) ) )
    (define (d.invoke fn args env)

       (if (procedure? fn)
           (fn args env)
           (wrong "Not a function'1 fn) ) )
    (define (d.make-function variables body def.env)
       (lambda (values current.env)
           (eprogn body (extend current.env variables values)) ) )
   Here we notice that in the definition of d. invoke, it is no longer really useful
to provide the definition environment env to the def.env variable since only the
current environment, current.env, is being used.
   Now if we look at the same expression, highlighted with the name of the envi-
ronment being used, we see that our example works like this:
    ((lambda (a) ((lambda (b) (list a b)) (+ 2 a))) 1)
                                                                                                    env.global
       ((lambda (b) (list a b)) (+ 2 a))
                                                                     a-» 1
                                                                      env.global
      (list a b)
                       b-+ 3
                       a-* 1
                       env.global
    Of course, in this example, we clearly see the stack discipline that the bind-
ings are following. Every binding form pushes its new bindings onto the current
environment and pops them off after execution.

Fixing the Problem
There is still a problem, though. To see it, look at this variation:
    (((lambda (a)
         (lambda (b) (list a b)) )
       1 )
     2)
    The function (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b)) is created in an environment where
a is bound to 1, but at the time the function is applied, the current environment
is extended by the sole binding to b, and once again, a is absent from that envi-
ronment. As a consequence, the function (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b)) once again
forgets or loses its variable a.
    No doubt you noticed in the previous definition of d.make-function that two
environments were present: the definition environment for the function, def.env,
and the calling environment of the function, current.env. Two moments are im-
portant in the life of a function: its creation and its application(s). Granted, there
is only one moment when the function is created, but there can very well be many
times when the function is applied; or indeed, there may be no moment when it is
applied! As a consequence, the only17 environment that we can associate with a
function with any certainty is the environment when it was created. Let's go back
17. True, we could leave it up to the program to choose exphcitly which environment the function
should end up in. See the form closure on page 113.

to the original definitions of the functions evaluate and invoke, and this time,
let's write make-function this way:
    (define (make-function variables body env)
      (lambda (values)
          (eprogn body (extend env variables values)) ) )
   All the examples now behave well, and in particular, the preceding example
now has the following evaluation trace:
    (((lambda (a) (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b ) ) ) 1) 2)
                                                                                       env.global
   = ( (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b ) )
                                                    a^ 1
                                                    env.global
         2 )
               env.global
        (list a b)
                        b^ 2
                        a-+ 1
                        env.global
    The form (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b)) is created in the global environment ex-
tended by the variable a. When the function is applied in the global environment,
it extends its own environment of definition by b, and thus permits the body of the
function to be evaluated in an environment where both a and b are known. When
the function returns its result, the evaluation continues in the global environment.
We often refer to the value of an abstraction as its closure because the value closes
its definition environment.
    Notice that the present definition of make-function itself uses closure within
the definition language. That use is not obligatory, as we'll see later in Chapter 3.
[see p. 92] The function make-function has a closure for its value, and that fact
is a distinctive trait of higher-order functional languages.

1.6.1      Dynamic and Lexical Binding
There are at least two important points in that discussion about environments.
First, it demonstrates clearly how complicated the issues about environments are.
Any evaluation is always carried out within a certain environment, and the manage-
ment of the environment is a major point that evaluators must resolve efficiently.
In Chapter 3, we will see more complicated structures, such as escapes and the
form unwind-protect, that oblige us to define very precisely which environments
are under consideration.
    The second point concerns the last two variations in the previous section which
are characteristic of dynamic18 and lexical binding. In a lexical Lisp, a function
evaluates its body in its own definition environment extended by its variables,
whereas in a dynamic Lisp, a function extends the current environment, that is,
the environment of the application.
18. In the context of object-oriented languages, the term dynamic binding usually refers to the
fact that the method associated with a message is determined by the dynamic type of the object
to which the message is sent, rather than by its static type.

    Current fashion favors lexical Lisps, but you mustn't conclude from that fact
that dynamic languages have no future. For one thing, very useful dynamic lan-
guages are still widely in use, such languages as TgX [Knu84], GNU EMACS LISP
[LLSt93],or Perl [WS90].
    For another, the idea of dynamic binding is an important concept in program-
ming. It corresponds to establishing a valid binding when beginning a computation
and that binding is undone automatically in a guaranteed way as soon as that com-
putation is complete.
    This programming strategy can be employed effectively in forward-looking com-
putations, such as, for example, those in artificial intelligence. In those situations,
we pose a hypothesis, and we develop consequences from it. When we discover an
incoherence or inconsistency, we must abandon that hypothesis in order to explore
another; this technique is known as backtracking. If the consequences have been
carried out with no side-effects, for example in such structures as A-lists, then
abandoning the hypothesis will automatically recycle the consequences, but if, in
contrast, we had used physical modifications such as global assignments of vari-
ables, modifications of arrays, and so forth, then abandoning a hypothesis would
entail restoring the entire environment where the hypothesis was first formulated.
One oversight in such a situation would be fatal! Dynamic binding makes it pos-
sible to insure that a dynamic variable is present and correctly assigned during a
computation and only during that computation regardless of the outcome. This
property is heavily used for exception handling.
    Variables are programming entities that have their own scope. The scope of a
variable is essentially a geographic idea corresponding to the region in the program-
ming text where the variable is visible and thus is accessible. In pure Scheme (that
is, unburdened with superfluous but useful syntax, such as let), only one binding
form exists: lambda. It is the only form that introduces variables and confers on
them a scope limited strictly to the body of the function. In contrast, the scope
of a variable in a dynamic Lisp has no such limitation a priori. Consider this, for
example:
     (define (foo x) ( l i s t x y))
     (define (bar y) (foo 1991))
   In a lexical Lisp, the variable y in foo 19 is a reference to the global variable y,
which in no way can be confused with the variable y in bar. In dynamic Lisp, the
variable y in bar is visible (indeed, it is seen) from the body of the function foo
because when foo is invoked, the current environment contains that variable y.
Consequently, if we give the value 0 to the global variable y, we get these results:
     ( d e f i n e y 0)
     ( l i s t ( b a r 100) ( f o o 3 ) )              -> ( ( 1 9 9 1 0) ( 3 0 ) )                   in lexical Lisp
     ( l i s t ( b a r 100) ( f o o 3 ) )              -> ( ( 1 9 9 1 100) ( 3 0 ) )                 in dynamic    Lisp
    Notice that in dynamic Lisp, bar has no means of knowing that the function foo
that bar calls references its own variable y. Conversely, the function foo doesn't
know where to find the variable y that it references. For this reason, bar must
put y into the current environment so that foo can find it there. Just before bar
returns, y has to be removed from the current environment.
19. For the etymology of foo, see [Ray91].

    Of course, in the absence of free variables, there is no noticeable difference
between dynamically scoped and lexically scoped Lisp.
    Lexical binding is known by that name because we can always start simply
from the text of the function and, for any variable, either find the form that bound
the variable or know with certainty that it is a global variable. The method is so
simple that we can point with a pencil (or a mouse) at the variable and go right
along from right to left, from bottom to top, until we find the first binding form
around this variable. The name dynamic binding plays on another concept, that
of the dynamic extent, which we'll get to later, [see p . 77]
    Scheme supports only lexical variables. COMMON LISP supports both kinds
of binding with the same syntax. EULISP and IS-Lisp clearly distinguish the two
kinds syntactically in two separate name spaces, [see p . 43]
    Scope may be obscured locally by shadowing. Shadowing occurs when one
variable hides another because they both have the same name. Lexical binding
forms are nested or disjoint from one another. This well known "block" discipline
is inherited from Algol 60.
    Under the inspiration of A-calculus, which loaned its name to the special form
lambda [Per79], Lisp 1.0 was defined as a dynamic Lisp, but early on, John Mc-
Carthy recognized that he expected the following expression to return (2 3) rather
than (1 3).
    (let ( ( a 1))
      ( ( l e t ( ( a 2 ) ) (lambda (b) ( l i s t a b ) ) )
        3 ) )
    That anomaly (dare we call it a bug?) was corrected by introducing a new
special form, known as function. Its argument was a lambda form, and it created
a closure, that is, a function associated with its definition environment. When that
closure was applied, instead of extending the current environment, it extended its
own definition environment that it had closed (in the sense of preserved) within
itself. In programming terms, the special form function 20 is defined accordingly
with d. evaluate and d. invoke, like this:
    (define (d.evaluate e env)
      (if (atom? e) ...
          (case (car e)

               ((function)         ;Syntax: (function (lambda variables body))
                ( l e t * ((f     (cadr e))
                           (fun (d.make-function (cadr f) (cddr f) env)) )
                    (d.make-closure fun env) ) )
               ((lambda) (d.make-function (cadr e) (cddr e) env))
               (else          (d.invoke (d.evaluate (car e) env)
                                          ( e v l i s (cdr e) env)
                                         env )) ) ) )

20. This simulation is not exactly correct in the sense that there are many dialects (such as CLtLl
in [Ste84]) where lambda is not a special operator, but a keyword, a kind of syntactic marker similar
to else that can appear in Scheme in a cond or a case, lambda does not require d.evaluate for
it to be handled correctly, lambda forms may also be restricted to appear exclusively in the first
term of functional applications, accompanied by function, or in function definitions.

     (define (d.invoke fn args env)
       (if (procedure? fn)
            (fn args env)
            (wrong "Not a function" fn) ) )
     (define (d.make-function variables body env)
       (lambda (values current.env)
           (eprogn body (extend current.env variables values)) ) )
     (define (d.make-closure fun env)
       (lambda (values current.env)
           (fun values env) ) )
    That's not the end of the story, however. That function was regarded as a
convenience that the end-user had to rely on because of an inadequate implemen-
tation. The early compilers very quickly caught on to the fact that, in terms of
performance, lexical environments have a great advantage—as one might expect in
compilation—and that in any case, wherever the variables were during execution,
the compiler could generate a more or less direct access rather than searching dy-
namically for the value. By default, then, all the variables of compiled functions
were treated as lexical, except those that were explicitly declared as dynamic, or
in the jargon of the time, special The declaration (declare (special x)) solely
for the use of the compiler in Lisp 1.5, Maclisp, COMMON LISP, and so forth,
designated the variable x as having special behavior.
    Efficiency was not the only reason for this turn of events. There was also a loss of
referential transparency. Referential transparency is the property that a language
has when substituting an expression in a program for an equivalent expression does
not change the behavior of the program; that is, they both calculate the same thing;
either they return the same value, or neither of the two terminates. For example,
consider this:
     (let   ( ( x (lambda ( ) 1 ) ) ) ( x ) )= ( ( l e t ( ( x (lambda ( ) 1 ) ) )x ) ) = 1
    Referential transparency is lost once a language has side effects. In such a case,
we need new, more precise definitions for equivalence as a relation in order to talk
about referential transparency. Scheme—without assignment, without side effects,
without continuations—is referentially transparent, [see Ex. 3.10] This property
is also a goal that we work toward when we are trying to write programs that are
genuinely re-usable, in the sense of depending as little as possible on the context
where they are used.
    The variables of a function such as (lambda (u) (+ u u)) are what we con-
ventionally call silent. Their names have no particular importance and can be
replaced by any other name. The function (lambda (n347) (+ n347 n347)) is
nothing more nor less21 than the function (lambda (u) (+ u u)).
    We're still waiting for the language that respects this invariant. There's nothing
like that in dynamic Lisp. Just consider this:
     (define (map fn 1)             ; mapcar in Lisp
       ( i f (pair? 1)
             (cons (fn (car 1 ) ) (map fn (cdr 1 ) ) )

21. In the technical terms of A-calculus, this change of names for variables is known as an a-
conversion.

    ( l e t ( ( l >(a b c ) ) )
         (map (lambda (x) ( l i s t - r e f 1 x ) )
                 '(2 1 0 ) ) )
      (The function l i s t - r e f extracts the element at index n from a list.)
      In Scheme, the result would be (c b a), but in a dynamic Lisp, the result
would be (0 0 0). The reason: the variable 1 is free in the body of (lambda (x)
( l i s t - r e f 1 x)) but that variable is captured by the variable 1 in map.
      We could resolve that problem simply by changing the names that are in conflict.
For example, it suffices to rename one of those two variables, 1. We might perhaps
choose to rename the variable in map since it is probably the more useful, but
what name could we choose that would guarantee that the problem would not
crop up again? If we prefix the names of variables by the social security number
of the programmer and suffix them by the standardized time (indicated, say, by
the number of hundredths of seconds elapsed since noon, 1 January 1901), we
obviously lower the risk of name-collisions, but we lose something in readability in
our programs.
      The situation at the beginning of the eighties was particularly sensitive. We
taught Lisp to students by observing its interpreter, which differed from its compiler
in this fundamental point about the value of a variable. From 1975 on, Scheme
[SS75] had shown that we could reconcile an interpreter and compiler and then live
in a completely lexical world. COMMON LISP buried the problem by postulating
that good semantics were compiler semantics, so everything should be lexical by
default. An interpreter just had to conform to these new canonical laws. The
increasing success of Scheme, of functional languages such as ML, and of their
spin-offs first spread and then imposed this new view.

1.6.2      Deep or Shallow Implementation
Things are not so simple, however, and implementers have found ways of increasing
how fast the value of a dynamic variable is determined. When the environment is
represented as an association-list, the cost of searching22 for the value of a variable
(that is, the cost of the function lookup) is linear with respect to the length of the
list. This mechanism is known as deep binding.
     Another technique, known as shallow binding, also exists. Shallow binding
occurs when each variable is associated with a place where its value is always
stored independently of the current environment. The simplest implementation of
this idea is that the location should be a field in the symbol associated with the
variable; it's known as Cval, or the value cell. The cost of lookup is constant in that
case since the cost is based on an indirection, possibly followed by an additional
offset. Since there's rarely a gain without a loss, we have to admit here that a
function call is more costly in this model since it has to save the values of variables
that are going to be bound and modify the symbols associated with those variables
22. Fortunately, statistics show that we search more often for the first variables than for those
that are buried more deeply. Besides, it's worth noting that lexical environments are smaller than
dynamic environments, since dynamic environments have to carry around all the bindings that
are being computed [Bak92a].

so that the symbols contain the new values. When the function returns, moreover,
it must restore the old values in the symbols that they came from—a practice that
can compromise tail recursion. (But see [SJ93] for alternatives.)
    We can partially simulate23 shallow binding by changing the representation of
the environment. In what follows, we'll assume that lists of variables are not dotted.
This assumption will make it easier to decode lists of variables. We'll also assume
that we don't need to verify the arity of functions. These new functions will be
prefixed by s. to make them easier to recognize.
     (define (s.make-function variables body env)
       (lambda (values current.env)
          (let ((old-bindings
                 (map (lambda (var val)
                             (let ((old-value (getprop var 'apval)))
                               (putprop var 'apval val)
                               (cons var old-value) ) )
                      variables
                      values ) ))
            (let ((result (eprogn body current.env)))
              (for-each (lambda (b) (putprop (car b) 'apval (cdr b)))
                         old-bindings )
              result ) ) ) )
     (define (s.lookup id env)
       (getprop id 'apval) )
     (define (s.update! id env value)
       (putprop id 'apval value) )
    In Scheme, the functions putprop and getprop are not standard because they
cause highly inefficient global side effects, but they resemble the functions put and
get in [AS85]. [see Ex. 2.6]
    Here, the functions putprop and getprop simulate that field24 where a symbol
stores the value of a variable of the same name. Independently25 of their actual
implementation, these functions should be regarded as though they have constant
cost.
    Notice that in the preceding simulation, the environment env has completely
disappeared because it no longer serves any purpose. This disappearance means
that we have to modify the implementation of closures since they can no longer
close the environment (since it doesn't exist any longer). The technique for doing
so (which we'll see later) consists of analyzing the body of the function to identify
free variables and then treating them in the appropriate way.
    Deep binding favors changing the environment and programming by multi-
tasking, to the detriment of searching for values of variables. Shallow binding favors
searching for the values of variables to the detriment of function calls. Henry Baker
23. However, we are not treating the assignment of a closed variable here. For that topic, see
[BCSJ86].
24. The name of the property being used, apval [see p. 31], was chosen in honor of the name
used in [MAE"*" 62] when these values really were stored in P-lists.
25. The functions sweep down a symbol's list of properties (its P-list) until they find the right
property. The cost of this search is linear with respect to the length of the P-list, unless the
implementation associates symbols with properties by means of a hash table.

1.7. GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                                            25

[Bak78] combined the two in the technique of rerooting.
   Remember, finally, that deep binding and shallow binding are merely imple-
mentation techniques that have nothing to do with the semantics of binding.

1.7       Global Environment
An empty global environment is a poor thing, so most Lisp systems supply libraries
to fill it up. There are, for example, more than 700 functions in the global environ-
ment of COMMON LISP (CLtLl); more than 1,500 in Le-Lisp; more than 10,000 in
ZetaLisp, etc. Without its library, Lisp would be only a kind of A-calculus in which
we couldn't even print the results of calculations. The idea of a library is important
for the end-user. Whereas the special forms are the essence of the language from
the point of view of any one producing the evaluator, it's the libraries that make
a real difference for the end-user. Lisp folk history insists that it was the lack of
such banalities as a library of trigonometric functions that made number crunchers
drop Lisp early on. Their feeling, according to [Sla61], was that it might be a good
thing to know how to integrate or differentiate symbolically but without sine or
tangent, what could anyone really do with the language?
    We expect to find all the usual functions, such as car, cons, etc., in the global
environment. We may also find simple variables whose values are well known data,
such as Boolean values and the empty list.
    Now we are going to define two macros—just for convenience at this point, since
we haven't even talked about macros yet,26 important as they are. In fact, macros
are such a significant and complicated phenomenon that we will devote an entire
chapter to them later, [see p. 311]
    The two macros that we'll define here will make it easier to elaborate the global
environment. We'll define the global environment as an extension of the empty
initial environment, env.init.
     (define env.global env.init)
     (define-syntax definitial
        (syntax-rules ()
           ((definitial name)
            (begin (set! env.global (cons (cons 'name 'void) env.global))
                   'name ) )
         ((definitial name value)
          (begin (set! env.global (cons (cons 'name value) env.global))
                 'name ) ) ) )
    (define-syntax defprimitive
      (syntax-rules ()
        ((defprimitive name value arity)
         (definitial name
            (lambda (values)
              (if (= arity (length values))
                  (apply value values)                                        ; The real apply of Scheme
                  (wrong "Incorrect arity"

26. It is not our intention to put the whole book in its first chapter.

                                      (list        'name v a l u e s )            ) ) ) ) ) ) )
    Now we'll define a few very useful constants, though none of these three appears
in standard Scheme. We note here that t is a variable in the Lisp that is being
defined, while #t is a value in the Lisp that we are using as the definition language.
Any value other than that of the-f alse-value is true.
    (definitial t #t)
     (definitial f the-false-value)
     (def   initial nil »())
   Though it's useful to have a few global variables that let us get the real objects
that represent Booleans or the empty list, another solution is to develop a syntax
appropriate for doing that. Scheme uses the syntax #t and #f, and the values of
those are the Booleans true and false. The point of those two is that they are
always visible and that they cannot be corrupted.
     1. They are always visible because we can write #t for true in any context, even
        if a local variable is named t.
     2. They are incorruptible, an important fact, since many evaluators authorize
        alterations in the value of the variable t.
    Such alterations lead to puzzles like this one: (if t 1 2) will have the value
2 in (let ( ( t #f)) (if t 1 2)).
    Many solutions to that problem are possible. The simplest is to lock the im-
mutability of these constants into the evaluator, like this:
     (define (evaluate e env)
       ( i f (atom? e)
             (cond ((eq? e >t) #t)
                   ((eq? e >f) #f)

                     ((symbol? e) (lookup e env))

                     ( e l s e (wrong "Cannot evaluate" e ) ) )
              ... ) )
    We could also introduce the idea of mutable and immutable binding. An im-
mutable binding could not be the object of an assignment. Nothing could ever
change the value of a variable that has been immutably bound. That concept ex-
ists, even if it is somewhat obscured, in many systems. The idea of inline functions
designates those functions (also known as integrable or open coded) [see p. 199]
where the body, appropriately instantiated, can replace the call.
    To replace (car x) by the code that extracts the contents of the car field
from the value of the dotted pair x implies the important hypothesis that nothing
ever alters, has never altered, will never alter the value of the global variable car.
Imagine the misfortune that the following fragment of a session illustrates.
     ( s e t ! my-global (cons 'c 'd))
           — (c . d)
     ( s e t ! my-test (lambda () (car my-global)))
           -> #<MY-TEST procedure>
     (begin ( s e t ! car cdr)
                ( s e t ! my-global (cons 'a 'b))

1.8. STARTING THE INTERPRETER                                                                                       27

             (my-test) )

    Fortunately again, the response can only be a or b. If my-test uses the value of
car current at the time my-test was defined, the response would be a. If my-test
uses the current value of car, the response would be b. It's helpful to compare the
behavior of my-test and my-global, knowing that we'll usually see the first kind
of behavior for my-test when the evaluator is a compiler, and usually the second
kind of behavior for my-global. [see p . 54]
    We'll also add a few working variables27 to the global environment that we've
been building because there is no dynamic creation of global variables in the present
evaluator. The names that we suggest here cover roughly 96.037% of the names of
functions that Lispers testing a new evaluator usually come up with spontaneously.

    (definitial foo)
    (definitial bar)
    (definitial fib)
    (definitial fact)
    Finally, we'll define a few functions, but not all of them, because listing all of
them would put you to sleep. Our main difficulty now is to adapt the primitives
of Lisp to the calling protocol of the Lisp that is being defined. Knowing that the
arguments are all brought together into one list by the interpreter, we simply have
to use apply. 28 Note that the arity of the primitive will be respected because of
the way def primitive expands it.
    (defprimitive cons cons 2)
    (defprimitive car car 1)
    (defprimitive set-cdr! set-cdr! 2)
    (defprimitive + + 2)
    (defprimitive eq? eq? 2)
    (defprimitive < < 2)

1.8       Starting the Interpreter
The only thing left to tell you is how to get into this new world that we've defined.
    (define (chapterl-scheme)
      (define (toplevel)
          (display (evaluate (read) env.global))
          (toplevel) )
      (toplevel) )
   Since our interpreter is still open to innovation, we suggest an exercise in which
you implement a function for exiting.

27. These variables are, unfortunately, initialized here. This fault will be corrected later.
28. Once again, we congratulate ourselves that we did not call invoke "apply."

1.9       Conclusions
Have we really defined a language at this point?
    No one could doubt that the function evaluate can be started, that we can
submit expressions to it, and that it will return their values, once its computations
are complete. However, the function evaluate itself makes no sense apart from its
definition language, and, in the absence of a definition of the definition language,
nothing is sure. Since every true Lisper has an in-born reflex for bootstrapping, it's
probably sufficient to identify the definition language as the language that we've
defined. In consequence, we now have a language L defined by a function evaluate,
written in the language L. The language defined that way is thus a solution to this
equation in L:

      VTT G Program, L(evaluate                        (quote ?r) env.global) = LIT
    For any program ?r, the evaluation of TT in L (denoted LTT) must behave the
same way (and thus have the same value if ir terminates) as the evaluation of
the expression (evaluate (quote 7r) env.global), all still in L. One amusing
consequence of this equation is that the function evaluate 29 is capable of auto-
interpretation. The following expressions are thus equivalent:
     (evaluate (quote TT) env.global) =
       (evaluate (quote (evaluate (quote 7r) env.global)) env.global)
    Are there any solutions to that equation? The answer is yes; in fact, there are
many solutions. As we saw earlier, the order of evaluation is not necessarily appar-
ent from the definition of evaluate, and many other properties of the definition
language are unconsciously inherited by the language being defined. We can say
next to nothing about them, in fact, because there are also a great many trivial
solutions to the equation. Take, for example, the language L2001; its semantics is
that every program written in it has, as its value, the number 2001. That language
trivially satisfies our equation. We have to depend on other methods, then, if we
want to define a real language, and those other methods will be the subject of later
chapters.

1.10        Exercises
Exercise 1.1 : Modify the function evaluate so that it becomes a tracer. All func-
tion calls should display their arguments and their results. You can well imagine
extending such a rudimentary tracer to make a step-by-step debugger that could
modify the execution path of the program under its control.

Exercise 1.2 : When e v l i s evaluates a list containing only one expression, it has
to carry out a useless recursion. Find a way to eliminate that recursion.

29. It is necessary to clean all syntactic abbreviations and macros out of evaluate—such things
as define, case, and so forth. Then we still have to provide a global environment containing the
variables evaluate, evlis, etc.

1.10. EXERCISES                                                                                                  29

Exercise 1.3 : Suppose we now define the function extend like this:
    (define (extend env names values)
       (cons (cons names values) env) )
    Define the associated functions, lookup and update !. Compare them with their
earlier definitions.

Exercise 1.4 : Another way of implementing shallow binding was suggested by
the idea of a rack in [SS80]. Instead of each symbol being associated with a field
to contain the value of the variable of the same name, there is a stack for that
purpose. At any given time, the value of the variable is the value found on top of
that stack of associated values. Rewrite the functions s . make-function, s. lookup,
and s. update! to take advantage of this new representation.

Exercise 1.5 : The definition of the primitive < is false! In practice, it returns
a Boolean value of the implementation language instead of a Boolean value of the
language being defined. Correct this fault.

Exercise 1.6 : Define the function l i s t .

Exercise 1.7 : For those who are fond of continuations, define call/cc.

Exercise 1.8 : Define apply.

Exercise 1.9 : Define a function end so that you can exit cleanly from the inter-
preter we developed in this chapter.

Exercise 1.10 : Compare the speed of Scheme and evaluate. Then compare the
speed of evaluate and evaluate interpreted by evaluate.

Exercise 1.11 : The sequence begin was defined by means of lambda [see p. 9]
but it used gensym to avoid any possible captures. Redefine begin in the same
spirit but do not use gensyra to do so.

Recommended Reading
All the references to interpreters mentioned at the beginning of this chapter make
interesting reading, but if you can read only a little, the most rewarding are prob-
ably these:
   • among the A-papers, [SS78a];
   • the shortest article ever written that still presents an evaluator, [McC78b];

     • to get a taste of non-pedantic formalism, [Rey72];
     • to get to know the origins and beginnings, [MAE+62].

