Foreword from the First Edition

When I first got a summer job at MIT’s Project MAC almost 30 years ago, I was
delighted to be able to work with the DEC PDP-10 computer, which was more fun
to program in assembly language than any other computer, bar none, because of
its rich yet tractable set of instructions for performing bit tests, bit masking, field
manipulation, and operations on integers. Though the PDP-10 has not been manu-
factured for quite some years, there remains a thriving cult of enthusiasts who
keep old PDP-10 hardware running and who run old PDP-10 software—entire
operating systems and their applications—by using personal computers to simu-
late the PDP-10 instruction set. They even write new software; there is now at
least one Web site with pages that are served up by a simulated PDP-10. (Come
on, stop laughing—it’s no sillier than keeping antique cars running.)

I also enjoyed, in that summer of 1972, reading a brand-new MIT research
memo called HAKMEM, a bizarre and eclectic potpourri of technical trivia.1 The
subject matter ranged from electrical circuits to number theory, but what intrigued
me most was its small catalog of ingenious little programming tricks. Each such
gem would typically describe some plausible yet unusual operation on integers or
bit strings (such as counting the 1-bits in a word) that could easily be programmed
using either a longish fixed sequence of machine instructions or a loop, and then
show how the same thing might be done much more cleverly, using just four or
three or two carefully chosen instructions whose interactions are not at all obvious
until explained or fathomed. For me, devouring these little programming nuggets
was like eating peanuts, or rather bonbons—I just couldn’t stop—and there was a
certain richness to them, a certain intellectual depth, elegance, even poetry.

“Surely,” I thought, “there must be more of these,” and indeed over the years
I collected, and in some cases discovered, a few more. “There ought to be a book
of them.”

I was genuinely thrilled when I saw Hank Warren’s manuscript. He has sys-
tematically collected these little programming tricks, organized them thematically,
and explained them clearly. While some of them may be described in terms of
machine instructions, this is not a book only for assembly language programmers.
The subject matter is basic structural relationships among integers and bit strings

1. Why “HAKMEM”? Short for “hacks memo”; one 36-bit PDP-10 word could hold six 6-bit
characters, so a lot of the names PDP-10 hackers worked with were limited to six characters.
We  were  used  to  glancing  at  a  six-character  abbreviated  name  and  instantly  decoding  the
contractions.  So  naming  the  memo  “HAKMEM”  made  sense  at  the  time—at  least  to  the
hackers.

in a computer and efficient techniques for performing useful operations on them.
These techniques are just as useful in the C or Java programming languages as
they are in assembly language.

Many books on algorithms and data structures teach complicated techniques
for sorting and searching, for maintaining hash tables and binary trees, for deal-
ing with records and pointers. They overlook what can be done with very tiny
pieces of data—bits and arrays of bits. It is amazing what can be done with just
binary addition and subtraction and maybe some bitwise operations; the fact that
the carry chain allows a single bit to affect all the bits to its left makes addition a
peculiarly powerful data manipulation operation in ways that are not widely
appreciated.

Yes, there ought to be a book about these techniques. Now it is in your hands,
and it’s terrific. If you write optimizing compilers or high-performance code, you
must read this book. You otherwise might not use this bag of tricks every single
day—but if you find yourself stuck in some situation where you apparently need
to loop over the bits in a word, or to perform some operation on integers and it just
seems harder to code than it ought, or you really need the inner loop of some inte-
ger or bit-fiddly computation to run twice as fast, then this is the place to look. Or
maybe you’ll just find yourself reading it straight through out of sheer pleasure.

Guy L. Steele, Jr.
Burlington, Massachusetts
April 2002
