Caveat Emptor: The cost of software
maintenance increases with the square of
the programmer’s creativity.

First Law of Programmer Creativity,
Robert D. Bliss, 1992

This is a collection of small programming tricks that I have come across over
many years. Most of them will work only on computers that represent integers in
two’s-complement form. Although a 32-bit machine is assumed when the register
length is relevant, most of the tricks are easily adapted to machines with other reg-
ister sizes.

This book does not deal with large tricks such as sophisticated sorting and
compiler optimization techniques. Rather, it deals with small tricks that usually
involve individual computer words or instructions, such as counting the number
of 1-bits in a word. Such tricks often use a mixture of arithmetic and logical
instructions.

It is assumed throughout that integer overflow interrupts have been masked
off, so they cannot occur. C, Fortran, and even Java programs run in this environ-
ment, but Pascal and Ada users beware!

The presentation is informal. Proofs are given only when the algorithm is not
obvious, and sometimes not even then. The methods use computer arithmetic,
“floor” functions, mixtures of arithmetic and logical operations, and so on. Proofs
in this domain are often difficult and awkward to express.

To reduce typographical errors and oversights, many of the algorithms have
been executed. This is why they are given in a real programming language, even
though, like every computer language, it has some ugly features. C is used for the
high-level language because it is widely known, it allows the straightforward mix-
ture of integer and bit-string operations, and C compilers that produce high-quality
object code are available.

Occasionally, machine language is used, employing a three-address format,
mainly for ease of readability. The assembly language used is that of a fictitious
machine that is representative of today’s RISC computers.

Branch-free code is favored, because on many computers, branches slow
down instruction fetching and inhibit executing instructions in parallel. Another
problem with branches is that they can inhibit compiler optimizations such as
instruction scheduling, commoning, and register allocation. That is, the compiler
may be more effective at these optimizations with a program that consists of a few
large basic blocks rather than many small ones.

The code sequences also tend to favor small immediate values, comparisons
to zero (rather than to some other number), and instruction-level parallelism.
Although much of the code would become more concise by using table lookups
(from memory), this is not often mentioned. This is because loads are becoming
more expensive relative to arithmetic instructions, and the table lookup methods
are often not very interesting (although they are often practical). But there are
exceptional cases.

Finally, I should mention that the term “hacker” in the title is meant in the
original sense of an aficionado of computers—someone who enjoys making com-
puters do new things, or do old things in a new and clever way. The hacker is usu-
ally quite good at his craft, but may very well not be a professional computer
programmer or designer. The hacker’s work may be useful or may be just a game.
As an example of the latter, more than one determined hacker has written a pro-
gram which, when executed, writes out an exact copy of itself. 1 This is the sense
in which we use the term “hacker.” If you’re looking for tips on how to break into
someone else’s computer, you won’t find them here.

Acknowledgments
First, I want to thank Bruce Shriver and Dennis Allison for encouraging me to
publish this book. I am indebted to many colleagues at IBM, several of whom are
cited in the Bibliography. One deserves special mention: Martin E. Hopkins,
whom I think of as “Mr. Compiler” at IBM, has been relentless in his drive to
make every cycle count, and I’m sure some of his spirit has rubbed off on me.
Addison-Wesley’s reviewers have improved the book immensely. Most of their
names are unknown to me, but the review by one whose name I did learn was
truly outstanding: Guy L. Steele, Jr., completed a 50-page review that included
new subject areas to address, such as bit shuffling and unshuffling, the sheep and
goats operation, and many others. He suggested algorithms that beat the ones I
used. He was extremely thorough. For example, I had erroneously written that the
hexadecimal number AAAA AAAA factors as 
 Guy
pointed out that the 3 should be a 5. He suggested improvements to style and did
not shirk from mentioning minutiae. Wherever you see “parallel prefix” in this
book, the material is due to Guy.

2 3 17 257 65537;

·

·

·

·

See www.HackersDelight.org
for additional material related
to this book.

H. S. Warren, Jr.
Yorktown, New York
June 2012

1. One such program, written in C, is: 

main(){char*p="main(){char*p=%c%s%c;(void)printf(p,34,p,34,10);}%c";(void)printf(p,34,p,34,10);}
