Preface

Static program analysis or, for short, static analysis aims at
discovering semantic properties of programs without running them.
Initially, it was introduced in the seventies to enable compiler
optimizations and guide the synthesis of efficient machine code.
Since then, the interest in static analysis has grown considerably, as
it plays an important role in all phases of program development,
including the verification of specifications, the verification of
programs, the synthesis of optimized code, and the refactoring and
maintenance of software applications. It is commonly used to certify
critical software. It also helps improve the quality of general-purpose
software and enables aggressive code optimizations. Consequently,
static analysis is now relevant not only to computer scientists who
study the foundations of programming but also to many working
engineers and developers who can use it for their everyday work.
    The purpose of this book is to provide an introduction to static
analysis and to cover the basics of both theoretical foundations and
practical considerations underlying the implementation and use of
static analysis tools. The scientific literature on static analysis is
huge and may seem hard for students or working engineers to get
started quickly. Indeed, while we can recommend great scientific
articles on many specific topics, these are often too advanced for a
general audience; thus, it is harder to find good references that could
provide a quick and comprehensive introduction for nonexperts. The
aim of this book is precisely to provide such a general introduction,
which explains the key basic concepts (both in the theory and from a
practical point of view), gives the gist of the state of the art in static
program analysis, and can be read rather quickly and easily. More
precisely, we cover the mathematical foundations of static analysis
(semantics, semantic abstraction, computation of program
invariants), more advanced notions and techniques (abstractions for
advanced programming features and for answering a wide range of
semantic questions), and techniques to implement and use static
analysis tools.
    On the other hand, it is not possible to provide an exhaustive
description of the state of the art, simply because the sheer number
of scientific reports and articles published every year on the topic far
exceeds what a single person can assimilate or will even need. A
huge number of practical techniques and fundamental constructions
could be studied, yet they may be useful to only a small group of
readers. Therefore, we believe that exhaustivity should not be the
purpose of this book, and it is likely that most readers will have to
complement it with additional material that covers their personal
interest. However, we hope that this book will help all readers quickly
reach the point where they master the foundational principles of
static analysis, and help them acquire additional knowledge more
easily when they need it. To better achieve this, we try to present, in
an intuitive manner, some ideas and principles that often take years
of research and practical experience to fully understand and learn.
    We divide our material into chapters that can often be skipped or
omitted in the first reading, depending on the motivations of the
reader. Furthermore, we distinguish several reader profiles, which
we consider part of the target audience of this book and for whom
we can provide specific advice on where to start and how to handle
each chapter:
    Students (abbreviated as [S] in the introduction to each
    chapter) who follow a course on programming languages,
    compilers, program analysis, or program verification will find
    here material to construct a theoretical and practical knowledge
    of static analysis; we expect advanced students (e.g., graduate
    students specializing in program analysis or verification) to read
    most of the chapters and complement them with additional
    readings, whereas more junior students can focus on the first
    chapters.
    Developers ([D]) of programming tools (e.g., compilers and
    program verifiers) who need to implement static analysis
    techniques to solve practical problems will find both the
    technical basics that they need and practical examples with
    actual code to learn about common approaches to implementing
    static analyzers.
    Users ([U]) of static analysis tools need to know about the
    general principles underlying static analyzers and how to set up
    an analysis; they will find not only general notions on static
    analysis but also a chapter devoted specifically to the use of
    static analysis tools, including their configuration and the
    exploitation of the analysis results.
Structure of the Book     Chapters 1 and 2 provide a high-level
introduction to the main principles of static analysis. Chapter 1
provides the background to understand the goals of static analysis
and the kind of questions it can answer. In particular, it discusses the
consequence of the fact that interesting semantic properties about
programs are not computable. It also compares static analysis with
other techniques for reasoning about programs. Chapter 2 presents
an intuitive graphical introduction to the abstraction of program
semantics and to the static analysis of programs. These two
chapters are fundamental for all readers.
    Chapters 3–5 formalize the scientific foundations of program
analysis techniques, including the definition of the semantics of a
programming language, the abstraction of the semantics of
programs, and the computation of conservative program invariants.
These chapters present not only the most general methods but also
some advanced static analysis techniques. The notion of abstraction
is central to the whole book as it defines the logical predicates that a
static analysis may use to compute program properties; thus, it is
extensively studied here. Chapters 3 and 4 cover the notions of
semantics, abstraction, and abstract interpretation and show how
they work using a toy language as an example. Chapter 5 describes
a few advanced methods to construct abstractions and static
analysis algorithms. Readers who seek a comprehensive
understanding of the foundations should read these three chapters.
On the other hand, users of static analysis tools may skip part of this
material in a first reading and refer back to these chapters when the
need arises. Developers of static analyzers may take a similar
approach and skip chapter 5 in a first reading, returning to it when
needed.
    The following two chapters focus on the practical implementation
and use of static analysis techniques. Chapter 6 discusses the
practical use of a static analysis tool, its configuration, and how the
analysis results can be used to answer specific semantic questions.
It is particularly targeted at users of static analyzers, even though its
content should be useful to all readers. Chapter 7 reviews the
implementation of a simple static analyzer, provides source code,
and discusses implementation choices. It was written for readers
who intend to develop static analyzers, although other readers may
also find it useful for gaining deeper understanding of how a static
analyzer works. Readers who are mainly interested in the
foundations may skip these two chapters, at least in the first reading.
    The next two chapters consider more advanced applications.
Chapter 8 reviews more advanced programming language features
than those included in the examples shown in chapters 3 and 4 and
discusses abstractions that apply to them. Chapter 9 studies more
complex semantic properties than those considered in earlier
chapters and highlights abstractions to cope with them. Chapter 10
discusses a few specialized frameworks that are less general than
those presented in chapters 3 and 4, yet take advantage of specific
programming language features or properties of interest to build
efficient static analyses. These chapters often focus on the high-level
ideas and main abstractions to solve a class of problems. We expect
readers interested in these issues to pursue reading of additional
material.
    Finally, chapter 11 summarizes the main concepts of static
analysis, several routes for further studies, and a few challenges for
the future.
    For reference, appendix A recalls standard mathematical
notations used throughout the book (to make it accessible even
without a background in discrete mathematics and logics), and
appendix B collects the proofs of the theorems presented in the core
of the formal chapters.
Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the many people who helped bring this book to
fruition. First and foremost, we thank all the great researchers and
professors who contributed to the emergence and development of
the static analysis field. In particular, Patrick Cousot and Radhia
Cousot have built a very robust, powerful, and general framework for
designing static analysis and more generally for reasoning about
program semantics. Since these foundational works have been
achieved, many research scientists, developers, engineers, and
pioneer end users have contributed to the development and adoption
of static analysis and have greatly advanced the state of the art. We
would like to thank them all here.
    Many colleagues have contributed directly or indirectly in the
genesis of this book with discussions, ideas, and encouragement,
and we thank them all, even though we cannot gather an exhaustive
list. We especially thank Alex Aiken, Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, Cezara
Drăgoi, Jérôme Feret, Kihong Heo, Chung-kil Hur, Woosuk Lee,
Mayur Naik, Peter O’Hearn, Hakjoo Oh, Sukyoung Ryu, Makoto
Tatsuda, and Hongseok Yang. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers commissioned by the publisher, who were extremely
helpful with their productive comments and suggestions.
    This book is based on our work throughout our careers, which
was supported by a series of research grants. Kwangkeun is grateful
to National Research Foundation of Korea for continued and
generous grants, including the National Creative Research Initiatives
and the Engineering Research Center of Excellence. Kwangkeun
also thanks Samsung Electronics and SparrowFasoo.com for their
support, which drove his team to go the extra mile to industrialize a
static analysis tool beyond the laboratory workbench. Xavier is
grateful to the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche and the
European Research Council for their support.
   We would also like to acknowledge the organizations that
supported the building of this book, including Seoul National
University, the Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et
Automatique (INRIA), the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), the École Normale Supérieure de Paris, and
Université Paris Sciences et Lettres (PSL University). We are also
grateful to MIT Press editors Marie Lee and Stephanie Cohen for
their professional assistance in realizing this book project since our
proposal.
   Last, but not least, Kwangkeun expresses his deep appreciation
for his wife Young-ae, for her love and care, and both authors
gratefully acknowledge the love and encouragement of their family
members and relatives.
