1 Program Analysis

Goal of This Chapter    Before we dive into the way static analysis tools
operate, we need to define their scope and describe the kinds of
questions they can help solve. In section 1.1 we discuss the importance of
understanding the behavior of programs by semantic reasoning, and we
show applications in section 1.2. Section 1.3 sets up the main concepts of
static analysis and shows the intrinsic limitations of automatic program
reasoning techniques based on semantics. Section 1.4 classifies the main
approaches to semantic-based program reasoning and clarifies the
position of static analysis in this landscape.
Recommended Reading:   [S], [D], [U]

1.1 Understanding Software Behavior

In every engineering discipline, a fundamental question is, will our design
work in reality as we intended? We ask and answer that question when
we design mechanical machines, electrical circuits, or chemical
processes. The answer comes from analyzing our designs using our
knowledge about nature that will carry out the designs. For example,
using Newtonian mechanics, Maxwell equations, Navier-Stokes
equations, or thermodynamic equations, we analyze our design to predict
its actual behavior. When we design a bridge, for example, we analyze
how nature runs the design, namely, how various forces (e.g., gravitation,
wind, and vibration) are applied to the bridge and whether the bridge
structure is strong enough to withstand them.
    The same question applies to computer software. We want to ensure
that our software will work as intended. The intention for analysis ranges
widely. For general reliability, we want to ensure that the software will not
crash with abrupt termination. If the software interacts with the outside
world, we want to ensure it will not be deceived to violate the host
computer’s security. For specific functionalities, we want to check if the
software will realize its functional goal. If the software is to control cars,
we want to ensure it will not drive them to an accident. If the software is to
learn our preference, we want to ensure it will not degrade as we teach
more. If the software transforms the medical images of our bodies, we
want to ensure it will not introduce false pixels. If the software is to
bookkeep the ledgers for crypto currency, we want to ensure it will not
allow double spending. If the software translates program text, we want to
ensure the source’s meaning is not lost in translation.
    There is, however, one difference between analyzing software and
analyzing other types of engineering designs: for computer software, it is
not nature that will run the software but the computer itself. The computer
will execute the software according to the meanings of the software’s
source language. Software’s run-time behavior is solely defined by the
meanings of the software’s source language. The computer is just an
undiscerning tool that blindly executes the software exactly as it is written.
Any execution behavior that deviates from our intention is because the
software is mistakenly written to behave that way.
    Hence, for computer software, to answer the question of whether our
design will work as we intended, we need knowledge by which we can
somehow analyze the meanings of software source language. Such
knowledge corresponds to knowledge that natural sciences have
accumulated about nature. We need knowledge that computer science
has accumulated about handling the meanings of software source
languages.
    We call a formal definition of a software’s run-time behavior, which is
determined by its source language’s meanings, semantics:
Definition 1.1 (Semantics and semantic properties) The semantics of a program is a (generally
formal—although we do not make it so in this chapter) description of its run-time behaviors. We call
semantic property any property about the run-time behavior (semantics) of a program.

Hence, checking if a software will run as we intended is equivalent to
checking if this software satisfies a semantic property of interest.
   In the following, we call a technique to check that a program satisfies a
semantic property program analysis, and we refer to an implementation of
program analysis as a program analysis tool.
   Figure 1.1 illustrates the correspondence between program analysis
and design analysis of other engineering disciplines.

1.2 Program Analysis Applications and Challenges
Program analysis can be applied wherever understanding program
semantics is important or beneficial. First, software developers (both
humans and machines) may be the biggest beneficiaries. Software
developers can use program analysis for quality assurance, to locate
errors of any kind in their software. Software maintainers can use program
analysis to understand legacy software that they maintain. System
security gatekeepers can use program analysis to proactively screen out
programs whose semantics can be malicious.
   Software that handles programs as data can use program analysis for
the programs’ performance improvement too. Language processors such
as translators or compilers need program analysis to translate the input
programs into optimized ones. Interpreters, virtual machines, and query
processors need program analysis for optimized execution of the input
programs. Automatic program synthesizers can use program analysis to
check and tune what they synthesize. Mobile operating systems need to
understand an application’s semantics in order to minimize the energy
consumption of the application. Automatic tutoring systems for teaching
programming can use program analysis to hint to students a direction to
amend their faulty programs.

    Figure 1.1
    Program analysis addresses a basic question common in every engineering area

   Use of program analysis is not limited to professional software or its
developers. As programming becomes a way of living in a highly
connected digitized environment, citizen programmers can benefit from
program analysis, too, to sanity-check their daily program snippets.
    The target of program analysis is not limited to executable software,
either. Once the object’s source language has semantics, program
analysis can circumscribe its semantics to provide useful information. For
example, program analysis of high-level system configuration scripts can
provide information about any existing conflicting requests.
    Though the benefits of program analysis are obvious, building a cost-
effective program analysis is not trivial, since computer programs are
complex and often very large. For example, the number of lines of
smartphone applications frequently reaches over half a million, not to
mention larger software such as web browsers or operating systems,
whose source sizes are over ten million lines. With semantics, the
situation is much worse because a program execution is highly dynamic.
Programs usually need to react to inputs from external, uncontrolled
environments. The number of inputs, not to mention the number of
program states, that can arise in all possible use cases is so huge that
software developers are likely to fail to handle some corner cases. The
number easily can be greater than the number of atoms in the universe,
for example. The space of the inputs keeps exploding as we want our
software to do more things. Also, constraints that could keep software
simple and small quickly diminish because of the ever-growing capacity of
computer hardware.
    Given that software is in charge of almost all infrastructures in our
personal, social, and global life, the need for cost-effective program
analysis technology is greater than ever before. We have already
experienced a sequence of appalling accidents whose causes are
identified as mistakes in software. Such accidents have occurred in
almost all sectors, including space, medical, military, electric power
transmission, telecommunication, security, transportation, business, and
administration. The long list includes accidents, the large-scale Twitter
outage (2016), the fMRI software error (2016) that invalidated fifteen
years of brain research, the Heartbleed bug (2014) in the popular
OpenSSL cryptographic library that allows attackers to read the memory
of any server that uses certain instances of OpenSSL, the stack overflow
issues that can explain the Toyota sudden unintended acceleration (2004–
2014), the Northeast blackout (2003), the explosion of the Ariane 5 Flight
501 (1996), which took ten years and $7 billion to build, and the Patriot
missile defense system in Dhahran (1991) that failed to intercept an
incoming Scud missile, to name just a few of the more prominent software
accidents.
   Though building error-free software may be far-fetched, at least within
reasonable costs for large-scale software, cost-effective ways to reduce
as many errors as possible are always in high demand.
   Static analysis, which is the focus of this book, is one kind of program
analysis. We conclude this chapter by characterizing static analysis in
comparison with other program analysis techniques.

1.3 Concepts in Program Analysis

The remainder of this chapter characterizes static program analysis and
compares it with other program analysis techniques. We provide keys to
understand how each program analysis technique operates and to assess
their strengths and weaknesses. This characterization will give basic
intuitions of the strengths and limitations of static analysis.

1.3.1 What to Analyze
The first question to answer to characterize program analysis techniques
is what programs they analyze in order to determine what properties.
Target Programs     An obvious characterization of the target programs to
analyze is the programming languages in which the programs are written,
but this is not the only one.
     Domain-specific analyses: Certain analyses are aimed at specific
     families of programs. This specialization is a pragmatic way to
     achieve a cost-effective program analysis, because each family has a
     particular set of characteristics (such as program idioms) on which a
     program analysis can focus. For example, consider the C
     programming language. Though the language is widely used to write
     software, including operating systems, embedded controllers, and all
     sorts of utilities, each family of programs has a special character.
     Embedded software is often safety-critical (thus needs thorough
     verification) but rarely uses the most complex features of the C
     language (such as recursion, dynamic memory allocation, and non-
     local jumps setjump/longjump), which typically makes analyzing
     such programs easier than analyzing general applications. Device
     drivers usually rely on low-level operations that are harder to reason
    about (e.g., low-level access to sophisticated data structures) but are
    often of moderate size (a few thousand lines of code).
    Non-domain-specific analyses: Some analyses are designed
    without focus on a particular family of programs of the target
    language. Such analyses are usually those incorporated inside
    compilers,      interpreters,   or     general-purpose      programming
    environments. Such analyses collect information (e.g., constants
    variables, common errors such as buffer overruns) about the input
    program to help compilers, interpreters, or programmers for an
    optimized or safe execution of the program. Non-domain-specific
    analyses risk being less precise and cost-effective than domain-
    specific ones in order to have an overall acceptable performance for
    a wide range of programs.
   Besides the language and family of programs to consider, the way
input programs are handled may also vary and affects how the analysis
works. An obvious option is to handle source programs directly just like a
compiler would, but some analyses may input different descriptions of
programs instead. We can distinguish two classes of techniques:
    Program-level analyses are run on the source code of programs
    (e.g., written in C or in Java) or on executable program binaries and
    typically involve a front end similar to a compiler’s that constructs the
    syntax trees of programs from the program source or compiled files.
    Model-level analyses consider a different input language that aims
    at modeling the semantics of programs; then the analyses input not a
    program in a language such as C or Java but a description that
    models the program to analyze. Such models either need to be
    constructed manually or are computed by a separate tool. In both
    cases, the construction of the model may hide either difficulties or
    sources of inaccuracy that need to be taken precisely into account.
Target Properties  A second obvious element of characterization of a
program analysis is the set of semantic properties it aims at computing.
Among the most important families of target properties, we can cite safety
properties, liveness properties, and information flow properties.
    A safety property essentially states that a program will never exhibit
    a behavior observable within finite time. Such behaviors include
    termination, computing a particular set of values, and reaching some
    kind of error state (such as integer overflows, buffer overruns,
    uncaught exceptions, or deadlocks). Hence, a program analysis for
      some safety properties chases program behaviors that are
      observable within finite time. Historically this class is called safety
      property because the goal of the analysis is to prove the absence of
      bad behaviors, and the bad behaviors are mostly those that occur on
      finite executions.
      A liveness property essentially states that a program will never
      exhibit a behavior observable only after infinite time. Examples of
      such behaviors include non-termination, live-lock, or starvation.
      Hence, program analysis for liveness properties searches for the
      existence of program behaviors that are observable after infinite time.
      Information flow properties define a large class of program
      properties stating the absence of dependence between pairs of
      program behaviors. For instance, in the case of a web service, users
      should not be able to derive the credential of another user from the
      information they can access. Unlike safety and liveness properties,
      information flow properties require reasoning about pairs of
      executions. More generally, so-called hyperproperties define a class
      of program properties that are characterized over several program
      executions.
The techniques to reason about these classes of semantic properties are
different. As indicated above, safety properties require considering only
finite executions, whereas liveness properties require reasoning about
infinite executions. As a consequence, the program analysis techniques
and algorithms dedicated to each family of semantic properties will differ
as well.

1.3.2 Static versus Dynamic
An important characteristic of a program analysis technique is when it is
performed or, more precisely, whether it operates during or before
program execution.
   A first solution is to make the analysis at run-time, that is, during the
execution of the program. Such an approach is called dynamic, as it takes
place while the program computes, typically over several executions.
Example 1.1 (User assertions) User assertions provide a classic case of a dynamic approach to
checking whether some conditions are satisfied by all program executions. Once the assertions are
inserted, the process is purely dynamic: whenever an assertion is executed, its condition is
evaluated, and an error is returned if the result is false.
    Note that some programming languages perform run-time checking of specific properties. For
instance, in Java, any array access is preceded by a dynamic bound check, which returns an
exception if the index is not valid; this mechanism is equivalent to an assertion and is also
dynamic.

  A second solution is to make the analysis before program execution.
We call such an approach a static analysis, as it is done once and for all
and independently from any execution.
Example 1.2 (Strong typing) Many programming languages require compilers to carry out some
type-checking stage, which ensures that certain classes of errors will never occur during the
execution of the input program. This is a perfect example of a static analysis since typing takes
place independently from any program execution, and the result is known before the program
actually runs.

   Static and dynamic techniques are radically different and come with
distinct sets of advantages and drawbacks. While dynamic approaches
are often easier to design and implement, they also often incur a
performance cost at run-time, and they do not force developers to fix
issues before program execution. On the other hand, after a static
analysis is done once, the program can be run as usual, without any
slowdown. Also, some properties cannot be checked dynamically. For
example, if the property of interest is termination, dynamically detecting a
non-terminating execution would require constructing an infinite program
run. Dynamic and static analyses have different aftermaths once they
detect a property violation. A dynamic analysis upon detecting a property
violation can simply abort the program execution or apply an unobtrusive
surgery to the program state and let the execution continue with a risk of
having behaviors unspecified in the programs. On the other hand, when a
static analysis detects a property violation, developers can still fix the
issue before their software is in use.

1.3.3 A Hard Limit: Uncomputability
Given a language of programs to analyze and a property of interest, an
ideal program analysis would always compute in a fully automated way
the exact result in finite time. For instance, let us consider the certification
that a program (e.g., a piece of safety-critical embedded software) will
never crash due to a run-time error. Then we would like to use a static
program analysis that will always successfully catch any possible run-time
error, that will always say when a program is run-time error free, and that
will never require any user input.
    Unfortunately, this is, in general, impossible.
The Halting Problem Is Not Computable The canonical example of a semantic
property for which no exact and fully automatic program analysis can be
found is termination. Given a programming language, we cannot have a
program analysis that, for any program in that language, correctly decides
in finite time whether the program will terminate or not.
    Indeed, it is well known that the halting problem is not computable. We
explain more precisely the meaning of this statement. In the following, we
consider a Turing-complete language, that is, a language that is as
expressive as a Turing machine (common general-purpose programming
languages all satisfy this condition), and we denote the set of all the
programs in this language by L. Second, given a program p in L, we say
that an execution e terminates if it reaches the end of p after finitely many
computation steps. Last, we say that a program terminates if and only if its
executions terminate.
Theorem 1.1 (Halting problem) The halting problem consists in finding an algorithm halt such
that,
                for every program p ∈ L, halt(p) = true if and only if p terminates.

The halting problem is not computable: there is no such algorithm halt, as proved simultaneously
by Alonso Church [20] and Alan Turing [106] in 1936.

This means that termination is beyond the reach of a fully automatic and
precise program analysis.
                                              More generally, any nontrivial
Interesting Semantic Properties Are Not Computable
semantic properties are also not computable. By semantic property we
mean a property that can be completely defined with respect to the set of
executions of a program (as opposed to a syntactic property, which can be
decided directly based on the program text). We call a semantic property
nontrivial when there are programs that satisfy it and programs that do not
satisfy it. Obviously only such properties are worth the effort of designing
a program analysis.
   It is easy to see that a particular nontrivial semantic property is
uncomputable; that is, the property cannot have an exact decision
procedure (analyzer). Otherwise, the exact decision procedure solves the
halting problem. For example, consider a property: this program prints 1
and finishes. Suppose there exists an analyzer that correctly decides the
property for any input program. This analyzer solves the halting problem
as follows. Given an input program P, the analyzer checks its slightly
changed version “P; print 1.” That the analyzer says “yes” means P stops,
and “no” means P does not stop.
   Indeed, Rice’s theorem settles the case that any nontrivial semantic
property is not computable:
Theorem 1.2 (Rice theorem) Let L be a Turing-complete language, and let P be a nontrivial
semantic property of programs of L. There exists no algorithm such that,
     for every program p ∈ L, it returns true if and only if p satisfies the semantic property P.

As a consequence, we should also give up hope of finding an ideal
program analysis that can determine fully automatically when a program
satisfies any interesting property such as the absence of run-time errors,
the absence of information flows, and functional correctness.
Toward Computability However, this does not mean that no useful program
analysis can be designed. It means only that the analyses we are going to
consider will all need to suffer some kind of limitation, by giving up on
automation, by targeting only a restricted class of programs (i.e., by giving
up the for every program in theorem 1.2), or by not always being able to
provide an exact answer (i.e., by giving up the if and only if in theorem
1.2). We discuss these possible compromises in the next sections.

1.3.4 Automation and Scalability
The first way around the limitation expressed in Rice’s theorem is to give
up on automation and to let program analyses require some amount of
user input. In this case, the user is asked to provide some information to
the analysis, such as global or local invariants (an invariant is a logical
property that can be proved to be inductive for a given program). This
means that the analysis is partly manual since users need to compute part
of the results themselves.
    Obviously, having to supply such information can often become quite
cumbersome when programs are large or complex, which is the main
drawback of manual methods.
    Worse still, this process may be error prone, such that human error
may ultimately lead to wrong results. To avoid such mistakes, program
analysis tools may independently verify the user-supplied information.
Then, when the user-supplied information is wrong, the analysis tool will
simply reject it and produce an error message. When the analysis tool can
complete the verification and check the validity of the user-supplied
information, the correctness of the final result will be guaranteed.
   Even when a program analysis is automatic, it may not always produce
a result within a reasonable time. Indeed, depending on the complexity of
the algorithms, a program analysis tool may not be able to scale to large
programs due to time costs or other resource constraints (such as
memory usage). Thus, scalability is another important characteristic of a
program analysis tool.

1.3.5 Approximation: Soundness and Completeness
Instead of giving up on automation, we can relax the conditions about
program analysis by letting it sometimes return inaccurate results.
   It is important to note that inaccurate does not mean wrong. Indeed, if
the kind of inaccuracy is known, the user may still draw (possibly partly)
conclusive results from the analysis output. For example, suppose we are
interested in program termination. Given an input program to verify, the
program analysis may answer “yes” or “no” only when it is fully sure about
the answer. When the analysis is not sure, it will just return an
undetermined result: “don’t know.” Such an analysis would be still useful if
the cases where it answers “don’t know” are not too frequent.
   In the following paragraphs, we introduce two dual forms of
inaccuracies (or, equivalently, approximations) that program analysis may
make. To fix the notations, we assume a semantic property of interest P
and an analysis tool analysis, to determine whether this property holds.
   Ideally, if analysis were perfectly accurate, it would be such that,
         for every program p ∈ L, analysis(p) = true ⇔ p satisfies P.
This equivalence property can be decomposed into a pair of implications:

Therefore, we can weaken the equivalence by simply dropping either of
these two implications. In both cases, we get a partially accurate too that
may return either a conclusive answer or a nonconclusive one (“don’t
know”).
   We now discuss in detail both of these implications.
Soundness    A sound program analysis satisfies the first implication.
Definition 1.2 (Soundness) The program analyzer analysis is sound with respect to property P
whenever, for any program p ∈ L, analysis(p) = true implies that p satisfies property P.
When a sound analysis (or analyzer) claims that the program has property
P, it guarantees that the input program indeed satisfies the property. We
call such an analysis sound as it always errs on the side of caution: it will
not claim a program satisfies P unless this property can be guaranteed. In
other words, a sound analysis will reject all programs that do not satisfy P.
Example 1.3 (Strong typing) A classic example is that of strong typing that is used in program
languages such as ML, that is based on the principle that “well-typed programs do not go wrong”:
indeed, well-typed programs will not present certain classes of errors whereas certain programs
that will never crash may still be rejected.

    From a logical point of view, the soundness objective is very easy to
meet since the trivial analysis defined to always return false obviously
satisfies definition 1.2. Indeed, this trivial analysis will simply reject any
program. This analysis is not useful since it will never produce a
conclusive answer. Therefore, in practice, the design of a sound analysis
will try to give a conclusive answer as often as possible. This is in practice
possible. As an example, the case of an ML program that cannot be typed
(i.e., is rejected) although there exists no execution that crashes due to a
typing error is rare in practice.
Completeness      A complete program analysis satisfies the second, opposite
implication:
Definition 1.3 (Completeness) The program analyzer analysis is complete with respect to
property P whenever, for every program p ∈ L, such that p satisfies P, analysis(p) = true.

A complete program analysis will accept every program that satisfies
property P. We call such an analysis complete because it does not miss a
program that has the property. In other words, when a complete analysis
rejects an input program, the completeness guarantees that the program
indeed fails to satisfy P.
Example 1.4 (User assertions) The error search technique based on user assertions is complete
in the sense of definition 1.3. User assertions let developers improve the quality of their software
thanks to run-time checks inserted as conditions in the source code and that are checked during
program executions. This practice can be seen as a very rudimentary form of verification for a
limited class of safety properties, where a given condition should never be violated. Faults are
reported during program executions, as assertion failures. If an assertion fails, this means that at
least one execution will produce a state where the assertion condition is violated.
    Figure 1.2
    Soundness and completeness demonstrated with Venn diagrams

   As in the case of soundness, it is very easy to provide a trivial but
useless complete analysis. Indeed, if analysis always returns true, then it
never rejects a program that satisfies the property of interest; thus, it is
complete, though it is of course of no use. To be useful, a complete
analyzer should often reject programs that do not satisfy the property of
interest. Building such useful complete analyses is a difficult task in
general (just as it is also difficult to build useful sound analyses).
Soundness and Completeness         Soundness and completeness are dual
properties. To better show them, we represent answers of sound and
complete analyses using Venn diagrams in figure 1.2, following the legend
in figure 1.2(d):
      Figure 1.2(a) shows the set of all programs and divides it into two
      subsets: the programs that satisfy the semantic property P and the
      programs that do not satisfy P. A sound and complete analysis would
      always return true exactly for the programs that are in the left part of
      the diagram.
      Figure 1.2(b) depicts the answers of an analysis that is sound but
      incomplete: it rejects all programs that do not satisfy the property but
     also rejects some that do satisfy it; whenever it returns true, we have
     the guarantee that the analyzed program satisfies P.
     Figure 1.2(c) depicts the answers of an analysis that is complete but
     unsound: it accepts all programs that do satisfy the property but also
     accepts some that do not satisfy it; whenever it returns false, we
     have the guarantee that the analyzed program does not satisfy P.
Due to the computability barrier, we should not hope for a sound,
complete, and fully automatic analysis when trying to determine which
programs satisfy any nontrivial execution property for a Turing-complete
language. In other words, when a program analysis is automatic, it is
either unsound or incomplete. However, this does not mean it is
impossible to design a program analysis that returns very accurate (sound
and complete) results on a specific set of input programs. But even in that
case, there will always exist input programs for which the analysis will
return inaccurate (unsound or incomplete) results.
   In the previous paragraphs, we have implicitly assumed that the
program analysis tool analysis always terminates and never crashes. In
general, non-termination or crashes of analysis should be interpreted
conservatively. For instance, if analysis is meant to be sound, then its
answer should be conservatively considered negative (false) whenever it
does not return true within the allocated time bounds.

1.4 Families of Program Analysis Techniques

In this section, we describe several families of approaches to program
analysis. Due to the negative result presented in section 1.3.3, no
technique can achieve a fully automatic, sound, and complete
computation of a nontrivial property of programs. We show the
characteristics of each of these techniques using the definitions of section
1.3.

1.4.1 Testing: Checking a Set of Finite Executions
When trying to understand how a system behaves, often the first idea that
comes to mind is to observe the executions of this system. In the case of
a program that may not terminate and may have infinitely many
executions, it is of course not feasible to fully observe all executions.
   Therefore, the testing approach observes only a finite set of finite
program executions. This technique is used by all programmers, from
beginners to large teams designing complex computer systems. In
industry, many levels of testing are performed at all stages of
development, such as unit testing (execution of sample runs on a basic
function) and integration testing (execution of large series of tests on a
completed system, including hardware and software).
    Basic testing approaches, such as random testing [11], typically
provide a low coverage of the tested code. However, more advanced
techniques improve coverage. As an example, concolic testing [47]
combines testing with symbolic execution (computation of exact relations
between input and output variables on a single control flow path) so as to
improve coverage and accuracy.
    Testing has the following characteristics:
     It is in general easy to automate, and many techniques (such as
     concolic testing) have been developed to synthesize useful sets of
     input data to maximize various measures of coverage.
     In almost all cases, it is unsound, except in the cases of programs
     that have only a finite number of finite executions (though it is usually
     prohibitively costly in that case).
     It is complete since a failed testing run will produce an execution that
     is incorrect with respect to the property of interest (such a counter-
     example is very useful in practice since it shows programmers exactly
     how the property of interest may be violated and often gives precise
     information on how to fix the program).
Besides, testing is often costly, and it is hard to achieve a very high path
coverage on very large programs. On the other hand, a great advantage
of testing is that it can be applied to a program in the conditions in which it
is supposed to be run; for instance, testing a program on the target
hardware, with the target operating system and drivers, may help
diagnose issues that are specific to this combination.
    When the semantics of programs is non-deterministic, it may not be
feasible to reproduce an execution, which makes the exploitation of the
results produced by testing problematic. As an example, the execution of
a set of concurrent tasks depends on the scheduling strategy so that two
runs with the same input may produce different results, if this strategy is
not fully deterministic.
    Another consideration is that testing will not allow attacking certain
classes of properties. For instance, it will not allow proving that a program
terminates, even over a finite set of inputs.
1.4.2 Assisted Proof: Relying on User-Supplied Invariants
A second way to avoid the limitation shown in section 1.3.3 consists in
giving up on automation.
    This is essentially the approach followed by machine-assisted
techniques. This means that users may be required to supply additional
information together with the program to analyze. In most cases, the
information that needs to be supplied consists of loop invariants and
possibly some other intermediate invariants. This often requires some
level of expertise. On the other hand, a large part of the verification can
generally still be carried out in a fully automatic way.
    We can cite several kinds of program analyses based on machine-
assisted techniques. A first approach is based on theorem-proving tools
like Coq [24], Isabelle/HOL [49], and PVS [88] and requires the user to
formalize the semantics of programs and the properties of interest and to
write down proof scripts, which are then checked by the prover. This
approach is adapted to the proof of sophisticated program properties. It
was applied to the verified CompCert compiler [77] from C to Power-PC
assembly (the compiler is verified in the sense that it comes with a proof
that it will compile any valid C program properly). It was also used for the
design of the microkernel seL4 verified [69]. A second approach leverages
a tool infrastructure to prove a specific set of properties over programs in
a specific language. The B-method [1] tool set implements such an
approach. Also, tools such as the Why C program verification framework
[43] or Dafny [76] input a program with a property to verify and attempt to
prove the property using automatic decision procedures, while relying on
the user for the main program invariants (such as loop invariants) and
when the automatic procedures fail.
    Machine-assisted techniques have the following characteristics:
     They are not fully automatic and often require the most tedious logical
     arguments to come from the human user.
     In practice, they are sound with respect to the model of the program
     semantics used for the proof, and they are also complete up to the
     abilities of the proof assistant to verify proofs (the expressiveness of
     the logics of the proof assistant may prevent some programs to be
     proved, though this is rarely a problem in practice).
In practice, the main limitation of machine-assisted techniques is the
significant resources they require, in terms of time and expertise.
1.4.3 Model Checking: Exhaustive Exploration of Finite Systems
Another approach focuses on finite systems, that is, systems whose
behaviors can be exhaustively enumerated, so as to determine whether
all executions satisfy the property of interest. This approach is called
finite-state model checking [38, 93, 21] since it will check a model of a
program using some kind of exhaustive enumeration. In practice, model-
checking tools use efficient data structures to represent program
behaviors and avoid enumerating all executions thanks to strategies that
reduce the search space.
    Note that this solution is very different from the testing approach
discussed in section 1.4.1. Indeed, testing samples a finite set of
behaviors among a generally infinite set, whereas model checking
attempts to check all executions of a finite system.
    The finite model-checking approach has been used both in hardware
verification and in software verification.
    Model checking has the following characteristics:
      It is automatic.
      It is sound and complete with respect to the model.
An important caveat is that the verification is performed at the model level
and not at the program level. As a first consequence, this means that a
model of the program needs to be constructed, either manually or by
some automatic means. In practice, most model-checking tools provide a
front end for that purpose. A second consequence is that the relation
between this model and the input program should be taken into account
when assessing the results; indeed, if the model cannot capture exactly
the behaviors of the program (which is likely as programs are usually
infinite systems since executions may be of arbitrary length), the checking
of the synthesized model may be either incomplete or unsound, with
respect to the input program. Some model-checking techniques are able
to automatically refine the model when they realize that they fail to prove a
property due to a spurious counter-example; however, the iterations of the
model checking and refinement may continue indefinitely, so some kind of
mechanism is required to guarantee termination. In practice, model-
checking tools are often conservative and are thus sound and incomplete
with respect to the input program. A large number of model-checking tools
have been developed for verifying different kinds of logical assertions on
various models or programming languages. As an example, UPPAAL [8]
verifies temporal logic formulas on timed automata.
1.4.4 Conservative Static Analysis: Automatic, Sound, and
Incomplete Approach
Instead of constructing a finite model of programs, static analysis relies on
other techniques to compute conservative descriptions of program
behaviors using finite resources. The core idea is to finitely over-
approximate the set of all program behaviors using a specific set of
properties, the computation of which can be automated [26, 27]. A (very
simple) example is the type inference present in many modern
programming languages such as variants of ML. Types [50, 81] provide a
coarse view of what a function does but do so in a very effective manner,
since the correctness of type systems guarantees that a function of type
int - > bool will always input an integer and return a Boolean (when it
terminates). Another contrived example is the removal of array bound
checks by some compilers for optimization purposes, using numerical
properties over program variables that are automatically inferred at
compile-time. The next chapters generalize this intuition and introduce
many other forms of static analyses.
    Besides compilers, static analysis has been very heavily used to
design program verifiers and program understanding tools for all sorts of
programming languages. Among many others, we can cite the ASTRÉE
[12] static analyzer for proving the absence of run-time errors in
embedded C codes, the Facebook INFER [15] static analyzer for the
detection of memory issues in C/C++/Java programs, the JULIA [103] static
analyzer for discovering security issues in Java programs, the POLYSPACE
[34] static analyzer for ADA/C/C++ programs, and the SPARROW [66] static
analyzer for the detection of memory errors in C programs.
    Static analysis approaches have the following characteristics:
     They are automatic.
     They produce sound results, as they compute a conservative
     description of program behaviors, using a limited set of logical
     properties. Thus, they will never claim the analyzed program satisfies
     the property of interest when it is not true.
     They are generally incomplete because they cannot represent all
     program properties and rely on algorithms that enforce termination of
     the analysis even when the input program may have infinite
     executions. As a consequence, they may fail to prove correct some
     programs that satisfy the property of interest.
Static analysis tools generally input the source code of programs and do
not require modeling the source code using an external tool. Instead, they
directly compute properties taken in a fixed set of logical formulas, using
algorithms that we present throughout the following chapters.
   While a static analysis is incomplete in general, it is often possible to
design a sound static analysis that gives the best possible answer on
classes of interesting input programs, as discussed in section 1.3.5.
However, it is then always possible to craft a correct input program for
which the analysis will fail to return a conclusive result.
   Last, we remark that it is entirely possible to drop soundness so as to
preserve automation and completeness. This leads to a different kind of
analysis that produces an under-approximation of the program’s actual
behaviors and answers a very different kind of question. Indeed, such an
approach may guarantee that a given subset of the executions of the
program can be observed. For instance, the approach may be useful to
establish that this program has at least one successful execution. On the
other hand, it does not prove properties such as the absence of run-time
errors.

1.4.5 Bug Finding: Error Search, Automatic, Unsound, Incomplete,
Based on Heuristics
Some automatic program analysis tools sacrifice not only completeness
but also soundness. The main motivation to do so is to simplify the design
and implementation of analysis tools and to provide lighter-weight
verification algorithms. The techniques used in such tools are often similar
to those used in model checking or static analysis, but they relax the
soundness objective. For instance, they may construct unsound finite
models of programs so as to quickly enumerate a subset of the
executions of the analyzed program, such as by considering only what
happens in the first iteration of each loop [110], whereas a sound tool
would have to consider possibly unbounded iteration numbers. As an
example, the commercial tool COVERITY [10] applies such techniques to
programs written in a wide range of languages (e.g., Java, C/C++,
JavaScript, or Python). Similarly, the tool CODESONAR [79] relies on such
approaches so as to search for defects in C/C++ or Assembly programs.
The CBMC tool (C Bounded Model Checker) [70] extracts models from
C/C++ or Java programs and performs bounded model checking on them,
which means that it explores models only up to a fixed depth. It is thus a
case that a model checker gives up on soundness in order to produce
fewer alarms.
   Since the main motivation of this approach is to discover bugs (and not
to prove their absence), it is often referred to as bug finding. Such tools
are usually applied to improve the quality of noncritical programs at a low
cost.
   Bug-finding tools have the following characteristics:
     They are automatic.
     They are neither sound nor complete; instead, they aim at
     discovering bugs rather quickly, so as to help developers.

    Figure 1.3
    An overview of program analysis techniques

1.4.6 Summary
Figure 1.3 summarizes the techniques for program analysis introduced in
this chapter and compares them based on five criteria. As this comparsion
shows, due to the computability barrier, no technique can provide fully
automatic, sound, and complete analyses. Testing sacrifices soundness.
Assisted proving is not automatic (even if it is often partly automated, the
main proof arguments generally need to be human provided). Model-
checking approaches can achieve soundness and completeness only with
respect to finite models, and they generally give up completeness when
considering programs (the incompleteness is often introduced in the
modeling stage). Static analysis gives up completeness (though it may be
designed to be precise for large classes of interested programs). Last,
bug finding is neither sound nor complete.
   As we remarked earlier, another important dimension is scalability. In
practice, all approaches have limitations regarding scalability, although
these limitations vary depending on the intended applications (e.g., input
programs, target properties, and algorithms used).

1.5 Roadmap

From now on, we focus on conservative static analysis, from its design
methodologies to its implementation techniques.

Definition 1.4 (Static analysis) Static analysis is an automatic technique for program-level
analysis that approximates in a conservative manner semantic properties of programs before their
execution.

   After a gentle introduction to static analysis in chapter 2, we present a
static analysis framework based on a compositional semantics in chapter
3, a static analysis framework based on a transitional semantics in
chapter 4, and some advanced techniques in chapter 5. These
frameworks, thanks to a semantics-based viewpoint, are general so that
they can guide the design of conservative static analyses for any
programming language and for any semantic property. In chapter 6, we
present issues and techniques regarding the use of static analysis in
practice. Chapter 7 discusses and demonstrates the implementation
techniques to build a static analysis tool. In chapter 8, we present how we
use the general static analysis framework to analyze seemingly complex
features of realistic programming languages. Chapter 9 discusses several
important families of semantic properties of interest and shows how to
cope with them using static analysis. In chapter 10, we present several
specialized yet high-level frameworks for specific target languages and
semantic properties. Finally, in chapter 11 we summarize this book.
