2 A Gentle Introduction to Static Analysis

                   In this chapter, we provide an introduction to static
Goal of This Chapter
analysis that does not require any background. This introduction aims
at making the core concepts of static analysis intuitive and crisp. To
this end, we define a basic programming language that describes
sequences of transformations applied to points in a two-dimensional
space. 1 The notions presented here extend to realistic programming
languages. We formalize them thoroughly in chapter 3 in the case of
a basic imperative language.
Recommended Reading:   [S], [D], [U] We recommend this chapter to all
readers, as it introduces the basic intuitions useful to understand
many more advanced static analysis techniques and the way static
analysis tools work. Understanding these concepts is important not
only to design or implement a static analyzer but also to use it as well
as possible.

2.1 Semantics and Analysis Goal: A Reachability Problem

Syntax of a Very Basic Language    For the sake of making our first
introduction to static analysis intuitive, we consider a very basic
language with intuitive notions of states and executions. The
language under study is inspired by drawing languages used for
educational purposes, such as introducing children to programming.
    A state describes the configuration of a computer running a
program, observed at a given instant. In general, this includes a
description of the memory contents, the registers, and the program
counter. In this chapter, a state will simply denote a point in the two-
dimensional space, described by its real coordinates (x,y). We denote
the set of such states by S.
    We let programs define combinations of basic geometric
operations. Basic operations comprise:
      initialization with a point that is non-deterministically chosen in a
      fixed region ℜ (e.g., the [0,1] × [0,1] square or any other
      geometrical shape specified by a set of points);
      geometrical translations (specified by a vector); and
      geometrical rotations (specified by a center and an angle in
      degrees).
Moreover, a program is defined as a sequence of operations, or as a
non-deterministic choice of two sequences of operations, or as a non-
deterministic iteration of a sequence of operations (the number of
iterations is chosen non-deterministically). To avoid starting from an
undefined state, we assume that a program always begins with an
initialization, which fixes the set of initial states.
    The syntax of programs is defined by the grammar below (note
that we only consider programs that start with an initialization
statement, even though this grammar does not express that
constraint):
 ::=init(ℜ)          initialization, with a state in ℜ
   | translation(u,v)translation by vector (u,v)
   | rotation(u,v,θ) rotation defined by center (u,v) and angle θ
p | p;p              sequence of operations
   | {p}or{p}        choice (the branch taken is non-deterministic)
                     iteration (the number of iterations is non-
   | iter{p}
                     deterministic)
Semantics  As observed in chapter 1, static analysis aims at computing
semantic properties of programs. Therefore, before we look into the
definition of a static analysis, we need to define the semantics of
programs, which should characterize the program executions. A
common way to achieve this is to simply let the semantics be the set
of all the program executions. Such a semantics is often called
collecting semantics.
   An execution provides a complete view of a single run of the
program. Since we assume that a program makes discrete
computation steps at every clock tick, it is naturally described by a
sequence of states. Each of the basic program constructions in the
above grammar is quite simple, so we do not formalize them fully.
Intuitively, their semantics is defined as follows:
     The initialization operation simply produces a state in a given
     region.
     Translation and rotation transformations induce basic execution
     steps,      which    perform     the    corresponding  geometric
     transformations.
     Sequences of operations yield sequences of execution steps.
     Non-deterministic choices and iterations, respectively, select or
     repeat a block of code and construct executions that can be
     derived from those of the subprograms.

     Figure 2.1
     A few program executions

Example 2.1 (Semantics) To make this semantics more intuitive, we consider the following
program:
This program starts in the [0,1] × [0,1] square, performs a translation, and then performs a
number of translations or rotations that are chosen non-deterministically (i.e., an oracle
decides at run-time both the number of operations and their nature). Figure 2.1 shows three
executions:
      In the first execution (left), the program starts from (0.5,0.2); performs two translations,
      one rotation, and two translations; and then terminates.
      In the second execution (middle), the program starts at point (0.5,0.5) and repeats the
      same transition forever.
      In the third execution (right), the program starts at point (0.5,0.5) and then repeats
      forever the sequence made of one translation, two rotations, two translations, and one
      rotation.
While the first execution is finite, the other two are actually infinite (which means that the
program runs forever).

                                       It is now time to set the property
Semantic Property of Interest: Reachability
of interest that we are going to consider in this chapter.
    We aim for a reachability property that is specified by a zone
made of points that should not be reached by any execution of the
program. Intuitively, we assume that a set of points is fixed and
defines a zone that we expect program executions to never reach. In
other words, if any execution reaches this zone, we would consider it
an error. In the following, we search for a static analysis that is able to
catch and reject any program with such an erroneous execution.
When a program has no such offending execution, the analysis
should, as often as possible, accept the program and issue a proof of
correctness.
     Figure 2.2
     Region supposed to be unreachable: points with a negative x-coordinate

    This semantic property is a classic example of safety property
(section 1.3.1) (although not all safety properties are of that form).
Very often, programmers would like to ensure similar properties in
real programs. As an example, reaching a state where a C program
will dereference a null pointer will produce an abrupt run-time error.
Similarly, if a C program reaches a state where it writes over a
dangling pointer, either the execution will fail abruptly or some data
will be corrupted. For these reasons, C programmers are usually
interested in checking that their programs will never reach a state
where they would dereference an invalid, null, or dangling pointer.
Thus, the reachability property that we study here is actually quite
realistic, even though we are looking at a contrived language.
    In this chapter, we often use the region defined by = {(x,y) | x <
0} to denote the set of states that program executions should never
reach, although we will construct a program analysis technique that
would work for other regions as well. This “error zone” is depicted in
figure 2.2. We let      denote the property that we would like to verify
since it expresses that all the states a program may reach are not in
  . To give more intuition, we study a couple of programs.
Example 2.2 (Reachability and incorrect executions) First, we consider the program of
example 2.1. Obviously, it violates the property    since figure 2.1 shows two executions
that eventually reach a point (x,y), where x < 0. As an example, figure 2.3(a) displays an
execution of the program studied in example 2.1, which is incorrect because it reaches the
error zone after three steps.
      Figure 2.3
      Reachability and programs

Example 2.3 (Reachability and program with only correct executions) In this example,
we study a second program:

Figure 2.3(b) displays a few executions of this program, and we observe they are all correct,
in the sense that they never enter the error zone . In fact, we can informally show that all
executions of this program will stay in the safe zone      at all times:
      They start at a point (x,y) such that 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, which thus satisfies .
      During a loop iteration, x is increased by either 1 or 0.5 depending on the result of a
      non-deterministic choice; thus, the coordinate x remains non-negative.

                               In the rest of this chapter, we define a
Static Analysis for Reachability
static analysis (actually, a family of static analyses) that attempts to
determine whether an input program satisfies the semantic property
   . The analysis should always return a sound result: if it returns true
when applied to an input program p, we expect to have the guarantee
that no execution of p will ever reach . Therefore, a program such
as that of example 2.1 will be flagged as “possibly violating the
property of interest.” Ideally, we would also like the analysis to be
precise enough so that it can conclusively report that the program of
example 2.3 is correct.
   An obvious way to do this would be to enumerate all executions of
the input program so as to determine all reachable configurations.
But this would not be feasible, as even simple programs (such as
those presented in example 2.1 and example 2.3) have infinitely
many executions since the set of initial states is infinite, the length of
executions is infinite, and the set of possible series of non-
deterministic choices is infinite.
   Therefore, we will seek other ways to determine the set of all
reachable configurations.

2.2 Abstraction

Core Principle of Abstraction   In this section, we search for a way to
reason about program executions that will produce a superset of the
reachable states and that should be rather simple to compute.
   To choose this superset, we first try to draw some intuition from
the program studied in example 2.3. Notice that in that example, no
execution reaches the region , and we gave an informal proof of this
fact:
      In the beginning, the x-coordinate is non-negative.
      At each step it may only grow, which means that, if it is non-
      negative, it will remain so.
In the following, we aim at making such reasoning steps automatic.
We remark that the steps of this proof do not use all the information
present in program states:
      The value of the y-coordinate is completely ignored.
      Only the sign of the x-coordinate is considered in the proof (or,
      more precisely, the fact that the value of x may be either positive,
      zero, or negative).
   This intuition forms the basis of abstraction [26]: by retaining only
rather coarse information about program states and considering how
the program runs, we can still infer interesting information about the
set of all program executions (in this case, that x ≥ 0 at all times).
Such information is captured by a set of logical properties that the
analysis may manipulate, using algorithms described in the next
section. In example 2.3, the only logical properties that seem to
matter in the proof are x ≥ 0 (used in the case of the program of
example 2.3) and the property true, which is satisfied by any state
(that is needed to describe the states the program of example 2.1
may reach).
   Of course, many possible sets of logical properties could be used
in such proofs. Thus, we need to make clear what logical properties
the analysis may manipulate.
Definition 2.1 (Abstraction) We call abstraction a set A of logical properties of program
states, which are called abstract properties or abstract elements. A set of abstract properties
is called an abstract domain.

      Figure 2.4
      Abstraction based on the sign of the x component

In this definition, the word abstract is used here as opposed to the
word concrete; in the following, we use the “concrete” qualifier to
denote actual program behaviors, whereas the “abstract” qualifier
applies to the properties used in the (automatic) proofs. As an
example, the concrete semantics is the actual semantics of programs
as defined in section 2.1. By contrast, an abstract semantics shall
define a computable over-approximation of the concrete semantics
expressed in terms of abstract states. Actually, the goal of static
analysis is precisely to compute such a sound abstract semantics.
   The mathematical and computer representation of abstract
elements is crucial for the definition of all the static analysis
algorithms that we are going to consider. Ideally, the abstract
properties should come with an efficient computer representation and
with analysis algorithms (the algorithms are discussed further in this
chapter), since we intend to develop a static analyzer that relies on
these predicates. Thus, it is important to distinguish the abstract
elements from their meaning.
Definition 2.2 (Concretization) Given an abstract element a of A, we call concretization the
set of program states that satisfy it. We denote it by γ(a).
Example 2.4 (Abstraction by the sign of the x-coordinate) As a first example, we present
the abstraction used above in order to informally demonstrate that the program of example
2.3 never reaches the region . This abstraction has two elements a0,a1, where
      a0 denotes all the states (x,y) such that x ≥ 0 (γ(a0) is the infinite half-plane area that is
      filled with dots in figure 2.4).
      a1 denotes the set of all the states such that γ(a1) = S (the whole two-dimensional
      space).

In figure 2.4 (and subsequent figures that depict abstract elements),
we represent the points described by an abstract element as a zone
filled with dots. This region is syntactically different from the abstract
element itself: the latter is the representation of the former, and the
analysis manipulates only the representation. Even though we often
focus less on this distinction in this chapter (and sometimes implicitly
assimilate abstract elements and the regions they denote), it will play
a great role in subsequent chapters.
     Figure 2.5
     Signs abstraction

   Of course many possible choices of abstractions are less
contrived than the one of example 2.4. Some abstractions describe
more expressive sets of logical properties than others. Furthermore,
some abstractions yield simpler computer representations and less
costly algorithms than others. In the following paragraphs, we present
a few other examples of abstractions that also have a simple and
intuitive graphical representation.
Signs Abstraction    The abstraction of example 2.4 treats x and y
differently and is very specific to the property defined in section 2.1.
It would not work if we wanted a static analysis to prove that y never
becomes negative. Similarly, it would not apply if the property to
prove was that x does not become positive. However, this abstraction
generalizes into a more expressive one, which describes a set of
states using two pieces of information: the possible values of the sign
of x and the possible values of the sign of y. For each variable, this
abstraction records whether it may be positive, negative, non-
negative, and so forth. The concretizations of a few abstract elements
are shown in figure 2.5:
     The left diagram shows the concretization of the abstract
     element that expresses the fact that x is negative, and y is non-
    negative.
    The right diagram shows the concretization of the abstract
    element that expresses the fact that x is positive and this
    abstract element carries no information about y.
We can observe that this signs abstract domain can express any
property the previous domain could express, but it can also describe
some properties that were beyond the reach of the previous domain.
                    In practice, abstractions based on signs are often
Intervals Abstraction
too weak to capture strong program properties, but other more
precise abstractions have been proposed.
   Using inequalities and range constraints over variables is a very
natural approach to reason over numerical properties. Similarly, we
can use range constraints over program variables so as to more
precisely describe what values they may take. This is the principle of
intervals abstraction [26]:

     Figure 2.6
     Intervals abstraction

Definition 2.3 (Intervals abstraction) The abstract elements of the interval abstraction are
defined by constraints of the form lx ≤ x, x ≤ hx, ly ≤ y, and y ≤ hy.

An abstract element is thus composed of at most four finite bound
constraints. We remark that such an abstract element may denote
the empty set of points, since some sets of constraints cannot be
satisfied, such as 1 ≤ x, x ≤ 0. We do not write down infinite bound
constraints (cases where no lower and/or upper bound is given for a
given variable).
   Intuitively, interval abstract domain elements correspond to
rectangles in the two-dimensional space, the sides of which are
parallel to the axes.
Example 2.5 (Intervals abstraction) The following three abstract elements illustrate the
kind of constraints that can be expressed by the intervals abstract domain, together with
their concretizations, shown in figure 2.6:
       a0 corresponds to numerical constraints 1 ≤ x ≤ 3 and 1 ≤ y ≤ 2 (the concretization of
       a0 is shown in figure 2.6(a));
       a1 corresponds to numerical constraints 1 ≤ x ≤ 2 (the concretization of a1 is shown in
       figure 2.6(b));
       a2 corresponds to numerical constraints 1 ≤ x and 1 ≤ y (the concretization of a2 is
       shown in figure 2.6(c)).

Obviously, the intervals abstract domain is more expressive than the
signs abstract domain. Indeed, any abstract element of the signs
abstract domain also corresponds to an element in the intervals
abstract domain.
   The representation of an abstract element of the intervals domain
boils down to at most two numerical constants per variable. Thus, this
domain over-approximates a set of points in the two-dimensional
space with at most four numerical constants, which take very little
space in memory during the analysis.
    Figure 2.7
    Best abstraction

    We can introduce at this stage the concept of best abstraction.
Given any set of points (which correspond to program states), we
would like to define an abstract element in the intervals abstract
domain that over-approximates our initial set. For instance, let us
consider the set of program states defined by the disk shown in figure
2.7(a). Then any box that encloses the disk is a valid over-
approximation of this set; indeed, any such box describes all the
points in the disk (and more), so it provides a conservative
approximation of the disk. However, there exist many such enclosing
boxes. Yet, some of these abstractions are more desirable than
others. As we mentioned earlier, the goal of abstraction is to account
for the concrete set of points using a simple description, at the cost of
adding some additional points that are not in the concrete set. Adding
fewer points that are not in the concrete set is better since it means
the abstraction characterizes the set of points in a less ambiguous
and more informative way. In the case of the intervals abstract
domain, we can actually solve this problem in an elegant manner;
indeed, the smallest rectangle that encloses any non-empty set of
points is well defined, using the greatest lower bounds and least
upper bounds over both coordinates (the case of the empty set of
points is trivial, as the empty rectangle is also an element of the
abstract domain). In particular, figure 2.7(c) shows the best
approximation of the disk.
   More generally, the best abstraction [26] is defined as a function
that interprets any set of concrete points into an optimal abstract
element.
Definition 2.4 (Best abstraction) We say that a is the best abstraction of the concrete set S
if and only if S ⊆ γ(a) and for any a′ that is an abstraction of S (i.e., S ⊆ γ(a′)), then a′ is a
coarser abstraction than a. If S has a best abstraction, then the best abstraction is unique.
When it is defined, we let α denote the function that maps any concrete set of states into the
best abstraction of that set of states.

As observed above, the intervals abstract domain has a best
abstraction function. While computing a precise abstraction (if
possible the best abstraction) is preferable in general, we will often
encounter useful analyses that cannot compute the best abstraction,
or such that the best abstraction cannot even be defined in the sense
of definition 2.4. The impossibility to define or compute the best
abstraction is in no way a serious flaw for the analysis, as it will only
cause it to err on the side of caution (i.e., to return conservative but
sound results). Using an over-approximating abstract element is fine,
though we prefer to compute the most tightly encompassing one, if it
exists.
   Finally, we remark that interval constraints cannot capture in a
precise manner any complex numerical constraint over both x and y.
For instance, it cannot express in an exact manner the property that x
is smaller than y. We thus call it a non-relational abstraction.
Intuitively, an abstract state characterizes each variable by an interval
independently from the other variables. On one hand, this simplifies
the shape of abstract elements and their representation; on the other
hand, it limits the expressiveness of the abstraction.
Convex Polyhedra Abstraction      The obvious way to overcome the
limitation inherent in the non-relational abstraction is to extend the
abstract domain with relational constraints. Augmenting the abstract
domain with all linear constraints allows this to be achieved.
Definition 2.5 (Convex polyhedra abstraction) The abstract elements of the convex
polyhedra abstract domain [30] are conjunctions of linear inequality constraints.
This abstract domain can describe precisely any concrete set that
can be described by the signs and intervals abstract domains. It can
also describe many other sets of concrete points in a much more
precise way than the previous abstractions.
Example 2.6 (Convex polyhedra abstraction) Figure 2.8 displays the concretization of
three convex polyhedra a0, a1, and a2:
      a0 describes the conjunction of the three linear constraints:

     a1 consists of the conjunction of six linear constraints and is of bounded size (we do
     not list the constraint representation as it would be more involved);
     a2 consists of the conjunction of four linear constraints and describes an unbounded
     zone (its concretization describes points where x,y may be arbitrarily large).

There exist several representations for the abstract elements of the
convex polyhedra abstract domain. We have already mentioned the
representation based on a conjunction of linear inequalities. Since we
also noticed that their concretization corresponds exactly to convex
polyhedra (hence the name of the abstraction), the abstract elements
also have a geometrical representation, based on their sets of
vertexes and edges. Actual static analysis algorithms based on
convex polyhedra exploit both representations. However, these
representations are significantly more complex and costly than for the
previous abstract domains: while signs required only a couple of bits
per variable, and intervals required at most only two bounds per
variable, defining a convex polyhedron typically involves a large
number of coefficients or vertexes and edges (in theory there exists
no upper bound on the number of constraints).
     Figure 2.8
     Convex polyhedra abstraction

   Another interesting remark about the convex polyhedra
abstraction is that concrete sets of points have no best abstraction in
general. A disk of diameter 1 provides an example of a concrete set
without a smallest enclosing convex polyhedron. On the other hand,
some concrete sets have a best abstraction (in particular, any set that
is a convex polyhedron is its own smallest enclosing convex
polyhedron).
   In the previous paragraphs, we have provided a few common
examples of abstract domains, but many others can be defined and
are useful to capture all sorts of constraints (simple or complex,
relational or non-relational).
                                       We can now refine the goal of
Abstraction of the Semantics of a Program
the rest of the chapter. We have set up the notion of abstraction of
sets of program states and have shown a few basic abstract
domains, adapted to express different kinds of properties. In the next
sections, we aim at defining static analysis algorithms to compute in a
fully automatic way an over-approximation of the states that a
program may reach. Such an over-approximation will be described by
an abstract element in one of the abstract domains that we have
sketched. It is called a conservative abstraction of the program
semantics.
Example 2.7 (Abstractions of reachable states) We consider the program of example 2.3.
Figure 2.9(a) shows all the states that this program may reach; a few program executions
were sketched in figure 2.3(b), and we consider here the set of all the states that can be
reached in at least one execution. We then show the best abstractions that can be computed
for this set of states:
       Using the intervals abstract domain in figure 2.9(b).
       Using the convex polyhedra abstract domain in figure 2.9(c).
Obviously, the abstraction based on convex polyhedra is much tighter, even though it is still
approximate, due to convexity.

      Figure 2.9
      Program reachable states and abstraction

   As shown in example 2.7, not all abstractions of the semantics of
the program are equivalent. Abstractions that describe fewer points
are more selective, since they filter out more concrete points, and are
thus more likely to help prove that the reachable states are included
in a specific set, to prove the property of interest. This means that set
inclusion here is fundamental to our study:
     For an abstract element to be a conservative abstraction of the
     semantics of programs, it should include all the points that are
     reachable according to the semantics.
     If two abstract elements a0,a1 are such that γ(a0) is included into
     γ(a1), this means that a0 is more precise than a1 in the sense
     that it allows proving stronger semantic properties.
2.3 A Computable Abstract Semantics: Compositional Style

As the notion of abstraction has been set up in section 2.2, we now
show how to derive step-by-step an over-approximation for the states
that are visited by a program.
    In this section, we introduce a compositional approach to static
analysis, based on the step-by-step computation of the effect of each
program command. More precisely, given an abstraction of a set of
states that denotes a pre-condition (i.e., a set of program execution
starting points), we propose to compute an abstract state that over-
approximates the set of all the states that may be observed after
running that command from the pre-condition (this set is usually
called a post-condition). To analyze a sequence of commands, this
technique composes the analyses of each sub-command, which is
why it is called compositional.
    Intuitively, this approach incrementally discovers an over-
approximation of the set of reachable states of the program. Thus,
this also makes it possible to verify that a program never reaches any
state in the error zone. Using an accumulator, it is also possible to
keep track of an abstraction of all the reachable states of the
program.

    Figure 2.10
    Analysis of initialization

2.3.1 Abstraction of Initialization
We start with the effect of the initialization statement that appears at
the beginning of programs. At the concrete level, a program
initialization statement simply asserts that the initial state of a
program execution is located in a given region ℜ.
    To produce an abstraction of the result of initialization, the static
analysis simply needs to produce an abstract element that over-
approximates the region ℜ.
    When the abstract domain features a best abstraction function α
and when the best abstraction of the region ℜ is computable, then
the abstract element α(ℜ) provides a solution. This is the case with
the intervals abstract domain and with the signs abstract domain.
    When the abstract domain does not have a best abstraction
function or when this best abstraction is not computable, any abstract
element a such that γ(a) includes ℜ can be chosen. For instance, the
convex polyhedra abstract domain does not feature a best
abstraction function; however,
      if ℜ is a convex polyhedron, then it can be used as an over-
      approximation of itself;
      otherwise, an enclosing box can be found by using the intervals
      abstract domain abstraction, and this enclosing box is also an
      enclosing convex polyhedron, so it also provides an admissible
      solution (although an imprecise one).
Example 2.8 (Initialization) We consider the program of example 2.3. Figure 2.10 shows
the best abstraction of the initial states, both with the intervals abstract domain and with the
convex polyhedra abstract domain. We remark that this abstraction is exact; namely, it incurs
no loss of precision.

2.3.2 Abstraction of Post-Conditions
We now discuss basic geometric transformations and try to find a
systematic way to over-approximate their output, when given an
abstraction of their input. We first fix some terminology:
     An abstract pre-condition is an abstraction of the states that can
     be observed before a program fragment.
     An abstract post-condition is an abstraction of the states that can
     be observed after that program fragment.
      Figure 2.11
      Abstraction of the result of a translation

Effect of a Translation  We assume an abstract pre-condition apre and
consider program translation(u,v). When the program is run in state
(x,y) in γ(apre), the result is the state (x + u, y + v). Thus, the set of all
the images of the points in γ(apost) can be obtained very simply by
translating γ(apre) by (u,v). Thus, to produce an over-approximation of
the effect of the translation, we simply need to compute an abstract
element apost that contains all the points obtained by applying the
translation to a point in γ(apre).
Example 2.9 (Translation) We consider translation(2,1) and the computation of abstract
post-condition with a couple of example abstract domains. The effect of the program is
shown in figure 2.11(a): any execution boils down to a pair of states.
    Figure 2.11(b) demonstrates the computation of an abstract post-condition with the
abstract domain of intervals under the assumption of a given abstract pre-condition. The
element apost is obtained directly from apre by applying translation (2,1). If we consider a
translation defined by another vector, an abstract post-condition in the intervals abstract
domain can be derived from the abstract pre-condition in a similar way.
    The case of the abstract domain of convex polyhedra is similar to the case of intervals,
as shown in figure 2.11(c).
    In both cases, we note that the abstract post-condition not only contains all the points in
the image of the concretization of the pre-condition but also contains no other point; in this
sense, the post-condition is exact.

Effect of a Rotation We now consider a program of the form
rotation(u,v,θ). The same reasoning toward the design of an
automatic algorithm to compute abstract post-conditions from an
abstract pre-condition as for the translation still holds. We discuss
this transformation in the following example.
Example 2.10 (45° rotation) To fix the ideas, we assume that (u,v) = (0,0) and that a = 45°
(45° rotation around the origin). A few concrete executions are depicted in figure 2.12(a).

      Figure 2.12
      Abstraction of the result of a 45° rotation

     First, we discuss the case of polyhedra, as it is actually simpler than the case of
intervals. Figure 2.12(c) shows that the abstract post-condition can be computed exactly in
the same way as for the translation in the previous paragraph. Indeed, if the analysis
computes the image of the abstract pre-condition by the rotation, the resulting convex
polyhedron contains all the images of the points in the concretization of the pre-condition
and thus provides a precise over-approximation of the points that the program may reach
after the rotation.
     The case of intervals is shown in figure 2.12(b). Intuitively, rotating the pre-condition
should give a safe over-approximation of the points that the program may produce after the
rotation, but the rotated box is not a valid element of the intervals abstract domain. Indeed,
we defined the intervals abstract domain as the set of (finite or infinite) rectangles that are
parallel to the axes, and the image of the pre-condition by the rotation is not parallel to the
axes. Therefore, to produce a conservative post-condition, that is also an element of the
abstract domain, the analysis should produce a bigger box, which is parallel to the axes, as
shown in figure 2.12(b). But this result is somewhat imprecise; indeed, as usual, the area
filled with dots describes the result of the analysis, and the part of that zone that has a gray
background corresponds to points that cannot be observed when running the program from
any point in the pre-condition, yet these points have to be included in the result of the
analysis due to the limited expressiveness of the intervals abstraction. Such imprecisions
may ultimately prevent the analysis from proving the property of interest.
                                  Based on the two transformations
Conservative Abstract Transfer Functions
that we have studied so far, we now summarize how the analysis
should compute post-conditions in the abstract level. In general, we
call an abstract operation that accounts for the effect of a basic
program statement a transfer function. The definition below
formalizes the soundness property that all transfer functions should
satisfy.
Definition 2.6 (Sound analysis by abstract interpretation in compositional style) We
consider a static analysis function analysis that inputs a program and an abstract pre-
condition and returns an abstract post-condition. We say that analysis is sound if and only if
the following condition holds:

      Figure 2.13
      Sound analysis of a program p

               If an execution of p from a state (x,y) generates the state (x′,y′),
                     then for all abstract element a such that (x, y) ∈ γ(a),
                                     (x′,y′) ∈ γ(analysis(p,a))

Intuitively, this property states that the analysis should cover all
executions of the program: whenever there exists an execution
starting from a state that lies inside the abstract pre-condition, the
output state should also belong to the abstract post-condition. The
diagram of figure 2.13 gives an intuitive presentation of the
soundness property: when a concrete state can be described by an
abstract pre-condition (bottom to top arrow in the left diagram) and is
the starting point of an execution that reaches a final state (left to
right arrow in the left diagram), running the analysis will close the
diagram and return an over-approximation of the post-state, as
shown in the right diagram.
   The transfer functions shown in the previous paragraphs for
translations and rotations, for both the interval and polyhedra abstract
domains, satisfy the soundness property. Furthermore, we will make
sure in the following that the analysis algorithms that we design for
other program constructions still preserve this property.
   This technique is an instance of abstract interpretation: it lets the
analysis evaluate each program construction one by one, a bit like a
standard interpreter would, albeit in the abstract domain.
   At this point, we have defined the following:

    Definition 2.6 entails that the analysis will produce sound results in
the sense of definition 1.2 when considering the property               of
interest. Since the analysis over-approximates the states the program
may reach, if it claims that      is not reachable, then we are sure that
the program cannot reach .
    On the other hand, this definition does not rule out imprecisions.
Thus, it accepts analyses that produce coarse over-approximations.
In the previous paragraphs we saw both precise analyses and
imprecise analyses:
      With the convex polyhedra abstract domain, both the analysis
      functions for the translation and rotation are precise.
      On the other hand, with the intervals abstract domain, the
      analysis function for the rotation is imprecise.
Such imprecisions entail that the analysis is not complete in the
sense of definition 1.3, and that it may fail to prove that a given region
is unreachable.
    In the following, we continue the definition of the analysis function
that can compute sound abstract post-conditions for any program in
our language. We proceed by induction over the syntax of programs.
Indeed, we have already seen how to handle basic operations
(initialization, translations, and rotations); thus, we now consider
inductive cases.
    The case of sequences of operations is trivial: to compute an
abstract post-condition for p0;p1, we start from the abstract pre-
condition a, compute an abstract post-condition analysis(p0,a) for p0,
and then feed the result as the pre-condition to compute an abstract
post-condition for p1:
           analysis(p0;p1,a) = analysis(p1, analysis(p0, a))
The other cases (for non-deterministic choice and iteration) are a bit
more complex than the sequence case.

2.3.3 Abstraction of Non-Deterministic Choice
We now assume that p0 and p1 are two programs that we already
know how to analyze, and we propose constructing a way to over-
approximate post-conditions for {p0}or{p1}.
   Let a be an abstract pre-condition, and state (x,y) ∈ γ(a).
Intuitively, we should consider two cases:
     either p0 is executed, and the result is in γ(analysis(p0,a)); or
     p1 is executed, and the result is in γ(analysis(p1,a)).
Thus, the analysis should simply produce an over-approximation of
both analysis(p0,a) and analysis(p1,a).
   The computation of an over-approximation for two abstract
elements can be done in a systematic way for all the abstract
domains that we considered in section 2.2. We can remark that this
operation computes an over-approximation for the union of two sets
of points viewed as abstract elements. Thus, we denote this abstract
operation by union. In the case of intervals, the analysis should
simply compute the minimum of lower bounds and the maximum of
greatest bounds for both dimensions. In the case of convex
polyhedra, it should simply produce a convex hull for both abstract
elements. To summarize:
     analysis({p0}or{p1},a) = union(analysis(p1,a),analysis(p0,a))
     Figure 2.14
     Abstraction of the result of a non-deterministic choice

Example 2.11 (Analysis of non-deterministic choice) In this example, we consider the
very simple program below, and we show its analysis with both intervals and convex
polyhedra:
                          {translation(2,1)}or{translation(−2,−1)}

Figure 2.14(b) shows the computation of an abstract post-condition in the intervals abstract
domain, and figure 2.14(c) shows the computation of an abstract post-condition in the
convex polyhedra abstract domain. These two cases are quite similar since each branch of
the non-deterministic choice boils down to a geometric translation (which induces a
translation of the shape of abstract elements), and the analysis should then return an over-
approximation of the effects of both branches. In both domains, this operation incurs a
significant loss of precision due to the approximation of the convex hull.

The above example shows another reason for the incompleteness of
our analysis, as it cannot express precise disjunctive properties. This
is a common issue in static analysis, and we present several
solutions to this problem in section 5.1.

2.3.4 Abstraction of Non-Deterministic Iteration
Non-deterministic iteration is the last construction that we have to
define the analysis for, and is also the most difficult to analyze since it
can produce executions of any length and even infinite executions.
Therefore, the analysis should compute in finite time an over-
approximation for infinitely many arbitrarily long executions. Still, we
observed in example 2.3 that we can derive interesting properties
about such programs with rather short informal proofs. Thus, we
generalize this approach in this paragraph and design analysis
algorithms that compute an over-approximation for the set of output
states of a loop.
   Note that the abstract post-condition produced as the analysis
result describes only the final states of the terminating program
executions. This result means that, if a concrete execution
terminates, then this abstract post-condition holds. The result does
not mean that the iteration will terminate with this abstract post-
condition. This is because the halting problem cannot be computed
exactly in finite time.
   In the following, we consider the following program p that consists
of a loop with body b:

We can discriminate the executions of p depending on the number of
iterations of the loop; indeed, an execution of program p executes b
either zero times, one time, two times, three times, or so on. Thus, p
is conceptually equivalent to the following (infinite) program:

This program fully eliminates the loop and resorts only to the or
construct, which can be analyzed as described in section 2.3.3,
though it obviously cannot be completely written since it would be
infinite. However, if we focus on the executions that spend at most k
iterations in the loop, we can easily write a program without a loop
that has exactly the same behaviors. For any integer k, we let bk
denote the program that iterates b k times (b0 is {}, b1 is b, b2 is b;b,
and so on). Moreover, we write pk for {b0}or{b1}or…or{bk−1}or{bk}. In
short:

Then we observe the following equivalence, which relates these
programs all together:
                          pk+1 is equivalent to pkor{pk;b}
Indeed, an execution of pk+1 either executes the loop at most k times
(hence, it is an execution of pk), or runs it k + 1 times exactly (and
then it is an execution of pk;b). Conversely, one can can prove that an
execution of pk or{pk;b} is also an execution of pk+1.
   Therefore, the analysis of this sequence of programs can be
computed recursively as follows:
   analysis(pk+1,a) = union(analysis(pk,a),analysis(b,analysis(pk,a)))
This approach corresponds to the analysis algorithm that inputs an
abstract pre-condition a, stores it into a variable R, and iterates the
operation:
                            R ← union(R,analysis(b,R))
Moreover, as shown above, any execution of p can be characterized
by the number of times it iterates over the loop. Thus, any execution
is ultimately covered by repeating this iterative abstract computation.
    The following example illustrates this approach.
Example 2.12 (Abstract iteration) We consider the program below, which starts at a point
located in a triangle and iterates a basic geometric translation a non-deterministically chosen
number of times:
We assume that the analysis uses the convex polyhedra abstract domain. Then the set of
states observed after initialization and before the iter statement is shown in figure 2.15(b).
We show in figure 2.15(c), figure 2.15(d), and figure 2.15(e) the first three iterations of the
analysis algorithm sketched above. The imprecision is inherent in the computation of over-
approximations (in gray) of abstract elements as in the previous examples.
    While this process does not terminate, we observe that repeating it forever would yield
the result shown in figure 2.15(f), which also provides a sound approximation of all the
possible output states of the program.

    The iterative algorithm demonstrated in example 2.12 will actually
always terminate if using the signs abstract domain. Indeed, this
abstract domain has a finite number of abstract elements, and when
the iterative algorithm computes R ← union(R,analysis(b,R)), the
value of R will converge after finitely many steps: whenever it
updates R, either the new value is the same as the previous one (in
that case, so will be all the other subsequent values since they are
computed using the same formula), or the new value denotes a
strictly less precise property. Since the number of abstract properties
is finite, the latter case will occur at most finitely many times.
Therefore, at some point the value of R stabilizes, and then this value
over-approximates the behaviors observed after any number of
iterations. As a consequence, the termination of signs analysis is
guaranteed.
    However, we have not solved the issue of termination in the
general case yet. The iteration technique used in example 2.12 will
obviously not allow for a terminating analysis with the convex
polyhedra abstraction or with the interval abstraction.
    Figure 2.15
    Abstract iteration

   To ensure termination of the analysis, we need to enforce the
convergence of abstract iterates, possibly at the price of a coarser
result. Note that a common way to prove that an algorithm terminates
involves finding a strictly positive value that decreases strictly over
time toward a finitely reachable basis. Thus, a way to enforce the
termination of the analysis is to exhibit such a measure. Very often,
non-termination is due to some loop indexes not being incremented
properly, preventing such a decreasing measure to exist. Intuitively,
this is the issue the iterative analysis algorithm we sketched above
suffers from, as shown in example 2.12.
    Another interesting observation is that abstract elements are made
of finite sets of constraints. Therefore, another way to over-
approximate abstract elements that arise in the abstract iteration
would consist in forcing this number of constraints to decrease
(possibly down to zero) until it stabilizes, thereby recovering
termination.
    Given the current constraint a0, suppose that analyzing one more
iteration generates a1. To have an approximate constraint that
subsumes both, we can let the analysis:
      keep all constraints of a0 that are also satisfied in a1 and
      discard all constraints of a0 that are not satisfied in a1 (hence to
      subsume a1).
Applying this method to abstract iterates will produce a sequence of
abstract elements with a positive, decreasing number of constraints
until the sequence stabilizes. This method is an instance of a general
technique called widening, which enforces the convergence of
abstract iterates. We denote this operator by widen:

   Stabilization holds when the concretization of the next iterate is
included in that of the previous one. For all the abstract domains
considered in this chapter, this inclusion can be decided in the
abstract level simply by checking geometric inclusion. We thus let
inclusion denote a function that inputs two abstract elements a0,a1
and returns true only when it can prove that γ(a0) ⊆ γ(a1):
   operator inclusion returns true only when it succeeds checking
                              inclusion
  As a conclusion, the following algorithm computes an abstract
post-condition for the loop construction:

This iteration technique will produce a sound result since it over-
approximates the abstract elements produced by the sequence of
iterates without widening, and its limit (reached after finitely many
iterates) also over-approximates all the abstract elements produced
by the sequence of iterates without widening and, thus, the states
that the program may reach.
    The following example illustrates its use in practice.
Example 2.13 (Abstract iteration with widening) We consider the same program as in
example 2.12. Figure 2.15 shows the sequence of abstract iterates using the widening
technique. This sequence converges after only two iterations and produces a (rather coarse)
over-approximation of the reachable states of the program (shown in figure 2.15(a)). The
most interesting point is the computation of the abstract element shown in figure 2.16(b)
from the two triangles obtained in the first two iterations:

     Figure 2.16
     Abstract iteration with widening

     The constraints 0 ≤ y and y ≤ 2x are stable as they are satisfied in the translated
     triangle; thus, they are preserved.
      The constraint x ≤ 0.5 is not preserved; thus, it is discarded.

The result obtained in the example clearly shows that widening is
another source of imprecision and, thus, of potential incompleteness.
Indeed, to ensure convergence in finite time, the analysis weakens
the abstract elements more aggressively, adding many points that
cannot be observed in any real program execution, as shown in
figure 2.16(b).
   Fortunately, we can implement many techniques to make the
analysis of loops more precise. The example below demonstrates a
classic such technique on the same code.
Example 2.14 (Loop unrolling) We observe that we can rewrite a program with a loop in
different ways than the one used so far in this section. In particular, the program of example
2.12 is equivalent to the following program:

In essence, analyzing this second version instead has the following effect on the analysis.
Indeed, for the first iteration, the union operator will be used, and for all subsequent
iterations, widen will be used instead. When computing widening at iteration 2, all constraints
are stable, but the constraint x ≤ 1.5. This produces the result shown in figure 2.17(c). Thus,
both the result of the first iteration (shown in figure 2.16(b)) and the widening output (shown
in figure 2.17(c)) are much more precise than with the standard widening iteration technique
presented in example 2.13.
    Figure 2.17
    Abstract iteration with widening and unrolling

2.3.5 Verification of the Property of Interest
The analysis function that we have designed allows verifying the
reachability property of interest introduced in section 2.1.
    While the analysis function that we have shown so far returns only
an over-approximation of the output states (and not of all the
intermediate reachable states), it actually computes as intermediate
results over-approximations for all the reachable states of the input
program. Let us consider the case of a sequence p0;p1. The analysis
then returns analysis(p1,analysis(p0,apre)). We observe that, after
analyzing p0 and before analyzing p1, the analysis holds an over-
approximation of all the states that can be observed after executing
p0 and before executing p1 (the abstract element analysis(p0,apre)).
The same holds for each kind of instruction of our language.
    As a consequence, the analysis can attempt to verify the property
of interest by checking that the abstract elements computed at each
step have an empty intersection with , or, equivalently, are included
in    . This inclusion can be fully verified in the abstract level, using
the same inclusion test we used for checking the termination of the
sequences of abstract iterates.
    We assume the analysis uses the abstract domain of convex
polyhedra and illustrate successful and unsuccessful analyses in the
two examples below.
Example 2.15 (Successful verification) Figure 2.18(a) shows the over-approximation
computed for the set of all the reachable states of the program of example 2.3. In this case,
the over-approximation does not intersect ; thus, the analysis proves the program correct.
Again, this result is in line with the conclusion of example 2.7 that this program is correct.
Example 2.16 (Unsuccessful verification) Figure 2.18(b) shows the over-approximation
computed for the set of all the reachable states of the program of example 2.1 (region filled
with dots). Since this zone corresponds to the whole field and intersects the error zone ,
the analysis cannot prove the property of interest for this program. This was to be expected.
Example 2.2 has shown executions of this program that enter . While the analysis rightfully
flags this program as “potentially wrong,” it does not produce a proof that the program is
definitely wrong (though we will see in section 5.5 that we can propose static analysis
techniques that achieve this proof in certain cases).

      Figure 2.18
      Abstractions of reachable states

2.4 A Computable Abstract Semantics: Transitional Style

In section 2.3, the analysis function has no explicit machinery to
collect all intermediate, reachable states. In other words, it is
extensionally defined, analogous to the denotational (or
compositional) approach to the semantics. Its inductive definition over
the syntactic structure of the program returns just a post-state of the
input program from a pre-state. No collection of intermediate states is
manifest in the definition. As discussed in section 2.3.5, however, a
simple monitoring mechanism on top of analysis can collect all
occurring intermediate states.
   In this section, we introduce a different style of the analysis
function. The new analysis function computes, from the outset, all
occurring intermediate states. This formulation is analogous to an
operational approach to the semantics.
   This transitional style provides us with another convenient
perspective that sheds new light on static analysis. In subsequent
chapters, we will discuss how the compositional style is better suited
for some problems, whereas the transitional style is a better fit for
others. Therefore, understanding both styles is beneficial to better
grasp static analysis techniques in general.

    Figure 2.19
    Transition sequences and the set of occurring states

2.4.1 Semantics as State Transitions
In the transitional style, we view an execution of a program as a
sequence of transitions between states. This transition sequence
exposes all the states that occur during the execution.
   Let us consider the example language (section 2.1) of this chapter.
In this language, a program execution moves a point in the two-
dimensional space. In this case, a state can be defined as a pair
comprising a statement label l and a point p in the two-dimensional
space.
   A single transition
                                   (l, p) ↪ (l′, p′)
between states represents that the program at statement label l
transforms the point p to p′ and passes it to the next statement label l′
for continuation.
    One proper transition corresponds to a “single-step” execution of a
basic statement. For a compound statement that consists of other
statements, its execution consists of the transitions of its sub-
statements.
    An example of transition sequences for an example program is
shown in the next section, after we define how we represent
programs and what we mean by “statement labels.”
                                             Let our analysis goal be to
State Transitions and the Collection of all States
collect all the states occurring in all possible transition sequences of
the input program. Given such a set of all reachable states, we can
check, for example, whether every reachable state remains in a safe
zone of our interest.
   Figure 2.19 illustrates transition sequences and the collection of
states occurring in the sequences. Each node si is a state (l, p): a pair
comprising a statement label and a point set in the two-dimensional
space that is to be transformed by the statement at the label. Here,
we schematically show the transition sequences and occurring
states. We will show in example 2.17 concrete examples of transition
sequences.
Statement Labels and Execution Order We view a program as simply a
collection of statements with a well defined execution order. We
assign a unique label to each statement of the program. This label
can be understood as the so-called program counter or program
point. The execution order, between statements, the so-called control
flow, is specified by a relation between the labels (from current
program points to next program points).
   Since our language has a non-deterministic choice and non-
deterministic iterations, the execution order is non-deterministic too.
Entering the or-statement {p}or{p′}, the next statement to execute is
either p or p′. Entering the iteration statement iter{p}, the next
statement to execute is either the loop body p or the next statement
after the exit of the loop. The next statement of the loop body is again
the iteration statement.
    For example, consider an example program in figure 2.20. Each
statement has a unique label. Figure 2.20(a) shows the program text
with statement labels in circles. The statement corresponding to a
label is circumscribed by a box with a light contour. Figure 2.20(b)
shows a graphical representation of the program with its execution
order as directed edges. Rectangular nodes are either basic
statements or heads of compound statements. Numbered circle
nodes are statement labels.
    The non-deterministic function (or relation) for the execution order
is defined as follows (as visible in the graph view of figure 2.20(b)):

   Note that, in general, for most modern languages the execution
order (control flow) is not syntactically obvious. For example, when a
language has a dynamic jump construct such as dynamic goto label,
dynamic method dispatch, higher-order function call, or the raising of
an exception whose target is computed only during execution, the
exact execution order is not available before the static analysis. For
such languages, determining the execution order should be a part of
the static analysis under design or needs to be computed beforehand
by another separate static analysis.
   Chapter 4 presents a formal framework that covers such dynamic
control-flow cases. Our example language in this chapter is one
whose control-flow is obvious from the syntax.
Example 2.17 (Transition sequences) For the example program in figure 2.20, two
examples of state transition (↪) sequences starting from statement 0 are as follows: recall
that a state (l, p) is a pair of a statement label (l) and a point (p) just before being
transformed by the corresponding statement. In the following, the left sequence is a
transition sequence when the program terminates after two iterations; the right one is when
the same program terminates after one iteration:
Figure 2.20
Example program with statement labels
where

Figure 2.21 shows, on top of the graph view of the program, the right transition sequence.

2.4.2 Abstraction of States
Collecting the exact set of all the states that can occur during
program executions (transition sequences) is in general either too
costly or impossible in finite time. Indeed, due to loops, program
executions may be arbitrarily long. Moreover, the set of initial states is
also potentially infinite. The situation is worse for other conventional
languages that receive inputs from outside. The number of possible
inputs is usually combinatorially explosive or even infinite. That is, the
number of transition sequences can be infinite too.
   Hence, as discussed in section 2.3, the static computation of the
set of all possible states cannot be exact in general. Our static
computation may be only an approximation in an abstract world.
   Now the question is what abstract world we are going to use. As
an illustration among many candidates, let us use the following
statement-wise abstract world:
      For each statement (program point), an abstract element approximates the set of
      points that can occur at that program point during executions. The abstract
      elements for point sets are convex hull pre-conditions as used in section 2.3. In
      other words, an abstract state is a set of pairs of statement labels and abstract
      pre-conditions.
   Figure 2.22 schematically shows the state abstraction we are
using on top of the graphic view of a program. The areas in the two-
dimensional plane depict the set of points that can occur during
executions.

2.4.3 Abstraction of State Transitions
The abstract state transition is defined over the abstract states of the
preceding section. Note that an abstract state is a set of pairs of
statement labels and abstract pre-conditions. An abstract transition
transforms an abstract state into another abstract state.
     Let Step# be such an abstract state transition function. Given an
abstract state X, Step#(X) returns an abstract post-state. The Step#
function is defined by the one-step abstract transition operator ↪#,
lifted for a set (for an abstract state):
                     Step#(X) = {x′ | x ∈ X,x,↪#x′}
The one-step abstract transition x↪#x′ is the same as the post-
condition computations in section 2.3 except that the proper transition
happens only for non-compound basic statements, and we reference
the next function for the next label:
Figure 2.21
States on top of the graph view of the program. Each point pi belongs to the
rectangular area of the corresponding two-dimensional plane.
Figure 2.22
Statement-wise abstraction of all the possible states for statement label l
   Note that the above Step# function is sound because the analysis
function (section 2.3) is sound for basic statements (figure 2.13).

      Figure 2.23
      Next labels, depending on the statement of l, both l′ and l″, or l′ only

2.4.4 Analysis by Global Iterations
The static analysis for collecting all abstract states should be sound.
Soundness means that the set of concrete states implied by the
analysis result over-approximates the reality.
Definition 2.7 (Sound analysis by abstract interpretation in transitional
style) Let analysisT be a static analysis function in transitional style that inputs a program
and returns a set of abstract states. We say that analysisT is sound if and only if the following
condition holds:
        If S is the set of states occurring in a transition sequence of p from initial state s0,
        then for any abstract element a such that s0 ∈ γ(a),
                                          S ⊆ γ(analysisT (p,a)).

  For the input program p and an abstract state I that over-
approximates all the possible initial states, the analysis result
analysisT (p, I) is a set of pairs (l, apre) of statement label l and
abstract pre-condition apre. The soundness ensures that the abstract
pre-conditions at label l over-approximate all the points that may
occur at statement l during execution.
   Such a sound analysis function analysisT (p, I) is composed of the
sound abstract transition function Step# in Section 2.4.3 as follows:
letting          denote the abstract post-states after i consecutive
abstract transitions from I,

This abstract state          is sound: it subsumes all the states after i
transitions from an initial state implied by I. This soundness of i
consecutive applications of Step# is clear because each step by
Step# over-approximates the results of a single-step transition. For
our example language, the set I is {(0, true)}, where the label 0 lies at
the initial statement and its abstract pre-condition true implies all the
points in the two-dimensional plane.
   Then the analysis accumulates all the abstract states occurring at
each step of the abstract transition from the initial abstract state I:

    Now, a natural question is how to devise an algorithm that
accumulates the above sequence. We remark that the above
sequence is equivalent to what we illustrated in section 2.3.4 when
we devised the analysis function for the iter statement, whose body
is now Step#.
    The analysis algorithm is to compute the limit (limi→∞ Ci) of the
following sequence Ci:

Because the following equivalence holds:
                Ck+1 is equivalent to Ck ∪ Step#(Ck),
the analysis algorithm should simply start from I and iterate the
operation
                                 C ← C ∪ Step#(C)
until stable.
   Hence, the analysis algorithm for the input program p is a
monolithic global iteration:

The i-th iteration of the algorithm covers all states observed up to i
execution steps of the input program.
   The unionT and inclusionT operators do the same as the union and
inclusion operators (section 2.3.4), respectively, except that they are
label-wise. That is, the inclusionT (C,R) returns true only when at
every statement label the local point set implied from C is included in
that from R. Similarly, the unionT summarizes for each statement
label its local set of collected pre-conditions. The summarization is
done by applying the union operator to reduce each local set of pre-
conditions into a single pre-condition:

Example 2.18 (Abstract transitions) Consider the example program in figure 2.20.
Suppose we use the convex polyhedra abstractions for point sets. The above analysis
algorithm analysisT stores the following Ci iterates into the variable C after i iterations.
Remember that Ci covers up to i transitions of the input program:
where

    Figure 2.24 shows the snapshots of computing the iterates Ci on top of the graph view of
the program:
      Figure 2.24(a), Figure 2.24(b), and Figure 2.24(c) show the pre-condition a1 at
      statement labels 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 until C3.
      Figure 2.24(d), Figure 2.24(e), and Figure 2.24(f) are snapshots of computing C4 from
      C3.
      Figure 2.24(d) shows two new pre-conditions of statement 1 (post-conditions after
      statement 3 and 4) resulting from Step#(C3). They will be “unioned” with other pre-
      conditions at statement 1.
      Figure 2.24(e) shows the result of unioning a2 and a3 during union{a1,a2,a3} at
      statement 1.
      Figure 2.24(f) shows the final result of union{a1,a2,a3}, union of the above and a1.

                                                We remark that the
Analysis Algorithm with the Termination Guarantee
previous analysisT algorithm does not guarantee termination. If a
program has a loop, the analysis may iterate forever collecting new
abstract pre-conditions. To guarantee the termination, we need to use
the widening introduced to analyze the iteration statement in section
2.3.4.
    Figure 2.24
    Abstract transition snapshots in the graph view of the program

   A terminating analysis analysisT should use a widening operation
in place of the unionT operation:
The widenT operator ensures the termination of the sequence of
iterations. It makes sure the number of collected constraints for
abstract pre-conditions will always decrease.
    The widenT function is identical to the unionT operation except that
at the iter statements we use the widen operator in place of the union
operator. This is because the iter statement is the only place where
iteration happens during program execution. At other statements, we
use the union operator as before:

Note that, as opposed to the union operator, the widen operator is
sensitive to the order of its arguments. The widen(a,a′) extrapolates a
by a′ as defined in section 2.3.4. When either argument is false (the
abstract pre-condition for the empty set of points in the two-
dimensional plane), the widen operation simply returns the other
argument.
Example 2.19 (Abstract transitions with widening) Consider again the example program
in figure 2.20, and suppose we use the convex polyhedra abstractions for sets of points. The
above widening analysis algorithm analysisT stores the following iterates Ci in the
variable C after i iterations as before but using widenT in place of unionT :
where

    The widening operation becomes effective at iteration 4 (C4), when the algorithm brings
the effect of the loop body back to the loop head (statement label 1). Figure 2.24(e) shows
the abstract state produced when the two results from the or statement in the loop body are
unioned (union({a2,a3})). The algorithm brings this result to the loop head and widens it with
the old pre-condition (a1). In the algorithm, this widening operation
                                    widen(a1,union({a2,a3}))

at the loop head happens during the computation of C4 at iteration 4:
                                   widenT (C3,{(1,a2),(1,a3)}).

    The result corresponds to all the points such that x ≥ 0 and y ≥ 0, as shown in figure
2.25(b). It is a rather coarse over-approximation of the actual results, which are shown in
figure 2.25(a).
    The analysis accuracy can be improved by the “loop-unrolling” technique discussed in
example 2.14 (section 2.3.4). This technique rewrites a loop “ iter {b}” into “{}or{b};iter {b}”
before the analysis. The analysis of the unrolled, first iteration (“{}or{b}”) will bring the
unioned result to the subsequent loop head. For our example program the analysis result
right after the unrolled first iteration is shown in Figure 2.24(f). Widening it at the subsequent
loop head with the analysis result of the loop body will generate the result shown in figure
2.25(c). This result is still an over-approximation of the reality, yet it is more accurate than
the result shown in figure 2.25(b).

2.5 Core Principles of a Static Analysis

The previous sections sketch the design of static analyses in the
context of a simplistic graphical language. First, in section 2.1 we
selected semantic properties of interest and formalized the semantics
of programs, with respect to which these properties should be
proved. Then in section 2.2 we showed how to define abstractions of
the standard semantics of programs. Last, in sections 2.3 and 2.4, we
presented two static analyses for this graphical language. In fact,
both analyses were derived from a presentation of the semantics of
programs (one in compositional style and one in transitional style).

    Figure 2.25
    Static analysis results

   This three-stage approach is actually general and has many
fundamental and practical advantages, both for designing and for
using static analysis tools.
   Indeed, let us first recall the role of each stage:
  1. Selection of the semantics and properties of interest: This
     stage is critical as it fixes the goal of the analysis. It describes
     the behaviors of programs and the properties that need to be
     verified. This description is often formal, even though we did it
     with prose in this chapter.
  2. Choice of the abstraction: The abstraction describes the
     properties that are supposed to be manipulated by the analysis.
     These properties should be strong enough to express the
     properties of interest and all the invariants required to infer these
     properties.
  3. Derivation of the analysis algorithms from the semantics
     and from the abstraction: The analysis algorithms follow from
     the choices made in the first two phases for the semantics and
     for the abstraction. In the two analyses presented in this chapter,
     we have observed that the analysis closely follows the
     semantics. For instance, the compositional analysis (section 2.3)
     follows steps similar to those of a basic program interpreter, in
     the same order, but using abstract domain predicates instead of
     regular states.
   From the static analysis point of view, this approach puts the
choice of the reference semantics and property of interest at the
forefront of the design process, as it should be, since this semantics
and property define the actual goal of the analysis. It also addresses
the selection of the predicates to use before the design of the
algorithms to compute these predicates, although it does not
preclude revising these choices after testing the analysis, as
discussed at the end of this section.
   As observed in sections 2.3 and 2.4, most of the choices related to
the analysis algorithms are dictated by the abstraction and by the
way programs get evaluated according to the concrete semantics.
Therefore, this construction also allows justifying the soundness of
the analysis step-by-step; indeed, whenever we defined the way a
program construction should be handled by the analysis, we ensured
that the analysis does not forget any program behavior, according to
the abstraction. Thus, the mathematical proof of soundness follows
the design of the analysis closely. We discuss this more in chapter 3.
   Similarly, this approach also allows tying the analysis and the
“standard” semantics of programs. It is actually possible to follow the
same process when implementing a static analyzer, as we show in
chapter 7.
   Lastly, this methodology also simplifies the troubleshooting of the
analysis when it falls short, either in terms of precision (ability to
compute strong invariants and achieve the proof of the property of
interest) or in terms of scalability (ability to cope with input programs
that are large enough). In particular, let us consider the case where
the analysis fails to prove the property of interest. Then after
investigating the analysis results, the user can diagnose which step
“went wrong”:
    The first point to check is that the base semantics allows
    expressing all the steps needed to prove the property of interest
    and that the abstraction preserves them; indeed, if the
    abstraction throws important information away, there is no hope
    that the analysis algorithms will infer predicates that the
    abstraction cannot capture and will recover from the loss of
    precision.
    When the semantics and abstraction are strong enough, the
    imprecisions stem from the analysis algorithms, and one needs
    to identify which abstract operation (for instance, the
    computation of the abstract post-condition for some basic
    operations in the language or the computation of an over-
    approximation for union) discards important information, which
    causes the analysis to fail.
When the analysis tool can be parameterized, the user can often
remedy such issues by choosing settings carefully. We discuss this
point in more depth in chapter 6.

________________________
1
   This chapter has been partially inspired by graphical descriptions of the notion of
abstraction, such as the one presented in http://web.mit.edu/16.399/www/lecture_13-
abstraction1/Cousot_MIT_2005_Course_13_4-1.pdf, even though this chapter focuses on
different aspects of static analysis, transfer functions, and abstract iterations.
