3 A General Static Analysis Framework Based on a
Compositional Semantics

Goal of This Chapter     In this chapter, we provide a formal (yet as
lightweight as possible) introduction to the construction of a static
analysis framework to compute program invariants by abstract
interpretation. This framework is general and can be instantiated with
different abstractions. We consider a basic imperative programming
language that operates over purely numerical states, and we show
how to construct a static analysis step-by-step, starting from the
concrete semantics. The intuition conveyed in chapter 2 supports most
of the contents of this chapter.
Recommended Reading:   [S], [D], [U] We recommend this chapter to all
readers since it defines the core concepts of static analysis and is
fundamental to the understanding of most of the following chapters.
Readers less interested in the foundations may skip some parts of the
analysis design, whereas readers who would like to fully understand
how static analyses achieve sound results may want to read the proofs
supplied in appendix B. Moreover, readers interested in
implementation may also combine the reading of this chapter with that
of chapter 7 (in fact, both chapters may be read side by side, as
chapter 7 considers exactly the same language as in this chapter).
                                                                     The
Chapter Outline: Recipe for the Construction of an Abstract Interpreter
structure of this chapter follows the general recipe for the design of an
abstract interpreter:
  1. In section 3.1, we fix the target language and its concrete
     semantics.
  2. In section 3.2, we select an abstraction that allows describing a
     set of properties that the analysis may reason about, and we fix
     their representation.
  3. In section 3.3, we derive the abstract semantics of programs from
     their concrete semantics fixed in section 3.1 and from the
     abstraction chosen in section 3.2.
Finally, in section 3.4, we summarize the main assumptions and steps
toward the design of the abstract interpreter.

3.1 Semantics

Before we can define a family of static analyses, we need to fix a
language and its semantics.

3.1.1 A Simple Programming Language
To illustrate the concepts of static analysis, we do not require a
language with a very large set of features. Thus, we fix a basic
imperative language with a limited set of expressions, conditions, and
statements.
    The syntax is defined in the grammar shown in figure 3.1. We
assume that a set of scalar values V (which define the constants in the
language) and a finite set X of variables (defined by their name) are
fixed. All variables have scalar type. We denote the set of Boolean
values by B = {true,false}. Scalar expressions include constant
expressions, variables, and binary operations (e.g., arithmetic
operations) that are applied to pairs of expressions and evaluate into
scalar values. Boolean expressions describe comparisons of variables
with constants and evaluate them into Boolean values. Commands
include a skip statement (which does nothing), sequences of
commands, assignments, inputs of non-deterministic values (e.g.,
these values may be typed in by the user, or read on the disk or from
the network, during the execution), conditional statements, and loop
statements.
    Even though this language is rather contrived, it allows expressing
a large set of imperative programs. As such, it is enough to
demonstrate the analysis of most basic constructions of programming
languages, such as updates of scalar variables, conditions, and loops.
The analysis of a language including more advanced programming
constructions (functions, pointers, rich data types, etc.) is discussed in
chapter 8.

3.1.2 Concrete Semantics
Following the methodology shown in chapter 2, we define the
semantics of the programs that we intend to study before we formalize
their static analysis. This semantics (also called concrete semantics in
the rest of this chapter) formally defines the behavior of programs, and
serves as a reference to design and prove the soundness of the static
analysis that we study later in the chapter. Therefore, it should be rich
enough to express not only the target properties that we intend static
analysis to compute but also all the logical facts that would be required
to prove the property of interest. Indeed, a concrete semantics that
fails to provide this would not allow designing and proving correct a
static analysis that is sufficiently precise to establish the property of
interest.
    Many forms of semantics have been proposed, and some are more
expressive than others. For instance, trace semantics describes
program executions as sequences of program states, whereas
denotational semantics describes only input-output relations, and
ignores the intermediate steps. Some other forms of semantics only
describe the sets of reachable states. Before we can select which form
of semantics to use, we discuss the family of properties of interest.
     Figure 3.1
     Syntax of a simple imperative language

                            As in chapter 2, we focus on reachability
Family of Properties of Interest
properties, namely, properties that express program executions may
reach only a predefined set of states R. Equivalently, such properties
state that no execution should reach any state that is not in R, so the
states that do not belong to R should be unreachable. For instance,
the absence of run-time errors is a reachability property since it states
that no execution should reach an error state. The verification of user
assertions is another common case (in that case, the property
expresses that no execution should reach an assertion point, yet not
meet the assertion condition). More generally, set reachability
properties form a subset of the class of safety properties defined in
section 1.3.1. We address other classes of semantic properties (more
general safety properties, liveness, and hyperproperties) in chapter 9.
    A variant of reachability focuses on the final states of a program: it
expresses that the final states of a program should satisfy a given
post-condition (condition over final states), under the assumption that
executions start from initial states that meet a given pre-condition. As
an example of this family of properties, we can consider the verification
that a program that should compute an absolute value always returns
a non-negative number. To establish that a pre-condition entails a
post-condition, we simply need a semantics that describes the relation
between input states and final states; therefore, we shall use a
semantics of that form.
    The verification of reachability properties and of post-conditions are
very strongly related. Clearly, post-conditions express a particular case
of reachability property (i.e., that we should not reach a final state that
does not meet the post-condition). On the other hand, semantic
analyses that attempt at verifying post-conditions need to cover all
reachable states and hence do the same work as required for proving
more general reachability properties. Therefore, and since the focus of
this chapter is on the definition of an abstract interpreter, we consider
the computation of abstract post-conditions first and discuss the
verification of general reachability properties in a second step.
An Input-Output Semantics  In the following paragraphs, we set up an
input-output semantics, which characterizes the effect of executing a
program using a mathematical function that maps input states into
corresponding output states. For instance, in the case of a program
that computes an absolute value, this function will map a state where
the argument is −5 into a state where the result is 5. We observe that
one input state may yield several output states, due to the non-
deterministic execution of input commands: when running the
program input(x) from any input state, we may observe infinitely many
output states (one per value in V). Therefore, the actual form of the
semantics of a command is a function that returns a set of output
states. For the sake of compositionality, we also let it input a set of
states. We obtain the following definition:
   program semantics : set of input states ↦ set of output states
Such a semantics defines a very basic form of denotational semantics.
    Intuitively, this semantics behaves like an interpreter. An interpreter
is a program that inputs a program and an input state and runs the
program so as to compute an output state. This definition is very close
to that of the aforementioned semantics: the main difference is that an
interpreter inputs a single state and returns a single state (that is partly
chosen in a non-deterministic manner, in the case of the input
command). Besides this point, the interpreter essentially implements
the input-output semantics.
    An important characteristic of the input-output semantics is that it is
compositional, which means that the semantics of a command
composed of several sub-commands (e.g., a sequence or a
conditional command) can be defined simply by composing the
semantics of the sub-commands. The analysis will inherit many
characteristics from the semantics it is based on, including this one.
This kind of semantics fits also very well the verification of post-
conditions and can be easily instrumented to compute all reachable
states.
Memory States   In general a program state (or, for short, a state) should
capture the configuration of the computer at a given point of the
execution of a program. A state should thus describe the contents of
the memory and the value of the “program counter” or next command
to be executed. Therefore, it should comprise a memory state and a
control state (the current location in the program).
    In this chapter, we define an input-output semantics for programs,
so control states can safely be ignored. Indeed, an input state (resp.,
output state) is fully determined by the memory state since its control
state is known. As a consequence, in the following, a state will simply
be defined as a memory state.
    In our simple language, memory states can be described very
simply. Indeed, our simple language features only a fixed set of
variables, which all have the same type (it does not feature heap
allocated regions, structures with multiple fields, and values of different
sizes). Therefore, a memory state boils down to a function m from the
(fixed, finite) set of variables X into the set of values V. Thus, the set of
memory states M is defined by:

We write explicit definitions of functions that have a finite domain
between braces of the form {·}; for instance, if X = {x,y}, we write {x ↦
7,y ↦ 3} for the memory state that maps x into 7 and y into 3.
   In the following paragraphs, we define the way each element of the
language gets evaluated. Indeed, to describe the execution of
commands, we need to first explain how scalar and Boolean
expressions are evaluated.
Semantics of Scalar Expressions  The evaluation of a scalar expression
produces a scalar value. In the case of a constant n, the result is
simply n. In the case of a variable x, the result is obtained by reading
the content of variable x in the current memory state. Last, the result of
the evaluation of an expression composed of an operator applied to
two sub-expressions is obtained by evaluating the sub-expressions
and applying to their results the mathematical function described by
the operator. We let f⊙ denote the function associated to operator ⊙.
   The formalization of this semantics proceeds by induction over the
syntax of expressions and is shown in figure 3.2. We let 〚 E 〛 (m)
denote the semantics of expression E, evaluated in the memory state
m, so that 〚E〛 is a function from memory states to scalar values.
                               The case of Boolean expressions is very
Semantics of Boolean Expressions
similar to the semantics of scalar expressions, with the only difference
that it returns a Boolean value. We denote the semantics of a Boolean
expression B by 〚 B 〛 and define it as a function that inputs a
memory state and returns a Boolean value. Its definition is given in
figure 3.3. We denote the function associated to a comparison
operator by .
    Figure 3.2
    Semantics of scalar expressions

    Figure 3.3
    Semantics of Boolean expressions

Semantics of Commands   The semantics of a command C is a function
noted 〚 C 〛 P that maps a set of input states into a set of output
states, observed after the command. This choice entails that non-
terminating executions are not observed at this point; indeed, if an
execution of a command C does not terminate, it does not produce
any output state. We denote the power set of memory states by ℘(M),
and we write M for an element of ℘(M). The semantics 〚 C 〛 P is
shown in figure 3.4.
   The semantics of the skip command is the identity function. The
semantics of a sequence of commands is the composition of the
semantics of each command. The evaluation of an assignment x := E;
updates the value of x in the memory states with the result produced
by the evaluation of E. The evaluation of input(x) replaces the value of
variable x with any possible scalar value.
   The evaluation of a conditional command is determined by the
result of the condition. Since our semantics is defined over sets of
input states, it should simply filter the states for which the condition
evaluates to true and evaluate the corresponding branch, do the same
for the states for which the condition evaluates to false, and return the
union of the two results. The condition expression effectively filters out
memory states; thus, for each Boolean expression B, we define a
“filtering” function ℱB:
                   ℱB (M) = {m ∈ M | 〚B〛(m) = true}
We write ¬B for the negation of Boolean expression B. For instance
¬(x ≤ 3) is the Boolean expression x > 3. Thus, the set of states that
enter the true (resp., false) branch is defined by ℱB (M) (resp., ℱ¬B
(M)).
    The case of loops is more complex and interesting due to
unbounded executions. To determine the set of output states produced
by a loop command, we can simply partition executions based on the
number of iterations they spend inside the loop before they exit; thus,
the set of output states is the infinite union of a family of sets
M0,M1,Mn,…, where Mi denotes the states produced by program
executions that went through the loop body exactly i times. Intuitively,
each of these sets can be described using the same technique as if
we were considering the output of a sequence of conditional
commands (where the condition evaluates to true i times and to false
for the last test). Thus, a state is in Mi if and only if it is in Mi defined as
follows:

     Figure 3.4
     Semantics of commands
As a result, the set of output states of the loop is computed by:

Moreover, ℱB commutes with the union; thus,

Remark 3.1 (Alternate definition) As a side remark (which can be skipped in a first reading),
the above definition of the semantics of loops can also be written using a least fixpoint, using
Kleene’s fixpoint theorem (theorem A.1) ℱ¬B(lfpMF), where F : M′ ↦ M ∪ 〚 C 〛 P∘ℱB (M′).
(The application of the theorem requires verifying the continuity of F.)

  To conclude, the semantics of a command is defined by induction
over the syntax, as shown in figure 3.4.

3.2 Abstractions

3.2.1 The Concept of Abstraction
In the following, we make the definition of abstract domains and
concretization functions more formal than definitions 2.1 and 2.2.
Intuitions Gathered from the Previous Chapter         In chapter 2, we noted that an
abstract domain should provide:
    a set of abstract elements that stand for logical properties, to be
    used by the analysis;
    a compact and efficient data structure to represent abstract
    elements;
    a relation that fixes the meaning of each abstract element in
    concrete terms; and
    analysis algorithms, to carry out the computation of abstract post-
    conditions, union, widening, and so forth.
We also noted that logical comparison among abstract elements plays
a crucial role to determine which abstract elements are better than
others in terms of precision.
   Additionally, chapter 2 presents several examples of abstractions
based on signs, intervals, and convex polyhedra. These examples of
abstractions are all meaningful for the language introduced in section
3.1; thus, we expect to be able to apply them to this language as well,
and that the analyses set up this way also behave like the intuitive
analysis of chapter 2.
                                                     In the following,
Concrete Elements, Abstract Elements and Abstraction Relation
we distinguish carefully the abstract domain that is used for the
analysis of programs and the domain where the semantics of program
is defined. We apply the “abstract” qualifier to the former and the
“concrete” qualifier to the latter.
Definition 3.1 (Concrete domain) We call concrete domain a set C used to describe concrete
behaviors, with an order relation ⊆ that compares program behaviors in the logical point of
view: if x,y are elements of the concrete domain, then x ⊆ y holds whenever behavior x implies
behavior y (i.e., x expresses a stronger property than y).

The definition of order relations is recalled in appendix A.5. In this
book, we will always consider concrete domains that are power sets,
so that the order relation over the concrete domain will always be the
inclusion relation (which is why we write ⊆ as for set inclusion).
Example 3.1 (Concrete domain) For instance, to study sets of reachable states, we should
choose C = ℘(M) as the concrete domain.

   An abstract domain should also come with a way to compare
elements, and it should provide some way to interpret them with
respect to the concrete level. Intuitively, this notion of “meaning”
should say when a concrete element c can be described by an
abstract element a or, equivalently, when a concrete element c
satisfies the logical properties expressed by an abstract element a.
   In the following, we write c ⊨ a when this relation holds, that is,
when a describes c.
Definition 3.2 (Abstract domain and abstraction relation) We call abstract domain [26] a
pair made of a set A and an ordering relation ⊑ over that set.
    Given a concrete domain (C,⊆), an abstraction is defined by an abstract domain (A,⊑) and
an abstraction relation (⊨) ⊆ C × A, such that,
      for all c ∈ C,a0,a1 ∈ A, if c ⊨ a0 and a0 ⊑ a1, then c ⊨ a1; and
      for all c0,c1 ∈ C,a ∈ A, if c0 ⊆ c1 and c1 ⊨ a, then c0 ⊨ a.

The two properties that definition 3.2 requires ⊨ to satisfy capture the
fact that both order relations (in the concrete and in the abstract
domains) should be compatible with the same interpretation as logical
implication. For instance, let us consider the first one in detail: it
asserts that if a concrete element c satisfies the property described by
the abstract element a0, and if the abstract element a1 expresses a
weaker property than that expressed by a0, then c should also satisfy
the abstract property a1. The second item asserts the same thing for
the concrete ordering.
Example 3.2 (Abstraction) We consider the concrete domain of example 3.1 and the
abstraction that retain range information for each variable, following the principles set by
definition 2.3 in chapter 2. We characterize ⊨ based on a couple of examples. We assume
that there are two variables x,y, and we consider the following elements of the concrete
domain (which are sets of memory states):

Furthermore, we assume that the abstract element M# over-approximates the value of x by the
interval [0,10] and the value of y by interval [0,80]. Then,
      M0 ⊨ M# since any memory in M0 satisfies the range constraints in M#; and
      M1 ⊭ M# since there exist memory states in M0 that cannot be described by M#, such as
      the memory state that maps x to 100 and y to 50.

A relation ⊨ is not always the most convenient way to relate concrete
properties and abstract elements, and it is often preferable to look at
functions that
     map an abstract element into the concrete behaviors it describe,
     or
     turn concrete program behaviors into an abstract property that
     describe them accurately.
Therefore, in the following we study such functions and their basic
properties.
Concretization Function   The most common way to describe the
abstraction relation ⊨ proceeds by defining a function that maps each
abstract element to the largest set of program behaviors that satisfy it.
Definition 3.3 (Concretization function) A concretization function (or, for short,
concretization) is a function γ : A → C such that, for any abstract element a, γ(a) satisfies a
(i.e., γ(a) ⊨ a) and γ(a) is the maximum element of C that satisfies a.

A concretization function fully describes the abstraction relation,
because of the following equivalence:
                         ∀c ∈ C,a ∈ A, c ⊨ a ⇔ c ⊆ γ(a)
A concretization function is also monotone. From the static analysis
point of view, this remark is important since it means that an abstract
element that is bigger for ⊑ accounts for a larger set of concrete states
thus is less precise.
Example 3.3 (Concretization function) We use the same notations as in example 3.2. Then
the concretization of M# is the set of all the memory states such that the value of x ranges
between 0 and 10 and such that the value of y lies between 0 and 80. As expected, this set
includes M0 but not M1. We note there are memory states in γ(M#) that are not in M0, such as
the memory state m defined by m(x) = 8,m(y) = 3.

                                       In some cases, we can also
Abstraction Function and Galois Connection
describe ⊨ with a function that maps each concrete element into the
smallest abstract element that describes it. More intuitively, this
function maps each concrete element to its most precise abstract
property.
Definition 3.4 (Abstraction function) Let c be a concrete element. We say that c has a best
abstraction if and only if there exists an abstract element a such that (1) a is an abstraction of
c and (2) any other abstraction of c is greater than a. If it exists, this element is unique and
called the best abstraction of c.
    An abstraction function (or, for short, abstraction) is a function α: C → A that maps each
concrete element to its best abstraction.

An abstraction function is essentially the dual of a concretization
function. Thus, it also fully defines the underlying abstraction relation.
An abstraction function is also monotone.
Example 3.4 (Abstraction function) We use the same notations as in examples 3.2 and 3.3.
Then the best abstraction of M0 describes both x and y with range [0,8]. It is smaller (thus
more precise) than M#.

The existence of a best abstraction function is not guaranteed in
general, and some important abstractions have no best abstraction
function. As an example, we observed in chapter 2 that the abstract
domain based on convex polyhedra does not have a best abstraction
function (definition 2.5). Another, simpler example is provided later in
example 3.6, and other cases will also be encountered in the rest of
the book.
   While we can design abstraction relations such that no
concretization function can be defined, none will arise in this book.
When an abstraction relation defines both a concretization function
and an abstraction function, they are thus tightly related to each other.
Thus, they form what we call a Galois connection.
Definition 3.5 (Galois connection) A Galois connection [26] is a pair made of a
concretization function γ and an abstraction function α such that
                        ∀c ∈ C, ∀a ∈ A,   α(c) ⊑ a   ⇔   c ⊆ γ(a)
We write such a pair as follows:

Galois connections have numerous interesting algebraic properties,
many of which are presented in [28]. We list below the main properties
that one should know. Under the assumption that (C,⊆) and (A,⊑) form
a Galois connection with abstraction function α and concretization
function γ as defined above, then
     α and γ are monotone functions, which means that they map
     logically comparable inputs into logically comparable outputs;
     ∀c ∈ C, c ⊆ γ(α(c)) (or, more concisely, using the pointwise
     ordering of functions and the identity function id, id ⊆ γ ∘ α), which
     means that applying the abstraction function and concretizing the
     result back yield a less precise result (or, equivalently, a
     conservative approximation); and
     ∀a ∈ A, α(γ(a)) ⊑ a (or, more concisely, α ∘ γ ⊑ id), which means
     that concretizing an abstract element and then abstracting the
     result back refines the information available in the initial abstract
     element; this refinement is known as a reduction (it is studied
     more in detail in section 5.1.2).
The proofs for these properties are provided in appendix B.1.
Comparing Abstraction FormalizationsIn the case of a Galois connection,
both the abstraction and the concretization function can be used
interchangeably. In particular, since the abstraction function computes
the best way to abstract any concrete behavior, it is very helpful to set
the ideal analysis goal, namely, to compute the best abstraction of the
semantics of the program being analyzed.
   On the other hand, when no best abstraction function can be
defined, some concrete behaviors do not have a best approximation in
terms of precision. This means that, for some analysis operation, we
may not be able to even specify the best result that could be
produced; then the analysis will inevitably have to make choices
among several possible answers that are logically incomparable.

3.2.2 Non-Relational Abstraction
In chapter 2, we introduced non-relational abstractions as abstractions
that forget about all relations among program variables. In this section,
we formalize the most common form of non-relational abstraction,
where all variables are treated independently, with a similar abstraction
of their values. Intuitively, this abstraction proceeds in two steps:
  1. For each variable, it collects the values that this variable may take
     across a set of states.
  2. Then it over-approximates each of these sets of values with one
     abstract element per variable; each of these abstract elements
     consists of numerical constraints over a single variable.
This second step relies on a value abstraction.
Definition 3.6 (Value abstraction) A value abstraction is an abstraction of (℘(V),⊆).

Signs and intervals constraints (as used in chapter 2) define value
abstractions.
Example 3.5 (Signs) The elements of the sign value abstract domain AS are [≥ 0], [≤ 0], [= 0],
which describe the properties associated to their name; ⊤, which describes any set of values;
and ⊥, which describes only the empty set of values. Therefore, their concretizations are
defined by
      Figure 3.5
      Value abstract domains

This abstraction features a best abstraction function αS : if V is a set of values, αS (V) is the
smallest element of the signs lattice that over-approximates it. Figure 3.5(a) shows the order
relation in the abstract domain of signs using a Hasse diagram, which consists of a graph
where nodes denote abstract elements and edges link neighbors in the ordering relation, with
the convention that “smaller” abstract elements are lower than “bigger” abstract elements.
Example 3.6 (A variation on the lattice of signs, with no abstraction function) We can
build many variations over the lattice of signs exposed in example 3.5 by adding elements to
denote strict inequalities or to denote the predicate “not equal to zero,” or by removing some
elements. For instance, figure 3.5(b) shows another abstract domain that retains only abstract
elements ⊥, [≥ 0], [≤ 0], and ⊤. This new abstraction defines the same concretization function
as in example 3.5; however, it does not have a best abstraction function αS. Indeed, let us
consider the concrete set {0}; then [≤ 0], [≥ 0], and ⊤ define valid abstractions of {0}. However,
there exists no smaller abstract element that over-approximates it since [≤ 0] and [≥ 0] are
both incomparable (and smaller than ⊤). Thus, it would be impossible to define a best
abstraction function αS over {0}. The consequence in static analysis is that it is not possible in
general to identify one element as the most precise (in other words, best sound) possible
result. Provided the analysis designer and user are aware of this fact, it is not a serious
limitation, however.
Example 3.7 (Intervals) The elements of the intervals value abstract domain [26] AI are
      the element ⊥, which represents the empty set of values, and
      the pairs (n0,n1), where n0 is either −∞ or a value, n1 is either +∞ or a value, and n0 ≤ n1.
For clarity, pairs will often be given using the classic interval notation (e.g., we will write [8, +∞)
instead of (8, +∞)). Therefore, their concretization is defined by

The order relation ⊑I over abstract elements is induced by the concretization and captures the
interval inclusion. As in example 3.5, this abstraction relation also defines a best abstraction
function αI. The Hasse diagram of the abstract domain of intervals is shown in figure 3.5(c).
Example 3.8 (Congruences) While the instances of value abstractions presented so far all
boil down to inequality constraints, we can cite relevant abstractions that do not follow this
structure. A very useful example is the abstract domain of congruences [52], which describes
sets of values using congruence relations. Abstract values are ⊥ and pairs of the form (n, p)
where either p = 0 or 0 ≤ n < p. While ⊥ represents the empty set of values, a pair (n, p)
stands for a set of values that are equal to n modulo p:

We let AC denote the set of abstract elements, and let ⊑C be the order relation defined by a0
⊑C a1 ⇔ γC (a0) ⊆ γC (a1). This domain also has a best abstraction function αC. Note that the
set of all integers is described by the pair (0,1), and that a singleton {n} is described by the pair
(n,0).

   As remarked above, a non-relational abstraction collects separately
the values each variable may take and applies the value abstraction to
each component.
Definition 3.7 (Non-relational abstraction) We assume that a value abstraction (AV, ⊑V) is
given, with a concretization function γV : AV → ℘(V), a least element ⊥V, and a greatest
element ⊤V. Then the non-relational abstraction based on it is defined by
      the set of abstract elements AN = X → AV;
      the order relation ⊑N defined by the pointwise extension of ⊑V (which means that
                 if and only if ∀x ∈ X,                    ; and
      the concretization function γN defined by

Intuitively, this abstraction treats each variable independently and
applies the value abstraction to each variable separately from the
others. The order relation is the pointwise extension of ⊑V; indeed, in
the logical point of view,       describes a property that is stronger than
that of     if and only if it does so for each variable. The machine
representation of non-relational abstract values boils down to a data
structure for tuples (with record types in small dimensions or
arrays/functional arrays when the number of variables is high). When
defining such an abstract element explicitly, we use the same notation
{·} as before; for instance, if X = {x,y}, and if the AV is the signs
abstract domain, we write {x ↦ [= 0],y ↦ [≥ 0]} for the non-relational
abstract state that maps x into [= 0] (i.e., it expresses that x is equal to
zero) and y into [≥ 0] (i.e., it expresses that x is positive).
    The least element of the non-relational abstract domain is the
function that maps each variable to the least element ⊥V of the value
abstract domain:
                                ∀x ∈ X, ⊥N (x) = ⊥V
The greatest element ⊤N can be defined similarly.
    When the value abstraction also has an abstraction function αV, the
non-relational abstraction also has one that is defined as follows (note
that it maps a set of states into a function from variables into elements
of the value abstract domain):
                    αN : M ↦ (x ∈ X) ↦ αV ({m(x) | m ∈ M})
We remark that ⊥N is the best approximation of ∅.
   Chapter 2 already introduced particular instances of this non-
relational abstraction, in the case where X contains only two elements,
so that a concrete memory is a point in the two-dimensional space,
and an abstract element is a pair of value abstract elements (e.g., sign
or interval predicate). Definition 3.7 extends this construction to the
cases where the set of variables may have any size.
Example 3.9 (Non-relational abstraction) We assume that X = {x,y,z}, and we consider the
memory states defined as follows:
The best abstractions of {m0, m1, m2, m3} can be defined as follows:
     With the signs abstraction:

                                  M# : x ↦ [≥ 0] y ↦ ⊤ z ↦ [≤ 0]
      With the intervals abstraction:

                             M# : x ↦ [25,35] y ↦ [−7,8] z ↦ [−12,−9]

3.2.3 Relational Abstraction
We call relational abstraction any abstraction of sets of memory states
that allows maintaining at least some constraints that bind several
variables. Non-relational abstractions handle each variable separately
from the others and thus cannot express precisely any constraints
such as x + y ≤ 3 or x2 − y ≤ 0. If we were trying to represents such
constraints with non-relational abstractions, we would have to first
approximate them in a very coarse manner, which would first drop any
relationship between x and y.

      Figure 3.6
      A few relational domains

    Many relational abstract domains have been proposed in the
literature. We give a few examples in the rest of this section, some of
which are informally discussed in section 2.2.
    We start with linear equalities [67].
Definition 3.8 (Linear equalities) The elements of the abstract domain of linear equalities are
the ⊥ value denoting the empty set and the conjunctions of linear equality constraints over the
program variables to constrain sets of memory states.

In the geometrical point of view, abstract elements boil down to affine
spaces in VN where N is the number of variables. For instance, in
dimension 3 (i.e., if the program has three variables), this includes the
empty set, points, lines, planes, and the whole space. The resulting
abstraction features both a concretization and an abstraction function
(the best abstraction of a set of points is the smallest enclosing affine
space). The best abstraction of any set M of memory states is the
smallest affine space that contains all the memories in M. An example
is shown in figure 3.6(a).
    As discussed in chapter 2, linear inequalities also provide a good
basis to build an abstract domain.
Definition 3.9 (Convex polyhedra) The elements of the abstract domain of linear inequalities
(also called convex polyhedra abstract domain) [30] are the ⊥ value denoting the empty set
and the conjunctions of linear inequality constraints over the program variables to constrain
sets of memory states.

In the geometrical point of view, abstract elements correspond to
convex polyhedra of all dimensions in VN, where N is the number of
variables. An example is shown in figure 3.6(b).
   The abstract domain of convex polyhedra defines a concretization
function but features no best abstraction function, although certain
concrete sets do have a best abstraction. The canonical example of a
concrete set without a best abstraction is the disk (as discussed in
section 2.2) since it is possible to refine any polyhedron enclosing a
disk by adding one more face, thereby turning it into a strictly tighter
enclosing polyhedron.
   This example based on tighter and tighter abstractions of a disk
also illustrates the main source of cost for this abstraction: even with a
low number of variables, the number of inequalities (or faces in the
geometrical point of view) is not bounded. In practice, it may grow
exponentially with the number of variables.
   To alleviate this issue, it is possible to restrict the set of inequality
constraints that the abstract domain can express precisely. Due to the
lesser expressiveness of the abstraction, the static analysis becomes
less precise (it can infer fewer properties), but it may also benefit from
a more compact representation and from faster algorithms; thus, the
analysis may also become less costly. As an example, the following
abstraction retains only constraints with at most two variables, and
with coefficients −1,0, and 1.
Definition 3.10 (Octagons) The elements of the abstract domain of octagons [82] are the ⊥
element denoting the empty set and the conjunctions of linear inequality constraints of the
form ±x±y ≤ c or ±x ≤ c.

In the geometrical point of view, abstract elements correspond to
“octagonal” shapes (e.g., in dimension 2, an abstract element
corresponds to a convex polyhedron with at most eight faces that are
either parallel to the axes or at a 45° angle). This abstraction has both
abstraction and concretization functions. An example is shown in
figure 3.6(c).
   In general, the choice of an efficient computer representation for
abstract domains that describe relational constraints is more difficult
than in the case of non-relational abstract domains. Therefore, we
refer the reader to other sources, e.g., [30, 82], and do not discuss this
issue further in this book.

3.3 Computable Abstract Semantics

In this section, we formalize the static analysis algorithms for the basic
language introduced in section 3.1. It follows similar principles as the
analysis for a graphical language presented in chapter 2. We fully
describe the analysis based on the non-relational abstract domain
defined in section 3.2.2. We also detail the analysis modifications that
would be required to use a relational domain (section 3.2.3) instead
and show that these are minimal, in the same way as in chapter 2. The
analysis takes the form of a mathematical function that inputs a
program and an abstract pre-condition and computes an abstract post-
condition that covers all the output states of the program when run
from any state that satisfies the pre-condition. This setup is similar to
that of section 2.3.
    Figure 3.7
    Sound static analysis

    We let A denote the state abstract domain, and we write γ for the
associated concretization function. We write AV for the underlying
value abstraction, and we write γV for its concretization. The design of
the analysis is aimed at ensuring soundness in the sense of definition
2.6, which we recall in figure 3.7 in the present setup. In figure 3.7, we
let      denote the static analysis function, which we also call abstract
semantics. It states that, when (1) m is a concrete memory that can be
described by the abstract pre-condition apre (i.e., m ∈ γ(apre)) and (2)
we can observe output memory state m′ after running the program
from m (i.e., m′ ∈ 〚p〛({m})), then m′ can be described by the result
of the analysis applied to p and apre (i.e.,              ).
    While we use the concretization function γ, we could also use the
best abstraction function α, if it exists. Then soundness statements are
similar but expressed in terms of abstraction rather than
concretization.
    As in chapter 2, we are going to construct the definition of        by
induction over the syntax. First, this will result in a definition of the
analysis that is very close to the concrete semantics (likewise, it would
also be very similar to an implementation shown in chapter 7).
Moreover, this process allows for a straightforward step-by-step proof
that the soundness property of figure 3.7 holds. Indeed, when
considering any sort of command that includes some sub-commands
(e.g., sequences, conditions, and loops), we will simply assume that
the abstract semantics of the sub-commands has been defined and
build a definition of the abstract semantics of the command itself.
Therefore, both the definition of the analysis and its proof of
soundness proceed by induction over the syntax of programs; indeed,
to analyze (resp., prove the analysis of) a program, we will simply rely
on the analysis of (resp., on the proof of the analysis of) its
components.
   We start with a few easy cases before considering more complex
commands.
Bottom Element  For any command C, 〚C〛 P(∅) = ∅ since the set of
states reachable when running a program from an empty set of states
is empty. Therefore,

Skip CommandsThe concrete semantics of the skip command returns
its input unmodified; therefore, the following definition ensures
soundness:

Sequences of Commands   The soundness property of figure 3.7 is stable
under composition, and 〚p0;p1 〛 P(M) = 〚p1 〛 P( 〚p0 〛 P(M)); thus,
the following definition ensures that we can prove soundness by
induction over the syntax:

We can informally justify the soundness of this definition: to compute a
sound post-condition for C0; C1, starting from a pre-condition M#, we
can simply compute a sound post-condition for C0 from this pre-
condition M# and then use this post-condition as a pre-condition for C1
and, finally, compute a sound post-condition for C1.
    This principle generalizes to any composition of functions as
follows.
Theorem 3.1 (Approximation of compositions) Let F0,F1 : ℘(M) → ℘(M) be two monotone
functions, and let           be two functions that over-approximate them, that is such
that                 and      . Then F0 ∘ F1 can be over-approximated by      .

Indeed, if M# ∈ A, then                                     (by the soundness
assumption on F1), so since F0 is monotone,                                 ,
and by the soundness hypothesis on                                   .
Theorem 3.1 is of fundamental interest since the concrete semantics
heavily relies on the composition of functions, and this theorem means
that we can decompose the over-approximation of a composition of
operations into the composition of over-approximations of each
operation.
   We remark that the analysis functions for both skip commands and
sequences of commands proceed in the same way as in chapter 2.
Moreover, the definition of the analysis for these commands does not
depend at all on the abstract domain.

3.3.1 Abstract Interpretation of Assignment
In the graphical language of chapter 2, state updates boil down to
translation and rotation statements. We observed that the analysis of
these statements boils down to the application of a similar
transformation in the abstract level.
   In the language considered in this chapter, updates to memory
states are performed by assignment commands. However, the
principles of chapter 2 still apply here: the analysis should update the
abstract memory states so as to mimic any update that may occur in
the concrete level.
   To develop this idea, we will first present an algorithm for the
abstract interpretation of expressions that characterizes the values that
they may evaluate to, and then, we will show how abstract updates
can be performed.
     Figure 3.8
     Abstract semantics of expressions

Abstract Interpretation of Expressions  The algorithm for the abstract
interpretation of an expression should input an abstract pre-condition
and return an abstraction of the values the expression may take. We
denote the abstract interpretation of the expression E by 〚E〛#.
    Since the semantics of scalar expressions is defined by induction
over the syntax (figure 3.2), their abstract interpretation also proceeds
by induction over the syntax. First, when the expression is a constant
n, its abstract semantics should return any abstract element that over-
approximates {n}. If the value abstraction has a best abstraction αV,
then αV ({n}) obviously provides such an over-approximation.
Otherwise, we simply need to use a function ϕV : V → AV that returns
an abstraction (that may not be the most precise one): this function
should simply be such that n ∈ γV (ϕV (n)) for any value n. Second,
when the expression consists of a variable, the analysis should simply
return the value abstraction associated to this variable in the non-
relational abstract pre-condition. Last, to over-approximate the result of
a binary operation E0 ⊙ E1 assuming over-approximations of the
results of E0 and E1, the analysis simply needs to apply a conservative
approximation of the operator f⊙ in the non-relational lattice. Such an
approximation should consist of an operator                       , such
that
   for all                               , and
Intuitively, this operator should over-approximate the effect of the
operation on concrete values. For instance, if we consider addition and
assume that AV is the domain of intervals, then                       should compute an
over-approximation for the addition of intervals:

Other arithmetic operations have similar counterparts, although
sometimes more complicated (e.g., multiplication requires a number of
case splits to handle positive and negative inputs).
   The full definition of the abstract semantics of scalar expressions is
shown in figure 3.8.
Example 3.10 (Abstract semantics of expressions) We assume that we use the interval
abstract domain, that we consider x+2∗y−6, and that M# is defined by M#(x) = [10,20] and M#
(y) = [8,9]. For short, we denote operations over intervals just like the conventional arithmetic
operations. Then,

We can prove by induction over the structure of expressions that this
semantics is sound (the proof is provided in appendix B.2.1) as
follows.
Theorem 3.2 (Soundness of the abstract interpretation of expressions) For all
expressions E, for all non-relational abstract elements M#, and for all memory states m such
that m ∈ γ(M#),
                                 〚E〛(m) ∈ γV (〚E〛# (M#))

Analysis of Assignments  We now define the analysis function for an
assignment command x := E. We recall that 〚x := E〛 P(M) = {m[x ↦
〚E〛(m)] | m ∈ M}. Intuitively, an assignment is the composition of the
evaluation of the expression into a value n and of the update of the
variable x with this value n. By theorem 3.1, this composition can be
over-approximated piece by piece. We showed in the previous
paragraph how to compute an over-approximation of the right-hand
side of the assignment. The abstract counterpart of a write into a
concrete memory is a write in the abstract store. Therefore, the
following definition provides a sound over-approximation for the
concrete semantics of assignments:

We can also define a sound analysis function for the input statement;
indeed, the only change is that a value chosen in a non-deterministic
way is written into the variable, so in the abstract level, we should
replace its value with ⊤V :

Example 3.11 (Analysis of an assignment command) We consider the assignment x := x +
2 ∗ y − 6 and the abstract pre-condition M# defined in example 3.10. Then the abstract post-
condition is
                    〚x := x + 2 ∗ y − 6〛# (M)# = {x ↦ [20,32], y ↦ [8,9]}

Analysis of Assignments Using a Relational Abstract Domain   The analysis
presented in the previous paragraphs is intrinsically non-relational
since it first evaluates the right-hand side expression in the value
abstract domain (figure 3.8) and then updates the abstraction of the
left-hand side variable. Such separate steps prevent the inference of
relations. As an example, let us consider assignment x := y + 1 with
the abstract domain of convex polyhedra: then we expect the analysis
to infer the post-condition x ≤ y + 1 ∧ x ≥ y + 1, which involves both the
left-hand side variable x and the right-hand side expression y + 1.
    For this reason, relational abstract domains implement specific
algorithms for the analysis of assignments. A common way of
analyzing x := E in a relational domain proceeds as follows.
  1. Add a temporary dimension x′ that is meant to describe the value
      of the expression.
  2. Represent as precisely as possible the constraint x′ = E.
  3. Project out dimension x, and rename x′ to x.
The following example shows this technique.
Example 3.12 (Relational analysis of an assignment) We use the abstract domain of
convex polyhedra, and we assume the abstract pre-condition 2 ≤ x ≤ 3 ∧ 1 − x ≤ y. We
consider the assignment x := y + x + 2. After introducing temporary x′, we can represent the
assignment effect exactly:
                            2 ≤ x ≤ 3 ∧ 1 − x ≤ y ∧ x′ = y + x + 2
The last term allows rewriting all occurrences of x into x′ − y − 2, so that we get the
conjunction of constraints 2 ≤ x′ − y − 2 ≤ 3 ∧ 3 − x′ + y ≤ y. After projection and renaming, we
finally get 4 ≤ x − y ≤ 5 ∧ 3 ≤ x.

3.3.2 Abstract Interpretation of Conditional Branching
To design a static analysis algorithm for conditional commands, we
follow the same principle as in the previous paragraphs, and we over-
approximate the definition of the concrete semantics step-by-step. The
semantics of a command if(B) {C0}else{C1} is defined by

This formula guides the design of the analysis. To construct the
analysis function of this statement, we will first design an operation to
over-approximate ℱB for any Boolean expression B (recall that the
negation ¬B is simply a Boolean expression computed from B by
syntactic transformation, so that the definition of ℱB includes that of
ℱ¬B); then we will use the abstract semantics of both branches (as
part of the definition of the analysis by induction over the syntax), and
finally, we will apply an over-approximation of the union of concrete
sets. The non-deterministic choice construction of chapter 2 does not
have a condition and is thus simpler (the analysis of non-deterministic
choice in section 2.3.3 does not require any abstract filtering
operation).
Analysis of Conditions  To analyze conditions, we first construct an
abstraction of the concrete filtering function, which we denote by . In
the concrete level, ℱB (M) returns the memory states in M such that
the condition B evaluates to true. In the abstract level,   should thus
input an abstract state and refine it so as to take into account that B
should evaluate to true. Therefore, this operator should satisfy the
following soundness condition:
For all conditions B, and for all abstract states
Boolean expressions are of the form     , where x is a variable, is a
comparison operator, and n is a scalar value. Therefore, a sound and
precise    simply adds novel constraints to the abstract state, as
shown in the following cases (we show only a few representative
cases).
    With the signs abstract domain {⊥, ⊤, [= 0], [≥ 0], [≤ 0]}:

     The first case occurs when M# contains information that entails
     the condition will always evaluate to false, so that the set of
     memories for which the condition evaluates to true is empty and
     is described by the function that maps all variables to ⊥. The
     second case occurs when the condition may evaluate to true, and
     the information about x gets refined so as to take this into
     account. Similar rules handle conditions with other comparison
     operators and constants.
     With the intervals abstract domain, and if M#(x) = [a,b], then

     The first case occurs when M# contains information that entails
     the condition will always evaluate to false. The second case
     occurs when the abstract information can be refined by tightening
     the right bound, and the third case occurs when all stores
     represented by M# satisfy the condition x < n.
Example 3.13 (Analysis of a condition) We consider the code fragment below that
computes the absolute value of x − 7 into variable y:

We assume the abstract pre-condition M# defined by x ↦ ⊤, y ↦ ⊤. Then, by the rules shown
above (assuming the scalar values are of integer type)
Although we do not provide the full definition of the condition analysis
operator, we note that it should be proved sound (the proof is given in
appendix B.2.2) as follows.
Theorem 3.3 (Soundness of the abstract interpretation of conditions) For all expressions
B, for all non-relational abstract elements M#, and for all memory states m such that m ∈
γ(M#),

In particular, the cases that we have shown above for the condition
tests analysis in the signs and intervals abstract domain trivially meet
the soundness condition of theorem 3.3.
                     The concrete semantics computes the union of the
Analysis of Flow Joins
results of both branches. Thus, the analysis should over-approximate
unions of sets of concrete states. Therefore, the abstract join operator
⊔# should satisfy the following soundness property:

   In section 2.3.3, this was achieved by computing a weaker set of
constraints (that define the convex hull in the geometrical point of
view). Likewise, to define an abstract union operator in the non-
relational abstract domain, we can simply
     define a join operator        in the value abstract domain that
     satisfies a similar soundness condition (we remark that, both for
     signs and for intervals, the least upper bound in the abstract
     domain, in the sense of figure 3.5, provides a sound choice for
     ); and
     apply operator     in a pointwise manner:

                  For all variables x,
The definition of    depends on the abstract domain, for instance, for
the interval domain:
The abstract union operator defined for the non-relational domain is
sound in the following sense (the proof is given in appendix B.2.3).
Theorem 3.4 (Soundness of abstract join) Let          and      be two abstract states. Then,

We now show how this operator works on an example.
Example 3.14 (Analysis of flow joins) Let us consider the following abstract states:

Then:

                                We can now put together the definitions
Analysis of a Conditional Command
of all the elements defined in the previous paragraphs and obtain a
definition for the abstract semantics of conditional commands:

Intuitively, this analysis definition is very similar to that of section 2.3.3,
except for the       calls, which is not surprising since the language of
chapter 2 featured only non-deterministic choice (no condition
formula).
Example 3.15 (Analysis of a conditional command) We demonstrate the analysis of the
program of example 3.13, starting from the abstract pre-condition M# = {x ↦ ⊤, y ↦ ⊤}. Then
the analysis proceeds as follows:
    1. First, the analysis of the true branch applies the filtering function and then computes a
       post-condition for the assignment command y := x − 7; it produces
                                       {x ↦ [8, +∞),y ↦ [1, +∞)}
   2. In the same way, the analysis of the false branch produces the abstract state
                                       {x ↦ (− ∞,7],y ↦ [0, +∞)}
   3. Last, the abstract join of these two abstract states yields
                                          {x ↦ ⊤,y ↦ [0,+∞)}

                                                            So far, we
Analysis of Conditional Commands with a Relational Abstract Domain
have considered the analysis of conditional commands under the
assumption that the abstract domain is non-relational. Switching to a
relational abstract domain would let us still use the same method but
with different algorithms for the analysis of tests and for the
computation of abstract join.
   As for non-relational domains, the analysis of a condition test with a
relational domain boils down to the addition of one or several
constraints to the abstract state. It is in general more precise since
condition tests that involve several variables are more likely to be
represented exactly; as an example, condition x ≤ y can be analyzed
exactly with the abstract domain of convex polyhedra (by adding it to
the abstract state), whereas analyzing this test with a non-relational
abstract domain generally induces a loss of precision.

3.3.3 Abstract Interpretation of Loops
The last program construction left to analyze is the loop command. As
in the case of the other commands, we rely on the concrete semantics
in order to design the abstract semantics. In section 2.3.4, we
proposed a loop static analysis algorithm that iterates the analysis of
the loop body until stabilization. The concrete semantics shown in
section 3.1.2 lends itself to the design of such an abstract semantics;
therefore, we indeed expect the analysis of a loop command to
proceed by iteration in the general case too. Another takeaway of
section 2.3.4 is that the termination of the analysis requires special
care, either using abstract domains that naturally guarantee
termination or using a widening operator.
     Figure 3.9
     Two programs containing a simple loop

Concrete Semantics of Loops  To better design an analysis algorithm for
loops, we first study their concrete semantics a bit more. In section
3.1.2, we set up the following semantics of loops:

We are defining the abstract semantics by induction over the syntax;
therefore, we can assume that we can compute an over-approximation
of 〚 C 〛 P. In previous paragraphs we have defined over-
approximations for ℱB and ℱ¬B. For example, we have also observed
when defining the analysis of sequences of commands that an over-
approximation of function compositions can be obtained by composing
over-approximations of each command.
   Therefore, the problem we need to solve is to compute an over-
approximation for an infinite union ∪i≥0Fi(M) under the assumption that
the function F# over-approximates the function F (in the sense that F ∘
γ(M#) ⊆ γ ∘ F#(M#) for any abstract element M#), where F = 〚C〛 P ∘
ℱB.
Example 3.16 (Analysis of programs with loops) In the following paragraphs, we use the
example programs shown in figure 3.9 so as to demonstrate the computation of loop
invariants. The program of figure 3.9(a) consists of a simple loop that increments
variable x forever (recall we are assuming that all computations are done with mathematical
numbers and not with machine integers, so that we are not dealing with wrap-around
arithmetics). The program of figure 3.9(b) also consists of a loop that increments variable x,
but one that also resets x to 10, whenever it reaches a certain value.

                                          First, let us consider the
Sequences of Concrete and Abstract Iterates
executions that spend at most n iterations in the loop, for a fixed
integer value n. Then the states they generate at the loop head are
defined as

We can prove that this set of states can be computed by induction
over n. Indeed, let us consider the first elements of the sequence
(Mk)k∈ℕ:
    M0 = M;
    M1 = M ∪ F(M) = M ∪ F(M0);
    M2 = M ∪ F(M) ∪ F(F(M)) = M ∪ F(M ∪ F(M)) since F commutes
    with set union, so M2 = M ∪ F(M1);
    for any n greater than 2, we can show in the same manner than
    Mn+1 = M ∪ F(Mn).
This implies that the sequence (Mk)k∈ℕ can equivalently be defined
recursively as follows:

This observation is of great interest for the purpose of designing an
algorithm to analyze loops since it is very easy to compute an over-
approximation of Mn using the techniques shown in the previous
sections. Indeed, let us assume an element M# of the abstract domain
such that M ⊆ γ(M#), and we define the sequence of abstract iterates
       as follows:

Then we can prove by induction that, for all integers n,
Example 3.17 (Abstract iterates) We assume that the analysis uses the abstract domain of
intervals, and we show the abstract iterates for the two example programs shown in figure 3.9.
In both cases, the analysis of the command x := 0 produces the abstract state {x ↦ [0,0]}.
      In the case of the program of figure 3.9(a), we observe the following

      In the case of the program of figure 3.9(b), we obtain the following

                     The recursive formula (3.1) shows how to over-
Convergence of Iterates
approximate any fixed number of iterates but does not settle the case
of unbounded iteration and the termination problem, so we consider
these issues now. We observe that the sequence                      is
increasing, that is, that                 , since                     , and
         #
since ⊔ is a sound over-approximation of concrete unions (theorem
3.4). Intuitively, the elements of this sequence over-approximate larger
and larger sets of concrete states, which is expected since the kth
term describes all states observed in at most k iterations of the loop.
   Let us assume that the abstract iteration stabilizes at some rank n,
which means that             . A first consequence is that, for all ranks k
≥ n, we also have           . This also entails that          . Since this
holds for all ranks k ≥ n, we can also derive that
Another interesting observation is that

Thus

As a consequence, if the sequence of abstract iterates converges
(which can be observed simply by checking that two consecutive
iterates are equal), then its final value over-approximates all the
concrete behaviors of the program while(B){C}. This effectively
provides an algorithm for analyzing loops, under the assumption that
the sequence converges. However, the following example shows that
this assumption is problematic.
Example 3.18 (Convergence of abstract iterates) We consider the programs studied in
example 3.17:

     Figure 3.10
     Loop analysis algorithms

     In the case of the program of figure 3.9(a), since the ranges computed for x are always
     increasing, the sequence of abstract iterates does not converge.
     In the case of the program of figure 3.9(b), the ranges computed for x do stabilize but
     only after 51 iterations.
As we can see, neither of these two analyses is really satisfactory, because of either lack of
termination or a high number of iterates required to converge.

Therefore, the following paragraphs formalize conditions that ensure
that the sequence of abstract iterates converges or, equivalently, that
          for some bounded rank n.
                                  In this paragraph, we assume that ⊑ is
Convergence in Finite Height Lattices
such that         if and only if              for all abstract states  .
(this condition holds for all the value abstract domains introduced in
section 3.2). In particular, this means that the sequence of abstract
iterates is increasing, that is, for all k,  . Thus, a first case
where convergence is ensured is when the structure of the abstract
domain guarantees that the condition                           (which means
and           ) cannot hold infinitely many times. In particular, this new
condition is realized when the abstract domain has finite height, that is,
when the length of all the chains of the form                            is
bounded by some fixed value h, called the height of the abstract
domain. Indeed, let us assume that the abstract domain has finite
height h; then the sequence                       is increasing for ⊑ but
cannot be strictly increasing, so there exists a rank lower than h at
which it becomes stable, and this iterate provides an over-
approximation for the loop invariant. This bound is indeed the height of
the Hasse diagram of the abstract domain, as in figure 3.5: we observe
that the domain of signs is of height 3 and that the domain of intervals
has infinite height.
   We can then compute an abstract state          that over-approximates
Mloop within a finite number of iterations, using the algorithm shown in
figure 3.10(a). We observe that this iterative algorithm is quite similar
to the method used in section 2.3.4, even though we now consider a
more realistic language. This iteration technique is actually general
and can be utilized whenever analyzing programs that contain iterative
constructions that resemble loops (e.g., it also adapts to recursive
procedures).
   Another observation is that the exit condition here boils down to a
mere equality comparison. It is often possible to use ⊑ instead and to
let the analysis of the loop terminate when R is “included” in T, in the
abstract level, that is, when the abstract iteration does not discover
any new behavior.
Example 3.19 (Convergence of abstract iterates in the signs abstract domain) We
demonstrate the analysis using the signs abstract domain in the cases of the two programs of
example 3.16:
    In the case of the program of figure 3.9(a), we obtain the following iteration sequence:

     We observe that the analysis terminates after only two iterations.
     In the case of the program of figure 3.9(b), we obtain the same iteration sequence, and
     the analysis of the loop also converges after only two iterations.

                 As we noted in the previous paragraph, the abstract
Widening Operators
domain of intervals has infinite chains. In particular, the chain below
would be computed by the analysis of the program of figure 3.9(a), if
we were using the above algorithm:
                  [0, 0] ⊏ [0, 1] ⊏ ⋯ ⊏ [0, n] ⊏ [0, n + 1] ⊏ ⋯
In example 3.17, the analysis of the program of figure 3.9(b) was found
to terminate, although only after a very long sequence of abstract
iterates. In both examples, the issue is that the abstract domain does
not enforce a quick convergence of the iteration sequence.
    Therefore, we now propose a second technique to bound the length
of abstract iteration, using a notion of widening [26], as we did in
section 2.3.4. Essentially, a widening operator is a binary operator that
over-approximates concrete unions and also enforces termination of
all sequences of iterates:
Definition 3.11 (Widening operator) A widening operator over an abstract domain A is a
binary operator ∇, such that,
   1. for all abstract elements a0,a1, we have

                                    γ(a0) ∪ γ(a1) ⊆ γ(a0 ∇ a1)

   2. for all sequences (an)n∈ℕ of abstract elements, the sequence         defined below is
     ultimately stationary:
Assuming such an operator ∇ for the non-relational domain, we can
turn the sequence of abstract iterates into a terminating sequence, as
follows.
Theorem 3.5 (Abstract iterates with widening) We assume that ∇ is a widening operator
over the non-relational abstract A domain and that F# is a function from A to itself. Then the
algorithm shown in figure 3.10(b) terminates, and returns an abstract element  .
    Moreover, if we assume that F : M → M is continuous and is such that F ∘ γ ⊆ γ ∘ F# for
the pointwise inclusion (which means that, for all abstract element                              ,
then

We observe that this result derives from the continuity property
mentioned in remark 3.1.
   This theorem guarantees not only the termination of the loop
analysis but also its soundness; indeed, it shows that           over-
approximates the concrete semantics of the loop.
   We now discuss the construction of a widening operator for the
abstract domain of intervals. In section 2.3.4, we noted that such an
operator could, in some cases, be built by dropping constraints that
are not stable. This can be achieved very easily with intervals by
simply removing unstable bounds. For instance, the widening of two
intervals with the same left bound boils down to

The case of unequal left bounds is symmetric.
Example 3.20 (Widening operator for the abstract domain of intervals) We now study the
analysis of the examples of example 3.16. In both cases, we obtain the following iteration
sequence:

The convergence is now very fast. However, the result is far from precise, in the case of the
example of figure 3.9(b), since the analysis fails to stabilize any finite upper bound on x. While
this appears like a serious loss of precision, several common techniques allow actually
obtaining much more precise bounds, and we study some of them in section 5.2.
                We can now produce an analysis function for loops
Analysis of Loops
that inputs an abstract pre-condition and returns an abstract post-
condition:

This formula follows directly from the definition of the concrete
semantics of loops and from the loop condition over-approximation
method described in theorem 3.5.
                                                 The analysis of a loop
Analysis of Loops with a Relational Abstract Domain
statement with a relational domain such as convex polyhedra
proceeds the same way as with a non-relational domain and requires
only an abstract join or widening operator specific to the abstraction
being used. We note that linear equalities (definition 3.8) define a finite
height lattice. Thus, they necessitate no widening. Convex polyhedra
(definition 3.9) and octagons (definition 3.10) are of infinite height and
require a widening operator.
Another View on the Analysis of LoopsThis subsection offers an alternative
definition of the concrete semantics of loops and sheds a different light
on their analysis. As such, the material in this subsection may be
skipped in a first reading. On the other hand, it provides useful
information for readers interested in the design and implementation of
static analysis tools.
   First, let us recall the concrete semantics of a loop statement:

where Mloop represent the set of all the memory states that can be
observed “at loop head”:

This definition actually corresponds to the following characterization of
Mloop:
     First, it is such that M ∪ 〚C〛P ∘ ℱB (Mloop) =Mloop, which means
     it is a fixpoint for the function G : X ↦ M ∪ 〚C〛P ∘ ℱB(X).
     Second, it is the smallest set of memory states that satisfies this
     equality, which means it the least fixpoint for that function that
     contains M.
These two results follow from the algebraic properties of the function G
(essentially, it commutes with arbitrary unions over non-empty families
of sets of memory states) and from the Kleene fixpoint theorem
(theorem A.1, in appendix A). We let lfp G denote the least fixpoint of
G.
   The consequences of this remark are twofold.
   First, the concrete semantics of a loop can be expressed using the
least fixpoint of a function that calculates the effect of either starting
from a memory state in M or running one iteration of the loop:

   Second, the abstract semantics of a loop relies on the over-
approximation of a concrete least fixpoint and can benefit from many
techniques to compute over-approximations of least fixpoints. We have
already seen two such techniques:
     When the abstract lattice has finite height, we have proposed an
     iteration technique that relies on abstract union,
     In the case where the abstract lattice may have infinite height, we
     have proposed another technique that relies on a widening
     operator in order to enforce convergence.
    Figure 3.11
    Abstract semantics, with a non-relational abstract domain

Compared to the state of the art in static analysis, these techniques
are fairly basic, though, and we present several improvements in
section 5.2.

3.3.4 Putting Everything Together
We can now summarize the analysis definition in figure 3.11, and
discuss the properties of this analysis. This definition assumes several
elements that we have defined in the course of this chapter:
     The function ϕV for the abstraction of constants and the abstract
    counterpart      of the operator ⊙ are specific to the underlying
    value abstraction.
    The abstract condition      is also specific to the value abstraction.
    The abstract union operation ⊔# is defined based on the value
    abstract union .
    The general abstract iteration function abs_iter for the analysis of
    loops relies on the widening operator ∇.
We have designed this abstract semantics step-by-step, in a way that
ensures that it is sound, that is, that it never leaves out any concrete
behavior of the program being analyzed, as follows.
Theorem 3.6 (Soundness) For all commands C and all abstract states M#, the computation
of         terminates, and

The proof of this theorem proceeds by induction over the syntax of
commands: for each kind of command, we ensured that the definition
of its abstract semantics would lead to a sound result, assuming that
its components had a sound abstract semantics. We provide the full
proof of correctness of the analysis in appendix B.2.5.
                                              The analysis of figure
Computing an Over-Approximation of All Reachable States
3.11 can easily be extended with a global accumulator per program
location so as to compute an over-approximation of all reachable
states (and not just output states).
                                                                This
Using the Results of the Analysis to Prove the Properties of Interest
soundness theorem establishes that the analysis computes an over-
approximation of the states that the program may produce. This over-
approximation may be used to check reachability properties. For
instance, if one intends to verify that all the states that may be
observed when running a program C from a state in γ(M#) belong to a
set M, one may simply run the analyzer and attempt to verify that its
output            is included in M. We observe that this method is
sound (when it succeeds, it is guaranteed that 〚C〛P(γ(M#)) ⊆ M) but
incomplete: when the inclusion                         does not hold, no
information can be derived; in fact, either there may exist an execution
that violates the property of interest or the analysis may just be
imprecise. In general, when this inclusion does not hold, static analysis
tools emit reports that they failed to prove the property of interest,
which are generally called alarms, and users need to further inspect
the analysis results to decide whether the alarm is true (the property is
indeed violated) or false (the program actually satisfies it). This
process is called triage and is studied in detail in section 6.3.
   The analysis function         is not monotone in general. In some
cases, it is monotone, but in other cases it is not. In fact our framework
does not assume anything about the monotonicity or non-monotonicity
of the analysis function. Therefore, replacing the abstract pre-condition
M# with a more precise one does not entail that                     also
becomes more precise. In fact, the consequence of the lack of
monotonicity of all the abstract operations also means that replacing
one abstract operation with a more precise one would not necessarily
lead to an analysis that is more precise overall.
                                               We remark that the use of
Adapting the Analysis to Use a Different Abstraction
a relational domain actually changes little the analysis of statements
as defined in figure 3.11. The analysis of assignments in figure 3.11 is
intrinsically non-relational since it evaluates expressions in the value
domain. Switching to a relational abstract domain would require using
a relational algorithm to compute post-conditions for assignments and
for input commands. However, the overall structure of the analysis
would not need to be modified. In fact, many static analysis tools are
parametric in the choice of the abstract domain, which means that the
user may decide which abstract domain should be used, for instance,
using some launch option. More generally, the practical considerations
related to the setting of the analysis are discussed in section 6.2.
    We also observe that the whole analysis design could also have
been guided by a best abstraction function α instead of γ. In that case,
the soundness theorem would resemble

3.4 The Design of an Abstract Interpreter

To conclude this section, we summarize the process we have followed
in this chapter, so as to construct our abstract semantics. At this point,
we can also comment further on the discussion related to the structure
of a static analyzer. We have already discussed it in section 2.5, in the
context of an informal introduction to the analysis of a graphical
language (chapter 2).
     First, we fix a concrete semantics that describes the behaviors of
     programs in a faithful and formal manner. This step is crucial
     because it later serves as the foundation of the analysis, since it
     specifies the properties the analysis should compute and is the
     reference compared to which soundness is to be proved.
     Second, we fix an abstraction that defines the set of logical
     predicates that the analysis may use, and their computer
     representation. This also guides the definition of the analysis
     algorithms. In this section we use a non-relational abstraction that
     can be parameterized by the choice of the value abstraction
     (signs, intervals, or other). In general, the choice of the abstraction
     should be guided by the property of interest and by all the logical
     facts that need to be tracked in order to establish the property of
     interest.
     Last, we define the abstract semantics. This step is guided by the
     semantics and the abstraction to a large extent, although there
     are often several choices left for the definition of abstract
     operators. As an example, ϕV, and ⊔# are simply required to be
     sound. In certain cases, we may prefer intentionally choosing
     imprecise operators, for the sake of efficiency, faster
     convergence, or other practical reasons.
These three steps describe a standard and general process to
construct a static analysis:
  1. fix the reference concrete semantics,
  2. select the abstraction, and
  3. derive analysis algorithms.
This methodology applies not only to imperative languages, such as
the one considered in this chapter, but also to other programming
paradigms, such as logic programming languages [59], mobile
systems [41], or hardware designs [60, 105].
   This division of the analysis design into independent steps is of
great interest not only for the construction of a static analysis tool but
also when a static analysis needs to be improved. When an analysis is
not precise enough, one should identify which properties it fails to
compute and improve either the concrete semantics (step 1), the
abstraction (step 2), or the analysis algorithms (step 3), depending on
where the lack of precision stems from. Very often the imprecisions
stem from too coarse an abstraction that fails to express properties of
interest, and in that case, step 2 should be revisited. Another common
source of imprecision is when the analysis algorithms (e.g., widening)
return overly approximate results for the sake of cost, and then step 3
should be improved. It may also happen that the concrete semantics is
too coarse to express the properties of interest, and then step 1 should
be reconsidered. More generally, this structured design of abstract
interpreters makes the search for the origin of lack of completeness
more systematic [46].

    Figure 3.12
    An abstract interpretation framework, based on a non-relational abstract domain

   Figure 3.12 summarizes the framework used in this chapter and the
objects that need to be defined at each of these three steps. Moreover,
the informal presentation of chapter 2 also follows these steps, albeit
for a rather contrived programming language. Therefore, they define a
general process to design abstract semantics, so as to build static
analyses.
