4 A General Static Analysis Framework Based on a
Transitional Semantics

Goal of This Chapter In this chapter, we provide a formal introduction to
static analysis by abstract interpretation in the transitional style. This
framework is general and can be instantiated for different languages
and different abstractions. We show a step-by-step recipe for
constructing a sound static analysis in this framework. Following the
recipe will result in a sound static analysis. This soundness
guarantee is summarized in theorems whose proofs are in appendix
B. We assume that the readers are already familiar with key
concepts of static analysis in abstract interpretation. The intuition
conveyed in chapter 2 supports most of the contents of this
framework. Understanding the concept of abstraction and being
familiar with its formal notions of section 3.2.1 are necessary.
Recommended Reading:  [S], [D], [U] We recommend this chapter to all
readers since it defines the core concepts of static analysis and is
fundamental to the understanding of most of the following chapters
in the book. Readers less interested in the foundations may skip
some parts of the analysis design, whereas readers who would like
to fully understand how static analyses achieve sound results may
want to read the proofs supplied in appendix B. Moreover, readers
interested in implementation may also read this chapter together with
chapter 7.
Chapter Outline: Recipe for the Construction of an Abstract Interpreter in a
Transitional-Style Semantics  We present a general framework of
designing a sound static analysis by abstract interpretation in
transitional style. The presentation of this framework is not bound to
a particular programming language. We present the framework
solely in the semantic level, without referring to the syntax of a
specific target programming language. A transition-style semantics
allows this parameterization.
  1. In section 4.1, we define semantics as state transitions and
     show such semantics for an example program snippet. We then
     present a recipe for defining the concrete state-transition
     semantics.
  2. In section 4.2, we present a recipe for defining an abstract state-
     transition semantics that is a sound over-approximation of a
     concrete semantics as defined in section 4.1.
  3. In section 4.3, we present analysis algorithms that compute
     abstract state-transition semantics as defined in section 4.2.
  4. In section 4.4, we fix a simple imperative language and illustrate
     a use of the recipes of sections 4.1 and 4.2 in defining a correct
     analysis.

4.1 Semantics as State Transitions

We use a transitional-style approach to define semantics. In this
style we define concrete and abstract semantics in the small-step
operational semantics.
   This style of semantics is handy for languages whose
compositional semantics (also known as denotational semantics) is
not obvious. For example, if the target programming language has
dynamic jumps (e.g., function calls, local gotos, jump labels as
values, non-local gotos, function pointers, functions as values,
dynamic method dispatches, or exception raises), then defining its
compositional semantics becomes a burden. With gotos, programs
may loop with an arbitrary portion of the program, not tamed to a
particular construct such as the while-loop. Defining the
compositional semantics for such language feature needs an
advanced knowledge in programming language semantics.
Transitional semantics (one style of operational semantics), on the
other hand, is free from the need to be compositional and is
relatively easy to define, once we understand how programs
operate.
   The transitional style is also a good fit for the proof of the
reachability property. For this property, the static analysis goal is to
over-approximate the set of reachable states of the input program.
This set is obvious in the transitional style because the semantics
explicitly exposes all the intermediate states of program executions.

4.1.1 Concrete Semantics
We start from the concrete semantics. The concrete semantics of a
programming language defines the run-time behaviors of its
programs. Informally, the concrete semantics of a language is what
programmers have in mind about the run-time behaviors of their
programs when they program.
   The transitional-style semantics of a program is defined as the set
of all possible sequences of state transitions from the initial states.
We write a concrete state transition as
                                  s ↪ s′
A sequence
                            s0 ↪ s1 ↪ s2 ↪ ⋯
of state transitions is the chain that links the transitions
                           s0 ↪ s1, s1 ↪ s2, ⋯.
A state s ∈ S of the program is a pair (l,m) of a program label l and
the machine state m at that program label during execution. The
program label denotes the part of the program that is to be executed
next. The machine state is usually the memory state that contains
the effect of the program’s hitherto execution and a data for the
program’s continuation. For the example language of chapter 2, a
machine state is a point in the two-dimensional space because
program’s execution step transforms a point to another point. For
conventional imperative languages with local blocks and function
calls, the machine state would consist of a memory (a table from
locations to storable values), an environment (a table from program
variables to locations), and a continuation (a stack of return contexts
where a return context is a program label and an environment to
resume at the return of a function).
   One step of the state transition relation,
                                     (l,m) ↪ (l′,m′),
is defined by the language construct of the program part pointed to
by l. The next memory state m′ is the result of executing the program
part at l by one step.
   For simple languages, the next label l′ of the program (called
control flow) is determined by the program syntax. In case the
control flow is not determined solely by the syntax but is determined
by the program execution (e.g., goto target as values, function
pointers, functions as values, or dynamic method dispatches), the
next program label l′ is an evaluation result from the current program
label l and the current machine state m.
Example 4.1 (Concrete transition sequence) Consider the following program:

The labeled representations of this program in text and graph are, respectively,

Let the initial state be the empty memory Ø. Transition sequences for some integer inputs
are as follows:
   A transition sequence for a program can be infinitely long if the
program has non-terminating executions. The number of transition
sequences can be infinite too if the initial states can be infinitely
many.
Set of Reachable States We restrict our analysis interest to computing the
set of reachable states, the set of all states that can occur in the
transition sequences of the input program.
Example 4.2 (Reachable states) For the program in example 4.1, let us assume that the
possible inputs are only 0, 99, and 100. Then the set of all reachable states is the set of
states occurring in the three transition sequences:

   Given a program, the set of all its reachable states is intuitive in
the operational sense. Starting from the set of all initial states of the
program, we keep adding next states to the set. The next states are
those produced by the application of the single-step transition ↪ to
each state in the current set. We keep adding next states until no
more addition is possible. The final set is the set of all reachable
states.
   We will define this set of reachable states in mathematical terms.
This mathematical formalization is a necessary step in our
framework because it will later be a reference in proving the
soundness of a designed static analysis. We will see that the
mathematical concept called the least fixpoint of a monotonic
function exactly defines the reachable set.
   Given a program, let I be the set of its initial states, and let Step
be the powerset-lifted version of ↪:
Note that the set of states that can occur right after i transitions from
the set I of initial states is
                                        Stepi(I),
where

Example 4.3 (Stepi operation) For the program in example 4.1, assuming the set I = {(0,
Ø)} of initial states, and assuming that the possible inputs are 0, 99, and 100, we have the
following:

   Thus, the accumulated set of all reachable states of a program is
the collection of Stepi(I) for all i ≥ 0:

We can define this set inductively as follows. Let Ci be the
accumulated set I ∪ Step1(I) ∪ ⋯ ∪ Stepi(I) of reachable states in 0-
to-i transition steps. Then Ci can be inductively defined as

The base C0 is the initial set I. As of the inductive case, note that
Step(Ci) generates states occurring after one more step from Ci, that
is, in 1-to-(i+1) steps of transitions. Hence the set Ci+1 of states in 0-
to-(i + 1) steps of transitions is I ∪ Step(Ci).
    The accumulated set (4.1) of all reachable states is the limit of the
sequence (Ci)i∈ℕ, a set C such that accumulating further by I ∪
Step(C) remains the same as C. That is, the limit is the least solution
of the following equation:
                                      X = I ∪ Step(X)
Such limit corresponds, in mathematics, to the one called least
fixpoint of the continuous monotonic function F:

written as
                                             lfpF.
The least fixpoint lfpF of F is constructive as follows.
Theorem 4.1 (Least fixpoint) The least fixpoint lfpF of F(X) = I ∪ Step(X) is

where F0(X) = X and Fn+1 (X) = F(Fn(X)).

The above theorem, which is a version of the Kleene fixpoint
theorem (theorem A.1), holds because the function F :℘(S) → ℘(S)
is continuous over the powerset ℘(S) with the set-inclusion order.
(The reader may refer to appendix A.5 for the definition of
continuous functions. Intuitively, any function that can be exactly
implemented as a computer program is continuous.)
Definition 4.1 (Concrete semantics, the set of reachable states) Given a program, let S
be the set of states, and let ↪ be the one-step transition relation from a state to a state. Let I
be the set of its initial states, and let Step be the powerset-lifted version of ↪: one-step
transition relation over states:

Let
                                       F(X) = I ∪ Step(X).
Then the concrete semantics of the program, the set of all reachable states from I, is
defined as the least fixpoint lfpF of F.
4.1.2 Recipe for Defining a Concrete Transitional Semantics
When building a static analysis for programs written in a
programming language L, the first step is to define its concrete
semantics. The concrete semantics is the basis for later steps
toward a static analysis.

 1. For the target programming language, define the set of states
    between which a single-step transition relation ↪ is to be
    defined. Let us name this set S.
 2. Define the s ↪ s′ relation between states s and s′ ∈ S, and let
    Step be its natural powerset-lifted version:

 3. Given a program of the language with its set I ⊆ S of initial
    states, let

    The concrete semantics, defined as the set of all the reachable
    states of the program, is the least fixpoint of the continuous
    function F:

    The concrete semantics is not what we implement as a static
analyzer. Implementing this concrete semantics is rather equivalent
to implementing an interpreter that actually runs the programs of the
target language.
    The next steps toward a static analysis consist of defining an
abstract version of the concrete semantics and checking its
soundness. These steps will reference the concrete semantics.
    The concrete semantics as a mathematical object (as the least
fixpoint) provides the foundation upon which static analysis design
and its soundness check are conveniently formalized and proven.
We will see that our intuitions as sketched in chapter 2 about sound
static analysis and its algorithm have correspondences in
mathematics.
   Before we continue, we define two terms.
Definition 4.2 (Semantic domain and semantic function) We assume the concrete
semantics of a program by the least fixpoint of a function F : ℘(S) → ℘(S). Then we call the
function F concrete semantic function, and we call the space ℘(S) over this semantic
function is defined concrete semantic domain or simply concrete domain, whose partial
order is the subset order.

4.2 Abstract Semantics as Abstract State Transitions

Given a concrete semantics, we now focus on the design of an
abstract version that is finitely computable.
   An abstract semantic function F ♯ will have the same structure as
the concrete semantic function F:

where I♯, ∪♯, and Step♯ are the abstract versions of, respectively, I, ∪
, and Step. The concrete semantics of the target language consists
of two parts: a semantic domain ℘(S) and a semantic function over
the domain F : ℘(S) → ℘(S). An abstract semantics also consists of
two parts, an abstract domain S ♯ and an abstract semantic function
F♯ : S♯ → S♯ over it. The whole purpose of this abstract version is to
derive a finitely computable yet sound semantics for any program of
the target language.
    The forthcoming framework will guide us toward the definition of
such an abstract domain S ♯ and the abstract semantic function F ♯
such that the abstract semantics of the input program is always
finitely computable and is an over-approximation of the concrete
semantics lfpF.

4.2.1 Abstraction of the Semantic Domain
A concrete semantic domain D is the powerset of concrete states
The set S of concrete states is defined as the Cartesian product (set
of pairs) of L (program labels) and M (machine states). The concrete
semantics of a program, the set of all the reachable states of the
program, is an element of the concrete domain D. Given a program,
the L set is defined to be its finite and fixed set of labels.
Program-Label-wise Reachability  In this chapter we consider a class of
abstractions that come from one particular analysis goal: program-
label-wise reachability. We are interested in the reachable set for
each program label. For each program label we want to know the set
of memories that can occur at that label during executions. Such
analysis is sometimes called flow sensitive, because program labels
are in this case assigned along the control flow of programs.
   In this case, we can view the abstraction in two steps (figure 4.1).
We first partition the set of states by the program labels of the states,

and then we abstract the local set of memories collected at each
label into a single abstract memory,

An element of this abstract domain is a table from each program
label to an abstract memory.
    The program labels are usually syntactic elements, such as those
assigned to every statement and/or expression of the program (as in
example 4.1 or section 2.4). For any input program we thus assume
that its label set L is finite and fixed before the analysis.
    For this class of abstractions, what remains is to design the space
M of abstract memories. The M ♯ is an abstraction of the powerset
  ♯

℘(M). This abstraction is the parameter and can be defined in many
ways depending on the target properties to compute by static
analysis.
Abstract Domain by Galois Connection We first design an abstract domain,
a space over which the abstract semantics of programs can be
finitely computable.
    In this chapter, an abstract domain is a partial order that has a
least element called bottom (written ⊥) and such that each totally
ordered subset (such a subset is called a chain) has a least upper
bound. Such structure is called CPO (complete partial order) (see
appendix A.5).

    Figure 4.1
    Label-wise abstraction of states. Each   over-approximates the set
    of memories collected at label l.

  Note that different structures other than CPO can also be used.
As in chapter 3, abstract domains as ⊔-semilattices also work. The
generality of CPO and that of ⊔-semilattice are not comparable.
  An abstract domain needs to preserve the partial order of the
concrete domain in the sense that the partial order in the abstract
domain has a corresponding partial order in the concrete domain.
This concept is captured by the Galois connection between the two
domains. Note that solutions other than the Galois connection would
work too (e.g., section 3.3). In this Chapter we choose to use the
Galois connection approach.
   We design an abstract domain as a CPO that is Galois connected
(definition 3.5 in section 3.2.1) with the concrete domain

The abstraction function α defines how each element (a set of
states) in the concrete domain is abstracted into an element in the
abstract domain. The adjoined concretization function γ defines the
set of concrete states implied by each abstract state. The partial
order ⊑ is the label-wise order:
                   a♯ ⊑ b♯ iff ∀l ∈ L : a♯(l) ⊑M b♯(l),

where ⊑M is the partial order of M♯.
   The above Galois connection (abstraction) can be understood as
the composition of two Galois connections:

The first abstraction α0 partitions the set of states by the labels of
each state and collects the memories for each label:

This partitioning is a Galois connection.
   What remains is to find a Galois connection pair α1 and γ1 for the
second abstraction, which is a label-wise abstraction of the collected
memory sets:

Thus, defining this second Galois connection pair boils down to
defining a Galois connection pair between the powerset of memories
and an abstract memory domain:

Notations Before we continue, we briefly define the notations used in
the rest of this chapter.
     An element of A → B, which is a map from A to B, is
     interchangeably an element in ℘(A × B). For example, an
     element in L → M ♯ of the abstract states is interchangeably an
     element in ℘(L × M ♯ ), a set (so-called graph) of pairs of labels
     and abstract memories. Note that in the above examples of this
     subsection we already used this graph notation to represent the
     abstract state function.
     A relation f ⊆ A × B is interchangeably a function f ∈ A → ℘(B)
     defined as
                           f (a) = {b | (a,b) ∈ f}.
    For example, the concrete one-step transition relation ↪ ⊆ S × S
    is interchangeably a function ↪ ∈ S →℘(S).
    For function f : A → B, we write ℘(f) for its powerset version,
    defined as

    For function f : A → ℘(B), we write           as a shorthand for ∪ ∘
    ℘( f):
    For example, powerset-lifted function Step : ℘(S) → ℘(S) of
    relation ↪,
                        Step(X) = {s′ | s ↪ s′,s ∈ X},
    is equivalently, by regarding ↪ as a function of S → ℘(S),

    For functions f : A → B and g : A′ → B′, we write ( f ,g) for

4.2.2 Abstraction of Semantic Functions
The abstract semantic function F ♯ over the abstract state is defined
as follows.
   Given a concrete semantic function F,

where

its abstract version is defined to be

where
    The Step ♯ function is the one-step transition function over the
abstract states L → M ♯ . The reason for its definition (4.2) is as
follows:
           : To an abstract state in L → M ♯ as a set ⊆ L × M ♯ , it
     applies the abstract transition function ↪ ♯ to each element and
     collects the results, returning a set ⊆ L × M♯.
              : The operator π partitions the result ⊆ L × M ♯ of
     by the labels in L, returning a set ⊆ L × ℘(M♯), where each label
     has only one pair, a set representation of an element in L →
     ℘(M♯).
                        : To the result ⊆ L × ℘(M♯) of          , applying
               returning a set ⊆ L × M ♯ , in effect an abstract state ∈ L
     → M ♯ , so that each label is to be paired with a single abstract
     memory. This single abstract memory is a sound approximation
        of the set of abstract memories at each label.
Example 4.4 (One-step transition Step ♯ ) Suppose the program has two labels, l1 and l2.
That is, L = {l1,l2}. Given an abstract state                    , Step♯ first applies      to it:

Suppose that               returns                        and that              returns              .
Then the result is

The subsequent application of the operator π partitions the result by labels into

The final organization operation                returns the post abstract state ∈ L → M♯:

Conditions for Sound ↪ ♯ , ∪ ♯ , and  The abstract one-step transition
relation ↪♯ must satisfy, as a function,
Figure 4.2 depicts the above condition in a diagram. The condition is
natural: the abstract one-step transition relation ↪ ♯ must cover the
cases of the corresponding concrete one-step relation ↪ in the
concrete semantics. Note that abstract state X ♯ ∈ L → M ♯ is
considered a set ∈ L × M♯ as the argument for         .

    Figure 4.2
    Sound one-step abstract transition ↪♯

  In the same vein, the condition for the abstract union operators ∪♯
and    to be sound is

    All the above postulates (concrete semantic domains, concrete
semantic function F, Galois connected abstract domains, abstract
semantic function F♯, sound ↪♯, sound ∪ ♯ , and sound ) contribute
to the correctness of the resulting abstract semantics.

4.2.3 Recipe for Defining an Abstract Transition Semantics
In summary, the recipe of achieving a sound static analysis based on
the transitional semantics is as follows. Such static analysis over-
approximates the concrete semantics of the input programs.
  1. Define M to be the set of memory states that can occur during
     program executions. Let L be the finite and fixed set of labels of
     a given program.
  2. Define a concrete semantics as the lfpF, where
   The ↪ is the one-step transition relation over L × M.
3. Define its abstract domain and abstract semantic function as
   follows:

   The ↪ ♯ is the one-step abstract transition relation over L × M ♯ .
   Function π partitions a set ⊆ L × M♯ by the labels in L, returning
   an element in L → ℘(M♯) represented as a set ⊆ L ×℘(M♯).
4. Check the abstract domains S ♯ and M ♯ are CPOs and form a
   Galois connection, respectively, with ℘(S) and ℘(M):

  where the partial order ⊑ of S♯ is label-wise ⊑M:

                  a♯ ⊑ b♯    iff   ∀l ∈ L : a♯(l) ⊑M b♯(l)

5. Check the abstract one-step transition ↪ ♯ and abstract unions
   ∪♯ and   satisfy

6. Then sound static analysis can be defined as follows:
  (a) (theorem 4.2) If S♯ is of finite height (every chain is finite)
     and F♯ is monotone or extensive, then
        is finitely computable and over-approximates the concrete
        semantics lfpF.
      (b) (theorem 4.3) Otherwise, find a widening operator
         (definition 3.11); then the following chain X0 ⊑ X1 ⊑ ⋯

                                 X0 = ⊥       Xi+1 = Xi ∇ F♯(Xi)
        is finite and its last element over-approximates the concrete
        semantics lfpF.
Theorem 4.2 (Sound static analysis by F♯) Given a program, let F and F♯ be defined as in
section 4.2.3. If S ♯ is of finite height (every chain S ♯ is finite) and if F ♯ is monotone or
extensive, then

is finitely computable and over-approximates lfpF:

   The proof of the above theorem is in appendix B.3.1.
   In case the abstract domain may have an infinite chain or the
abstract semantic function F ♯ can be neither monotone nor
extensive, by means of a special operator called widening operator
we can still finitely compute an upper approximation of the concrete
semantics of programs, as follows.
Theorem 4.3 (Sound static analysis by F ♯ and widening operator ) Given a program,
let F and F ♯ be defined as in section 4.2.3. Let be a widening operator as defined in
definition 3.11.
     Then the following chain Y0 ⊑ Y1 ⊑ ⋯

is finite, and its last element Ylim over-approximates lfpF:

              lfpF ⊆ γ(Ylim)         or, equivalently,         α(lfpF) ⊑ Ylim
    The proof of the above theorem is in appendix B.3.2.
    Note that if a widening operator is used with a monotone or
extensive F ♯ , the second condition for a widening operator in
definition 3.11 can be relaxed from “for all sequences (an)n∈ℕ” to “for
all chains a0 ⊑ a1 ⊑ ⋯”.

                              Like theorem 3.6 for compositional-style
Using the Results of the Analysis
abstract semantics, the above two soundness theorems formalize
what the analysis achieves: the analysis computes an over-
approximation of all the states that the program may reach during its
executions.
   The same discussion we had after theorem 3.6 regarding the use
of a sound analysis in practice applies here too. If the over-
approximate reachable set does not intersect with the set of error
states, then we are sure that the program will not generate an error
state. Otherwise, we cannot conclude anything. A non-empty
intersection may be due to an imprecision of the analysis, or to the
fact that the program can indeed generate an error state. Upon this
unsettled case, the analysis has to generate alarms so that users
should inspect the analysis results so as to decide whether the
alarms are true or not. This so-called triage process is discussed in
detail in section 6.3.

4.3 Analysis Algorithms Based on Global Iterations

4.3.1 Basic Algorithms
Once we have designed an abstract semantics function F ♯ as in the
recipe (section 4.2.3), the analysis implementation is straightforward
from theorems 4.2 and 4.3.

Algorithm from Theorem 4.2 If the abstract domain S ♯ is of finite height
and if F♯ is monotone or extensive, the increasing chain
                         ⊥ ⊑ (F♯)1(⊥) ⊑ (F♯)2(⊥) ⊑ ⋯
is finite, and its biggest element is equal to
Hence, the analysis algorithm is a simple loop, shown in figure 4.3.

    Figure 4.3
    Algorithm without widening

   As a side note, the algorithms in the gentle introduction of section
2.4.4 can be rephrased as the following algorithm that computes an
upper bound of              . Instead of starting the iteration from I ♯ as
in section 2.4.4 the I♯ is always included when we compute the body
F♯:

Note that this algorithm computes a chain
                         Y0 = ⊥      Yi+1 = Yi ∪♯ F♯(Yi)
such that every element Yi is an upper bound of its corresponding
element Xi of the first algorithm,

                            X0 = ⊥     Xi+1 = F♯(Xi).
Algorithm from Theorem 4.3 If the abstract domain S ♯ is of infinite height, or if F ♯ is
neither monotonic nor extensive, we have to use a widening operator . Even when the
abstract domain S ♯ is of finite height, we can accelerate the analysis steps by using the
widening operator.
    Given a program, the analysis algorithm with      is shown in figure 4.4. The algorithm
computes a finite increasing chain as ensured in theorem 4.3.

4.3.2 Worklist Algorithm
The basic iteration algorithms of section 4.3.1 have a room for
speedup. Let us reconsider the widening version with the operation
F♯(C) being inlined in order to expose its

     Figure 4.4
     Algorithm with

performance bottleneck:

Note that, at each iteration, computing
applies the abstract transition operation ↪♯ to the state at every label
in the program. The table C has as many entries as the number of
labels in the program. When every statement of the program is
uniquely labeled, a one-million-statement program has one million
labels.
    We can speed up the performance by reducing the program
labels to visit at each iteration. We keep a worklist, a set of labels for
which the transition needs to be applied because its input memories
were changed. For each iteration, the transition is applied only for
those labels in the worklist. The worklist for the next iteration comes
to consist of the labels whose input memories are changed in the
previous iteration.
    This worklist version is in figure 4.5. As for notation, for the table
C from all labels in the program to their abstract memories, C|WorkList
is the same as the C table but restricted only for labels in WorkList.
    This worklist algorithm calls for improvements regarding two
specific points:
     Note that collecting the new worklist for next iteration
                      WorkList ← {l | C(l) ⋢ R(l),l ∈ L}
    rescans all the labels of the program. We can avoid this
    scanning of all the labels. Right after each application ↪ ♯ to
    (l,C(l)), if the result state (l′,M♯) is changed (M♯ ⋢ C(l′)), we add l′
    to the new worklist.
    Figure 4.5
    Analysis algorithm with worklist and widening

    Generally, the widening operator deteriorates the precision of
    resulting abstract elements; thus, they should be applied only as
    necessity. Naive implementation of the widening operation
                   would be a squandering, label-wise widening:
             for every (l,M♯) ∈ F♯(C|WorkList) we widen C(l) by M♯
    The precision would be better if we apply the widening operation
    only when the l is the target of a cycling control flow (e.g., the l-
    labeled statement is a while statement or a target statement of
    a cycling goto) [13]. For other labels, we apply the upper bound
    operation ∪♯ instead.

4.4 Use Example of the Framework

4.4.1 Simple Imperative Language
We consider a simple imperative language (figure 4.6) that is almost
identical to the one in chapter 3 on the compositional-style
framework. One difference, in order to expose the merit of the
transitional style, is the goto statement whose target label is not fixed
in the program text but to be computed during execution by its
argument expression. Labels in a program are integers that are
uniquely assigned to every statement of the program; we assume
that the programmers know the labels for each statement of their
programs. The expressions compute values without mutating the
memory. An expression E computes an integer or a program label. A
Boolean expression B computes a Boolean value.

    Figure 4.6
    Syntax of a simple imperative language
Program Labels and Execution Order     Given a program, each of its
statements has a unique label as a natural number. For example,
figure 4.7 shows an example program where a unique label is
associated to each statement.
    Except for goto E, the execution order (or control flow) between
the statements in a program is clear from the program syntax. The
function 《 C ,l′ 》 defined below collects all the execution orders
available from syntax between the statement labels in C. The label l′
is the next label to continue after executing C. Thus, given a program
p and label lend for the end label of the program, 《p,lend 》 collects
the function graphs of next, nextTrue, and nextFalse. We write
label(C) for the label of statement C.

    Figure 4.7
    Example program with statement labels and execution order (all labels are
    statically known)
4.4.2 Concrete State Transition Semantics
Given a program p, let X be the finite set of its variables. Each
statement of the program is uniquely labeled, and we assume that
the next, nextTrue, and nextFalse functions are syntactically
computed beforehand by 《p,lend》, except for the goto case.
   Then the concrete semantics of the program, for the set I of input
states, is the least fixpoint
                                 lfpF
of the continuous function

The set of states is the set of label-and-memory pairs
                              S = L × M,
where

   The state transition relation (l,m) ↪ (l′,m′) is defined as follows.
The transition relation is defined by case analysis on statement
labeled by l:
The memory update operation updatex(m,v) returns a new memory
that is the same as m except that its image for x is v. The
expression-evaluation operation evalE(m) returns a value of
expression E given memory m. The filterB (m) (resp., filter¬B (m))
operation returns m if the value of Boolean expression E for m is true
(resp., false). Otherwise, no corresponding transition relation
happens.

4.4.3 Abstract State
An abstract domain M♯ is a CPO such that

We define an abstract memory M ♯ for a set of memories as a single
map from program variables to abstract values:
                         M♯ ∈ M♯ = X → V♯,
where V♯ is an abstract domain that is a CPO such that

We design V♯ as
                            V♯ = ℤ♯ × L♯
where ℤ♯ is a CPO that is Galois connected with ℘(ℤ), and L ♯ is the
powerset ℘(L) of labels.
   Note that all abstract domains are Galois connected CPOs.
Because ℤ ♯ and L ♯ are Galois connected CPOs, so are the
compound domains built from them: V♯, the component-wise-ordered
pairs of ℤ♯ and L♯; M♯, the point-wise-ordered vectors of V ♯ ; and S ♯ ,
the point-wise-ordered vectors of M♯.

4.4.4 Abstract State Transition Semantics
For an abstract memory M ♯ , we define the abstract state transition
relation (l,M♯) ↪♯ (l′,M♯′) as follows.
   Case: The l-labeled statement of

Let F♯ be defined as the framework:

If Step ♯ and ∪ ♯ are sound abstractions of, respectively, Step and ∪,
as required by the framework

then we can use F ♯ to soundly approximate the concrete semantics
lfpF (theorems 4.2 and 4.3), and the approximation is finitely
computable as in the algorithms in section 4.3.
Defining Sound ↪ ♯
                 Note that the abstract transition relation ↪ ♯ is the
same as ↪ except that it uses the abstract correspondents for
semantic operators: operator eval ♯ E for evalE, update ♯ x for updatex,
filter♯B for filterB, and filter♯¬B for filter¬B.
     If each of the abstract semantic operators is a sound abstraction
of its concrete correspondent, then ↪ ♯ is a sound abstraction of ↪,
as follows.
Theorem 4.4 (Soundness of ↪ ♯ ) Consider the concrete one-step transition relation of
section 4.4.2 and the abstract transition relation of section 4.4.4. If the semantic operators
satisfy the soundness properties

then                       . (The × is the Cartesian product operator of two sets.)

The proof is included in appendix B.3.

Defining Sound ∪ ♯ and  For a sound ∪ ♯, one candidate is the least-
upper-bound operator ⊔ if S♯ is closed by ⊔, because

By the same reason, if M ♯ is closed by the least-upper-bound
operator ⊔M, then we can use ⊔M for a sound .

                                                Soundness theorem 4.4
Adapting the Analysis for a Different Abstraction
also suggests a way to adapt the analysis for a different abstraction.
We follow the recipe of section 4.2.3, and for a different analysis we
need to use different abstract domains and semantic operators. The
new analysis is sound if the abstract transition relation ↪ ♯ is the
same as ↪ except that it uses the abstract correspondents for
semantic operators, and that each abstract semantic operator f♯ : A ♯
→ B♯ satisfies the pattern ℘( f ) ∘ γA ⊆ γB ∘ f♯.
   In fact, many static analysis tools are parametric in the choice of
the abstract domains and semantic operators. The practical
considerations related to the parameter setting of the analysis are
discussed in section 6.2.
