5 Advanced Static Analysis Techniques

Goal of This Chapter This chapter completes chapters 3 and 4 with some
advanced concepts that play an important role in program analysis. A
very large number of advanced analysis techniques have been
introduced, and it is not possible to describe or even summarize them all
in a single book; therefore, we focus on the most important ones. The
techniques described in this chapter allow building more general,
efficient, and precise static analyzers.
Recommended Reading:   [S], [D] (2nd reading), [U] (2nd reading) Some
readers may want to skip this chapter during the first reading and come
back to it when they need the techniques it introduces. In particular,
readers motivated by the practical use of static analysis tools should read
more practical material in chapter 6 and refer to this chapter later when
the need to understand specific techniques arises.
Chapter Outline We will consider three important areas in static analysis:
     Abstract domains: The choice of the abstraction is one of the most
     crucial steps in the design of a static analysis since it fixes the set of
     logical predicates that the analysis may use. In chapter 3 we
     introduced only a few basic instances and mainly focused on the use
     of non-relational domains; thus, we present in section 5.1 more
     advanced ways to construct powerful abstract domains. In this
     chapter, we study only general techniques to construct abstract
     domain; abstraction for specific features is discussed in chapter 8.
     Iteration techniques: Static analyzers rely on iterative techniques
     to compute program invariants, and chapter 3 presented only the
     most basic ways to achieve this. Yet, these iterative techniques have
     a great influence on both the precision and the cost of the analysis.
     The design space for widening operators and algorithms to solve the
     iterative equations is large, and a design choice may greatly
     contribute to improving a given analysis. Therefore, we discuss such
     refinements in section 5.2.
     Scalability techniques: Even when efficient iteration techniques are
     used, static analysis tools may have significant room for efficiency
     improvement. In particular, when a static analyzer computes a
     fixpoint as a table from program labels to abstract memory states (as
     in chapter 4), the memory consumption during the fixpoint iterations
     is often the bottleneck for the scalability. In section 5.3, we discuss
     sparse analysis techniques to exploit the sparsity of abstract
     semantics to reduce the time and space consumptions of the
     induced analyses. In section 5.4, we also discuss modular analysis
     techniques for modular analysis, which allow analyzing program
     fragments (e.g., procedures) separately and combining the modular
     results into the final analysis result.
     Analysis direction: In chapter 3, we showed forward abstract
     interpretation, which computes abstract post-conditions from
     abstract pre-conditions, which is the most common static analysis
     pattern, in order to infer effects from causes. Another useful pattern
     computes abstract pre-conditions from abstract post-conditions, so
     as to derive the causes of some observable effects. We study this
     approach in section 5.5.
In this chapter, we stick (as much as possible) to the notations fixed in
chapters 3 and 4.

5.1 Construction of Abstract Domains

The selection of an adequate abstract domain is at the foundation of the
design of any static analysis tool, as it fixes the logical predicates that the
analysis may use. In section 3.2, we presented a few common numerical
abstract domains. However, real-world static analyses require far more
sophisticated abstract domains that are able to express more complex
properties. The goal of this section is to study a few techniques to
construct such abstract domains.
   We show in section 5.1.1 how to describe states with Boolean
variables as well as numerical variables. In sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, we
discuss how to construct domains to express composite logical
properties, such as conjunctions or disjunctions of basic properties.
Finally, we provide guidelines for the construction of abstract domains in
section 5.1.4.
   However, note that we cannot cover the abstraction of all possible
data types in this section. In particular, we defer complex data structures
to section 8.3.

5.1.1 Abstraction of Boolean-Numerical Properties
In chapters 3 and 4, we considered the analysis of languages where all
variables have the same type and are all scalars. This is unrealistic, as
real programming languages support many data types, including
Booleans, strings, pointers, and so on. We now discuss the abstraction of
heterogeneous states, with both variables of numerical type and and
variables of Boolean type. We consider other more complex types in
chapter 8.
    We let x0,x1,… denote numerical variables, and we denote the
Boolean variables by b0,b1,… We show an example program in figure
5.1(a) that is rather contrived but will help demonstrate two Boolean
abstractions in the following paragraphs. Figure 5.1(b) shows the set of
states that can be observed at the end of this program. We remark that in
this set the variables x0 and x1 have the same sign and that both b0 and
b1 store the value true if and only if x0 is negative.
      Figure 5.1
      Boolean-numerical program and abstraction

                         As we showed in section 3.2.2, the principle of
Non-Relational Abstraction
non-relational abstraction is to describe the value of a variable separately
from the other variables. To extend this technique to variables of Boolean
type, we simply have to specify an abstraction for sets of Boolean values.
A common such abstraction is provided by the lattice AB =
{⊥,true,false,⊤}, with concretization function γB defined by
γB(⊥) = Ø        γB(true) = {true}         γB(false) = {false}          γB(⊤) = {true,false}
Extending the analyses of chapters 3 and 4 to this domain is fairly
straightforward and results in the computation of the following invariants.
Example 5.1 (Non-relational Boolean abstraction) Assuming that numerical variables are
abstracted using intervals (figure 3.5(c)) and that Boolean variables are abstracted using the
above lattice, the compositional analysis of the program of figure 5.1(a) produces the following
invariants:
                             b0 ↦ ⊤    b1 ↦ true    x0 ↦ ⊤    x1 ↦ ⊤

This abstraction is obviously not precise and captures no relation between b0,x0, and x1.

                 To remedy the imprecision uncovered in example
Relational Abstraction
5.1, we need an abstract domain that captures relations between
Boolean and numerical variables. In this program, Boolean variables
store the result of numerical comparisons and affect control flow later on.
Intuitively, the relation between Boolean and numerical variables can be
expressed with basic decision trees of the following form, where C0 and
C1 are basic numerical constraints:

Such predicates can be encoded as decision trees over program
variables [12, 53, 54] with techniques similar to binary decision diagrams
(BDDs), except that the leaves store numerical abstract constraints (e.g.,
C0 and C1 in the above example) instead of Boolean values true and
false.
Example 5.2 (Relational Boolean abstraction) The abstract decision tree shown in figure 5.1(c)
characterizes precisely the set of reachable states shown in figure 5.1(b) of the program of figure
5.1(a): when b0 is equal to true, then x0 is negative, and when b0 is equal to false, then x0 is
positive or null. Nonetheless, the analysis algorithms required to achieve these results are more
complex than those shown in chapter 3, as the domain is relational.

5.1.2 Describing Conjunctive Properties
Verifying a program often requires using conjunctive predicates, that is,
logical predicates that correspond to the conjunction of several basic
predicates. We consider here the construction of abstract domains that
can handle such cases.
                                      More precisely, we assume that two
Construction of a Domain for Conjunctions
abstract domains A0 and A1 describing sets of concrete states are
defined together with their concretization functions γ0 : A0 → ℘(M) and γ1
: A1 → ℘(M), and we define an abstract domain that describes logical
predicates that correspond to the conjunction of two predicates,
respectively, from A0 and A1. Since the most intuitive way to define a
logical predicate P0 ∧ P1 (where we denote logical conjunction by ∧) is to
build a pair of P0 and P1, this domain of conjunctive properties boils
down to a product abstract domain, as follows.
Definition 5.1 (Product domain) The product abstraction is defined by
      the abstract domain A× = A0 × A1 that collects the pairs made of an element of A0 and of an
      element of A1; and
      the concretization function γ× defined as
                                ∀(a0,a1) ∈ A×, γ×(a0,a1) = γ0(a0) ∩ γ1(a1)

This definition matches the intuition of the conjunctive abstractions since
an abstract value (a0,a1) describes the set of concrete states that satisfy
both the property denoted by a0 and the property denoted by a1.
Furthermore, we note that it generalizes seamlessly to the conjunction of
more than two properties. The machine representation of product
abstract domains usually relies on record types. In fact, we have already
manipulated conjunctive properties, hence products, in previous chapters
even though we did not stress this fact at that point.
Example 5.3 (Non-relational domain as a product domain) Let us assume that concrete states
are stores with two variables x,y (thus, a concrete state is essentially a point in the two-
dimensional space, as in chapter 2). We consider a non-relational abstraction introduced in
definition 3.7, that is, intervals. Then an abstract state defines an interval for x and an interval
for y. This corresponds to an instance of a product abstraction, where A0 characterizes the values
that x may take, and A1 does the same for y.

   Obviously, product abstractions are also very interesting when the two
domains characterize the same variables with distinct kinds of
predicates.
Example 5.4 (Product of two numerical abstract domains) Let us assume that a concrete
state is a store with a single variable i (i.e., a concrete state is characterized by a single value,
and the non-relational abstraction coincides with the value abstraction). Moreover, we denote the
abstract domain of intervals (example 3.7) by A0, and we write A1 for the abstract domain of
congruences (example 3.8). Then the product domain A0 × A1 lets an abstract value pack both a
range constraint and a congruence constraint. For instance, abstract state ([0,100],(0,2))
describes sets of even values that are between 0 and 100. Low-level programs often manipulate
pointers, with range and alignment constraints, and this product abstraction provides the right
information to characterize such values.

                                             The basic product abstraction
Product Domain, Precision, and Reduced Product
of definition 5.1 is not sufficient to effectively let both sides of the
conjunction cooperate, that is, to exchange information so as to derive
stronger properties. To show this, we use the same setup as in example
5.4, and consider the combination of the interval constraint [1,3] and of
the congruence constraint (0,2) that describes even numbers; then the
real concretization is {2}, so that the most precise abstract information is
defined by interval [2,2] and by congruence (0,2) (which describes
constant 2). This information refinement operation is called a reduction
[27]. It proceeds by merging equivalent abstract information into their
best representation, as follows.
Definition 5.2 (Reduced product) With the same notations as in definition 5.1, the reduced
product [27] of abstract domains A0 and A1 is defined by the set A⋈ of equivalence classes of A0
× A1 for the relation ≡, defined by

The concretization function of the reduced product is defined by γ× on the equivalence classes of
≡.

Before we comment on the application of this definition in static analysis,
we consider how it works out on our two examples of product domains.
Example 5.5 (Coalescent product and non-relational abstraction) We consider the issue of
reduction in the setup of example 5.3. For simplicity, we assume that X = {x,y} and that the
abstract domain of intervals is used (an abstract value maps each variable to an interval). We
write    for the abstract element defined by                        . First, we search which abstract
values need reduction.
    When an abstract state maps both x and y to non-empty intervals, it describes exactly the set
of concrete states that satisfy these range constraints; thus, there exists no other abstract state in
the same equivalence relation for ≡, and it needs no reduction.
    Let us now assume that M ♯ is an element of the non-relational abstract domain that
maps x into the empty interval ⊥. Then we observe that                                   . Therefore,
M♯ and      belong to the same equivalence class and can all be represented by a single abstract
element. Obviously, the most simple choice is        . More generally, when M ♯ maps any variable
into ⊥, it should be reduced into      . This principle generalizes to any number of variables (or
numerical dimensions) and to any underlying value abstract domain. We call the corresponding
abstraction the coalescent product. It is defined by the following set of elements:
      The least element     is the function that maps any dimension into the bottom value of the
      underlying value abstraction.
      The elements M ♯ : X → AV are such that, for all x ∈ X, M ♯ (x) ≠ ⊥ (i.e., no dimension is
      mapped to the bottom value of the underlying domain).

In fact, the analysis of section 3.3 uses such a coalescent product.
Indeed, we observed that the best approximation of the empty set of
stores in a non-relational domain is the ⊥ element that maps each
variable to the infimum element of the value domain, and we let
            for any command C.
   Last, we sketch the reduction in the case of the product of intervals
and congruences.
Example 5.6 (Reduced product of intervals and congruences) We use the same setup as in
example 5.4. We consider an interval [a,b] and a congruence (n, p), and we discuss when this
information can be improved. One obvious case is when either bound of [a,b] does not satisfy the
congruence constraint. For instance, if the interval is [1,5] and if the congruence information
describes even values (i.e., is the pair (0,2)), then we can refine the interval into [2,4] without
losing any concrete state since values 1 and 5 can be ruled out from the concretization. In
particular, this reduction may turn an abstract state into the pair (⊥,⊥) when no value in the
interval satisfies the congruence information. For instance, if the congruence information
describes the set of values that are a multiple of 4 (i.e., is (0,4)), and if the interval is [1,3], then
the concretization is actually empty, and we can reduce ([1,3],(0,4)) to (⊥,⊥). Finally, when the
interval boils down to a singleton, then the congruence information can be refined too.

Analysis with a Reduced Product Domain  Reduced product (definition 5.2) is
generally vastly superior to the regular product of abstract domains
(definition 5.1) in terms of precision [27] since it lets constraints in either
member of the product refine the information described by the other
member. This follows from the precision gains noticed in examples 5.5
and 5.6. In particular, coalescent product often improves the precision of
the analysis of condition tests, as shown in the following example.
Example 5.7 (Coalescent product-based analysis of a condition test) We study the program
shown in figure 5.2. Although it is contrived, this program illustrates how coalescent product
contributes to the analysis precision.
    First, we consider an analysis that does not perform the reduction of the coalescent product.
The abstract state computed at the entry of the true branch of the condition statement is {x ↦ ⊥,y
↦ [1,1]}. At the end of the true branch, the analysis computes the abstract state {x ↦ ⊥,y ↦ [0,0]}.
Computing the point-wise abstract union of this abstract state with the abstract state produced on
the false branch produces the abstract state {x ↦ [8,8],y ↦ [0,1]}, which is obviously imprecise.
Indeed, the true branch is not reachable in the concrete semantics, and y is always equal to 1.

      Figure 5.2
      Analysis with a coalescent product domain

    We now consider an analysis that carries out the reduction. Then, the abstract state that is
obtained at the entry of the true branch is   and so is the abstract state at the exit of that
branch. As a consequence, the analysis produces {x ↦ [8,8],y ↦ [1,1]} as a post-condition, which
is the expected result.

Other forms of reduced product (e.g., the one presented in example 5.6)
achieve similar precision gains.
   For this reason, a static analysis based on a reduced product is in
general more precise than a product of static analyses. To better
understand the implication of this remark, let us assume that we need to
infer two distinct (seemingly unrelated) semantic properties by static
analysis of a same program. Then performing two separate analyses
generally yields less precise results than doing a single analysis based
on a reduced product, as the reduced product-based analysis can refine
abstract information at any time and not only at the very end.
   On the other hand, the definition of the optimal reduced product is
often hard and may be costly to implement. Therefore, a common
techniques relies on a product representation (an abstract value of A⋈ is
a pair made of an element of A0 and of an element of A1) and on a
reduction operation that refines abstract states. Examples 5.5 and 5.6
provide instances of reduction operations. Such an operation should be
sound (it should not lose any concrete state) and should ideally turn any
abstract element into its optimal representation. However, in practice, an
approximate reduction operation is often preferable to an optimal one
when it allows achieving a sufficient level of precision at a lower
computational cost. Moreover, reduction is typically performed only at
specific points where it is known that it can provide a useful precision
gain. As an example, we consider the reduction presented in example
5.5. This reduction propagates ⊥ information to all dimensions when the
possible values of any variable can be abstracted by ⊥. Since condition
tests are the only kind of statement where the analysis may derive such
a fact from a non-⊥ abstract pre-condition, the coalescent product
reduction needs to be computed only at these locations.
    Figure 5.3
    A challenging program with respect to abstract join

5.1.3 Describing Properties Involving Case Splits
We now study abstractions to reason over properties that involve logical
case splits. In particular, this includes disjunctive properties.
    First, we remark that we have already studied in section 5.1.1 an
abstract domain construction that allows expressing some disjunctive
properties. Indeed, the Boolean diagram-based abstract domain depicted
in figure 5.1(c) can represent exactly disjunctive properties of the form (b
= true ∧ ⋯) ∨ (b = false ∧ ⋯). Nevertheless, not all relevant disjunctive
properties are of that form.
    As an example, we consider the program in figure 5.3. We make the
assumption that the execution may start from any state. Then after the
conditional statement, x0 is not equal to 1, so the division at the next line
is safe. We now discuss the verification of this property.
    However, if we use a static analysis based on intervals similar to that
defined in chapter 3, we obtain (−∞,+∞) as a range for x0 at that point. All
values in this range can be observed in concrete executions, except
value 1. Therefore, this analysis is imprecise and fails to prove that the
division is safe due to this. We may seek for another numerical abstract
domain that does not suffer from this imprecision.
    Unfortunately, none of the domains shown in chapter 3 allow
computing more precise information on x0, as we can easily show. First,
we can observe that any abstract domain such that all abstract elements
describe convex sets of values (in the geometrical sense) cannot avoid
this loss of precision. Indeed, there exist executions where x0 is smaller
than 0 at the division location and executions where it is greater than 2 at
that same point. This remark rules out the existence of a successful
analysis using not only intervals but also constants, octagons, polyhedra,
and so forth. Additionally, we remark that the abstract domains of signs
and congruences cannot capture exactly the set (−∞,0] ∪ [2,+∞).
    In the logical point of view, there are two ways to address this issue:
      We can build a domain that supports disjunctive reasoning and is
      able to express properties, such as
                                   A0 ∨ A1 ∨ ⋯ ∨ An
     We can construct an abstract domain that supports reasoning by
     case analysis, which boils down to conjunctions of implications:
                         (A0 ⇒ B0) ∧ (A1 ⇒ B1) ∧ ⋯ ∧ (An ⇒ Bn)
The following paragraphs study these two approaches.
Disjunctive Completion In the analysis of the program shown above using
intervals, the imprecision occurs at the control flow join point. This
imprecision is because the abstract join adds the value 1 to the
concretization of the result. Therefore, a straightforward way to avoid this
issue is to change the abstract domain so that we can compute a very
precise abstract join.
   We call exact abstract join an over-approximation of unions of
concrete sets that does not lose precision. In chapter 3, we required
abstract join to ensure that                        for all abstract states
   and . By contrast, an exact abstract join is an operator that satisfies
the following formula:

Some abstract domains allow defining such an operator. For instance,
the two variants of the sign abstract domains shown in figure 3.5 satisfy
this property.
    However, many abstract domains do not allow defining such an
operator. This includes the abstract domains of intervals (figure 3.5(c)), of
linear equalities (figure 3.6(a)), and of convex polyhedra (figure 3.6(b)).
The disjunctive completion [27] of an abstract domain (A,⊑) is obtained
by adding elements to A so that it becomes possible to define an exact
abstract join. In the case of the abstract domain of intervals, we need to
add all finite disjunctions of intervals. This allows expressing exactly
(−∞,0] ∪ [2,+∞) and thus addresses the imprecision remarked above.
   However, disjunctive completion is generally a very costly and rather
impractical approach. The issue is that the representation of abstract
states tends to become prohibitively large. This also brings a new issue
regarding the analysis of loops; indeed, a widening should be defined,
either by limiting the size of symbolic disjunctions or by computing
approximate union of well-chosen basic disjuncts.
Reduced Cardinal Power     We now study the construction of an abstract
domain to represent properties defined by case analysis, as a
conjunction of implications of the form Ai ⇒ Bi. The idea is to let two
abstract domains respectively represent the left-hand side and the right-
hand side of each implication. The general notion of cardinal power
abstraction achieves this and may be used for many kinds of properties.
In particular, it allows reasoning by case analysis over various notions of
program behaviors, such as reachable states or feasible executions.
Thus, we denote the set of all possible such behaviors by ℰ.
Definition 5.3 (Cardinal power abstract domain) We assume that two abstract
domains A0,A1 are defined together with their concretization functions γ0 : A0 → ℘(ℰ) and γ1 : A1
→ ℘(ℰ) (where we denote the set of program behaviors by ℰ). We write ⊑0 and ⊑1 for the order
relations induced by the concretizations. The cardinal power abstraction [27] is defined by
       the set of abstract elements A→ made of the monotone functions from A0 to A1 (the origin of
      the name cardinal power is that we consider elements of      ); and
      the concretization γ→ :

                      γ→ (a→) = {m ∈ ℰ | ∀a0 ∈ A0, m ∈ γ0(a0) ⇒ m ∈ γ1(a→ (a0))}

The abstract ordering induced by a→ is the point-wise extension of ⊑1.

Intuitively, such an abstract element maps a property a0 described by an
element of A0 to a property a→ (a0) described by an element of A1 such
that, if a concrete memory satisfies a0, then it also satisfies a→ (a0).
Therefore, definition 5.3 indeed captures the notion of conjunction of
implications that was introduced earlier. This notion offers a great level of
flexibility since it is parameterized by two abstractions (one for each side
of the implication). The following paragraphs discuss several common
choices for A0.
   We can observe that the Boolean diagram-based abstract domain
depicted in figure 5.1(c) can be viewed as an instance of cardinal power.
Indeed, the elements of this abstract domain naturally describe
conjunctions of implications, for instance,

   In the same way as for the product abstract domains, cardinal power
abstract domains can be made more precise by reduction. For instance,
the information in a0 may refine that in a→ (a0). In practice, abstract
elements of cardinal power abstract domains can be represented using
arrays or functional arrays. Moreover, we may use a more compact
representation that does store the full definition of all the entries (a0,a→
(a0)); indeed, when one such entry can be recomputed from others, it can
be omitted from the abstract state without changing the overall meaning.
State PartitioningWe call state partitioning the application of definition 5.3
under the assumption that ℰ is the set of memory states M. We consider
a few interesting choices for A0 in this setup (under the assumption that
A1 is the abstract domain of intervals).
   First, we let A0 describe the abstract domain of signs with elements
{⊥,[< 0],[= 0],[> 0], ⊤} (where we denote the set of negative numbers by
[< 0] and we denote the set of positive numbers by [> 0]). The following
abstract state describes exactly the set of states that we need to capture
to analyze precisely the program of figure 5.3:

As another example, if some variables have Boolean type, and A0
describes their values (and abstracts away all numerical variables), we
obtain exactly the relational Boolean abstraction described in example
5.2.
   Other interesting choices of A0 include information on the context:
     We say that a static analysis is flow-sensitive if it computes one
     abstract state per program point, which accounts for all the states
     observed at that point (all analyses presented in chapters 2, 3, and 4
      are of that kind). A flow-sensitive analysis can be viewed as an
      instance of state partitioning, where the elements of A0 correspond
      exactly to the program labels (or control states), as shown in section
      4.1.1, so that the abstract elements of A→ are functions from labels
      to local invariants.
      Although we have not considered languages with procedures yet
      (we consider them in sections 8.2 and 8.4.1), we say that a static
      analysis is context-sensitive if the analysis discriminates, to some
      extent, the contexts of multiple procedure calls [100]. A context-
      sensitive analysis can also be viewed as an instance of state
      partitioning, where A0 describes context information, so that an
      element of A→ maps a calling context to abstract information relative
      to that context.
Elements of A0 fix the structure of partitions used during the analysis. In
some cases, these partitions need to be determined by the analysis
itself, based on the target program or on the target properties. This is
called dynamic partitioning [13, 61].
Trace Partitioning We call trace partitioning [56, 97] the application of
definition 5.3 under the assumption that ℰ is the set of all program
executions, defined as sequences of states produced during a run of a
program. In this view, A0 is an abstraction that describes sets of program
executions.
   In general, all forms of state partitioning discussed above are also
instances of trace partitioning, where A0 describes only the last state of
execution traces.
   More interesting examples resort to abstractions that describe global
execution properties. An example is the case where A0 discriminates
executions depending on sequences of program points visited in the
past. For instance, we can use an instance of trace partitioning that
distinguishes program executions that went through either branch of a
condition test instruction. This also solves the imprecision observed in
the analysis of the program in figure 5.3:

5.1.4 Construction of an Abstract Domain
In general, an abstract domain is characterized by the set of logical
properties that it can express and their machine representation.
Moreover, it should also come with basic abstract operations to build
static analyzers.
    More precisely, each abstract domain that we have defined so far is
defined by the set of logical predicates that its elements describe. The
implementation of an abstract domain requires a representation for
abstract elements. In some cases, this representation is obvious. For
instance, an element of the lattice of interval is either bottom or an
interval made of two bounds, so it boils down to a sum type with one
case defining pairs. On the other hand, elements of the abstract domain
of convex polyhedra may be viewed either as conjunctions of linear
inequalities or as geometric objects, with edges and vertices.
    The abstraction relation defines the meaning of each abstract
element; thus, it bridges the gap between the representation of abstract
elements and, for instance, the concrete states that they describe. It
plays a very important role since it underlies the statement of soundness
of the analysis (e.g., theorems 3.6 and 4.4) and its proof. In practice, one
should identify the nature of the relation between concrete and abstract
elements, due to the implications on the resulting static analysis. For
instance, when the abstraction relation has a best abstraction function α
(definition 3.4), one may identify a most precise abstraction for any
concrete property. On the other hand, when no best abstraction relation
can be defined, some concrete properties have no best approximation in
the abstract domain; thus, some analyses may necessarily return
imprecise results. Depending on the abstraction relation, one may also
need to implement a reduction operator over the abstract domain (as the
reduced product construction does, as shown in definition 5.2).
    Typical abstract operations include abstract lattice operations
(inclusion test, abstract union, widening) and transfer functions (to over-
approximate post-conditions for assignments, condition tests, and other
basic program commands). Their design is guided by the abstraction
relation and the goal to ensure soundness. In fact, it is often a good
practice to derive the definition of these operations and to construct the
proof of soundness in the same time.
    When constructing the abstract domain required for a static analysis,
one typically first considers the set of logical predicates that need to be
computed and then chooses the representation and formalize the
abstraction relation. In this process, it is often most helpful to identify
when standard constructions such as reduced product or cardinal power
apply, and what basic abstract domains can be used:
    When constraints that bind the values of distinct variables are
    required, relational abstract domains are required.
    When abstract elements should describe conjunctions of predicates
    of different forms, one needs to consider product or reduced product
    abstract domain compositions (section 5.1.2).
    Finally, disjunctive properties generally call for (partial) disjunctive
    completion or for partitioning abstract domains based on cardinal
    power (section 5.1.3).

5.2 Advanced Iteration Techniques

We have shown in chapters 2, 3, and 4 that the inference of loop
invariants involves the computation of sequences of abstract iterates.
This process computes weaker and weaker abstract states until
stabilization; hence, the computation of abstract iterations is a common
source of imprecision. There exist many techniques to improve the
precision of the static analysis of loops. We study some of them in the
following paragraphs, after we recall a basic setup for the analysis of a
loop while(B){C}:
     We assume that a concrete function F from sets of states to sets of
     states accounts for the effect of the condition on loop entry followed
     by the body of the loop (as shown in chapter 3, F = 〚C〛℘ ∘ ℱB).
    We assume that an abstract function F ♯ over-approximates F in the
    sense that F ∘ γ ⊆ γ ∘ F♯, and that M♯ is an abstract pre-condition for
    the loop.
    We call G the function defined by G(X) = γ(M♯) ∪ F(X).
    Then the analysis needs to compute an over-approximation for the
    join of the iterates of G, which is also its least fixpoint (the notion of
    least fixpoint is used in section 5.2.3, but not in sections 5.2.1 and
    5.2.2):

    To achieve this, we propose to use a widening operator ∇ and to
    compute the converging sequence of abstract iterates defined by
      We let G♯ denote the function defined by G♯(X) = M♯ ⊔♯ F ♯ (X) (which
      is thus also such that G ∘ γ ⊆ γ ∘ G♯).
      We denote the limit of this sequence by       , which is reached after
      finitely many iterates, and the analysis returns the sound loop post-
      condition          .
We use the language of chapter 3 and the interval abstract domains, but
all techniques discussed in the following would apply to other setups as
well.

5.2.1 Loop Unrolling
In practice, the first iteration(s) of a loop often has a special effect. For
instance, a common practice is to let the first iteration perform some
initialization tasks. Thus, letting the analysis handle the first iterations
separately from the rest is often beneficial to precision.
    Figure 5.4
    Loop unrolling

    Let us consider the program in figure 5.4(a). The loop is executed a
non-deterministically chosen, nonnull number of times. When the
execution enters the loop for the first time, the variable x is uninitialized;
thus, it may store any integer value. However, after the first execution of
the loop body, it is in the range [0,1001]. Subsequent iterations of the
loop preserve this invariant; indeed, when x reaches 1001, it is reset to 0.
This range constraint also holds when the execution eventually exits from
the loop.
    However, the analyses relying on the iteration strategies described in
chapters 3 and 4 cannot infer this range, whatever the abstraction. The
reason for this limitation is that the analysis of loops essentially computes
a local invariant at the loop entry point, and this invariant needs to cover
all states at loop entry, including the initial states; therefore, the most
precise invariant they can compute at loop head accounts for states
where x may take any possible value.
   To compute a better result, we need to single out the first iteration in
the loop from the subsequent iterations, as we observed that the value of
x is unconstrained only at the beginning of the first iteration. Intuitively,
we would like to unroll the first iteration, and analyze it separately from
the subsequent iterations. The program of figure 5.4(b) captures this
intuition. While x is still assumed to be uninitialized at the beginning, the
most precise range constraint over x at the loop head is indeed [0,1001],
and it allows deriving the precise post-condition mentioned above.

    Figure 5.5
    Basic loop examples where analysis can be improved using basic widening
    techniques

   The principle of loop unrolling [12] is to delay the application of
abstract unions during the analysis of programs such as the one in figure
5.4(a). The delay may affect one iteration or more. We now formalize this
intuition with the notations recalled at the beginning of section 5.2. The
analysis unrolling the N first iterations of the loop computes the following
sequence:

Once this sequence reaches a limit        , it returns
This approach delays join, hence the loss of precision that it may induce.
In particular, if we consider figure 5.4(a) and let N = 1, it effectively avoids
to merge the first iteration states with the states observed later; hence, it
allows computing the range [0,1001] for x.

5.2.2 Fixpoint Approximation with More Precise Widening Iteration
We now discuss a few techniques related to the computation of widening
sequences. Indeed, we showed in chapter 2 that widening enforces
convergence at the cost of a significant loss of precision. However, in
many cases, this loss of precision can be significantly reduced, as the
next paragraphs show, based on a couple of contrived but representative
examples.
Delaying Widening with Union    Let us first consider the program shown in
figure 5.5(a). We write rand() for an expression that returns a random
value (it would be trivial to simulate it in the language of section 3.1 using
an input command and an additional variable). In this example, the
variable x ranges in [−1,+∞) since it starts at 0, may be set to −1 at any
time, and may take arbitrarily high values. A widening sequence following
the definitions of chapter 3 would produce the following result:
     Before entering the loop, the range for x is [0,0].
     At the exit of the first iteration, x is in [−1,2]; thus, the first iterate is
     [0,0] ∇ [−1,2] = [−∞,+∞]. At this stage, the abstract iteration obviously
     terminates since it reached the most imprecise possible result.
The issue is that the first iteration causes x to take various new values,
thus weakening the previous [0,0] in both directions. The standard
widening presented in chapter 3 produces rather coarse results in such a
case. While widening the right bound to +∞ provides the desired result, it
is not acceptable to widen the left bound to −∞.
    An alternative approach is to delay the application of widening [12].
This could be done by loop unrolling as in section 5.2.1, but loop
unrolling is not really necessary here as the first iteration is not any
different from the subsequent ones. A middle ground solution consists in
using regular abstract union ⊔ ♯ for the first N iterations in the loop. This
way, the results of the N first iterations are likely more precise than if
widening were used. This amounts to computing the following iteration
sequence:
The soundness of the result of this iteration sequence can be justified in
the same way as in section 3.3.3.
   It is also possible to unroll the N first iterations (as done in section
5.2.1) and then to apply ⊔ ♯ instead of ∇ for the next N′ iterations. Note
that both techniques are different: unrolling completely postpones join
until after the loop invariant computation, whereas using abstract join for
the first abstract iterations allows initiating the abstract convergence
(though using a slower and more precise operation than ∇).
   Assuming N = 2, the analysis of the program of figure 5.5(a) now
produces the following sequence of ranges for x:

Widening with ThresholdWe now consider the program of figure 5.5(b). This
example was studied in figure 3.9(b), and we noted there that a basic
iteration with widening computes the range [0,+∞) for x instead of the
best possible invariant [0,50]. The issue here is that the iteration starts
with the upper bound 0 on the value of x, which is not stable; thus, it gets
widened all the way to +∞. However, we remark that 50 would be stable.
In fact, other values would be stable, such as 70 or even 120; if x is
greater than 100, the loop exits, so the value of x does not increase
anymore, and if we enter the loop with any value greater than 50, x gets
reset to 10.
    It is possible to solve this issue with a slower and more precise
widening. Instead of widening all unstable bound constraints to +∞ in a
single step, this new widening does so in several steps and stops at pre-
defined threshold values [12]. Let us assume that we consider only one
threshold B. Then the widening with threshold can be defined as follows
(we show only the right bounds, since the case of the left bounds is
symmetric):
Assuming B = 50, we get the following sequence:

5.2.3 Refinement of an Abstract Approximation of a Least Fixpoint
The previous subsections discussed how the analysis of loops can be
made more precise before and during the computation of a sequence of
abstract iterates.
   In certain cases, it is also possible to improve the precision of the
result of an abstract iteration sequence after it converges. To show this,
we use the fixpoint characterization of the loop semantics made in
section 3.3.3. Recall the basic setup of loop analysis there.
   First, we observe that once       has been computed and provides an
over-approximation of Mloop, then so does          . Indeed, let us assume
that       over-approximates Mloop; then,
       since the concrete semantic function G is monotone and
                   (since    is a sound over-approximation of Mloop), we
       have                ;
       since Mloop is a fixpoint of G, G(Mloop) = Mloop, we have
                     ;
     since G ∘ γ ⊆ γ ∘ G♯, we have                         ;
     thus, by composing implications, we derive                    .
In other words, given a concrete fixpoint of the concrete function G,
applying G ♯ again to any sound approximation of this concrete fixpoint
produces another sound approximation. This means that, once the
algorithm of theorem 3.5 stabilizes, we can simply compute one more
iteration in the abstract level and still obtain a sound approximation of the
states at loop head. Very often, this additional iteration actually provides
an increase in precision. In particular, condition tests may help refine the
information in the loop invariant. Obviously, this process may be repeated
several times. In fact, it can even be generalized with the use of a
narrowing operator [26].

    Figure 5.6
    Refinement of loop invariants

    To illustrate this, we first consider the program of figure 5.6(a) and do
not make use of any of the unrolling or threshold techniques presented in
the previous paragraphs. This means that the algorithm of theorem 3.5 or
4.3 will compute the loop invariant          with the imprecise range [0,+∞)
for x. The semantic function F associated to the loop body is composed
of a test that the value of x is strictly smaller than 50, and of an
incrementation of x; thus, applying the corresponding analysis function to
     yields {x ↦ [1,50]}. After an abstract join with the entry abstract state
{x ↦ [0,0]}, we thus get {x ↦ [0,50]}. The above remark proves [0,50] is a
sound over-approximation of the values that x may take at loop head. We
also remark that this is the most precise range that we could hope for
since it is exactly the set of all the values that x may take at that point.
    However, this technique has some important limitations that can be
observed in the case of the program of figure 5.6(b). In this case, the
reachable states are all such that 0 ≤ y ≤ x ≤ 50. Using interval analysis,
we thus expect the abstract loop invariant {x ↦ [0,50],y ↦ [0,50]}. As in
the case of the code of figure 5.6(a), the abstract iteration sequence
computed by the algorithm of theorem 3.5 or 4.3 produces {x ↦ [0,+∞),y
↦ [0,+∞)}. After applying the same technique as above, the test allows
refining the information on x into the interval [0,50]. However, the
assignment to y may be performed or not. Thus, the resulting abstract
state is {x ↦ [0,50],y ↦ [0,+∞)}. We may apply again the same technique
as above, but still the range on y will not improve, for the same reason.
The issue here is twofold. First, {x ↦ [0,50],y ↦ [0,+∞)} over-
approximates several fixpoints of the concrete function G; in fact, the
concretization of {x ↦ [0,50],y ↦ [0,+∞)} is a fixpoint for G but is strictly
less precise than the range of the least fixpoint that we would like the
analysis to over-approximate. Second, the justification that we gave
above to prove that applying G to the limit of the sequence of abstract
iterates works not only for the least fixpoint of G but also for any fixpoint.
In other words, applying G again will not allow refining analysis results
below any fixpoint that the analysis already overshot. The consequence
is that analyzing precisely the program of figure 5.6(b) requires the use of
threshold widening since a loss of precision on y cannot be compensated
for a posteriori.

5.3 Sparse Analysis

In this section we discuss a technique for reducing the analysis cost (in
terms of memory and time consumption) without sacrificing the analysis
precision.
    Since all operations in an abstract interpreter definition are
computable, the gap is fairly narrow between the definition and its
implementation. The computable abstract semantics of section 3.3 is
directly implementable, and the global fixpoint iteration algorithms in
section 4.3 are straightforward enough to see that they faithfully
implement the analysis specification.
    However, blindly implementing the analysis as specified in the
worklist-based fixpoint algorithm is not sufficient to ensure that the
analysis scales up in practice. Such implementations may still be too
costly to globally analyze, say, million-line programs. As an example of
the complexity that the analysis must handle, see figure 5.7. The
example C program (less-382) is over 20,000 lines of code, and the
figure shows the hairy complexity of its call flows between procedures.
    There exists lots of room for efficient implementation. In particular, the
fixpoint iteration algorithm in section 4.3.2 leaves plenty of room for cost
reduction. The time and space footprint of an analysis can be reduced by
exploiting both the spatial and temporal sparsities of the program
semantics, as follows.
     Spatial sparsity: Usually, each program portion (an expression, a
     statement, a sequence of statements, a procedure, a loop body, etc.)
     accesses only a small part of the whole memory.
     Temporal sparsity: After the definition (write) of a memory location,
     its use (read) is not immediate but a while later.
    By exploiting these two sparsities in the semantics, hence reducing
the time and memory footprint, we can substantially improve the
scalability of the analysis. We call this cost-reduction technique sparse
analysis [85].
    The sparse analysis technique is largely independent of the
underlying analysis definitions. Analysis designers first design a global
and correct abstract interpretation whose scalability is unattended. Upon
this underlying sound static analysis specification, analysis designers
add the sparse analysis techniques to improve its scalability.
    Figure 5.7
    Illustration of the complexity of the semantics of real programs that static analysis
    must handle: call graph of less-382 (23,822 lines of code)

   The sparse analysis technique preserves the precision of the
underlying analysis. Implementing the technique on top of a given global
analysis only improves the analysis cost; the resulting sparse version
computes the same analysis result as the underlying analysis.
   The cost-reduction benefit of the sparse analysis is noticeable when
the analysis is to estimate the abstract memory state at every program
label. That is, the analysis result is a table from program labels to their
abstract memory states. If the abstract memory state is again a table
from abstract locations to abstract values, then the analysis result is a
table in
                                    L → (A♯ → V♯).
Thus, since the number of labels and the number of abstract locations
are proportional to the size of the input program to analyze, naive
implementation of the above analysis will entail a huge memory footprint.
For example, for a one-million-line input program, a naive implementation
is to bookkeep a table of some million abstract locations (proportional to
the number of lines) at each of its million labels (proportional to the
number of lines).
    The sparse analysis technique exploits the typical reality in program
semantics: both the necessary states that flow and the necessary edges
along which states flow are just fractions of the whole. First, we need to
exploit a prevalent spatial sparsity. We do not have to bookkeep the
whole memory state at each label. Rather, it is enough to keep only a
fraction of the memory that will be used for the program part at the label.
If the program part contains a statement that accesses, for example, only
two variables, only those two entries are necessary. We can exploit this
spatial sparsity to reduce the memory footprint.
    Second, a temporal sparsity exists too. Memory entries do not have to
follow the order in the program text. We do not have to deliver post-
memory of each program label blindly following the syntactic control flow
of the program. Recall that the semantic function is to transform the pre-
memory at each label by the semantics of the program portion at the
label into its post-memory. The post-memory becomes the pre-memory
of the next label. Although for most cases this next label is syntactically
determined, for example, at the next line of the program text, we can
deliver post-memory directly to where it is used. When a memory entry is
updated at the current label, we directly deliver the new entry to the label
where the updated entry needs to be read. When a memory location is
updated we can move the result directly to the place where the location
is read. We can exploit this temporal sparsity to reduce the time footprint,
bypassing the labels whose code does not need those entries.

5.3.1 Exploiting Spatial Sparsity
This technique is sometimes called abstract garbage collection, or frame
rule in separation logic [95]. When analyzing a program portion, we need
only the part of the memory that will be accessed in that program portion.
We do not need the whole memory.
      Figure 5.8
      Code fragment: we assume that a points to v and b to z

   In our analysis context, for each program label we need only a part of
the memory that will be accessed by the program portion associated with
the label. Suppose that for each program label we know which memory
locations are used. The abstract semantic function
                               F♯ : (L → M♯) → (L → M♯)
becomes

where the           denotes the set of memories (M ♯ ) whose entries
(dom(M ♯ )) are restricted to the abstract locations Access ♯ (l) that may be
accessed by the program portion of each label l:

The set Access♯(l) of abstract locations to be used for each label l of the
input program can be computed by a sound pre-analysis, which is
typically coarser, hence quicker yet still sound, than the main analysis.
Example 5.8 (Spatial sparsity) Consider the C-like imperative program fragment in figure 5.8.
Suppose that the analysis is to compute the memory state at each program label. The whole
memory state is a table from all variables (x,y,z,v,a, and b) to their values. Figure 5.9(a) shows
the case where the analysis bookkeeps the whole memory state at every label and where the flow
edges (black arrows) are directly extracted from the program text. Note that each statement
needs a fraction of the memory as its pre-state. For example, the first statement accesses only x,
the second statement only y, and the last statement only a, b, v, and z. Bookkeeping the whole
memory state at every label is wasteful. Figure 5.9(b) shows the case where the analysis
bookkeeps only the necessary fractions of the whole memory.

5.3.2 Exploiting Temporal Sparsity
We let the analysis follow the semantic dependence to directly deliver the
memory effect to its use point, not blindly following the syntactic control
flow. For each program label, its defined locations are directly passed to
its use labels, the program fragment of which will use the defined
locations.

    Figure 5.9
    Spatial and temporal sparsity of program semantics

   This def-use chain information that should be available before the
analysis can be over-approximated by yet another analysis, which is
coarser, hence quicker yet still sound, than the main analysis.
   Assuming the availability of the def-use chain information, the
temporally sparse analysis is defined by streamlining the abstract one-
step relation
                        (l,M♯) ↪♯ (l′,M′♯) for l′ ∈ next♯(l,M♯)
so that the link ↪♯ should become sparse, from a label where a location
is defined to a label where the defined location is read.
    At label l, the input memory state M♯ consists only of the locations that
are to be accessed at label l. For each location defined (written) at l, the
label l′ is for a program portion that reads the defined location.
   The next♯(l,M♯) is to determine, in the abstract semantics, the def-use
relation from definition point l to its use point l′ for the locations dom(M′ ♯ ).
In case that program portion at l does not define a location, l′ would be
the same as in the non-sparse case, and M′♯ would be equal to M♯.
Example 5.9 (Temporal sparsity) Consider again the program fragment in figure 5.9. Figure
5.9(c) shows sparse flow edges (the rounded, skipping arrows). For example, the defined variable
x in the first statement “x = x + 1” can directly flow to the third statement “z = x”, which uses that
new x, skipping the second statement. As opposed to the black edges, the rounded gray arrows
are sparse, skipping the statements between the definitions and their uses.

5.3.3 Precision-Preserving Def-Use Chain by Pre-Analysis
For the sparse version to preserve the precision of the underlying original
static analysis, the def-use chain information from a pre-analysis must be
defined as follows.
Definition 5.4 (Safe def and use sets from pre-analysis) Let D ♯ (l) and U ♯ (l) be the sets of
abstract locations, respectively defined and used by the original non-sparse abstract semantics of
the program portion at label l. Let      and      be, respectively, those that are computed by the
preanalysis.
    We say     and    are safe whenever
     the def and use sets from the pre-analysis over-approximate those of the original non-
     sparse analysis:

      all spurious definitions from the pre-analysis are included in the use set from the pre-
      analysis:

   The precision-preserving def-use chain from the pre-analysis is
defined as follows.
Definition 5.5 (Def-use chain information from pre-analysis) Let          and      be, respectively,
safe def and use sets from a pre-analysis as in definition 5.4. We say that two labels a and b have
a def-use chain for an abstract location η whenever                             , and η may not be
redefined between the two labels: for every intermittent label c in the execution paths from a to b,
           .

   Definitions 5.4 and 5.5 warrant that the resulting sparse analysis
version should have the same precision as the original non-sparse
analysis. Note that the def-use chain defines the “express highway”
along which the sparse analysis delivers the abstract memory portions. If
this express highway covers all the def-use edges of the original
analysis, then the sparse analysis will compute the same analysis result
as the original analysis because it uses the same abstract semantics as
the original analysis.
    The first condition of safe def-use sets (definition 5.4) is intuitive;
under-approximation may miss some def-use edges of the original
analysis. We have to cover all def-use edges. Over-approximating the
def sets (D ♯ ), however, may also result in missing some def-use edges.
The second condition recovers the def-use edges that can be blocked by
over-approximating definitions in      that are extra to D♯. A definition can
block a def-use edge if an extra definition is in an abstract execution path
between the def-use labels. By enforcing such extra definitions to also be
included in the uses, the def-use chain is recovered. Consider figure
5.10(a). The def-use edge for location η is from label a to label b
because it is defined at a, used at b, and not defined at the intermediate
label c. An over-approximating pre-analysis can conclude the η may be
defined also in c, hence, instead of the def-use edge from a to b, edge
from c to b is only possible (figure 5.10(b)). The second condition of
definition 5.4 requires all such extra definition             to be reflected
also in the use           , hence recovers the missing edge as in figure
5.10(c).
    Figure 5.10
    Def-use edge by over-approximating safe pre-analysis

5.4 Modular Analysis

Independently of the sparse analysis technique of the previous section,
we can further improve the analysis scalability also by separately
analyzing components of a program then stitching the componential
results into the final result for the whole program. As compilers translate
files separately and then link them into a whole-program translation,
static analysis too can separately analyze components of a program and
then stitch the componential results into a monolithic whole-program
analysis result. Such static analysis is called modular analysis. 2
    Suppose that the unit of modular analysis is a procedure (function) in
the input program. A modular analysis analyzes each procedure of the
input program and then links them into the whole-program analysis
result. Modular analysis enables a kind of incremental analysis and the
improvement of analysis precision. It computes an abstract summary of
each procedure that is parameterized by its call context. Later, at link
time, the analysis can derive an abstract post-condition sensitive (hence
precise) to each call context. When a procedure is modified, the analysis
has only to recompute its abstract summary and update the instantiations
at its call sites.
    As an example, consider a static analysis for detecting buffer overruns
in C-like imperative programs. The analysis estimates the possible sizes
of stack or heap-allocated buffers and the value ranges of the buffer
access expressions. The analysis issues an alarm whenever it cannot
prove that a buffer access always looks for a cell within the buffer area.
Suppose we use intervals to over-approximate the range of index values
and buffer sizes.

5.4.1 Parameterization, Summary, and Scalability
Separately analyzing procedures without knowing their calling context
(pre-states) involves parameterization. We parameterize the calling
context by symbols. From this symbolic pre-state, we analyze
procedures. The result is summarized in terms of the parameter symbols
for the calling context. Later, at link time, when the calling context is
known, the analysis can finalize the actual analysis result by instantiating
the summary with the actual calling context. This instantiation at link time
makes the whole-program analysis scalable and precise; it avoids
repeated analyses of procedures and entails context-sensitive results for
each call.
Parameterization Consider a basic interval analysis that works with intervals
[l,h] whose bounds l and h are constants (integers or infinite symbols −∞
and ∞). Forwardly analyzing each procedure in isolation needs a
parameterization of the unknown calling context (pre-state). For unknown
intervals in the possible calling context, we parameterize the interval’s
lower and upper bounds. We let the, if any, intervals of the pre-state have
bounds as symbols. From these symbolic intervals of the pre-state, the
forward analysis result of each procedure is the post-state in terms of the
symbolic parameters and a condition on these parameters to ensure that
all buffer access expressions inside the procedure stay within the target
buffer area. Later, at link time, the symbolic parameters of the pre-state
and the return state are instantiated and no-buffer-overrun conditions are
resolved.
Summary-Based We analyze each procedure going forward starting from a
symbolic pre-state (memory image) for its parameters and free variables.
As it goes forward it gathers constraints that in the end play as a pre-
condition that dictates in symbolic form the safety conditions for buffer
accesses inside the procedure. When we resolve the symbolic safe
conditions to be violated, an alarm is raised.
Scalability The scalability stems from the way that the modular analysis
treats reasoning involving multiple procedures (interprocedural analysis).
We compute a description of what a procedure does, its summary, in
isolation from its calling context. The isolation is possible by
parameterizing the calling contexts during the computation of the
summary. We then compute an approximation of the global behavior of
the program by stitching the procedure summaries in accordance with
each call context.
   When a procedure is modified, the whole-program analysis result is
quickly obtained by updating only the parts that transitively depend on
the procedure for which abstract states have changed. These local
updates are done by instantiating the precomputed summaries of the
involved procedures.

5.4.2 Case Study
Let us show how a modular analysis works by looking at simple
examples. Suppose that the analysis goal is to estimate the sizes of
buffers and the ranges of their indexing expressions. We examine the
analysis summaries for a few procedures and then describe how they
can be stitched together. We use the C syntax in example code.
   First of all, let us consider a dereference that involves formal
parameters:

  For this procedure, the parametric context is for the parameters arr
and i:
The safety condition is
                          [s0 + s4,s1 + s5] < [s2,s3].
The pointer parameter arr is an offset from the beginning of a buffer of
some size. The offset is a symbolic interval [s0,s1] whose lower and
upper bounds are, respectively, symbol s0 and symbol s1. The buffer size
and parameter i are again symbolic intervals. The safety condition for the
buffer access arr[i] is expressed as its offset [s0 + s4,s1 + s5] (the pointer
arr [s0,s1] shifted right by i [s4,s5]) should be non-negative and less than
the buffer size [s2,s3].
   Second, let us take a look at a malloc wrapper:

   For this procedure, the symbolic procedure summary would be

For brevity, we do not include the case that malloc fails. The return value
is a pointer whose offset is [0,0] and size is the parameter n that is a
symbolic interval [s0,s1].
   Finally, let us take a look at the original example, but using
malloc_wrapper in place of malloc and set_i in place of direct writes:

   For each call, the modular analysis instantiates the symbolic summary
of procedures by the actual calling context and raises an alarm if it could
conclude its, if any, safety condition false. From the actual parameter 9 in
call malloc_wrapper(9) the symbolic interval [s6,s7] becomes [9,9];
hence, the array pointer arr becomes a pointer of offset [0,0] to a buffer
of size [9,9]. For the call set_i(arr,i), the actual parameters arr and i
instantiate the symbolic summary of set_i into

and the safety condition is
                              [0 + 0,0 + 8] < [9,9].
The safety condition is true; hence, no alarm is raised.
   For the second call set_i(arr, i+1), the newly instantiated summary of
set_i is

and the safety condition is
                              [0 + 1,0 + 9] < [9,9].
   The safety condition is false because 9 in [1,9] cannot be smaller than
[9,9]; hence, the analysis raises an alarm.
   Note that the modular analysis can analyze the original procedure just
as accurately when the specific dereferencing operations are abstracted
by procedures, even though the procedures are analyzed independently.
To do this we need an accurate enough notion of summary, as well as a
good means of stitching together summaries.

5.5 Backward Analysis

While the previous chapters and sections have considered static
analyses that start from over-approximations of sets of input states and
compute over-approximations of a set of output states, we can actually
design static analyses to compute over-approximate pre-conditions from
a post-condition. This section provides an intuitive introduction to such
analyses and to their applications.

5.5.1 Forward Semantics and Backward Semantics
The semantics used in chapter 2 consists of a set of reachable states. It
is based on the assumption that the program always starts from a given
set of initial states (the square [0,1] × [0,1] as fixed in section 2.1). Then
the computation is a forward process that iteratively uncovers successor
states. The semantics used in chapters 3 and in 4 is defined in the
forward direction and computes successor states from predecessor
states.
   Let us recall the semantics in chapter 3. The semantics of
expressions (figure 3.2) takes a set of states and returns the set of
values the expression evaluates to; it is thus also defined in forward
style. The semantics of Boolean expressions (figure 3.3) used in
condition tests is similar and is thus also forward. However, we also
defined the operation ℱB that takes as inputs a Boolean expression B
and a set of states and that filters out the states such that B evaluate to
false, keeping only those states such that B evaluates to true:
                    ℱB (M) = {m ∈ M | 〚B〛(m) = true}
More generally, we could define 〚B〛 bwd and let ℱB be defined from it
as follows:

The semantics 〚B〛bwd is defined in backward style, as it takes a value
(i.e., a result) and returns the set of states that lead to this value.
Therefore, we call it a backward semantics.
    We also observed in chapter 3 that the analysis of a condition test
boils down to the computation of an over-approximation of the result of
ℱB, using an operation :
  for all conditions B, and for all abstract states M♯,
Therefore, the analysis of a condition test is actually a form of local
backward analysis. We give other examples in the rest of this section.
   This notion of backward semantics also applies to other elements of
our example language (or to other languages):
    The backward semantics of a scalar expression takes a scalar value
    and returns the set of states that lead to this value, just like the
    backward semantics of a Boolean expression.
    The backward semantics of a command takes a set of output states
    and produces the set of states that may lead to such outputs:

We remark that the backward semantics of a command return a set of
states that may lead to some of the output states. Due to non-
determinism, an input state may lead to several executions, some of
which lead to M and some of which do not. The above definition is based
on the preference to not omit any state that may lead to M, but one may
be interested in other kinds of pre-conditions, where only input states that
only produce executions leading to M are included. We do not consider
all possible choices in this book and focus on the above definition. The
following paragraphs discuss the possible applications of such a
semantics.

5.5.2 Backward Analysis and Applications
A first application of backward analysis is to discover how a program may
reach a given state. This is a dual issue to the computation of an over-
approximate post-condition for a given pre-condition considered in the
previous chapters, but it is just as useful in practice.
An Example    As an example, we consider the program C shown in figure
5.11. It consists of a very simple absolute value computation. Variable x0
is an input; thus, we assume that it may take any value (hence the input
command), whereas x1 stores the result. Obviously, the output states are
such that x1 is positive, and indeed, the abstract post-condition computed
by the analysis of chapter 3 is {x0 ↦ ⊤, x1 ↦ [0,+∞)}.
    First, let us assume that we are interested in the abstract post-
condition defined by the constraints 2 ≤ x1 ≤ 5. The backward semantics
〚 C 〛 bwd maps this post-condition to the set of states where x0 is in
[−5,−2] ∪ [2,5] right after the input statement. Therefore, the most
precise result that we can expect a sound approximation of this
backward semantics to return is this union of intervals. However, if using
the interval abstract domain, the result can only be an interval containing
[−5,−2] ∪ [2,5]; thus, it may be at best [−5,5]. The interpretation is that
this range contains all the states that lead to an absolute value in [2,5].
An analysis based on a partitioning abstraction (section 5.1.3) may return
a more precise invariant that includes only the states where x0 is in
[−5,−2] ∪ [2,5].
    Now, let us assume that we are interested in the abstract post-
condition defined by the constraint x1 ≤ −3. If we look at the concrete
executions, we can observe that there is no input state that produces
such an output state. Indeed, the result of the absolute value is
necessarily non-negative; thus, no output state may satisfy the above
constraint. In other words, when it is applied to the set of states such that
x1 ≤ −3, the backward semantics returns the empty set. Therefore, we
expect the backward analysis of this program to return ⊥ when applied to
this program and the abstract post-condition {x0 ↦ ⊤, x1 ↦ (−∞,−3]}.

     Figure 5.11
     Backward analysis of a simple program

ApplicationsThis example illustrates a second application of backward
example (besides the analysis of condition tests). By computing an over-
approximation of the sets of states leading to some given behavior, it
provides a necessary condition for this behavior to occur. Dually, it can
also compute a sufficient condition for a given behavior not to occur:
     a necessary condition to return a value in [2,5] is to start with an
     input value that lies in [−5,−2] ∪ [2,5];
     the absolute value never returns a negative value.
Such information may be useful in itself, for instance, for the purpose of
program understanding. Indeed, given a large legacy program to
maintain or extend, a developer may want to know when a program may
return a given value. While this would be trivial in the case of the
program shown in figure 5.11, large code may benefit from automatic
analysis techniques. Information on pre-conditions may also be useful to
help some other static analysis, as we address in section 9.1.2. We show
another application of backward analysis in section 5.5.3.
Definition   of   a   Backward      After discussing the meaning and
                                 Analysis
applications of the backward analysis, we study its definition. In chapters
3 and 4, the static analysis algorithms were derived from the definition of
the concrete semantics. The same methodology applies here. We
consider a few cases, using the same notations as chapter 3.
   The backward semantics 〚 skip 〛 bwd of a skip command is the
identity function, just like the forward semantics. Therefore, if we let
        also denote the identity function, then it defines a sound
approximation of 〚skip〛bwd:

   Similarly, the analysis of a sequence boils down to the composition of
the analysis of each command, but in the reverse order compared to the
forward analysis:

    The case of an assignment command is of course more complex. The
definition of a backward analysis function shares some similarity with the
case of condition tests discussed in section 5.5.1 although it requires a
bit more work. Indeed, let us consider the assignment command x := E
and the abstract post-condition M♯ and discuss how to compute a sound
abstract pre-condition:
     If x does not appear in the right-hand side E (we call such an
     assignment “non-invertible”), then we simply need to apply the
     operator        and then forget all constraints on x (the assignment
     overwrites the value of x, so x may store any value in the pre-
     condition).
     If x appears in the right-hand side E (we call such an assignment
     “invertible”), constraints over the old value of x can usually be
     derived from constraints over the new value. As an example, let us
     assume that the analysis uses the interval domain, that E is x + 2,
     and that the post-condition is {x ↦ [10,12]}, then a range over the old
     value can be computed by simply subtracting 2 to its bounds, so we
     obtain the abstract pre-condition {x ↦ [8,10]}.
As one can observe, the definition of the backward analysis of an
assignment command depends on the abstract domain and on the form
of the right-hand-side expression.
    The backward semantics of a condition command composes the
effect of the branches with the effect of the test and combines both
branches using set union (observe that the only difference with the
concrete semantics given in chapter 3 is that the effects of the test and of
the branches are composed in the reverse order):
   〚if(B ){C0}else{C1}〛bwd(M) = ℱB (〚C0〛bwd(M)) ∪ ℱ¬B (〚C1〛
                             bwd(M))

We derive the following abstract semantics:

    As in the case of the forward analysis, the backward analysis of a loop
command requires the computation of an approximation of a fixpoint. It
involves abstract iterates (with widening if the abstract domain has
infinite height) and is very similar to section 3.3.3, so we do not detail it
here.

5.5.3 Precision Refinement by Combined Forward and Backward
Analysis
We now present a third application of backward analysis and show that it
can help refine results of a forward static analysis. To do this, we focus
on a simple example that consists of a single execution branch (which
we could think of as an excerpt of a larger program), shown in figure
5.12. Since we ignore all the other branches in the program, it may be
more convenient to think of it in the transitional framework provided in
chapter 4.
    Figure 5.12
    Example of forward backward analysis

   First, we observe that the third true branch is not feasible; indeed,
there exist no values for x and y that satisfy all three condition tests
encountered over the branch. Therefore, we expect static analysis to
prove that no execution reaches point ③ when starting from point ⓪
(and whatever the assumption on the values of the variables at that
point).
   While a forward analysis with the abstract domain of convex
polyhedra (definition 3.9) can establish this fact, the abstract domain of
interval is too weak to prove it. Indeed, let us compare the results
produced by these two analyses at each point:

This table clearly shows the difference between the two analyses: while
the domain of convex polyhedra stores relations and ultimately
demonstrates that the three conditions are not feasible in the same time,
the domain of intervals drops the relation y ≤ x and thus fails. In general,
any non-relational domain has no chance of success here.
   Let us now consider intervals only and perform a backward analysis
after the above forward analysis. More precisely, the backward analysis
shall start with the abstract post-condition computed in the above forward
phase: it simply assumes the abstract state {x ↦ (−∞,4],y ↦ [5,+∞)} at ③.
This backward analysis provides another approximation of the set of
executions that go through the branches of figure 5.12. The table below
shows the results of the backward analysis, in the order in which they are
computed:

What happens here is that the backward analysis propagates range
information that occurs late in the execution back to the beginning, where
the test y ≤ x can clearly be proved infeasible even when using only
intervals. As a result, we obtain the empty pre-condition. Applying a
forward analysis again finishes to prove that no state can traverse this
branch, as shown in the following table.

   The refinement process shown here can be useful both on small and
on larger programs [96]. It can even be applied very locally to refine the
analysis of tests, following a method referred to as local iterations [51].
   This forward-backward iteration process may be iterated as many
times as required to improve precision. Of course, due to termination and
cost consideration it should always be limited in practice.
   Moreover, each analysis phase may use the previous one to compute
more precise results. In particular, the backward analysis of some
operations may be imprecise but could be improved by intersection with
the results of the previous forward phase.
________________________
2
   This section mostly reuses the explanations and example code that initially appeared in
https://research.fb.com/inferbo-infer-based-buffer-overrun-analyzer/.
