6 Practical Use of Static Analysis Tools

Goal of This Chapter This chapter discusses the issues related to the
use of a static analysis tool. It focuses on the user perspective on the
analysis and deliberately stays away from the internals of analysis
tools, which are the topics of other chapters. It does not substitute for
the manual of a specific static analyzer but provides guidelines on
how to better understand it, so as to efficiently and correctly deal
with the deployment of static analysis techniques.
Recommended Reading:     [S], [D], [U] This chapter is mainly targeted at
developers and engineers who are using or planning to use static
analysis tools to verify software projects. To some extent, notions
exposed in this chapter have been covered from a more theoretical
point of view in chapters 3 and 4, so students who feel comfortable
with the practical implications of the frameworks exposed in the
previous chapters may skip this one. We also recommend the
reading of this chapter to designers of static analyzers who would
like to better plan the interaction with their analyses.
Chapter Outline   In section 6.1, we study the adequacy between a
verification goal and a static analysis tool. Section 6.2 addresses the
task of setting up the analysis of a target program, including the
choice of hypotheses about the program that need to be taken into
account. Section 6.3 describes the exploitation of results produced
by a static analyzer. Section 6.4 studies the deployment of static
analysis tools in a broader context.

6.1 Analysis Assumptions and Goals
In the next few subsections, we consider a language L (with a syntax
and a concrete semantics) and a semantic property ℘ that are fixed.
To fix the ideas, L could be the Java language, and ℘ could be the
absence of uncaught exception, including null pointer exceptions or
array-out-of-bounds exceptions (these exceptions cannot be caught
at run-time and will cause the program to crash). We also assume
that a static analyzer A is available that inputs programs written in
language L.
    Depending on the application domain, soundness with respect to
all executions may be absolutely required or not. For instance, in the
case of safety-critical software, it is very important to make sure that
certain kinds of errors will never happen. Other application domains
may not require such a stringent verification yet benefit from a partial
verification that omits certain aspects and is not sound with respect
to the actual semantics of programs. Regardless of the intended
application domain, we consider it very important to know when
analysis results allow deriving certain semantic facts, so that users
are able either to require a fully sound analysis or to decide what
behaviors the analysis may ignore.
    The crucial question, before even running A to verify some actual
program, is to what extent the results that A is going to produce will
allow actually establishing the property of interest ℘. In chapters 3
and 4, we showed abstract interpretation-based static analyzers that
come with a soundness theorem; this theorem expresses the
correctness property guaranteed by the analysis. For example,
theorems 3.6 and 4.2 state that the analysis accounts for all outputs
that can be produced by a program. Therefore, we discuss the
soundness property of A in the following paragraphs, so as to
determine to what extent A is able to establish the property ℘.
                         In general, the soundness property of a static
Analysis Target Properties
analyzer is of the form “for any program p that satisfies some
assumption H, the analysis A computes a semantic property of the
form S that is satisfied by all executions of p.” To check that A can be
useful to verify ℘, we need to make sure that there exist properties of
this form S that entail the target semantic property ℘. On the other
hand, if the results of the analysis are not logically strong enough,
there is no chance that it ever allows proving ℘.
   Let us consider the verification of absence of uncaught
exceptions in Java programs as an example target property. If A
computes precise information about the integer values that a
program manipulates, and produces range information over indexes
in array lookup and write operations, then we can hope for A to
prove the absence of index-out-of-bounds exceptions. On the other
hand, if A only computes information about the reachable program
points (i.e., the program locations that may be visited during program
executions), then there is no hope that it proves a reachable lookup
instruction a[i] will never fail with an index-out-of-bounds exception.
Source Language Semantics    The second point to confirm is that A
applies to the class of programs that are under consideration and
that it guarantees sound results for them. The semantics of a
programming language is often so complex that it is very hard to
design a static analysis tools that follows it completely without many
important assumptions. Let us consider some examples.
   Most programming languages support single-precision and/or
double-precision floating-point arithmetic, as described in the IEEE
754 standard [5]. This standard specifies the format of the floating-
point representation, and the arithmetic operations, with various
rounding modes. The actual results depend on the rounding mode
(which may be “to the closest value,” “toward 0,” “toward +∞,” or
“toward −∞”) of the machine on which the program is executed. In
fact, the situation may be even more complex, as compilers
sometimes perform optimizations and may evaluate expressions
made of constants. Then one should take into account the rounding
mode of the machine used to compile the program. When analyzing
a program that makes extensive use of floating-point data, it is
important to make sure the static analysis tool accounts either for all
possible rounding modes or at least for the rounding mode(s) used
for the evaluation of the program. Failing to do so may lead to
unsound results, such as floating-point ranges that do not include all
the values one may observe at run-time.
    The low-level description of the memory layout provides a second
example of programming language feature that may need to be
handled in a specific way. Let us consider the C programming
language. The C semantics as defined in the standard of the
language [4] does not fully specify the representation of data, the
size of data types, and the alignment of structure fields. To
understand the physical representation of each entity manipulated by
a given program, developers also need to refer to the Application
Binary Interface (ABI) and to the documentation of the compiler that
they use. This issue is well known, since it often makes the
portability of software (action to adapt a given program to different
host architectures) quite challenging. Indeed, addresses computed
by pointer arithmetics are likely to evaluate to different locations,
depending on the architecture, which means that the programs may
also behave differently. Some developers do actually make use of
such features intentionally, for example, when they know the target
architecture precisely, and when they write programs that will interact
with other low-level software. From the static analysis point of view,
this dependency of the physical representation makes it very difficult
to produce as a result of a single analysis some abstract invariants
that precisely account for all behaviors of a program, for all possible
target architectures. There exist several ways to cope with this issue:
     One may let the analysis depend only on the C standard and
     reject any program the correctness of which depends on
     architecture-specific or compiler-specific assumptions.
     On the other hand, one may build and use a static analysis
     tailored for a specific architecture or set of architectures and that
     is able to very precisely take into account this assumption.
    The execution order provides a third and last example. While
some languages fully specify it (as Java does), others do not. The C
language falls in this case and leaves the execution order of many
expressions undefined. This means that when a program contains
the expression f(&x) + g(&x), the language semantics does not fix
which sub-expression (f(&x) or g(&x)) is evaluated first. The intent of
the language designers is to let future compiler developers
implement optimizations that cannot be foreseen when the language
is designed and that would require modifying the evaluation order.
As a consequence, the effective execution order may vary from one
compiler to another and not even be consistent in a given compiler
run. From the point of view of the design of a static analysis tool, the
main solutions are
     to let the analysis account for all possible orders (though this is
     likely to be very costly and to reduce precision);
     to consider only one execution order that is fixed in the
     soundness statement of the tool, and openly ignore all other
     possible execution orders; then the analysis is sound only with
     respect to that order;
     to check that the analyzed program does not contain
     expressions the result of which depends on the execution order,
     and to select a fixed order to be considered for the analysis; in
     that case, programs that may follow a different order are
     explicitly rejected during the analysis.
   In general, it is the responsibility of the user to make sure that the
semantic assumptions of the analysis tool are compatible with the
intended use of the analyzed program. As an example, when using a
known compiler that follows a known evaluation strategy, a static
analysis tool following the same execution order can be used safely.
On the other hand, when the order is not known, this approach may
lead to unsound results.
Back to Soundness The gist of the two previous paragraphs boils down
to the soundness theorem that the static analysis tool A satisfies. In
this context, the soundness theorem may either take the form of a
formal mathematical statement, such as theorems 3.6 and 4.3, or
may consist of a documentation in plain English that states formally
what the analyzer computes and under which assumption. It usually
takes the following form.
Theorem 6.1 (Soundness) The static analyzer A is sound with respect to the subset of
programs Lsnd (where Lsnd ⊆ L) and to the subset of executions Esnd (where Esnd ⊆ E) in
the following sense:
A theorem of this form precisely characterizes what programs and
program behaviors A is able to account for and what it ignores:
     Programs outside Lsnd are unsupported and either they may be
     rejected outright or their semantics may not be covered (e.g., if
     the analyzer rejects or ignores commands with an unknown
     execution order, programs that contain such patterns are
     outside Lsnd).
     Executions outside Esnd may not be covered (e.g., if the analysis
     assumes a specific execution order and ignores all other orders,
     then traces corresponding to other execution orders are outside
     E).
Generally, a static analysis tool that defines Lsnd and Esnd precisely is
much more useful than one that does not make these clear, in the
sense that it allows users to assess whether the programs they are
interested in are covered and ultimately what was actually proven.
We may observe that theorems 3.6 and 4.4 come with no such
restriction. This is because the language considered in chapter 3 is
simple and requires no such limitation. On the other hand, real-world
programming languages typically have a much more complex
semantics, which would make it extremely hard to build a static
analysis tool that accounts for all executions without any restriction.
   From the user point of view, when the correctness of the target
software is critical, one should make sure that the limitations
mentioned in theorem 6.1 are acceptable and satisfied by the target
software. Otherwise, users may fail to understand that a static
analysis may incorrectly handle an incorrect program due to invalid
assumptions. On the other hand, when static analysis is aimed only
at improving the quality of non-critical software, such well-
understood obliviousness is usually not problematic.
                                              As we have been
Static Analyzer Implementation Bugs and Soundness
commenting on the soundness of an analysis tool and its application
in verification to catch some classes of bugs, an important question
is what happens if the tool A itself contains implementation bugs.
Obviously, the main concern is that the verification will emit invalid
results, as this could cause software defects to be missed. The
situation is a bit similar to that of a buggy compiler that emits
incorrect code and causes issues that are very hard to diagnose: a
programmer may rightfully consider the source code of a program
correct and then struggle to understand why the compiled binary has
unexpected behaviors. Therefore, we now discuss the correctness of
the implementation of a static analysis tool and the possible
consequences of implementation bugs inside the static analyzer
itself.
    Not all static analyzer bugs are dangerous. For instance, let us
consider the case of an implementation bug that causes the analyzer
A to crash. This bug will not cause the analyzer to inaccurately claim
a target program is correct when it is not. Indeed, a user should
consider that a static analyzer crash amounts to rejecting the
program. On the contrary, such a bug may only prevent correct
programs from being verified correct (which is problematic, but less
so than issuing a wrong claim that the property of interest holds).
The consequences of an implementation bug that reduces the
precision of the analysis are similar.
    Soundness bugs are bugs of A that may cause it to issue a wrong
result, which violates its (formal or informal) soundness guarantee.
As an example, a static analyzer that is supposed to discover all run-
time errors and fails to report a possible division by zero would be
unsound. Developers of static analysis tools usually do their best to
avoid such issues, but they are hard to avoid completely since static
analyzers are often complex pieces of software. From the user
perspective, several techniques may reduce this risk, such as
      the use of several tools that were designed and implemented
      independently, so as to compare their results; and
      the testing of the analyzer on small well-understood benchmarks
      to become more confident that the results meet the
      expectations.
   Additionally, some techniques may be applied to the design and
implementation of static analyzers, and increase the confidence in
their results. One approach consists of verifying the soundness of
the static analyzers A using, for instance, assisted proving
techniques discussed in section 1.4.2 [65]. Another approach lets
each run of A issue a certificate that the results it produced are
correct (then the certificate may need to be checked using an
external, independent tool). Last, certain tools are provided with a
“qualification kit” which comprises additional documentation and test
cases to let users make sure the tool returns satisfactory results on
their own production code. From the user point of view, and when
verifying safety-critical code (possibly with the intent of certifying it), it
is often a better choice to select an analysis tool that benefits from
either of these techniques.
                                         While the previous paragraphs
Analysis Precision and Partial Completeness
focused on the soundness of the analysis (i.e., whether it delivers
results that can be trusted), users should also care about the ability
of the analysis to compute abstract semantic facts that are
sufficiently precise. In particular, to be useful, the analysis should
actually be able to prove the property of interest often enough.
Indeed, soundness may be easily met by an analyzer that always
returns an overly coarse approximation of the program semantics,
but such an analyzer would be useless from a user standpoint.
Therefore, the precision of the analysis, namely, its ability to
establish the property of interest in many cases, is of great
importance in practice.
   Ideally, users who have a well-identified family of software to
analyze would wish to rely on a static analysis tool that is complete
with respect to this set of programs, which means that it returns
abstract results that are always conclusive for these programs. Due
to undecidability (see section 1.3.3), completeness with respect to all
input programs cannot be achieved in the same time as soundness
and automation. The notion of partial completeness with respect to a
family of input programs weakens that of completeness by focusing
on a given set of programs to analyze. In theory, completeness is
achievable for a given program, which means that if one program to
analyze is given, it is possible to craft a static analysis tool that is
able to cope with it. However, this analyzer would of course not be
complete for all possible input programs, which means that it would
still fail on infinitely many others. This result generalizes to a finite
set of input programs. However, it does not extend to infinite sets of
programs, which is of course the common case.
     In practice, any analysis is a compromise between the precision
of the results and the resources (time and memory) it requires.
Parameterizable analysis tools can generally be tuned to either use
simpler abstract predicates, and idealy return faster, or use more
complex abstract domains for better precision, yet possibly at the
cost of increased time or memory consumption. Such parameters
are discussed in section 6.2.2. Furthermore, in some cases it is also
possible to trade some coverage of program inputs for faster
execution, based on the soundness under assumption of theorem
6.1: by adopting assumptions that restrict the set of executions that
are considered during the analysis (e.g., by using narrower input
ranges, or by considering only certain execution orders among
others), one may obtain both better run-time and better precision. In
particular, this approach is often acceptable in noncritical
applications or when all executions of interest are still covered.
     However, an important remark is that many static analysis tools
rely on an abstract interpretation function that is not monotone (due
to the computation of widening sequences, or to the use of
nonmonotone abstract operators as observed in chapter 3), which
means that increasing precision locally (using more accurate
predicates or restrictive assumptions) may fail to improve the overall
level of precision. Similarly, the consumption of resources by a static
analysis tool does not always increase when considering more
sophisticated abstract domains and analysis algorithms. In some
cases, improving precision (possibly by the means of an apparently
more costly analysis) may successfully prove certain states
unreachable, hence reducing the amount of work the analysis needs
to do for a given program. These remarks mainly show that tuning an
analysis for precision and more efficient use of resources is a hard
task in general that requires a good understanding of the analysis
tool and of the trade-offs that its parameterization implies. We
discuss these issues further later in this chapter.

6.2 Setting Up the Static Analysis of a Program

We now assume that the static analysis tool A is adequate to
compute a sound abstraction of the semantic property of interest,
and we discuss the next task, namely, the configuration of the
analysis and its execution.
   Configuring a static analysis tool can be a complex task. Thus, we
consider only the main aspects. We distinguish two sets of
parameters: first, section 6.2.1 focuses on soundness-critical points
such as the definition of the code to analyze; second, section 6.2.2
presents parameters supposed to guide the analysis and that may
affect its performance and precision by tuning the abstract domain
and iteration strategy.

6.2.1 Definition of the Source Code and Proof Goals
The most important parameters of a static analyzer designate the
code to analyze, the properties to attempt proving, and the
assumptions that are available to do that. We first discuss programs
and consider goals and assumptions afterward.
                                                     In the following,
Form of the Program to Verify: Complete versus Incomplete
we distinguish two common situations, depending on the form of the
analysis target program:
    We call whole-program analysis the static analysis of a program,
    the source code of which is fully available, and that should be
    verified in its own specific context.
    Conversely, we call program-fragment analysis the static
    analysis of a software component such as a library, that is
    meant to be called in a context specified by a general API
    (application programming interface).
The difference may seem subtle, yet these call for dissimilar ways to
configure the analysis.
   Whole-Program Analysis A whole-program analysis may take
place when the full program text is available. This case suits well the
verification of a software application at the end of its development
and before it is shipped. Indeed, a complete piece of software
generally consists of a well defined set of functions with a known
entry point, and the initial states and inputs are also usually well
specified. In the case of a whole-program analysis, we can supply
the analysis tool with
      all the program files (e.g., as a bunch of C files);
      the entry point (e.g., the function main); and
      information on all possible inputs (e.g., input ranges).
Depending on the tool, the files may need to be in a specific format.
For instance, unpreprocessed C code is often not supported by static
analyzers for the C language; then users should make sure to
preprocess their code, if possible with the preprocessor that is meant
to be used for compilation.
   The entry point usually boils down to the selection of a function.
   Information on inputs comprises ranges for all input variables of
the program, and also an abstraction of the content of the initial
memory states. For instance, let us discuss the case of C programs.
Depending on the compiler and the program loader, static memory
locations may be initialized to zero (initialization to zero of the static
space of the program), or simply to whatever value they store when
the program starts. Either way, the users should specify what
assumption the static analysis should make. Failure to do so would
lead to results that do not soundly account for the program
executions being considered. In general these assumptions may be
either encoded as plain assertions in the program to analyze or
communicated to the analysis tool as external parameters.
   Analysis of Program Fragments A program-fragment analysis
considers a piece of code that is not complete and hence cannot be
executed as is. For instance, when an application is incomplete
because its development is not finished yet, or because a part of it is
developed separately, we may not be able to supply all its
components to the analysis tool. Libraries also fall into this category:
by nature, a library comprises functions meant to be called by a
client application, and the internals of such client codes are unknown
when the library is developed. In this case, the data that should be
supplied to the static analysis are a bit more complex to define, and
include
     the available portion of the code;
     the definition of all the possible entry points for the part of the
     code that is available (usually, there are several of them,
     especially in the case of a library);
     the definition of the states that are expected for each entry point;
     and
     information of all other possible inputs.
Usually, most of these pieces of information are available as part of
APIs and documentations of software fragments. The specification of
the code to analyze, of the entry points, and of the expected inputs is
similar to the case of a whole-program analysis.
    However, the definition of states that are expected for each entry
point is usually much more complex than for a whole application. For
instance, let us consider the case where the program to analyze is a
library that implements a container data structure (e.g., a hash
table). Such a library typically provides functions to initialize the
container data structure, to add or remove an element, or to iterate
over the structure. Each of these should be called only in states that
meet some specific properties. For instance, a removal function may
be applied only to a well-formed container that contains the element
to suppress. As a consequence, one should communicate to the
analysis of each library function assumptions about the state of the
container. Depending on the analyzer, two main approaches can be
considered:
     use an interface provided by the analyzer to specify the initial
     states; or
     write a code harness that creates a valid initial state before
     calling a library function; this technique essentially reduces the
     analysis of a program fragment to that of a whole program,
     including the harness plus a library function (and of course, if
     the library has several entry point, its verification may require
     the implementation of several harnesses as well).
    Bottom-Up and Top-Down Analyses The distinction between
whole-program analysis and program-fragment analysis may have
other consequences for the way the analysis is performed. There are
several ways to analyze programs that consist of many functions or
procedures. Top-down analyses start from the entry function and
analyze other functions whenever a call site is encountered. Bottom-
up analyses start with basic functions and do not reanalyze functions
in their calling contexts. In general, top-down analyses are more
relevant in the case of a whole-program analysis, whereas bottom-
up are more naturally adapted to the analysis of program fragments,
even if it is entirely possible to apply top-down analyses to each
entry point of a library to verify, or to analyze a whole application in
bottom-up style. Top-down analyses can more easily make use of
the calling contexts of each procedure. The main advantage of the
bottom-up approach is to compute a summary per procedure (as
shown in section 5.4, in the case of a buffer overflow detection
analysis) that can be reused for each call site, thereby alleviating the
need to reanalyze procedure bodies multiple times. On the other
hand, procedure summaries often require more sophisticated
abstract domains. In particular, taking procedure calling contexts into
account requires more involved procedure summaries. Procedure
abstractions are defined and compared more in detail in section
8.4.1.
    Calls to External Code Another aspect related to the availability
of the code is when the program to analyze calls some external
functions that we cannot provide to the analyzer. This is the case
when analyzing a whole program or a program fragment that calls
one or several external libraries, or system calls. A possible reason
not to provide these components is that they may be very large and
would increase the analysis time too much. Another possible reason
is that they may be available only as precompiled binaries.
    The standard approach to solve this case is to rely on function
stubs or, for short, stubs. A stub is a function mockup that has the
same signature as the function it simulates but that does not contain
the full code. Instead, it just describes assumptions and assertions
that can be understood by the analyzer, so as to faithfully account for
the effect of the real function. For instance, let us consider a function
that computes the square root of an integer argument. Clearly this
function should apply only to non-negative values. Moreover, it will
always return a non-negative result. Therefore, its stub should
contain an assertion that its input is non-negative, and its result may
be any possible non-negative integer. Of course, this description is
overly conservative; however, we may hope that it is precise enough
for the analyzer to reason on the program that calls it.
Selection of Analysis Goals Before starting the analysis process, the
user should also make sure the analysis will work toward the right
property to verify. Depending on the analyzer, there are several ways
to achieve this.
    Most commonly, some analyzers are dedicated to the verification
of a specific property, and no parameterization is required in order to
specify this property. For instance, some static analysis tools are
designed specifically for the verification of the absence of a specific
set of run-time errors, for the verification of termination, or for
computing a conservative approximation of the set of reachable
control states.
    Sometimes, other tools require properties to be specified as code.
For instance, programming languages such as C or Java feature an
assertion mechanism, which can encode properties of the form
“whenever a given program point is reached, some given condition
over the values of the variables of the program should hold.” In this
case, the properties to verify should be integrated into the program
and be defined with the same semantics as the source language
itself.
    A last approach relies on external specification languages. In that
case, the documentation of the static analysis tool defines the syntax
and semantics of a language of assertions that remain external to
the program to analyze. The user should comply with this definition
and make sure to encode faithfully the property of interest.
    In all cases, and as we noted in section 6.1, it is important to
ensure the analysis will tackle the right property, so as to prevent it
from producing results that are unsound or irrelevant.
6.2.2 Parameters to Guide the Analysis
In addition to the program and property to verify, static analyzers
often take additional parameters to tune the way the analysis is
performed and its overall cost-accuracy performance. The next
paragraphs review a few common such parameters, and afterward
we discuss how they can be chosen.
Selection of the Abstract Domain Some static analysis tools implement
several abstract domains and may be set to use one or another. As
we have shown in the previous chapters, the abstract domain fixes
the set of logical predicates to be used for the analysis, their
computer representation, and the algorithms to reason over them
(e.g., to compute over-approximations of post-conditions and unions
of sets of states). Therefore, the choice of the abstract domain has
huge impact on the way the analysis performs. Choosing too
expressive an abstract domain may cause the analysis to take too
much time and/or too much memory. On the other hand, if the
abstract domain is not expressive enough, the analysis is likely to fail
to prove the intended results. In fact, using an abstract domain that
is not adapted may cause not only the analysis to lack precision and
to fail to prove the property of interest but also to explore a far larger
state space as a consequence of that, which means it may also
consume too much time and memory.
    In sections 2.2 and 3.2, we introduced a few common abstract
domains that can be used by analyzers that only need to manipulate
numerical constraints:
      Constants and intervals define non-relational abstractions (an
      abstract value cannot capture a constraint over two variables).
      Convex polyhedra and octagons define relational abstractions
      (some constraints over several variables may be expressed).
These remarks illustrate the considerations that should guide the
selection of the abstract domain: polyhedra bring high precision but
are costly (the number of constraints is not bounded by a function of
the number of variables), whereas the non-relational domains
mentioned above are strictly less expressive but much cheaper.
Some static analysis tools such as ASTRÉE [12] feature a switch that
allows selecting a specific abstract domain. The benefit is to tune the
precision/cost ratio.
    Additionally, section 5.1 described ways to define even more
expressive abstract domains from basic ones. For instance, we
presented reduced product of abstract domains as a way to express
conjunctions of constraints defined in distinct domains. We also
presented partitioning abstractions that allow capturing implication
properties, and to partition states or traces so as to gain
expressiveness. Some static analysis tools allow not only selecting
the abstract domain but also constructing it so as to capture a wider
class of logical properties.
    Furthermore, it is also possible to apply a more expressive and
expensive abstract domain in a local manner, using packing: the idea
is to cut down the cost of the expensive abstraction by limiting the
number of variables this expensive abstraction is applied to, to a
small group called pack [12]. The choice of the packing strategy has
no effect on soundness (whatever the packs, the analysis produces
an over-approximation of the behaviors of the program) but may
affect precision or cost.
                 Handling loops (or, equivalently, recursion) precisely
Iteration Strategy
and at a reasonable cost is one of the most challenging issues in
static analysis. In section 5.2, we showed a few techniques that
improve the precision of the analysis of loops. These techniques boil
down to simple additional parameters:
     Loop unrolling (section 5.2.1) unfolds the first iterations and
     postpones the application of abstract join and of widening to a
     later stage of the analysis of loops.
     Delayed widening (section 5.2.2) lets the analysis make use of a
     more precise abstract join (instead of widening) for a few
     iterations.
     Widening with threshold (section 5.2.2) slows down the loss of
     precision incurred by widening, so as to search more precise
     stable constraints.
     Post-fixpoint refinement iteration (section 5.2.3) lets the analysis
     continue after a post-fixpoint has been computed, so as to refine
     it by computing a few additional iterations.
    Each of these technique (as well as others) may be employed
and controlled by specific analysis parameters (number of unrolled
iterations, abstract joins and post-fixpoint iterations, number and
value of widening thresholds, etc.).
Analysis Coverage and Time-OutsThe amount of resources required by a
static analysis run is an important consideration. It may range from a
nonmeasurable amount of time and memory in the case of simple
analysis to days of computation on powerful machines when
attempting to verify strong semantic properties on large software. We
can cite various strategies that may be applied in order to bound the
duration when the analysis takes too long. For instance, time-outs
may specify an upper bound on the analysis time, so as to keep the
analysis cost under control. Failure to terminate within the time-out
bound would be interpreted as a failure to establish the property of
interest. Thus, it would not be unsound. Another approach is to let
the analysis deliberately ignore some well-specified parts of the
program, or behaviors, thereby relying on a specific instance of
soundness under assumption (theorem 6.1).
Analysis Outputs   Static analyzers also commonly feature options that
affect the analysis output. One option is to let the analysis produce
only basic (e.g., “pass”/“fail”) results that merely say whether the
property of interest could be proved or not. On the other hand, more
verbose logs provide additional information and are usually required
for the user to fully understand why a given run of the analyzer falls
short of proving the property of interest. The level of verbosity in
analysis logs impacts both the amount of resources required (due to
the time to produce the outputs and to the space to store them) and
the usability of the analysis (as we address in section 6.3).
                                 While many static analysis tools
Automatic Parameter Selection Methods
feature    manual     parameterization    methods,     automatic
parameterization is often the preferred choice for most users.
Indeed, manual parameterization requires both time and expertise,
especially when using an analyzer that is highly parameterizable.
Therefore, we list the main techniques for automatic selection of
static analysis parameters.
     Syntactic pre-analysis: Before the analysis starts, a
     preprocessing phase searches the code to analyze for some
     patterns and selects abstract domain and iteration strategies to
     use accordingly. For instance, this approach is extensively used
     in the ASTRÉE analyzer [12]. Since the pre-analysis is syntactic, it
     may not be robust enough to identify an accurate
     parameterization.
     Machine-learning-based pre-analysis: This approach lets the
     static analysis tool learn how to select its parameters efficiently
     thanks to precomputed relations among program syntactic
     features, analysis parameters, and corresponding results [18].
     Thus, it defines a more systematic way to construct syntactic
     pre-analyses.
     Semantic pre-analysis: This also takes place before the
     analysis but consists of another semantic static analysis that is
     generally much simpler than the main analysis [86]. This
     approach is often more robust than syntactic pre-analysis but
     harder to design.
     Semantic online analysis: A limitation of pre-analyses is that
     they cannot make use of all the semantic information computed
     by the main analysis (before they take place before it). Thus,
     another approach lets the main analysis parameterize itself.
     Such approaches are hard to design but can be very powerful.
     As an example, the co-fibered abstract domain [108]
     construction lets a static analysis select dynamically the kind of
     abstract predicates it requires. For example, it is possible to
     automatically adapt the widening strategy based on semantic
     information from the abstract states ([78]).
                                       When an analysis based on
Automatic versus Manual Parameterization
automatic parameterization fails to provide the expected level of
precision and performance, manual parameterization comes in
handy. Depending on the tool, it may involve
      adding command line parameters or filling in equivalent settings
      in a graphical user interface; or
      inserting directives as comments into the code of the program to
      analyze.
    In practice, a good approach consists of using automatic
parameterization first and tweaking the analysis parameterization
manually afterward. From the user point of view, the process is as
follows:
  1. Carefully set the parameters related to the definition of the code
      to analyze and property to verify.
  2. Leave      all    the   analysis-guiding   parameters      set  to
      default/automatic values, and run the analysis.
  3. Inspect the results (section 6.3).
  4. When the analysis takes too long or is too imprecise, investigate
      the reason for this.
  5. Attempt to remedy this with alternative manual parameters, and
      run the analysis again.
This method enjoys the advantages both of automatic
parameterization (less work or expertise required for the first
analysis) and of manual parameterization (ability to better tune the
analysis).

6.3 Inspecting Analysis Results

The previous section discussed the parameterization of a static
analysis before launching it, and we now turn to the next stage in the
analysis workflow, which aims at exploiting the results produced by
the analysis either to conclude the verification or to understand how
to improve the analysis parameterization so as to obtain more
satisfactory results.
                                                        The main
Analysis Success or Failure to Establish the Property of Interest
output most users are interested in is whether the static analysis
could achieve the proof of the property of interest ℘ on the input
program. In all cases, when the tool is supposed to be sound, the
answers are always conservative: when the analysis claims it
successfully proved the property ℘, we can naturally trust it holds,
but when the analysis reports a failure to prove it, the property may
hold or may not hold. When ℘ is global (e.g., “does the whole input
program terminate?”) and cannot be split into simpler ones, this
result boils down to a “yes” or “no” answer. When ℘ consists of a
conjunction of local properties, the analysis result also splits down
into smaller pieces of information. As an example, let us assume that
℘ denotes the absence of run-time errors in the input program p.
Then we can define the set O = {o0,…,on} of operations of p that are
potentially dangerous and may trigger a run-time error. Then ℘
writes down as “no execution crashes due to o0 and no execution
crashes due to o1 and … ” so that the analysis result also splits down
into a series of “yes” or “no” answers.
   In the following, we call alarm a negative report issued by the
analyzer, which means that the analysis failed to prove the property
of interest either as a whole (in the case of a global property) or
because one of its components could not be verified (in the case of a
conjunction of local properties). The next paragraphs discuss the
meaning and consequences of alarms raised at the end of a static
analysis and how to investigate them.
Semantics of Alarms and Soundness    In general, an alarm indicates not
only that the analysis fails to prove part or all of the target property
but also that a loss of precision is taking place.
    As an example, we consider the case of a static analysis that
attempts to verify the absence of out-of-bound array accesses in C
programs. When a C program attempts to write into an array, using
an index value that does not fit its bounds, several behaviors are
possible. The program may either crash due to a segmentation fault
or write into a memory location that is not within the array. In the
latter case, the execution will continue, albeit with a corrupt memory
state. Identifying the variable or structure stored at the memory
location that gets corrupted is very difficult in general. From the static
analysis perspective, it is very hard to account for such executions
where the memory was corrupted. Thus, a reasonable approach is to
let the analysis report an alarm when it cannot prove an array access
is safe, and to “cut out” the corresponding executions, which means
the analysis reports all possible array index out-of-bounds accesses
but does not say anything about what happens after such an
incident. At a high level, this analysis behavior is somewhat similar to
a parser that stops at the first error it encounters, as error recovery
would be hard to even specify. However, in the case of static
analyzers, it happens only for the executions that cannot be proved
correct. While this may look unsound (as a crash occurring after
several occurrences of out-of-bounds accesses may go unreported),
it is actually sound in the following sense: any program execution is
either correct or exhibits out-of-bounds accesses, and in that case,
the analysis will report at least one unverified array access
operation. This analysis behavior is an instance of the notion of
soundness under assumption described in theorem 6.1.
     The gist of this discussion is that the user should pay attention to
the way the static analysis resumes after an alarm:
      If it continues with an over-approximation of the possible states,
      the analysis still covers all executions, even after an erroneous
      behavior that corrupts the state.
      If it cuts out executions, the results after the alarm point are
      valid only for executions that do not exhibit such an erroneous
      behavior.
Additional Analysis OutputsIn addition to alarms, static analyzers also
often produce more extensive analysis logs. Logs are very useful to
understand the alarms produced by static analyzers. There are two
main kinds of logs:
     Logs that are produced at the end of the analysis can
     summarize global information, such as sound invariants that
     describe an over-approximation of all states at all program
     points.
     Logs that are produced during the analysis can only describe
     partial information that is made available at the time they are
     displayed.
Alarms Triage    As mentioned above, the fact that the analysis emits
some alarm does not mean the analyzed program does not satisfy
the semantic property of interest. Indeed, each alarm may be
      a true alarm that indicates a real defect of the program, and that
      can be observed on at least one concrete execution; or
      a false alarm that is due to the imprecision of the analysis.
When the analysis emits a number of alarms, the next step in the
verification process is to diagnose each alarm so as to decide
whether it is a true alarm or a false alarm. We call this process alarm
triage.
    Alarm triage allows not only understanding whether or not the
analyzed program satisfies the property of interest but also finding
out how to better configure the analysis (e.g., by manual
parameterization, as discussed in section 6.2) or by improving the
static analyzer itself (as discussed in chapter 5). When an alarm
turns out to be false, it is thus important to determine its origin:
      If it is due to overly imprecise assumptions provided in the
      analysis setup (as discussed in section 6.2), then we can simply
      fix these assumptions and resume the analysis.
      If it is because the abstract domain of the analyzer cannot
      express crucial proof steps, a more expressive abstract domain
      should be selected (if available) or implemented (this case is
      beyond the scope of this chapter).
      If it is due to imprecisions that stem from the iteration or the
      analysis algorithms, alternative parameters should be used so
      as to better guide the analysis (if available), or the analysis has
      to be reimplemented (again, in this chapter we consider only the
      user side of static analysis and do not discuss the design and
      implementation of the analyzer).
    Ideally, the triage of an alarm should produce either a concrete
counter-example that characterizes the problem or a set of logical
arguments that the analysis missed and would allow completing the
proof. Alarm triage is often a rather tedious and time-consuming
task; thus, we discuss three families of techniques to cope with it. In
practice, one often needs to combine several of these techniques.
Manual Inspection  The most basic method relies on a manual search
through analysis logs to localize a possible loss of precision or make
sure that the alarm corresponds to a real issue. To do this, the user
should look at invariants computed during the analysis and interpret
them so as to decide whether they show some imprecision that may
explain the analysis failure.
    In general, manual inspection requires some expertise from the
user, but a few basic techniques allow progressing more quickly. For
instance, it is usually better to start with the first alarm that is
reported, following the order of the analysis computation. Indeed,
when the analysis reports an alarm, it is often the sign that it starts
losing precision, and this loss of precision may cause a cascade of
alarms by domino effect. Thus, understanding the first report often
gives a clue about other subsequent alarms. Moreover, invariants at
critical points (e.g., loop heads) should be looked at first, as they
often correspond to natural program invariants and can thus more
easily be compared with the expected results.
Automatic Refinement   Several automatic techniques based on static
analysis may help better understand an alarm raised by a static
analysis. First, dependence analysis and slicing [109] compute
automatically the part of a program that has an impact on a specific
observation of program behaviors. In the case of an alarm, they can
extract the set of program commands, the result of which may affect
the occurrence or absence of an error, hence limiting the part of the
program that should be inspected. Backward analysis techniques
(section 5.5.3) can refine the information known about the
executions that would produce an error at an alarm point, and can
either lead to showing no error can happen at that point or help
come up with a counter-example. The idea is to compute a tighter
approximation of the executions that reach the alarm point and
violate the property of interest. When this tighter approximation is
empty, the alarm is proved false. Otherwise, it can still help better
characterize a counter-example. Last, constraint solving attempts to
identify the constraints over an execution that violates the property of
interest at the alarm point and to identify sufficient error conditions.
When a set of realizable error conditions is identified, we may be
able to produce a counter-example.
Empiric Ranking and Logical Clustering Techniques  Empiric techniques can
also be used so as to rank alarms and help better cope with them.
They do not need to perform any sound or formal proof search,
which opens a wide range of possibilities. For instance, ranking
based on kinds of alarms suggests addressing some class of issues
first (e.g., that are judged more severe, or easier to fix at a cheaper
cost). Also, machine learning techniques may help compute
categories of alarms that would help users better decide where to
look at first [66]. Last, empirical knowledge may show that a given
analysis tool provides more accurate results on certain families of
alarms than on others, which also suggests where to start. These
empiric techniques can be combined with the manual approach
discussed before. For example, when a clustering technique
identifies similarities between alarms, then users may initially
investigate the origin of only one alarm per cluster and assess
whether the other alarms of a cluster have a similar cause. This
makes triage simpler. Such techniques aim at reducing the amount
of time users need to spend on the manual investigation of alarms. A
particular case of logical clustering where alarms may be grouped
together to speed up investigation is when there exist dependences
among them [75]. Let us consider an example analysis for array
bound checking: when a possible out-of-bound access is detected in
a loop with index variable i, it is likely that other accesses in the loop
body and with the same index variable have the same issue, so that
corresponding alarms are related.
                               Analysis reparameterization may help
Reparameterization and Reanalysis
improve the analysis in terms of performance or precision. When
triage puts in evidence better parameter choices (e.g., by showing
that certain loops could be analyzed more precisely with a higher
number of unrolls), a new analysis is likely to improve the results
overall.
   However, this is not always the case; indeed, the frameworks of
chapters 3 and 4 (theorem 4.3) do not assume that the abstract
semantics is a monotone function (in fact, the widening used to
analyze loops is generally not monotone in its second argument);
thus, a local increase in precision (e.g., for the analysis of the body
of a given loop) may actually not improve the precision overall, or
even deteriorate it. Such effects may be quite nonintuitive. It is thus
useful for users to be aware of the behavior of the static analyzer
they rely on.
   Similarly, some alternative analysis parameters may be identified
that cut down the cost of the analysis. Again, a local performance
improvement may unintuitively cause a worse total analysis time. In
particular, when a new analysis uses less expressive abstract
domains and analysis algorithms, a loss of precision may also take
place and ultimately cause the analysis to be slower, as it may also
need to explore more program branches (due to the decrease in
precision).

6.4 Deployment of a Static Analysis Tool

To conclude this chapter, we discuss the deployment of a static
analysis tool in the software development workflow.
    In the following, we call dispatch model the way the analysis is
integrated into the software development process. Depending on the
application domain (e.g., safety-critical or not) and on the
requirements (e.g., short or long software development cycle), there
can be different dispatch models. Each case has implications related
to the kind of static analysis that can be used and to the usefulness
of partial analysis results.
    As it is not possible to account for all possible workflows, we
present in the following paragraphs two specific categories of
dispatch models, even though real cases most often fit somewhere
in between.
                         We call online analysis dispatch model a
Online Analysis Dispatch Model
setup where programmers frequently perform static analysis runs as
part of the development process. This means the software is
reanalyzed whenever updates are made, compiled, committed into a
revision system, or tested. The motivation for such a model is to
catch certain families of bugs early. An extreme case of in-line
analysis is the compiler-level analyses such as typing. Other
analyses may be deployed this way to verify safety properties
(absence of basic run-time errors) and security properties (absence
of illegal information flows, with a rather simple flow model). In this
model, developers should be able to take advantage by themselves
of the analysis outputs. Thus, the parameterization of the analysis
and the triage of alarms need to be lightweight. Moreover,
incremental and modular analysis techniques are much more
adapted to such a model, because of the speed and memory
consumption constraints. Indeed, developers cannot afford to wait
too long for analysis results, if they have to commit their updates
quickly. Depending on the criticality of the software, the developers
may be able to make great use of analysis tools that cover only a
well-specified set of program behaviors, or to take advantage of
partial triage of analysis alarms. Such an approach relies on the
soundness under assumption principle described in theorem 6.1. For
example, the INFER static analysis tool [14] is designed specifically
for this dispatch model. As another example, the CLOUSOT static
analysis tool [39] verifies code contracts over procedures in a
modular way and explicitly assumes that distinct pointer parameters
refer to memory regions that are not aliased. This means that the
analysis does not cover all executions but still covers all executions
satisfying this assumption, which allows for much faster analyses,
while users who are aware of this behavior will understand the scope
of the results.
                             We call off-line analysis dispatch model a
Offline Analysis Dispatch Model
setup where the analysis is performed as part of a validation phase
that is separate from the software design and implementation
stages. Then the software is not analyzed whenever it is modified
but only after larger sets of modifications are made. The verification
may be done each time a significant revision is issued. In the case of
critical software, verification is carried out by a team that is not taking
part in the actual programming (for the sake of separation of
concerns, or to rely on more specialized teams for each phase). As a
consequence, more costly analyses are feasible than in the case of
an in-line analysis (the analysis will not slow down developers). This
means that precise and global analyses can be successfully
deployed that way and address more involved classes of semantic
properties of interest (e.g., the computation of precise global
invariants, or the verification of absence of run-time errors in
complex software). Moreover, when a specialized team is
responsible for running the analysis, tools that require a higher level
of expertise (both for parameterization and for alarm triage) can be
used. Last, when the application domain requires thorough software
certification criteria to be met (as in avionics), soundness is critical.
Thus, the assumptions on which the analysis relies should be well
understood, and all alarms should be manually checked with help
from some interactive triage tools.
Hybrid Dispatch Models   The two cases discussed in the previous
paragraphs are a bit extreme, and most software development
processes lie somewhere in between. As an example, a possible
model relies on frequent periodic analysis runs, with dedicated
teams working closely with the developers to identify faults. Even
though it is not possible to summarize all such models here, the
principles presented in the previous paragraphs may serve as
guidelines to optimize general verification processes.
