7 Static Analysis Tool Implementation

Goal of This Chapter This chapter shows how to design and implement
a static analysis tool and demonstrates the strong parallel between
the concrete semantics, a concrete interpreter, the static analysis
definition, and its implementation. We provide source code in OCaml
for the implementation of two simple analyses that both target the
basic programming language introduced in figure 3.1 and that
respectively correspond to the compositional style presented in
chapter 3 and to the transitional style presented in chapter 4. We use
the OCaml language since it can express type definitions and
operations over abstract syntax trees, and symbolic computations in
a concise and intuitive manner.
   We assume that the main elements of the theoretical foundations
presented in chapters 3 and 4 are known (though it may be read in
parallel, or before the most advanced points of these two chapters
are fully mastered). In this chapter we focus on the implementation
of a non-relational static analysis since, as we noted in chapter 3,
relational abstract domains require more sophisticated data
structures and algorithms and are outside the scope of this book.
The code we provide is optimized not for efficiency but for size, so as
to make it as easy to understand as possible (though we comment
on efficiency later in this chapter).
Recommended Reading:    [S], [D] This chapter is important to designers
of static analysis tools. It should also be useful for readers and
students who seek a better understanding of the internals of static
analyzers. In fact, it may even be studied side by side with chapters
3 and 4, as we are considering the same language in this chapter.
On the other hand, it may be skipped by readers who are less
interested in the internals of a static analyzer, or by readers who are
more interested in the use of a static analyzer (although a good
understanding of the internal design of static analysis tools is helpful
when using one).
Chapter Outline  We follow the methodology exposed in previous
chapters, which defines the semantics first, then fixes the
abstraction, and lastly derives the analysis from the semantics and
the abstraction. In section 7.1 we define the representation of
programs, recall the concrete semantics, and show how it relates to
implementations of concrete interpreters. In section 7.2 we describe
the data structures that represent the abstract values and the
implementation of the basic operations on them. Section 7.3 focuses
on the implementation of the static analysis of expressions and
conditions. The last two sections describe the two kinds of analyses
studied in depth previously: section 7.4 discusses the
implementation of a static analyzer based on a compositional
semantics (as shown in chapter 3), and section 7.5 describes the
implementation of a static analyzer based on a transitional style
semantics (as shown in chapter 4).

7.1 Concrete Semantics and Concrete Interpreter

The first step toward the design of the analysis is the definition of the
syntax of programs and their semantics. We cover this phase in this
section.
Syntax of Programs   We use the same language as in chapter 3, and
figure 7.1(a) recalls the grammar of figure 3.1.
    In comparison with the example language of chapter 4 (section
4.4), this language lacks only the dynamic goto (goto E ). For
illustrative brevity we chose to use this minimal common syntax in
illustrating implementation code for both compositional and
transitional styles of static analyzers. Having studied the code, the
readers will find it easy to extend the transitional-style code to cover
other language constructs (dynamic gotos, function calls, etc.).
    Figure 7.1(b) shows the definition of the corresponding data types
in OCaml. This definition follows very closely the grammar of figure
7.1(a), except for commands, where data types also need to embed
a notion of labels, so as to support the transitional-style analysis of
chapter 4. Constants are denoted by type const, which is defined
here as int, namely machine integers. Similarly, figure 7.1(b) lets
variable names be designated by consecutive non-negative integers
(as in x0,x1,…), which will make code simpler later. Types bop, rel,
expr, and command all boil down to sum types, defined by lists of
constructors that describe all the ways to build a value of these
types. For instance, expr stands for expressions, and an expression
is either a constant Ecst c or a variable Evar v, or the application of a
binary operator to a pair of expressions Ebop (b, e0, e1) (where b is
the operator, and e0 and e1 are the sub-expressions). Conditions
are defined by a product type that encloses the comparison operator,
the variable, and the constant. Commands are described by two
types. First, type command also boils down to a sum type, with six
cases that correspond to the six basic kinds of commands of figure
7.1(a). Second, type com consists of pairs made of an integer (the
type label) and an element of type command: the integer stands for
the program point at which this command occurs, and the second
element defines the command.
Representation of Memory States (or Memories)We now show that the
concrete semantics is surprisingly close to an interpreter, namely, a
program that inputs an abstract syntax tree and an initial memory
state and performs the evaluation of the program starting from this
memory state.
    Figure 7.1
    Syntax of programs

   We have provided a representation for program abstract syntax
trees in figure 7.1(b), but we still need a representation for memory
states. Recall that a memory was defined in chapter 3 as a function
from variables to values:
                             M=X→V
In figure 7.1(b), we let the representation of a variable be an integer
value. Assuming that the variables of a program are always a
contiguous sequence of integers starting from 0, we can simply let a
memory be represented by an array, where the cell of index i
denotes the value of the variable i. The definition of the type mem is
thus trivial and provided in figure 7.2. In the following, we note read
and write for two functions to read and write into a variable:
    Function read: var -> mem -> const inputs a variable index and
    a memory, and returns the value of the variable.

            Figure 7.2
            Definition of memory states and of states

    Function write: var -> const -> mem -> mem inputs a variable
    index, the new value, and a memory and returns the memory
    obtained after the write.
  Moreover, a program state is made of a label and a memory.
Therefore, the corresponding type state is defined as a pair type
shown in figure 7.2.
Semantics    of           Figure 7.3(a) recalls the semantics of
                  Expressions
expressions as defined in chapter 3, and figure 7.3(b) provides an
implementation for this evaluation algorithm. For clarity, we show the
type of the function sem_expr in the comment above its definition.
This evaluation function inputs an expression and a memory and
returns the value of the expression in that memory. It is defined
recursively over the syntax of expressions, just like the semantics. It
relies on a function binop to compute the result of the application of
any binary operator to any pair of values, in the same way as f⊙
(since this function is trivial, we omit it). We remark that this
interpreter follows precisely the same structure as the semantics of
expressions.
    Following the same principles, figure 7.4 recalls the semantics of
condition tests and presents its implementation. This interpreter
simply applies a function relop, which computes the value of any
comparison operation applied to any pair of values (since this
function is trivial, we omit it). Again, the semantics of Boolean
expressions is very close to the code of the interpreter for Boolean
conditions shown in figure 7.4(a).
                                  Figure 7.5(a) recalls the definition
Compositional Semantics of Commands
of the semantics of commands. This semantics takes a slightly
different form compared to the semantics of expressions and
conditions since it operates on sets of memory states. As a
consequence, the equivalent interpreter differs from the semantics of
commands since it simulates only one run of the program.

    Figure 7.3
    Evaluation of expressions
    Figure 7.4
    Evaluation of Boolean expressions

    Its definition is given in figure 7.5(b). If we accept the fact that it
operates on a single element rather than on a set, it is mostly similar
to the mathematical definition in figure 7.5(a). Even then, the cases
of the skip commands, sequences of commands, assignments and
input commands are very similar in both versions. Minor differences
arise in the case of conditional commands, and loop commands. In
the case of conditional commands, the semantics needs to compute
the union of the output states of both branches, whereas the
interpreter evaluates only one branch, according to the result of the
condition. In the case of loop commands, we observe the same
difference. The reason for this is that the interpreter computes the
effect of a single execution, whereas the semantics accounts for all
of them. It would be possible to design a concrete interpreter that
computes all executions of a program and that follows the semantics
in a very faithful manner, but it would not terminate whenever the
program has at least one non-terminating execution. Despite this
difference, the structure of the code of the interpreter for these two
commands remains similar to that of the mathematical definition of
their semantics. Therefore, the interpreter code gives a strong
intuition for the definition of the semantics, and vice versa, although
they are not completely identical.

    Figure 7.5
    Evaluation of commands
     Figure 7.6
     Transition step

Transitional   Semantics   of   Commands  We can also provide an
implementation for the transition relation used in chapter 4, which
expresses how a program may step from one state to the next one.
In the following, we let a program be represented by a data type
prog. To navigate through the program, we assume the following two
functions are defined:
     Function next: prog -> label -> label inputs a program and a
     label (program point); it then returns the successor label (e.g.,
     as defined in section 4.4).
     Function find: prog -> label -> com inputs a program and a label;
     it then returns the command corresponding to this label.
   The function step inputs a program p and a state (l, m) and first
searches for the command located at label l; then it computes the
next operation to be performed by the program depending on the
form of this command. This function is presented in figure 7.6. In
each case, we remark that its definition follows the same structure as
the compositional semantics of figure 7.5. For instance, in the case
of an assignment command, it also evaluates the expression and
carries out the write operation, and it then returns the resulting
memory state together with the label corresponding to the next
statement to execute. In the case of the input statement, this function
assumes that a value is read from an oracle; thus, it computes a
single execution. In this point of view, it is similar to the definition of
figure 7.5.

    Figure 7.7
    Non-relational abstraction machine representation

    The evaluation of a call to this function corresponds to a single
step of program execution (we remark that it does not perform any
iteration in the case of a loop command). To compute a complete
execution, one simply needs to call this function step repeatedly.

7.2 Abstract Domain Implementation

As noted in chapter 3, it is usually better to separate the design of
the abstraction and that of the abstract interpreter itself. We follow
the same approach in this chapter; thus, this section focuses on the
implementation of the abstract domain, of the data structures to
represent the abstract elements, and of the basic operations on them
(bottom and top constants, abstract inclusion test, abstract union,
widening, scalar operations, condition tests, etc.).
Data Types    We first need to set the representation of the non-
relational abstraction. In this paragraph, we assume that we use the
value abstract domain based on signs defined in example 3.6 (figure
3.5(b)). We discuss other non-relational abstract domains in the end
of the section.
    The types of abstract elements are shown in figure 7.7:
     The type val_abs describes the elements of the value abstract
     domain and consists of a sum type; it consists of four
     constructors corresponding to each of the abstract elements
     ⊥,⊤,[≥ 0],[≤ 0].
     The type nr_abs describes the elements of the non-relational
     abstract domain, using arrays to represent functions (as such, it
     is very similar to the type mem used for the concrete interpreter;
     moreover, we assume it supports the same read and write
     operations to access or modify the abstract value associated to
     a variable).
                                        Figure 7.8 displays the source
Operations over the Value Abstract Domain
code for the operations on the value abstract domain. These include
    the val_incl function, which decides whether the abstract
    ordering relation holds for a pair of abstract elements;
    the function val_cst, which implements the ϕV operation, which
    maps a constant to an abstract element that over-approximates
    it (in the case of the constants abstraction, it coincides with the
    best abstraction function),
    the function val_sat, which over-approximates the effect of
    condition tests,
    the function val_ajoin, which over-approximates concrete
    unions, and
     the function val_binop, which implements the computation of
     for each operator ⊙ of the language (it is not shown fully).
The function val_sat inputs refines an abstract value using on the
condition expressed a comparison operator and a constant; for
instance, val_sat Csup 8 Atop returns Apos because all numbers
greater than 8 are positive. The structure of each of these functions
is quite straightforward. The functions val_binop, val_sat, and
val_join are defined by case analysis, just like the mathematical
functions that they implement. Moreover, the constant val_top is the
top abstract value, which approximates any set of scalars. Last, the
constant val_bot defines the bottom element. We note that this
lattice has finite height; thus, val_join can be used not only as an
abstract union operator but also as a widening (as shown in section
3.3.3).
                                              Figure 7.9 presents the
Operations over the Non-Relational Abstract Domain
implementation of the operations over the non-relational domain
abstract elements. The function nr_is_le decides abstract ordering
by checking that inclusion holds for each variable; thus, it boils down
to an iteration over the abstract environment. The function nr_join
computes an over-approximation for the union of sets of stores and
also proceeds component per component. The function nr_is_bot
checks whether an abstract element describes exactly the empty set
of memory states. Last, nr_bot inputs an abstract element and
returns an element describing the empty set of stores, over the same
variables. We remark that each of these functions simply uses the
operations over the value abstract domain.
Using Another Non-Relational Abstract Domain     The abstract domain
implementation provided in figures 7.7, 7.8, and 7.9 may look
compact and trivial, but it corresponds to a very simple abstract
domain. Realistic static analyses are likely to require much more
expressive abstract domains. As observed in the previous
paragraph, in the case of a non-relational domain based on a
different value abstraction, we can simply reuse the code of figure
7.9 and substitute our implementation of the lattice of signs
(including the type val_abs of figure 7.7 and the operations shown in
figure 7.9) with the implementation of the new (and more realistic)
value abstract domain. To illustrate this, we consider an alternate
implementation of the value abstract domain, based on the constants
abstraction. This value abstraction is based on the following abstract
elements:
     ⊥, which represents no value (as usual);
     abstract elements of the form [n]C for all scalars n—the element
     [n]C represents only the scalar value n; and
Figure 7.8
Implementation of the operations on the value abstraction
    Figure 7.9
    Implementation of the operations on the non-relational abstraction

      ⊤, which represents any set of values.
The implementation of this value abstract domain is shown in figure
7.10. The data type for the representation of the abstract elements
boils down to a simple sum type, with three constructors,
corresponding, respectively, to ⊥, to elements of the form [n]C, and to
⊤. The operations follow from this definition, and their code is quite
straightforward as well.
    The implementation of a more sophisticated non-relational
domain (e.g., intervals) would follow the same principles. Obviously,
a separate widening operator is required when the value domain has
infinite chains. The use of a relational abstract domain would require
more radical changes since type nr_abs would not be reused, and all
the functions of figure 7.9 would need to be replaced with code
implementing entirely different algorithms. We do not discuss this
topic in this book and refer the reader to the APRON library [63] for the
presentation of the interface of a relational abstract domain.

7.3 Static Analysis of Expressions and Conditions

We now assume that the implementation of a scalar abstract domain
is available and follows the structure shown in section 7.2. In this
section, we implement static analysis functions for scalar
expressions and for Boolean conditions. Indeed, these functions will
be useful both for the analysis based on a compositional semantics
(chapter 3) and for the analysis based on a transitional semantics
(chapter 4).
    Figure 7.10
    Alternate implementation of a value abstraction: constants

Analysis of Scalar Expressions Figure 7.11 shows the analysis of scalar
expressions. Figure 7.11(a) recalls the definition given in section 3.3,
and figure 7.11(b) shows the corresponding implementation. These
functions compute an over-approximation for the result of an
expression, when evaluated in a memory described by a given
abstract pre-condition. We observe that the forms of both definitions
are very similar and follow the inductive structure of scalar
expressions, just like the concrete semantics of expressions (figure
7.3):
    In the case of a constant, the approximation is provided by the
    val_cst function.
    In the case of a variable, the approximation of its value is read in
    the non-relational abstract state thanks to function read.

    Figure 7.11
    Static analysis of scalar expressions

     The effect of binary operators is over-approximated by the
     function val_binop.
We remark that each case in this function simply uses an operation
defined as part of the value abstract domain, in section 7.2. This
explains why the code in figure 7.11(b) is so concise and simple.
Using another non-relational domain instead of the sign abstract
domain would not require the function ai_expr to be modified. On the
other hand, and as we remarked in section 3.3, the use of a
relational abstract domain would require a radical structure change,
and more sophisticated algorithms.
Analysis of Condition TestsAs remarked in sections 3.3 and 4.4.4, the
analysis of a condition test B consists of the abstract interpretation of
a function ℱB or filterB that filters out states depending on whether
they satisfy B or not. As noted in section 5.5.1, it can be viewed as a
backward analysis of the standard semantics of Boolean
expressions (recalled in figure 7.4) that enriches abstract states with
information derived from the condition. Therefore, its structure is
different from that of ai_expr. The function ai_cond shown in figure
7.12 applies the function val_sat defined in section 7.2 to compute a
sound over-approximation of the values that satisfy the condition B .
It returns either the abstract state ⊥ when the condition is not
feasible, or the refined abstract state otherwise.

     Figure 7.12
     Code of the static analysis of condition tests

7.4 Static Analysis Based on a Compositional Semantics

At this point, we have implemented the operations related to the
abstract domain, and functions to analyze expressions and
conditions. Based on this, we now construct a static analyzer that
inputs a program and an abstract pre-condition (which is usually
defined as ⊤ at the beginning of a complete program, meaning that
we assume no information is available at that point) and computes
an abstract post-condition that over-approximates all program
behaviors. This analysis implements the definitions of section 3.3.
Analysis of Commands The abstract semantics of a command consists
of a function that inputs an abstract pre-condition and returns an
over-approximated abstract post-condition. In section 3.3, it was
defined by induction over the syntax. We recall it in figure 7.13(a).
The direct implementation of the function ai_com is shown in figure
7.13(b), and also proceeds by induction over the syntax. Let us
discuss more specifically the case of a few kinds of commands.
    When the input abstract element denotes the empty set of
memory states, the analysis immediately returns the bottom element
as well.
    The analysis of a sequence boils down to the composition of the
analysis of each of the sub-commands, in the same way as the
concrete semantics composes the semantics of each sub-command.
    Just like in the concrete semantics, the analysis of an assignment
command evaluates the expression and writes the result in the
position corresponding to the variable. The only difference with the
concrete semantics is that the evaluation of the expression takes
place in the value abstract domain (using ai_expr) instead of the set
of machine integers.
    The analysis of a condition command consists of three phases: it
first performs the analysis of the condition test (for both the true and
false branches, which, respectively, correspond to the Boolean
expression and to its negation); second, it performs the analysis of
both branches; and last, it applies the abstract join operator ai_join
(defined in section 7.2).
Figure 7.13
Abstract interpretation of programs
    The case of loop commands is more complex and interesting.
The analysis of a loop requires the computation of a sequence of
abstract iterates, until it converges (section 3.3.3). To implement this,
we define the higher-order function postlfp: it inputs a function f and
an abstract element a and checks if (f a) is smaller than a according
to the abstract ordering; if so, it terminates; otherwise, it computes
an abstract join and calls itself again so as to compute one more
iterate. The analysis of the loop then simply uses this function: it
calls it with the function f_loop as an argument, which describes the
analysis of one iteration of the loop, including the analysis of the
condition test (the condition should evaluate to true to stay in the
loop) and the analysis of the body of the loop. When the iteration
returns the loop head invariant, it applies the analysis of the
condition test again for the loop exit (the condition should then
evaluate to false).
    Note that we assumed a lattice of finite height, so that any
sequence of increasing iterates eventually stabilizes. Thus, abstract
iteration can use ai_join; if we remove this assumption, we would
need to use a function ai_widen that implements widening instead of
ai_join.
    This concludes the implementation of the design of the analysis.
To analyze a program, we simply need to call function ai_com, with
the program to analyze and the abstract pre-condition as arguments.
Usually, we make no assumption on the initial state and let the
abstract pre-condition be the top element.
    As remarked in section 3.3, this static analysis function can easily
be instrumented to also accumulate an abstraction of the reachable
states at any program point. This modification requires a global table
that maps labels to local abstract states and supports two functions:
     storage_find: label -> nr_abs (retrieval of the—possibly bottom
     —abstract state recorded at a given label)
     storage_add: label -> nr_abs -> unit (update of the abstract
     state at a given label)
Then the accumulation of the reachable abstract states at any
program point boils down to a single line addition in the beginning of
function ai_com so as to join its argument aenv with the element
previously associated to l in this global map:

Optimizing the Representation of Abstract States     So far, we have
deliberately opted for a representation that leads to simpler yet less
efficient code. The choice of efficient data structures is crucial to
achieve efficient static analysis algorithms.
    First, the abstract states could be represented as a coalescent
product (example 5.5). So far, we let the bottom abstract state be
represented as an array of val_bot elements, which makes testing
for bottom inefficient. By contrast, the coalescent product
representation suggests using a sum type to describe nr_abs, with
one case denoting the bottom abstract state and another case for
non-bottom abstract states.
    Second, the use of an array structure for the non-bottom abstract
states leads to inefficient copies in write. A real-world static analyzer
would use more efficient data structures, such as persistent
structures, that alleviate the need for such copies.
Improving the Analysis  In chapter 5, we showed several advanced
static analysis techniques. Many of these can be applied to the static
analyzer that we have shown in this section, without adding much
complexity to the code.
   We have already discussed in section 7.2 and in the previous
paragraphs how another abstract domain could be used instead of
the basic signs abstraction used above:
     The use of another non-relational domain would require local
     changes to the value abstraction, as shown in figure 7.10.
     The use of a relational domain would require more global
     changes affecting ai_expr and ai_cond.
    The use of an abstract domain that has infinite chains would
    necessitate the use of a widening operator ai_widen instead of
    abstract union in function postlfp.
   Section 5.2 presented several loop analysis techniques, such as
loop unrolling, delayed widening, and decreasing iterations. They
can all be implemented inside the functions postlfp and ai_com. As
an example, the following postlfp function will unroll all loops twice:

This function uses an accumulator to join separately unrolled
iterations and the non-unrolled iterations, but except for this, it
behaves entirely like the initial version of postlfp.

7.5 Static Analysis Based on a Transitional Semantics

We now provide an implementation for a second version of the
analysis, which relies on the transitional framework of chapter 4.
Abstract Interpretation of an Execution Step  First, we discuss the
implementation of the function that computes the effect of all
possible one-step transitions from a control point and abstract state.
Essentially, this function over-approximates the effect of the
transition relation that is used as a basis to design the analysis
presented in chapter 4. The function ai_step is shown in figure 7.14.
It inputs three arguments:
      The pair (l,c) designates a program point (label) and the
      associated command.
      The label lnext designates the next program point that follows
      the command c; this is useful whenever the execution of a
     single step from the control state l may complete the execution
     of the command c and branch to the next command.
     The abstract element aenv designates the current abstract
     memory at program point l.
It outputs a list of pairs made of a program point and an element of
the non-relational abstract memory; each pair in that list denotes a
program point after one transition step from (l,aenv) and an over-
approximation of the memories after that transition. This function is
sound in the sense that it accounts for all possible one-step
transitions from (l,aenv).
    The function ai_step performs a case analysis on the statement c.
Most cases can actually be directly related to a case in the definition
of the function ai_com presented in section 7.4:
     Skip commands, assignment commands, and input commands
     boil down to a one-step transition and are thus analyzed exactly
     in the same way as in section 7.4.
     A one-step transition at the beginning of a conditional command
     boils down to the evaluation of the test and the subsequent
     branching; thus, the analysis simply applies the condition test
     analysis function ai_cond on each of the two branches and
     returns the pairs made of the first label of each branch, with the
     corresponding new abstract state.
     The case of a loop statement is very similar to that of a
     conditional command; the only difference is that it branches to
     the loop head in the true case and to the next statement in the
     false case.
The function ai_step uses all the basic functions that were used by
ai_com defined in section 7.4. Indeed, the analysis of assignment
statements relies on the same function ai_expr for the analysis of
expressions, and the analysis of conditions is done by the same
function ai_cond. Therefore, both analyses share most of the code.
                        To compute the effect of arbitrarily long
Global Iteration Function
sequences of steps in the abstract, we need to iterate the function
ai_step. In chapter 4 this was done using a worklist algorithm.
Therefore, we now provide an implementation for this algorithm in
figure 7.15. This function proceeds as follows:

    Figure 7.14
    Abstraction of the transition relation

    It initializes the global table global_tbl that is meant to store the
    abstract states associated to each program point (label) of the
    program being analyzed. In the beginning this structure only
    stores an invariant at the entry label l; it is subsequently updated
    whenever a program point is visited by the analysis.
    It initializes the worklist wlist with the entry program label; this
    structure is also updated whenever the analysis visits a new
    control state for which no stable invariant has been computed
    yet.
    Then it picks a program label l from the worklist and carries out
    the analysis of all the transitions from l:
– It retrieves the corresponding command c and the current
 abstract memory aenv at l.
– It computes all the possible transitions from this point, using
 the function ai_step presented in the previous paragraph.
– For each element of the list (lnext, apost), it checks whether
 the new abstract memory is included in the previously known
 abstract memory at this label. If so, lnext does not need to be
 put back into the worklist; otherwise, it adds lnext to the
 worklist and updates the abstract memory at this program
 label.

Figure 7.15
Abstract interpretation of transitional semantics: global iterator
When the function ai_iter terminates, the worklist is empty, which
means that the analysis stabilized at all labels (program points) and
thus global_tbl stores a sound over-approximation of all the memory
states that may reach each label (program point) in the program.
    Note that the implementation in figure 7.15 has some gap from
the algorithm in figure 4.5, yet the equivalence of the two is easy to
observe. The difference on surface comes from the fact that the
algorithm in figure 4.5 is macroscopic, while the implementation in
figure 7.15 is microscopic. One iteration in figure 4.5 visits all the
program labels in the worklist, and a new worklist of labels to visit
next is constructed for the next iteration. On the other hand, one
iteration in figure 7.15 picks and visits one label from the worklist,
and new labels to visit next are added to the worklist. The F ♯ part in
figure 4.5 is macroscopic too, making one-step transitions for all the
labels in the worklist, partitioning the results by the labels, and
joining all at each label into a single abstract memory.
Implementation in figure 7.15 has the same effect as F♯ except that it
is microscopic, making one-step transition from a label and joining
the memories produced by the one-step transition with the existing
ones at the next labels.
    As we have remarked above, the implementations of the static
analysis derived from the compositional semantics and from the
transitional semantics share most of their code. The main difference
is the way they deal with iteration. In the case of the former, the
iteration is local to the analysis of loops, whereas the analysis of
other statements boils down to the composition of functions; thus,
the function ai_com calls postlfp locally when it needs to analyze a
loop. In the case of the latter, the iteration is global, and the main
analysis function is the worklist iteration function ai_iter, which calls
ai_step for the analysis of each transition.
Improvements of the AnalysisAs in section 7.4, the implementation of
the analysis presented in figures 7.14 and 7.15 can be improved in
many ways.
   Since all the code related to the abstract domain is shared with
the analysis of section 7.4, any change to a more expressive
abstract domain would be done the same way. In case of a switch to
a domain with infinite chains, a widening operator needs to be used
instead of nr_ajoin in the iteration function ai_iter.
   Optimizations related to the iteration strategy should be done
inside the ai_iter function. For instance, techniques such as unrolling
(section 5.2.1) should be integrated there. Similarly, when using a
widening operator and applying it only at specific points, the
selection of widening points should be carried out in this function too.
