8 Static Analysis for Advanced Programming Features

Goal of This Chapter This chapter discusses the analysis of more realistic
programming languages than those considered so far. Indeed, previous
chapters focus on the foundations of static analysis, and hence opt for a
somewhat contrived language. We now aim at considering full-featured
languages.
    Real-world programming languages feature arrays, pointers,
dynamic memory allocation, functions, and other constructions than the
basic arithmetic and Boolean operators considered so far. This chapter
provides a high-level view of the static analysis techniques for such
programming language features. As the range of these features is
quasi-infinite (e.g., exceptions, multi-staged meta programming,
parameterized modules, and dynamic dispatches), and the academic
literature on their analysis is also very wide and thorough, we do not
aim for an exhaustive coverage. Instead, we consider a few common
and representative constructions and present the most significant
techniques that cope with it. For each construction, we summarize the
concrete semantics at a high level, discuss the salient properties related
to static analysis, and present the main abstractions. We do not provide
in-depth discussion of the analysis algorithms (although we give the
underlying intuitions), as it would go beyond the scope of this
introductory book (instead, we provide references). We stress the link
between the properties of interest and the abstractions that are required
to cope with them. Note that our approach benefits from the advantages
of the abstract interpretation methodology as presented in previous
chapters; indeed, we rely on the facts that the concrete semantics
serves as a basis for the analysis design and that the analysis
algorithms derive from the abstraction, so that the choices of the
semantics and of the abstraction are key.
Recommended Reading:   [S] (Master), [D], [U] (2nd reading, depending on
need). Engineers and students can skip this chapter in a first reading
and revisit it when dealing with the analysis of software relying on more
advanced programming features. Teachers will find here examples that
can be used to illustrate in classes and practical sessions.
Chapter OutlineSections 8.1 and 8.2 first discuss the step-by-step design
of abstract interpreters in the framework of chapter 4 for two common
dynamic programming features: pointers and functions. While doing so,
we demonstrate the convenience of the semantics-based approach to
static analysis. Indeed, the design of an analysis is driven by the
concrete semantics and the abstraction. Therefore, the presence of
pointers and procedures does not require fundamentally different
frameworks to formalize, and prove the analysis correct, even though
novel abstractions need to be used.

     Figure 8.1
     Syntax of an example language with pointers and dynamic memory allocations

   Subsequently, sections 8.3 and 8.4 focus more on the abstractions
required to cope with complex programming languages. These two
sections describe a few common programming languages features and
corresponding basic abstractions. Features are treated separately, and
abstractions are mostly presented at a high level, for the sake of
concision. Section 8.3 focuses on features related to memory states,
whereas section 8.4 studies features related to control states.

8.1 For a Language with Pointers and Dynamic Memory
Allocations
8.1.1 Language and Concrete Semantics
Let us consider an imperative language that admits memory locations
as values. The syntax of this example language is shown in figure 8.1.
We extend the imperative language of section 4.4 (figure 4.6) with the
constructs that generate and use memory locations.
    A malloc expression allocates an isolated fresh memory and returns
its address. We let the allocated size be always a unit size that can
store integers, labels, or addresses. (A more realistic construct for the
dynamic memory allocation is considered in section 8.3.4.) Dereference
expression *E computes a location value from E and then returns the
value stored at this location. Indirect assignment *E1 ≔ E2 computes a
location from E1 and stores the value of E2 into the location.
Example 8.1 (Language semantics) Consider the following program:

After the first statement, “x ≔ malloc”, the memory is {x ↦ a}, where the a is the address of a
fresh memory location. After the second statement, “y ≔ &x”, the memory becomes {x ↦ a, y ↦
x}. Then the assignment “*x ≔ 5” assigns integer 5 to the address stored in x; hence, the
memory becomes {x ↦ a, y ↦ x, a ↦ 5}. Then the last assignment “*y ≔ *x” dereferences the
address (a) stored in x, gets 5, and stores it to the address (x) stored in y. Hence, the memory in
the end is

                                  {x ↦ 5, y ↦ x, a ↦ 5}.
    This concrete semantics is formalized in the following.
Concrete Transitional Semantics Given a program, its initial states I, and the
set L of the labels for its statements, the transitional-style semantics
(chapter 4) is the least fixpoint of the following semantic function F:

where

   Before we define the transition relation ↪ ⊆ S × S between concrete
states, we have to define the semantic domains. The memories are as
before, maps from locations to values, yet the location (address)
domain A is extended to include dynamically allocated memory
addresses as well as program variables. Since such locations can also
be values of expressions, the value domain V contains such locations
as well as integers (for integer expressions) and labels (for goto-target
expressions):

The H set denotes the locations generated by the malloc expressions.
Given a program, every malloc expression is assumed to have a
unique number µ, writing mallocµ. Let the set of these malloc-site
numbers be Nsite. Then we can model the domain of memory addresses
as
                             H = Nsite × N.
Thus, the addresses of fresh locations from a mallocµ are (µ, 0), (µ,
1),…
   Now we define the transition relation ↪ for the indirect assignment,
which is the only new statement added to the imperative language of
section 4.4 (figure 4.6). If label l is an indirect assignment statement,
then its transition is

where the update(m, ν1, ν2) returns the same memory as m except that
location ν1 has value ν2. For example, for assignment statement “*x ≔
3” the evaluation of x will return a location, a stored value in x, into
which integer 3 is stored.
   The evalE (m) computes the value of expression E given memory m.
For expressions, there are new constructs that generate or dereference
locations. The evaluation function eval for these three pointer
expressions, together with the reminder of the variable expression case,
are as follows:

where fetch(m, ν) returns the value of m at location ν.
  In summary, the types of the above semantic operations are

   Though the programs in the above language may easily have two
expressions point to the same location (alias), when we design a a
static analysis we do not need a separate concern about how to handle
the alias behavior. This is because all behaviors of programs are
defined within the semantics, and the alias behavior is one of the
phenomena that appear from the semantics. Thus, in designing a static
analysis it is sufficient to focus on the semantics. This is the power and
convenience of semantics-based static analysis framework (chapters 3
and 4).
   Now, designing a sound static analysis boils down to designing a
sound abstract semantics.

8.1.2 An Abstract Semantics
Following the framework of chapter 4, we define an abstract semantics
as follows:

where ↪# is the one-step abstract transition relation ⊆ S# × S#.
  At this level, all things remain the same as described in chapter 4.
The function π partitions a subset of L × M# by the labels, returning an
element in L → ℘(M#). The abstract state domain S# and the abstract
transition relation ↪# need to satisfy the framework’s required
conditions:
     We design the set L → M# of abstract states as a CPO that is
     Galois connected with ℘(L × M):

     We design the abstract memory M# as a CPO that is Galois
     connected with ℘(M):

     We need to check that the abstract transition relation ↪# as a
     function satisfies the soundness condition:

     We need to check that the abstract union operators ∪# and
     satisfy the soundness condition:

Then, for any input program, the algorithms of section 4.3 soundly
approximate the concrete semantics of the program.

Abstract Domains The abstract domains S#, M#, V#, and A# are all CPOs
that are Galois connected with the corresponding concrete domains:

where

Now, the abstract domain M# is the parameter.
Example 8.2 (A memory abstract domain) An example of such a domain M# is

                                    M# = (X ∪ Nsite) → V#,

given that V# is a Galois connected CPO. The X and Nsite are finite sets of, respectively, the
variables and the allocation sites in the input program.
    The abstraction and concretization functions are as follows:

Example 8.3 (An abstract value domain) An example abstract value domain V#, a CPO that is
Galois connected,

is achieved by abstracting kind-wise a set of values (integers, labels, and/or locations). We
abstract its set of integers into an abstract integer, its set of labels into an abstract label, and a
set of locations into an abstract location:

where

The abstract integers, abstract labels, and abstract locations need to be Galois connected
CPOs:

Note that the set of variables X and mallocsites Nsite are finite for a program; thus, the
powersets of those sets can be used as finite abstract domains.

Abstract Transition ↪# Given the above abstract domains, we define the
abstract transition relation ↪# as follows:

Note that the abstract transition is identical to the concrete one except
that it uses abstract versions for the semantic operators (e.g., update#
for update).
    The types of the semantic operators are as follows:
The abstract evaluation operator eval# can be defined as follows:

Safe Memory Operations   If we use the abstract domains of examples 8.2
and 8.3, sound memory read or write operations are as follows:
    The memory read operation fetch#(M#, ν#) looks up the abstract
    memory entry at the abstract location l# ∈ ℘(X ∪ Nsite) of ν#. Since
    the abstract location is a set of variables and malloc sites, the
    result is the join of all the entries:

      The memory write operation update#(M#, , ) overwrites the
      memory entry (called strong update) when the abstract target
      location l# of    means a single concrete location. Otherwise, the
      update cannot overwrite the memory. Every entry in the abstract
      memory that constitutes the target abstract location l# ∈ ℘(X ∪
      Nsite) must be joined with the value to store (called weak update):

Example 8.4 (Analysis of a pointer program) Consider the program in figure 8.2 that
repeatedly allocates a new memory and overwrites integers to it. The columns labeled Early,
Intermittent, and Stable show the snapshots of some entries of the abstract memory at each
program point during the analysis. The Stable column shows the final result of the analysis.
     We assume that the integer values are abstracted into the integer-interval domain.
     First, note the Early column that captures the abstract memory entries right after the first
iteration. The x variable has the abstract address µ for all the fresh memories allocated at
the malloc expression. Note the abstract value stored at the µ address. The assignment to the
abstract address µ must be the weak update because µ denotes multiple locations. At line 6, µ
contains [0,2], not [2,2], as the assigning of [2,2] to µ must be the join with the old value [0,0].
    In the Intermittent column, note the abstract values at µ at lines 4 and 6. The assignments
do not overwrite but join the new value with the old one. The abstract values stored at µ keep
expanding.

       Figure 8.2
       Analysis snapshots of a pointer program

The Stable column shows the abstract memory entries in the end. The expanding upper bounds
of the values at i and µ are widened to +∞ and become stable there.
Theorem 8.1 (Safety of ↪# for the pointer language) Consider the concrete one-step
transition of section 8.1.1 and the abstract transition relation of section 8.1.2. If the semantic
operators satisfy the soundness properties

then                       . (The × is the Cartesian product operator of multiple sets.)

   The proof is similar to the proof of theorem 4.4 (appendix B.3). Note
that the definition of ↪# is homomorphic to that of ↪; that is, the
structures of the two definitions are the same except that ↪# uses the
abstract versions for the semantic operators. Thus, the soundness of ↪#
follows rather straightforwardly from the soundness properties of the
abstract semantic operators.

     Figure 8.3
     Syntax of an example language with functions

8.2 For a Language with Functions and Recursive Calls

8.2.1 Language and Concrete Semantics
Let us consider an imperative language that allows functions. We
extend the imperative language in chapter 4 (figure 4.6) with function
definitions and recursive calls (see figure 8.3).
   The language has only flat function definitions (no nested function
definitions) as in the C language. Hence, variables other than function
parameters are all global variables. Returning a value from a function is
to be simulated by an assignment to a global variable. The function to
call is determined at run-time. The function names are first-class values:
programmers can store function names in program variables or pass
them as parameters to other functions. Hence, like function pointers in
C, functions are not necessarily called by their defined names. The
function part of the call statement can thus be any expression that
evaluates to a function name. We assume that the names in a program
for the functions and their parameters are all distinct and that every
function has one parameter.
Example 8.5 (Semantics of recursive function calls) Consider the following program:
     sum(x) = if(x = 0) {z ≔ 0; return} else {sum(x − 1); z ≔ z + x; return} sum(2)
The sum function is recursive, whose result is stored in the z variable. After two recursive
calls sum(1) and sum(0)), the result 3 of sum(2) is stored in z.
     The following diagram shows the memory snapshots during the execution. The down
arrows are for calls, and up arrows for returns. Each horizontal line shows a part of the program
to evaluate by each call to sum. Line 2 shows the function body after the initial call sum(2), line
3 the function body after the first recursive call sum(1), and so on.
The memory entries for the x and z variables are shown inside boxes at the program points.
Note that the parameter x needs to keep maximum three instances alive simultaneously in the
memory (to store 2, 1, and 0) during the recursive calls:

Semantic Domains     Because of recursive calls, the parameter of a
recursive function may have multiple instances alive in the memory at
any time during execution. At each recursive call, a new instance of the
parameter of the function is allocated in the memory. The function body
then uses this new instance as its parameter. The previous instance
must be alive and be back to use after the return of the recursive call.
   Thus, when defining the semantics of the above language, we need
a semantic entity that determines the current instance of function
parameters. In semantic jargon, such entity is a table called
environment. The current environment determines which memory
instances of parameters to use.
   Also, at function call, the return context must be remembered in
order to be recovered on the function return. Each return context
consists of the return label (the next label after the function call) and the
environment at the function call. Because of recursive calls, we need a
stack of remembered contexts, with the most recent context being on
the stack top. In semantic jargon, this stack of remembered contexts is
called continuation.
   Thus, we need four components in the state, in addition to the
program labels: memory, environment, continuation, and a kind of
global counter that we reference to generate fresh instances. The
definitions of the semantic domains are shown in figure 8.4.
   Given a program, the sets X, L, and F are, respectively, finite sets of
variables, labels assigned to each statement, and function names.
   An instance ϕ ∈ I is a time stamp, a kind of global counter that is
used to differentiate the instances of formal parameters. We use the
global counter ϕ as the instance of the formal parameter at each
function call. Since a new instance of a formal parameter is always
needed at function calls, the global instance counter ticks at each
function call.
Control Flow Is Dynamic     Note that the control flow in the presence of
function calls is dynamic; the return from a function call is determined at
run-time to flow back to its most recent call site. Furthermore, a function
is not always called by its defined name. Function to call is not
syntactically explicit in the program text when its name is a value that is
stored in a variable or passed as a parameter.

    Figure 8.4
    Concrete semantic domains

   Other than the dynamically determined control flow, we let the
portion of the control flow that is known beforehand from the program
syntax be prepared in next(l), nextTrue(l), and nextFalse(l). They
determine the next statement to execute upon completing the execution
of each l-labeled statement. Every statement of a given program is
uniquely labeled.
Concrete Transitional Semantics Concrete semantics of a program for a set I
of input states is the least fixpoint
                                      lfpF
of monotonic function
                                    F :℘(S) → ℘(S)
                                  F(X) = I ∪ ℘(↪)(X).
    The state transition relation 〈l, m, σ, κ, ϕ〉 ↪ 〈l′, m′, σ′, κ′, ϕ′〉 is defined
in figure 8.5. The transitions from an l-labeled statement are defined by
case analysis over the corresponding statement. For each function f, let
body(f) be the label of its body statement, and let param(f) be its formal
parameter name.
    The expression evaluation function evalE, the memory update
function updatex, and the filter functions filterB and filter¬B are the same
as before except that the location of a variable to read or write is the
instance of the variable determined by the current environment; hence,
they need the current environment σ:
    Figure 8.5
    Concrete transition relation ↪

Note that a function name f is a constant expression. The evaluation
evalf(m, σ) is the function name f itself.
  The other semantic operations are defined as usual (see figure 8.6).

8.2.2 An Abstract Semantics
Following the framework of chapter 4, we define an abstract semantics
as
where ↪# is the one-step abstract transition relation ⊆ S# × S#. The
function π partitions a set ⊆ L × M# × E# × K# × I# by the labels,
returning a set ⊆ L × ℘(M# × E# × K# × I#).

    Figure 8.6
    Other semantic operators

The      is an upper bound operator of M# × E# × K# × I#. The state
abstract domain S# and the abstract transition relation ↪# are required
to satisfy the framework conditions:
     The abstract state S# is to be a CPO, Galois connected with ℘(S):

    where the abstract component domains are also Galois connected
    CPOs:
      The abstract one-step transition relation ↪# as a function is
      required to satisfy

      The abstract ∪# in S# and               in M# × E# × K# × I# are required to
      satisfy

Then for any input program, the algorithms (section 4.3) based on such
F# compute a sound approximation of the concrete semantics of the
program.

Memory and Environment Abstract Domains An example of a memory abstract
domain M# is a Galois connected CPO

Example 8.6 (A memory abstract domain) An example of such an M# domain is

                                      M# = (X × I#) → V#,

given that V# is a Galois connected CPO. The set X is the finite set of variables and parameters
in the input program to analyze.

  An example of an environment abstract domain E# is a Galois
connected CPO

Example 8.7 (An abstract environment domain) An example of such an E# domain is

                                         E# = X → I#.

    An example value abstract domain V# is a Galois connected CPO
Example 8.8 (An abstract value domain) An example V# domain is achieved by abstracting
kind-wise a set of values (integers, labels, and/or function names). We abstract its set of
integers into an abstract integer, its set of labels into an abstract label, and a set of function
names into an abstract function name:

where the abstract integers, labels, and locations are Galois connected CPOs:

Note that the variables X and the function names F are finite sets for a program; thus, the
powersets of those sets are already finite, eligible to be used as abstract domains in static
analysis.

                  ↪#
Abstract Transition      The abstract state transition relation for the
function call and return statements are shown in figure 8.7. Basically,
the definition of ↪# is the same as that of ↪ except that ↪# uses
abstract semantic operators for their concrete correspondents.

      Figure 8.7
      Abstract transition relation ↪# for function call and return

   The abstract semantic operators are homomorphic to their concrete
correspondent except that they are defined over abstract domains:
Theorem 8.2 (Safety of ↪# for the language with functions) Consider the concrete one-step
transition of section 8.2.1 and the abstract transition of section 8.2.2. If the semantic operators
satisfy the soundness properties

then                          . (The × is the Cartesian product operator of
multiple sets.)
   The proof is similar to the proof of theorem 4.4 (appendix B.3). Since
the definition of ↪# has the same structure as that of ↪ except that it
uses abstract versions for concrete semantic operators, the soundness
of ↪# naturally follows from the soundness of the abstract semantic
operators.
Varying the Context SensitivityIn a concrete execution, every call to a
function may happen in a unique machine state. The global variables
may have unique values at each call time, and in case of recursive calls
the stacked instances of the formal parameter may be different at each
call.
   If the static analysis abstracts, for each function, all the machine
states at the function’s multiple calls into a single abstract state, then
the analysis is called context insensitive. If the static analysis abstracts
the multiple call contexts into multiple abstract contexts to distinguish
some differences of the call contexts, then the analysis is called context
sensitive.
  The context sensitivity boils down to how we abstract the instance
domain I:

If I# is a singleton set (i.e., if we do not differentiate the parameter
instances in abstract semantics), then follows the context insensitivity.
    On the other hand, by using multiple elements for I#, some kind of
context sensitivity emerges. For example, suppose that I# uses the set
Csite of every call sites of the input program:

                               I# =℘(Csite)
Then multiple abstract instances of each parameter, each of which
corresponds to each call site, emerge.
   A more elaborate context sensitivity is possible if we use, say,
abstract call strings [57] for I#. A call string is an ordered sequence of
function names that abstracts the continuation at the moment of a call.
The larger the maximum length of the abstract call strings in
      Figure 8.8
      Context-insensitive and -sensitive analyses of an example program

I#, the more varied abstract instances are used for a single parameter,
hence follows a more elaborate context-sensitive analysis. The
precision improvement from the context sensitivity comes with a cost.
We can selectively apply the context sensitivity only to those calls that
eventually contribute to the improvement of the analysis precision [86].
Example 8.9 (Analyses with different context sensitivities) The example program in figure
8.8 is the same as in example 8.5. Suppose we use the integer intervals for abstract integers.
Figure 8.8(b, c) show the abstract memory entries at each program point during analysis. The
down arrows are for calls and the up arrows are for returns. Each horizontal line shows a part of
the program to analyze by each call to sum.
       Figure 8.8(b) shows the abstract memory entries at each program point during the
       context-insensitive analysis. Recall that context insensitivity means that we use a single
    abstract location for all the instances of each function’s parameter. That is, the abstract
    instance domain I# is a singleton set. In this abstraction, the abstract value [0,2] of the
    abstract location x at the beginning of the function body subsumes all the values passed
    to x. The z variable at the end of the function body also has [0,4] that covers all the values
    stored there.
    Figure 8.8(c) shows the abstract memory entries at each program point during a context-
    sensitive analysis. Recall that context sensitivity boils down to using multiple abstract
    locations for the instances of each parameter. Suppose that we abstract the instances by
    the call sites. Thus, for the example program we have two abstract instances of x:
    one x0 for the initial call of sum(2) and the other x1 for the recursive calls of sum(1)
    and sum(0).

    Note that the first instance x0 of x for the initial call to sum has [2,2]. The second
    instance x1 has [0,1] that covers all the values bound to x by the two recursive calls.
    These two call-site-sensitive abstract locations for x result in a precise analysis for the
    final abstract value of z in the end. At the finish of the two recursive calls, z contains [0,1],
    not [0,2] as in the context-insensitive case, because it involves only x1. At the finish of the
    initial call, z contains [0,3], having the (weak update) effect of the assignment of the sum
    of [0,1] (z) and [2,2] (the value of x0).

8.3 Abstractions for Data Structures

The previous sections presented a general approach to the design of
static analysis for programming languages with pointers and with
functions. This section and the next one take a complementary step and
study abstractions that are specific to families of data structures and
functions. Their purpose is to provide readers with a good intuition of
what kind of abstraction should be used in any given practical case. On
the other hand, they provide a higher-level view of the analysis
algorithms.
   In this section, we study abstractions for data structures:
     arrays (section 8.3.1);
     buffers and strings (section 8.3.2);
     statically allocated pointer structures (section 8.3.3); and
     dynamically allocated pointer structures (section 8.3.4).

8.3.1 Arrays
Arrays are one of the most common data structures. An array reserves
a contiguous memory region of fixed size, an element of which can be
accessed using an integer index. Therefore, vectors and matrices are
naturally represented as arrays. Similarly, arrays are quite adapted to
the storage of tables of data. For instance, we encounter such
structures in all sorts of applications ranging from user-level databases
(each entry corresponds to one array cell) to operating system internal
states (each process corresponds to a cell in a process table array).
There are even some programming languages designed around the
notion of arrays, such as spreadsheet environments (Excel and similar)
and array programming languages (APL, Fortran, and similar).
Extension of the Language Syntax and Semantics    To illustrate the issues
inherent in the abstraction of arrays, we consider a minimal extension of
the language of chapter 3 with arrays of integer values and of arbitrary
length. While real-world languages feature arrays of other data types,
including structures, arrays of scalars are enough to illustrate the main
concepts.
   We reuse and extend the notations of chapter 3, although we adopt
a much less formal point of view here, as we focus on the abstraction
and do not intend to formalize static analyses. We assume that each
variable either stores a scalar value in V or consists of an array that
stores elements of V. Array elements are indexed by integers ranging
from 0 to n − 1, where n is the length of the array:

To account for all typical array operations, we need to add to the
language basic constructions to create, read, and write into arrays:
     Creation: We let the statement create (t, n) create a new array, the
     length of which is the value stored in variable n, and store it into
     variable t; the contents of array cells is unknown (after creation,
     each cell may store any value).
     Fead: We let the statement x ≔ t[n] read the contents of the cell of
     index n in array t, if this cell exists, and copy its value into the
     variable x; otherwise, it causes a run-time error.
     Write: We let the statement t[n] ≔ x write the contents of the
     variable x into the cell of index n of the array t, if this cell exists;
     otherwise, it causes a run-time error.
Note that array creation fails when n does not store a strictly positive
integer. In the case of an array cell read or write, the correct evaluation
is possible only when the index is valid, that is, if it lies within the
bounds of the array. Otherwise, the evaluation results in a run-time error
that terminates the execution of the program (section 3.1.2). This
semantics is close to that of the Java programming language. However,
the semantics of C leaves the behavior of such invalid accesses
undefined, which means that they may cause abrupt crashes or corrupt
other memory cells.
    As an example, figure 8.9 displays two versions of an array creation
and initialization routine. The version of figure 8.9(a) presents a correct
implementation, whereas the version of figure 8.9(b) is incorrect and
contains a common “off by one” index bug (it starts at 1 and ends at n).
As a consequence, under the assumption that n initially contains a
strictly positive integer, the first program will create and initialize a new
array of length n, whereas the second program will crash.
Semantic Properties Related to Arrays Array-manipulating programs are often
hard to get correct and are prone to several kinds of problems. One
common issue is the existence of errors related to attempts to access a
cell out of the bounds of the array. This is the case of the program of
figure 8.9(b).
   Another common issue is the breakage of more complex invariants
that are global to the array. For instance, fixing the loop exit condition of
the program of figure 8.9(b) will prevent a run-time error but will not
make the program fully correct; indeed, the resulting code would still
omit initializing the value of the first cell (at index 0).
     Figure 8.9
     Examples of array creation and initialization programs (we assume n is a predefined
     integer variable that stores a positive value, and v is a scalar variable that stores the
     value that should be used for initialization)

   There are many other challenging properties related to arrays. For
instance, a sorting routine needs to ensure several global properties: at
the end, the array should not only be sorted, but also contain the same
values as the initial array. Moreover, an initialization or sorting routine
typically treats the input array cell by cell, which means that
intermediate states satisfy even more complex invariants. As an
example, if we observe the state of the program of figure 8.9(a) after a
few iterations, we note that the first cells of the array are initialized while
the others may still contain any value.
   In the following paragraphs, we discuss a few existing abstractions
to reason about such semantic properties. These are representative of
general array abstract domains.
                                                         Array cell indexes
Abstractions to Reason on the Correctness of Array Indexes
are numerical values; hence, the verification of array indexes boils
down to an abstract interpretation using a numerical abstract domain
such as those presented in section 3.2. When constraints that bound
several variables are required, a relational abstract domain should be
employed. As an example, the programs of figure 8.9 contain accesses
to an array of length n, the value of which is not statically known; thus, a
relational domain such as octagons or convex polyhedra is needed
here. Assuming either of these two domains, a static analysis similar to
those presented in chapters 3 and 4 would produce the following
results:
     for the program of figure 8.9(a), 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1 inside the loop, so that
     all accesses are correct;
     for the program of figure 8.9(b), 1 ≤ i ≤ n inside the loop, which
     does not allow proving the absence of run-time errors (and as
     observed above, this program will indeed cause an out-of-bound
     access error).
If the length of the array was equal to a known, fixed integer value
instead, interval constraints would suffice.

    Figure 8.10
    Array contents abstractions: several abstractions of an array t

Abstraction of Array Contents and Summarization Let us now turn to the
inference of properties related to array contents. A reference concrete
state is given in figure 8.10(a).
   A basic approach attaches one abstract constraint to each cell. This
is quite a straightforward generalization of the analyses presented in
chapters 3 and 4. This cell-by-cell abstraction is depicted in figure
8.10(b), assuming each variable and array cell is abstracted by an
interval. This abstraction is able to carry very precise information; for
instance, figure 8.10(b) expresses that the contents of t[1] is 3. On the
other hand, some other cells may be abstracted in a less precise way,
just like any scalar variable; this is the case of t[0], which may store
either 3 or 4 according to the abstraction. Unfortunately, it is far from
solving the problem of array contents abstraction. First, the cell-by-cell
abstraction does not rely on any regularity inside the array and thus
overlooks any chance to use a more compact logical statement such as
“all cells contain value ν.” This is very costly when the array is large.
Second, it cannot cope with arrays the length of which is not known
statically, which happens in both programs in figure 8.9. Last, while the
analysis algorithm seem quite similar to those used in previous chapters
for programs with a set of variables, it actually requires identifying the
cells that may be modified by each statement.
    Another more compact way to describe the contents of an array is to
let a single abstract symbol represent the set of all the values stored in
the array. We call this special abstract symbol a summary since it
summarizes the contents of the whole array. This technique is illustrated
in figure 8.10(c): this example abstraction expresses that all the cells in
the array store a value in interval [3,8]. Such a constraint is not only
expressive but also compact, and it can be expressed whatever the
length of the array.
    Both abstractions require special operations to handle array creation
and access constructions. The analysis of an array creation is
straightforward, as it boils down to the definition of an abstract state as
shown in figure 8.10. The analysis of a read joins the information that
may be read for all the cells in the index range; for instance, if i is in
[2,4], the analysis infers that t[i] is in [3,7] in figure 8.10(b) and in [3,8] in
figure 8.10(c). The analysis of a write operation is more complex, as
also discussed in section 8.1.2:
      When the information on the index designates a single cell that is
      precisely known, the analysis of the write operation is similar to that
      of a write into a program variable. We call such a case a strong
      update. For instance, if i = 2, the analysis of t[i] ≔ x with the cell-by-
      cell abstraction (figure 8.10(b)) copies the information about x into
      the cell of index 2.
      When the index may designate several distinct cells, or when
      updating a summary, the analysis needs to be conservative and to
      account both for cases where a cell is modified and for cases
    where it is not. We call such a case a weak update. Using the
    abstraction of figure 8.10(b), if i is known to be in the range [0,1],
    and no other information is available about i, the analysis of t[i] ≔ 5
    needs to carry out a weak update and replace the information
    about both of these two cells with a less precise range [3,5].
    Indeed, the analysis should account for the case where t[0] is
    modified and t[1] is left intact, and for the symmetric case as well.
    Using the abstraction of figure 8.10(c), any write operation leads to
    a weak update; for instance, the analysis of t[3] ≔ 9 should replace
    the information about all the cells with range [3,9].
Abstraction Based on Array Partitioning  Weak updates present a real
challenge for analyses that rely on summaries, so we show another
family of array abstractions that avoid this issue. As observed above,
summarization is essential to describe array regions of unknown and/or
of unbounded size. We also remarked the importance of strong updates
to infer precise invariants. Array abstractions based on dynamic array
partitioning [48, 55, 29] combine these two ingredients and allow
proving properties such as correct initialization (as in figure 8.9(a)) or
sortedness. They partition the array into segments as in figure 8.10(d),
so as to abstract each block of cells separately: in this figure, we see
that the array can be divided into two zones, one that comprises cells
with an index ranging from 0 to i − 1, and one that comprises the other
cells. Moreover, we also observe that all the cells of the first zone are
known to contain the value 3.
   Array-partitioning abstract domains rely on sophisticated algorithms
since the analysis needs to compute not only content predicates but
also partitions of arrays into segments. To demonstrate these
algorithms, we consider the program of figure 8.9(a), with v = 3. Figure
8.11 shows the invariants computed at each program point, and we
discuss the main analysis steps based on this figure. First, the analysis
of the array creation command generates a single segment that
encompasses all the cells in the array and does not tie any content
information to them. The analysis of the assignment command t[i] ≔ 3
inside the loop splits this segment so as to materialize the cell that is
modified and to carry out a strong update. A widening operator
generalizes the abstract states observed at the loop head and
synthesizes two segments: the first segment includes all the cells
already initialized, whereas the second one describes all the other cells
(it is the same as the abstract state shown in figure 8.10(d)). The
invariants shown in figure 8.11 show the effect of the two assignment
commands: the analysis of the assignment to the array cell t[i] creates a
new segment of length 1, that describes exactly the cell that is modified
(hence the strong update), whereas the analysis of the assignment to i
causes the recomputation of the segment bounds. Finally, the loop exit
abstract state shows that all the cells of the array are initialized. A
similar algorithm would allow proving the correctness of a sorting
program, provided more expressive content predicates are used.

    Figure 8.11
    Static analysis based on array partitioning

8.3.2 Buffers and Strings
Buffers rely on a representation similar to arrays and with some specific
algorithms to add (and, possibly, to remove) pieces of data. A common
implementation of a buffer consists of an array with a separate variable
that indicates the first free position. Each array cell stores an atomic
piece of data. When cells store characters, we call such structures
string buffers. The end of a string buffer is marked by a special
character (e.g., ASCII code 0x0) that we denote by ϕ in the following.
String buffers are common and have been reported as the source of
many security issues; thus, they are a very important static analysis
target.
   As an example, figure 8.12 displays three string buffers; moreover,
b0 represents string “abc,” b1 stands for string “de,” and so on.

     Figure 8.12
     A few string buffers

                                             We use the same language
Extension of the Language Syntax and Semantics
as in section 8.3.1 (with commands for the creation of a buffer, and for
the read/write of a buffer cell), with additional high-level operations,
such as the following:
     Initialization to a given string: the operation s ≔ “…” stores a
     constant string specified as a sequence of characters into the
     buffer s and adds ϕ at the end, if the buffer is long enough;
     otherwise, it causes a run-time error.
     Append: the operation append(s, t) copies the characters of s until
     the first ϕ (included) from the position of the first in ϕ t; if s or t
     contains no ϕ, or if it attempts to write beyond the end of t, it
     causes a run-time error.
For instance, the state in figure 8.12 can be observed after the
execution of the sequence of operations s0 ≔ "abc"; s1 ≔ "ad"; s2 ≔
"abc"; append(s1, s2). The two operations mentioned above are
typically implemented into library functions, which use basic array
operations.
                                             Operations on string buffers
Semantic Properties Related to Buffers and Strings
are potentially dangerous in many ways. First, initialization and append
may fail when the target buffer is not large enough. While our language
extension assumes that programs will terminate with a run-time error in
such a case, real-world implementations (e.g., C string libraries) may
just carry out the write operation and overwrite space beyond the buffer
area. Such a corruption of the memory state is often even worse than
an abrupt crash since it makes it very hard to predict the behavior of the
program. In some cases, buffer overflows may allow a malicious user to
take over the execution of a program.
   Second, a read operation (using the usual array read command s[i])
beyond the bounds of a string buffer also represents a serious security
concern. Indeed, real-world implementations typically just read the
value stored at the corresponding address, even if it is sensitive data
that should not be leaked. This issue is actually the root cause of the
Heartbleed vulnerability in OpenSSL implementation [37].
   Last, content properties sometimes also need to be enforced. This is
the case when strings should contain valid data descriptions, such as a
valid number followed by a currency symbol or a valid URL.
                                                               The verification
Abstraction to Reason on Correctness of String Buffer Operations
of absence of run-time errors related to buffer overflows boils down to
checking numerical relations [102, 36]. Given a buffer s, we denote its
length by len(s) (so that valid positions in the buffer range from 0 to
len(s) − 1), and zero(s) is the position of the first ϕ in s, if any (if there is
none, we let zero(s) = len(s)). Then a string buffer is well-formed if and
only if it contains at least one occurrence of ϕ, that is, if zero(s) < len(s).
As an example, in figure 8.12, len(t0) = 8 and zero(t0) = 3.
    An initialization s ≔ "…" succeeds if and only if len(s) is strictly
greater than n, where n is the length of the string in the right-hand side;
afterward it contains a ϕ at position n. Moreover, append(s,t) succeeds
if and only if zero(t) + zero(s) < len(t), and afterward the position of the
first ϕ in t can also be computed precisely. For these reasons, it is
possible to reason over the correctness of string buffer operations using
a numerical static analysis, which computes constraints over the
program variables and the len(·) and zero(·) metavariables describing
buffers. This approach reduces the problem of verifying the correctness
of buffer operations to the computation of numerical invariants so as to
verify constraints over buffer lengths and sizes [102, 36]. Thus, static
analyses similar to those shown in chapters 3 and 4 apply. The use of a
relational domain for the representation of the numerical constraints is
preferable since the verification of an append operation requires
constraints that bind several variables. The verification of programs
using (non-string) buffers typically requires similar abstractions and
analysis techniques.
   To illustrate this technique, we present in figure 8.13 the results of
the analysis of a short series of commands that operate on two buffers
s0 and s1. The numerical constraints inferred by a forward static
analysis using the len(.) and zero(.) numeric metavariables are shown
between commands. We remark that the assignment into s1 and the
append operation can be proved safe using these invariants. Moreover,
the analysis proves that zero(s1) < n at the exit point of the program,
which means that the content of s1 is guaranteed to be a well-formed
buffer, with a zero before its final position.
                                       There exist many abstractions to
Abstractions to Reason over String Contents
describe the actual contents of strings viewed as character sequences.
As an example, abstractions based on occurrence counts based on the
Parikh vector [89], describe properties such as “the number of
occurrences of character ‘a’ is less than 3” or “character ‘z’ does not
occur at all.” Abstractions based on regular expressions [80] can
describe properties such as the well-formedness of a URL. Abstractions
based on grammars can express, for example, that a string describes a
well-parenthesized expression.

8.3.3 Pointers
Most programming languages feature pointers in one form or another.
Essentially a pointer allows referring to a stored object via its actual
numeric address (which depends on the program execution) rather than
via a fixed name. It is thus possible to share, pass, modify, and utilize
data structures in a very flexible manner. As an example, passing a
parameter by reference allows a function to easily access or modify a
large data area. Even purely functional languages make an extensive
use of pointers, with closures and shared immutable objects. Pointers
greatly enhance expressiveness but often make programming more
challenging and error prone. Therefore, pointers are also notoriously
important yet difficult to deal with when doing static analysis.
     Figure 8.13
     Analysis of a sequence of string buffer operations (we assume that 0 ≤ i < n at the
     entry point)

    This subsection discusses issues relevant to the manipulation of
pointer values whereas subsection 8.3.4 studies dynamic memory
allocation. This section also introduces abstractions that may be used
interchangeably in the analysis formalized in section 8.1.
Extension of the Language Syntax and SemanticsIn chapters 3 and 4, we let
the set of values, V consist of scalars (integer or floating-point numbers
or labels). Variables of pointer types store an address. This changes not
only the definition of the set of values but also the definition of memory
states. Indeed, it requires V to also include a set of addresses A and
memory states to map addresses in A into the contents of the
corresponding cells. Since dynamic memory allocation is considered
later in section 8.3.4, we assume here that addresses simply
correspond to variables: a variable name x is stored at an address &x.
Although we do not make explicit use of a type system, we will consider
only programs that do not lead to mismatches such as comparing a
pointer with an integer or multiplying a pointer by a scalar.
    There are two main operations that are specific to pointers:
    Computation of an address: the assignment p ≔ &x stores the
    address of variable x into variable p.
    Dereference: the expression *p denotes the memory location the
    address of which is the value of p, if p contains a valid address,
    and fails with a run-time error otherwise.

    Figure 8.14
    Two programs manipulating pointers

   It can be used in either side of an assignment; indeed, y ≔ *p stores
   into y the value read inside that cell, whereas *p ≔ y stores the value
   of y into that cell.
Figure 8.14 displays two programs that use a pointer variable. We let ?
denote a condition that non-deterministically evaluates to true or to
false. According to our semantics, the fragment presented in figure
8.14(a) may cause a run-time error, if the condition evaluates to false
and p does not get assigned a correct address. On the other hand, the
program of figure 8.14(b) is memory safe. Although these programs are
quite contrived, they will help us illustrate a few salient issues related to
the analysis of programs with pointers.
Semantic   Properties   Related   to          We remarked that pointer
                                       Pointers
dereference may cause a run-time error when the value of the pointer is
not a valid address. In real programming languages such as C,
incorrect pointer operations as in figure 8.14(a) may have undefined
behaviors and cause an unspecified memory location to be modified.
Thus, a first application of static analysis related to pointers is to check
the memory safety. Intuitively, it boils down to checking the absence of
null, dangling, or invalid pointer dereferences.
    A second application is to support client program analyses or
transformations. As an example, the program of figure 8.14(b) performs
a numerical assignment via a pointer; this means that the value of the
numerical variables at the end of the execution can be known only if we
have information about the value of the pointer variable p. This situation
is actually fairly common: whenever a program manipulates pointers,
the effect of a read/write memory operation is not so obvious, as it is
possible to modify a memory cell without referring explicitly to it
(provided we have stored its address in a pointer variable). Thus, many
static analysis tools (or even compiler optimizers) have to compute
pointer information beforehand.
    In the following paragraphs, we highlight two families of abstractions
for pointers that can be used for both of these goals.
Abstractions of Pointer ValuesThe most intuitive approach is to use a non-
relational abstraction of pointer values that attempts to describe the
value that each pointer variable may take separately from the other
variables. It is very similar to the other non-relational abstractions
presented in section 3.2.2, except that the abstraction for values
describes sets of addresses.
   A basic such abstraction consists of points-to sets: the abstraction of
a pointer boils down to a set of addresses it may point to [104, 58].
Special care must be taken for invalid pointer values. Thus, a points-to
set may include special symbols that denote the null pointer or an
invalid pointer value. We note 0x0 for the null pointer and 0x? for an
invalid pointer. We also write ⊤ for a points-to set that may contain any
possible address, for instance, when a pointer variable has not been
properly initialized. To illustrate the results that an analysis based on
points-to sets may compute, we consider the two programs of figure
8.14:
     After the condition in the program of figure 8.14(a), the points-to set
     for p is ⊤, which does not allow verifying the final assignment; as
     observed above, this statement may indeed cause a run-time error,
     so it is unsurprising that the analysis catches this issue.
     At the end of the program of figure 8.14(b), the points-to set for p is
     {&x, &y}; this information is actually sufficient to verify that the final
    assignment does not cause an error since it proves that p may
    point only to a valid address.
The computation of such points-to sets proceeds by standard forward
abstract interpretation using points-to sets as a value abstraction.
Except for the value abstraction, it is very similar to the analyses
presented in chapters 3 and 4.
   Points-to sets provide only a rather naive abstraction and cannot
cope with programs where the number of possible addresses is high or
unbounded, since that would mean points-to sets may also become
very large. An alternative technique drops all information about points-to
sets that are too big; for instance, k-limiting turns any points-to set that
contains more than k elements into a special abstract value ⊤. More
advanced abstractions able to represent unbounded sets of concrete
addresses are presented in section 8.3.4.
                                Another family of abstractions for pointer
Abstractions of Aliasing Relations
values consists of aliasing relations across pointers [73, 33]. We say
that two pointers are aliased if and only if they store the same address.
Abstracting the aliasing relation allows expressing relational properties
between pointers. As an example, it is possible to state that two pointer
variables p and q store the same address, even though this address is
only known to be either &x or &y. Due to this, points-to set abstractions
can be viewed as abstractions of the aliasing relation, but the opposite
is generally not true.
Pointer Analysis and Weak Updates   Analyses based on abstractions for
points-to sets or aliasing relations rely on the principles presented in
chapters 3 and 4. An important remark is that, due to the nature of
pointers, the analysis of read/write operations may need to account for
cases where memory cells cannot be determined precisely. The very
same issue led to weak updates in sections 8.1.2 and 8.3.1. Likewise,
weak updates may also arise in pointer analyses. As an example, we
discuss the analysis of the last statement in the program of figure
8.14(b). The complete results are shown in figure 8.15. As we have
noted earlier, the most precise information that can be computed about
pointer p is that it may point either to &x or to &y. Because of this, it is
impossible to precisely say what the value of x is after the assignment
*p ≔ 8. In fact, the analysis needs to account for this statement by
carrying out a weak update, which means that it needs to consider
cases where either x is modified and y is unchanged, or x is unchanged
and y is modified.

    Figure 8.15
    Points-to analysis

8.3.4 Dynamic Heap Allocation
While section 8.3.3 discusses a few analyses for some programs that
manipulate pointers, it omits important language features that are often
used together with pointers. In particular, dynamic memory allocation
allows creating, using, and disposing of memory cells in a very flexible
way, and without defining new variables. It is often associated to
pointers in order to build data structures of dynamic size. Some
languages like C require programmers to explicitly carry out both
allocation and deallocation. Other languages like Java or ML let
programmers allocate new objects but provide automatic memory
deallocation. In all cases, reasoning over programs with dynamic
memory allocation is not trivial since the memory footprint of the
program, namely, the set of memory cells that it may read or write, is
not known statically and varies depending on the execution traces. In
static analysis terms, it means that the analysis should infer not only
content properties but also the memory footprint. By contrast, section
8.3.3 assumes a fixed, finite footprint. In the following, we study the
analysis of programs that construct and use dynamic data structures.
                                            We extend the language of
Extension of the Language Syntax and Semantics
chapter 3. The main change to the target language that is required to
support dynamic memory allocation is to let the set of memory cells
evolve during the execution of programs. So far, we have let it be fixed
by a pre-defined set of variables X. In section 8.3.3, we already
introduced a set of addresses A, although we let it be equal to the set of
addresses of program variables. We now need to relax this constraint.
Instead, we require A to contain the addresses of the variables, as well
as an infinite but countable set of heap addresses. Then a memory
state is not only a function from variables to values but also a partial
function from addresses (including the addresses of the program
variables) to values:
                                M = A →part V
Note that a memory state is only a partial function: first, the addresses
that are used vary during the execution; second, this set is not expected
to ever cover all elements of A (which is assumed infinite). Furthermore,
we assume in this subsection that dynamically allocated memory cells
are grouped in blocks made of series of contiguous fields (this would
actually require a slightly more complex definition of M, although we do
not formalize it here).
   Due to this modification to the definition of memory states, the formal
semantics of section 3.1 would need be thoroughly updated. The
updates are quite systematic, though: a variable read or write now
relates to an arbitrary cell and not necessarily to a variable.
   Besides this change and the addition of the pointer operations of
section 8.3.3, we need to add specific operations to allocate or free
memory and access block fields. The added operations are slightly
more realistic than those in section 8.1:
     Allocation of a block: When n is an integer, the statement p ≔
     alloc(n) creates a fresh block made of n fields and stores its
     address into the pointer variable p. Thus, it makes the set of valid
     addresses in the current memory state grow. For the sake of
     simplicity, we assume the values of the fresh block fields are
     chosen non-deterministically at run-time.
     Deallocation of a block: The statement free(p) frees the block
     that p points to.
     Block field access: If p is a pointer variable that points to a
     memory block, and if i is a valid field of that block (i.e., if it is
     between 0 and the length of that block), then p->i denotes the field
     of index i in the block; this expression can be used either to read
     the value of a field or to write into a field.
In the following, we consider a few programs that rely on dynamic
memory allocation to construct singly linked list structures, similar to
that shown in figure 8.16(a). A singly linked list consists of a chain of
blocks that have two fields: the first field stores either the address of the
next element or the special 0x0 pointer value that denotes the end of
the list; the second field stores another value (e.g., a scalar). In figure
8.16(a), we let dynamic blocks be denoted with light gray rectangles.
These structures are useful to store sets of records the number of which
is not known prior to the execution of the program.

    Figure 8.16
    Programs with dynamic memory allocation
   Figure 8.16 also presents a couple of list-manipulating programs. For
brevity, we show only operations on the fields that store list pointer links.
The program of figure 8.16(b) constructs a list of any possible length. To
do this, it allocates one block per element. In a real-world
implementation, the length of the list would depend on some program
input, and the data fields would also be modified. The program of figure
8.16(c) inserts a new element in a list. In a complete program, it would
determine the position based on the contents of each block (e.g., so as
to preserve sortedness).
Semantic Properties Related to Dynamic Heap Allocation   The properties of
interest mentioned in section 8.3.3 are still relevant here. In particular,
memory safety is a major concern, as the dereference of a null or
invalid pointer will cause a run-time error, and since dynamic structures
typically require complex series of pointer updates. Additionally, when a
block is deallocated, all pointers to it become dangling, so
dereferencing them will cause an error. Thus, memory safety is even
harder to ensure in presence of dynamic memory allocation.
    However, an important class of semantic properties become relevant
here: dynamic structures such as the list shown in figure 8.16(a) should
also satisfy structural invariants, which are easily broken. As an
example, the singly linked list structures introduced above consist of
acyclic sequences of blocks chained to one another, and such that the
last block is marked with a null pointer field. Breaking this property may
cause either run-time errors (e.g., a dangling pointer dereference if a
block is deallocated before the previous link is updated) or non-
termination (e.g., a function that traverses the list and stops when it
encounters the null pointer will not terminate when applied to a cyclic
structure). Therefore, it is often interesting to verify the correctness of
the shape of the data structures. The notion of shape property refers to
the compliance with a global structural property. For instance, we may
want to verify that the program of figure 8.16(b) constructs well-formed
lists and that the program of figure 8.16(c) never breaks structural
correctness.
    Last, for the same reasons as noted in section 8.3.3, pointer or
shape information may be required to reason over other aspects of
programs, such as numeric computations, if these numeric
computations depend on the memory layout. In that case, it is
necessary to combine (e.g., using the notion of product presented in
section 5.1.2) one of the abstractions that we present below with a
numeric abstract domain. For brevity, we do not comment on this last
family or target properties and focus on analyses for programs with
pointers and dynamic allocation to establish either memory safety or
shape properties.
Abstractions Based on Allocation Sites The pointer abstractions shown in
section 8.3.3 assume a finite set of addresses; thus, they do not directly
apply here. Indeed, they are defined under the assumption that the set
of possible addresses is known and finite (e.g., it is exactly the set of
the variables of the program). However, dynamic memory allocation
generates fresh blocks in a way that depends on the execution of the
program.
    To circumvent this limitation, a common approach groups memory
blocks that are allocated dynamically into a finite set of abstract blocks.
For instance, such an abstract block can be characterized by the
location in the source code at which its elements have been allocated.
This abstraction is called allocation site based, which also is the
abstraction used in example 8.4 of section 8.1. Then an abstract state
consists of a finite set of abstract addresses, including some summary
addresses, which account for a possibly unbounded number of concrete
addresses. Indeed, while the content of each variable is still described
precisely, the content of a block that is dynamically allocated at a point
visited several times is summarized. The notion of summarization
employed here is quite similar to the one introduced in section 8.3.1.
Such summaries usually incur a loss of precision compared to abstract
addresses that describe a single concrete cell. Indeed, the weak update
phenomenon described in sections 8.1 and 8.3.1 also occurs here.
    As an example, we describe the results of an analysis based on
allocation site abstraction for the program of figure 8.16(b). Both pointer
variables p and q are described by a single abstract address. Moreover,
all list blocks are allocated at the same point (in the first line of the loop
body); therefore, they are all described by a single abstract address,
which we denote by a. Let us now assume a points-to set abstraction of
pointer values. Then the following abstract state describes all memories
observed at the loop head:
We note that q may either be dangling (due to being still undefined) or
point to some location described by the summary address a. Similarly
the content of p is either the null pointer or an address described by a.
Last, all pointer fields in the list also store either the null pointer or the
address of another element of the list. However, we observe that this
abstract state is quite coarse and does not characterize a well-formed
singly linked list structure: while singly linked lists can be described by
these constraints, many other (incorrect) configurations would also be
described by it, including cyclic structures, or structures that are not
connected. For this reason, we discuss shape abstractions later, which
address this issue. On the other hand, the information this abstraction
allows computing is often sufficiently precise to verify basic memory
safety (absence of pointer dereference errors).
    Regarding to the static analysis algorithms, the main difference from
section 8.3.3 is that a summary abstract address may account for many
concrete addresses; thus, an update to a field of a dynamically
allocated block will require a weak update, which accounts both for the
case where a memory cell is updated and for the case where it is not
updated.
Abstraction of the Shapes of Data Structures  Shape abstractions aim at
preserving information about the shape or form of data structures, by
summarizing regions in a dynamic way (i.e., that depends on the
program points) and by attaching content information to summaries. For
instance, it can express that a region stores a well-formed singly linked
list as a whole. Compared to the basic allocation site abstraction
mentioned above, this approach enables more precise program
reasoning, although the abstract predicates and analysis algorithms are
significantly more complex.
    To understand the definition of summary structural predicates, we
focus on the case of singly linked list segments: a segment is a
contiguous fragment of a list. Essentially, a well-formed singly linked list
segment consists either of an empty region (then the first and last
addresses are equal) or of a first list element with a pointer to the tail of
the segment. This intuition supports an inductive definition of a
summary predicate, as shown in the graphical view of figure 8.17(a):
the rounded corner boxes denote sll (“singly linked list”) predicates, and
can be defined recursively, using basic list blocks. Essentially, the sll
predicate describes any empty or non-empty list segment. We do not
give a mathematical definition for the sll predicates and use the high-
level graphical representation shown in figure 8.17(a).
    Based on this graphical representation, we show two abstract states
in figure 8.17(b). The abstract state on the top describes memory states
with a pointer variable p that points to a well-formed singly linked list of
length at least one. The code shown in figure 8.16(b) constructs well-
formed lists. Thus, this abstract state correctly describes all these
states. The abstract state in the bottom describes memory states with
two pointer variables p and t, and such that p points to a well-formed
singly linked list and t points to one of the elements of this list.

    Figure 8.17
    Shape abstraction based on the summarization of list segments

   This abstraction relies on the summary predicates, in conjunction
with a more conventional pointer abstraction. There exists several ways
to describe these summaries in the literature, such as reachability
recursive predicates in three-valued logic [99], and separation logic [95]
with inductive predicates [35, 9, 19].
   Corresponding analysis algorithms deal with summary predicates by
going back and forth between summarized forms and more concrete
forms (as shown in figure 8.17(a)) as in the following examples.
      The analysis of an update into a field of a list element that is part of
      a summary predicate requires unfolding this summary into a
      disjunction of cases according to the schema shown in figure
      8.17(a), so as to materialize all the memory cells that are read or
      written; for instance, this is necessary when analyzing the list
      traversal of figure 8.16(c).
      The analysis of a loop needs to generalize memory shapes (with a
      specialized widening algorithm) that synthesizes summaries,
      following the schema of figure 8.17(a); for example, the analysis of
      a loop that constructs a list (as in figure 8.16(b)) requires such a
      generalization to produce the abstract state shown at the top of
      figure 8.17(b).
These two algorithms are illustrated in figure 8.18. First of all, let us
consider the abstract state in the left-hand side of the picture. The
variable p is known to store a pointer to a well-formed singly linked list
and is not equal to the null pointer. Therefore, it is possible to
materialize the memory cell that is pointed to by p; indeed, a direct case
analysis over sll would produce two disjuncts (either the list is empty, or
it is not empty), and the fact that p is a non-null pointer rules out the
case of the empty list. As a consequence, materialization produces the
abstract state in the right-hand side. Conversely, the abstract state in
the right-hand side can be replaced with the abstract state in the left-
hand side. This operation makes the structure of the list pointed to by p
more abstract; thus, it acts as a generalization analysis step.

    Figure 8.18
    Materialization and generalization of shape abstract states

   These algorithms allow computing invariants such as the abstract
states shown in figure 8.17(b).
   To give a general view of the main steps of such a shape analysis,
we study the analysis of a list reversal program shown in figure 8.19.
The program is assumed to start in a state such that l points to a well-
formed singly linked list. Moreover, it traverses this list and updates the
pointers between the elements so that their order is eventually
reversed. For the sake of clarity, line numbers in the source code are
indicated. Local abstract invariants that are computed at the end of the
analysis are shown at each source code location in the figure. Each of
these abstract states contains summaries that account for unbounded
numbers of list elements. Materialization occurs at line 3, inside the
body of the loop: at this point, the summary pointed to by p needs to be
unfolded, as shown in figure 8.17(a). The rest of the analysis of the loop
body is actually straightforward, as each step boils down to the update
of a pointer that is already precisely exposed. As usual, the computation
of the abstract state at loop head requires widening iterations (which
are not shown). This operation generalizes the abstract states before
the loop and at the end of the loop body:
     All information about n is dropped (as it is not initialized before the
     loop).
     The information about l is weakened into an sll predicate (l is the
     null pointer before the loop and points to a non-empty list at the
     end of the loop body; thus, it points to some sort of well-formed
     linked list in both cases).
   As a side note, we remark that the notion of summarizing abstract
predicates and the algorithms to navigate between the summary
predicates and more precise expressions have some similarities with
the array-partitioning abstraction of section 8.3.1. Indeed, both families
of analyses split summaries so as to perform updates, and synthesize
new summaries as part of the loop invariant computation process based
on widening.

8.4 Abstraction for Control Flow Structures

This section focuses on language extensions that make the control flow
more complex. Essentially, these require us to extend the notion of
control states (chapter 3) and to enhance static analyses accordingly.
    Figure 8.19
    Shape analysis of a list reversal, with the assumption that l initially points to a well-
    formed singly linked list

8.4.1 Functions and Procedures
Functions and procedures make code modular and allow splitting the
implementation effort more easily and reasoning over different pieces of
a same program in a separate manner. Therefore, they play a
fundamental role in programming and are present in one form or
another in all programming languages. On the other hand, they make
the execution flow a lot more complex to understand as there may be
infinitely many radically different ways to reach a given program point.
The flows of data are also more intricate due to the passing of values as
arguments and to the references into the call stack. Furthermore,
higher-order functions allow parameterizing a function by another
function, which complicates control flow even more.
   In the following, we discuss some of the main issues that are brought
up by functions and procedures, as well as some of the most common
abstractions and analysis techniques. As in the previous paragraphs,
exhaustivity is out of our reach; thus, we focus on the most salient
aspects. For instance, we deliberately leave out higher-order functions
to better focus on the call stack abstraction.
Extension of the Language Syntax and SemanticsWe will consider a slightly
different language from the one in section 8.2. As in the previous
section, we first set up a minimal language for our study, by extending
the basic language of chapter 3. Since functions with parameters and
possible return values would require a significantly more complex
syntax, we simply add basic procedures, and we assume the language
supports both global and local variables.
    In practice, this leads to a comparable level of expressiveness, but
with lighter syntax since both parameters and return values can be
eliminated using copies in global variables. Therefore, we consider only
procedures without argument and without a return value.
    A procedure declaration thus comprises only a finite set of local
variables and a command (often a sequence of commands) that stands
for the body of the procedure. We denote the declaration of a procedure
p with local variables x0,…,xn and with body C by
                         proc p local[x0,…,xn]{C}
The commands in the body of the procedure may access both its local
variables and the global variables. For the sake of consistency, we also
let the keyword global prefix the declarations of global variables in the
following.
    A procedure call command is simply defined by the name of the
procedure to be called (in the following, we refer it as the callee). We
denote a call to procedure p by
                                    call p;
  A program consists of a finite set of procedure declarations and of a
main body, which is the equivalent of the main function of a C or Java
program.
   Figure 8.20 presents two programs with procedures. The program of
figure 8.20(a) is quite contrived and mainly aims at showing how
procedures complicate static analysis. Indeed, we observe that the
behavior of function h depends on the caller procedure (f or g). The
program of figure 8.20(b) is inspired by a general dichotomic search
algorithm, and illustrates recursion.
   We now define the semantics of procedures. The semantics
presented below is lighter than that in section 8.2, as its only goal is to
show relevant abstractions. To make the definition lighter, we set it up in
two steps: first, we assume that procedures have no local variables,
and we focus on the control part; second, we consider local variables. A
control state describes the sequence of ongoing nested function calls.
Each function call in this sequence is defined by the name of the
procedure that is currently running, by the name of the procedure that
called it, and by the program location at which this call occurred.
Therefore, it consists of a stack of procedure names, also called call
stack. The call stack is, in the semantics jargon, called continuation in
section 8.2.
    Figure 8.20
    Example programs with procedures

   When the program starts, the call stack is empty. Then, whenever a
procedure p is called, p is added on top of this stack, and when the end
of the current procedure is reached, the execution continues at the
program point defined by the procedure and call site at the top of the
call stack. By definition, each local variable is created at the time of a
call to a procedure and disappears when this procedure returns. In fact,
when a procedure is called recursively (like p in figure 8.20(b)), several
instances of a local variable may be created. Therefore, the
aforementioned stack should also contain the local variables attached
to each procedure call. To summarize, the call stack is a sequence of 3-
tuples (p,l,mp), where
      p is a procedure name;
      l is the location at which it was called; and
     mp is a partial memory state that defines the value of the local
     variables of p.
Such a 3-tuple is called an activation record (in the compiler jargon).
Then a state should comprise not only the current program location and
the current value of global variables, but also the call stack. Using this
notion of state leads to a trivial extension of the semantics exposed in
chapters 3 and 4.
Semantic Properties Related to Functions and Procedures Regardless of the target
semantic property to verify, the existence of procedures requires an
additional effort in the analysis design. Therefore, all the semantic
properties mentioned in the previous chapters are relevant in our study
of the analysis of programming languages with procedures. Due to this,
we study in the following paragraphs general static analyses to over-
approximate the set of reachable states of a program with procedures.
However, we can also mention several semantic properties of interest,
which are specific to programs with procedures.
    First, the call stack (the continuation) that is now part of program
states also needs to be stored in memory, and most implementations
provide a fixed amount of stack space: when this space is exhausted,
the execution may crash (with a stack overflow error), or adjacent
memory cells may be corrupted. Thus, it is often useful to compute
statically an over-approximation of the stack space that a program may
consume. In practice, such analysis of the stack requires a reachable-
state static analysis that reasons over the low-level structure of
activation records at the assembly level [68]. If we design this stack
analysis in section 8.2.2, the design boils down to to the definition of the
abstract continuation domain K#.
    Second, it is often interesting to compute and verify that the effect of
a function matches some input-output specification. As an example, one
may want to prove that any call to the procedure p defined in figure
8.20(b) either does not return or returns in a state where the new values
of a and b are in the range [min(a,b),max(a,b)] of the old values of these
variables. We call this a relational property, as it relates input and output
states. Another example is the typing of functional languages. The type
of a function characterizes both the arguments that it may take and the
results that it may produce, and possibly the relations between both (in
the case of polymorphic types). Types are very valuable to developers
(they help catch many kinds of programming errors) and compilers (they
guide the choice of data representation formats). We do not study these
families of properties in this chapter (typing is discussed in chapter 10).
                                 As we remarked above, the main change
Fully Context-Sensitive Abstraction
in the definition of the language is the addition of the call stack. A first
technique to analyze programs with procedures simply keeps all the
stack information fully precise. In other words, it does not abstract the
call stack at all. We call this approach a fully context-sensitive
abstraction, as it keeps all information about call contexts. It can be
viewed as an application of the sensitive abstraction method described
in section 5.1.3, where the analysis maps each possible context to
abstract information that can be observed in that context. It is also
known as the call string approach [100] since it relies on call strings to
describe contexts.
    As an example, a fully context-sensitive analysis of the program
shown in figure 8.20(a) should distinguish the following contexts:
     the empty context (when the program executes the main
     command);
     the context corresponding to a call to f (there is only one call site to
     f, located in the main command);
     the context corresponding to a call to g (similar to the previous
     one);
     the context of a call to h from f (so that the call stack contains
     triples corresponding to f and h in that order); and
     the context of a call to h from g (so that the call stack contains
     triples corresponding to g and h in that order).
As a consequence, such an analysis keeps precise information about
each call to function h. This is the main advantage of fully context-
sensitive abstractions.
    On the other hand, keeping information about each possible context
may be costly, or even impossible. In the settings of section 8.2.2, the
full context sensitivity corresponds to not abstracting the instance
domain ℘(I). In the case of the recursive procedure shown in figure
8.20(b), there are infinitely many call contexts since a call context boils
down to a sequence of calls to p; thus, it is characterized by the
recursion depth. Therefore, a fully context-sensitive abstraction that
distinguishes all contexts requires abstracting elements that cannot be
represented. Even without recursive functions, fully context-sensitive
abstractions may be too costly due to a too high number of contexts,
which means that the analysis will require too much memory or time to
explore all possible contexts.
   From the analysis implementation point of view, this approach is
quite simple to set up, as it assumes that a control state is a pair of a
call context and a location in the program text: whenever a call is
encountered, the analysis should extend the call context with the new
call, and when a procedure return point is reached, the analysis should
pop the topmost element from the call context and use it to continue the
analysis of the caller. These analysis operations are very similar to the
way concrete program executions progress.
Context-Insensitive Abstraction Another approach completely abstracts
contexts away. It is called context-insensitive abstraction. This
abstractions essentially collects all states observed in a same function,
before applying any other abstractions (e.g., the value abstractions
described in chapter 3). In the setting of section 8.2.2, a context-
insensitive abstraction is obtained by abstracting away the instance
domain ℘(I).
    If we consider the example code shown in figure 8.20(a), then the
context-insensitive abstraction does not distinguish between the states
that are reached when h is called from f and the states that are reached
when h is called from g. This implies that such states will not be
distinguished and that overall analysis results are likely to be much less
precise than with the fully context-sensitive abstraction presented in the
previous paragraph. Another comparison between the context-sensitive
abstraction and the context-insensitive abstraction can be found in
example 8.9 (see figure 8.8).
    The obvious advantage of context-insensitive abstraction is a lower
cost than the context-sensitive approach. Even when a program has
recursive procedures, the context-insensitive abstraction can produce
rather compact results since it yields only one piece of abstract
information per procedure in the program. As an example, a context-
insensitive abstraction of the executions of the program of figure 8.20(b)
will produce a single abstract state at the entry into procedure p. On the
other hand, we should expect analyses based on context-insensitive
abstraction to produce less precise results than a fully context-sensitive
one.
    The easiest way to view a context-insensitive analysis is to start with
an analysis that iterates over a control flow graph with additional edges
for procedure calls and returns [94]. For each call command, we have
two edges: one from the point before the call site to the procedure entry
and the other from the procedure exit to the point right after the call
command. Note that in general the exit point of a procedure has several
outgoing edges; as an example, in the case of the program of figure
8.20(a), there are two edges from the last control point of h (one per call
site).
                                     Very often the fully context-sensitive
Partially Context-Sensitive Abstraction
abstraction is too heavy and the context-insensitive one leads to results
that are too imprecise. To cope with such cases, a whole range of
intermediate abstractions can be used that retain some but not all of the
context information. We call them partially context-insensitive since they
preserve only part of the context information.
    The most common way to achieve such a partially context-
insensitive abstraction preserves only the topmost k activation records
in addition to the topmost one, where k is an integer bound fixed before
the analysis; moreover, it discards the rest of the call stack altogether.
This approach is generally called k-CFA [101]. For instance, let us
assume that k = 1, and consider the two examples of figure 8.20. We
first discuss the program of figure 8.20(a). Using partially context-
sensitive abstract up to depth 1, the analysis distinguishes the states
that reach h after a call from f from those that reach h after a call from g.
It thus remedies the imprecision observed with the context-insensitive
abstraction. In the case of the code of figure 8.20(b), recursion prevents
fully context-sensitive abstraction from producing a finite representation.
However, with partially context-sensitive abstraction up to depth 1, not
only this issue does not occur, but also two sorts of calls to procedure p
are differentiated: on one hand, the call from the main command body,
and on the other hand, the recursive calls that stem from p itself. These
two examples show how partial context sensitivity can provide decent
precision while limiting the cost. Because of this, many static analysis
tools let the user control to what extent the analysis should be sensitive
to contexts.
   In the analysis implementation point of view, partial context
sensitivity can easily be described as an iteration over a graph, where
nodes describe abstract contexts (e.g., contexts up to depth k) and a
program location.
                                    The previous paragraphs focused on
Abstraction of the Call Stack Contents
the abstraction of the call stack from the context point of view, as it is
often the most important choice to make when reasoning over programs
with procedures. However, the contents of the stack also need to be
abstracted. From the memory point of view, the call stack is a stack
data structure. Thus, the techniques discussed in section 8.3 apply. In
particular, the summarization and shape abstraction approaches
presented in section 8.3.4 can be used to describe the contents of local
variables stored in the call stack. When using a fully sensitive
abstraction of call contexts, another option is to keep a fully precise
representation of the layout of the call stack; for instance, we can apply
a non-relational abstraction of the value of program variables and
associate an abstract value to each local variable.
Relational Abstraction, and Procedure Summaries   The previous paragraphs
focused on the abstraction of the states that can be observed at various
points during the execution of programs with procedures. Another
approach aims at computing the effect of each procedure out of any
context. For instance, a procedure that increments a global variable has
the effect of modifying the value of that variable. This method is also
called the functional approach [100], as it relies on abstractions of the
functional behavior of procedures. It has been implemented in many
analyses [62, 92].
    The abstraction needed to represent the effect of procedures
depends on what the form of program states and on the nature of the
effect properties that are researched (numeric, Boolean, or related to
pointers). As mentioned above, function types are one instance. We can
also define other forms of summaries that characterize the relationship
between values before and after a procedure is run. For instance, the
procedure of figure 8.20(b) satisfies the following relation, where we
note ain (resp., aout) for the value of a before (resp., after) the execution
of the body of p:
This summary consists of a disjunctions of constraints that can be
described using a relational abstract domain, such as convex polyhedra
(definition 3.9), and that convey the fact that p shrinks the range
between a and b.
   Such summaries are interesting for several reasons. First, they
provide information about what a procedure or function does,
independently from its calling context. This implies that they are well
suited to verify functional properties of functions in a library. Second,
procedure summaries may also help accelerate a static analysis that
computes an over-approximation for reachable states, by avoiding the
need to analyze a procedure in many call contexts [17]; indeed, once an
abstract summary is available, the analysis can derive an abstract post-
condition for a call from an abstract pre-condition. While computing a
summary may be expensive, this cost can be amortized over a great
number of calls. For additional details on such modular analysis
approaches, we refer the reader to section 5.4, where we cover this
approach in a general setting.

8.4.2 Parallelism
Hardware and software architectures are increasingly parallel. Modern
processors have an increasing number of cores and often support
hyperthreading. Software often combines several tasks that should be
performed in concurrent threads; for instance, an operating system
needs to manage many resources (memory, access storage devices
and networks, etc.) and to run in the same time as user processes.
    Unfortunately, concurrency complicates significantly any reasoning
about program semantics, and static analysis in particular. First,
concurrency makes it harder to describe how program executions
progress since the executions of the parallel components are
interleaved [72]. Second, parallel programs may suffer defects that are
irrelevant in the case of sequential programs and thus motivate
verification tools. As an example, concurrent access to resources and
variables may cause undesirable races. Synchronization mechanisms
that are supposed to prevent races may cause parallel programs to
reach a deadlock state, which means that the execution cannot
progress any further. We discuss these issues in this subsection.
   Hardware-level concurrency brings its own set of issues with the
complexity induced by weak memory models, where actual read/write
operations may be reordered due to the cache hierarchy. We do not
study these issues in this book.
   This section provides a high-level description of the main issues
related to parallel programs and sketches a few important analysis
techniques.
                                     To include parallelism into our
Extension of the Language Syntax and Semantics
small language, we add a command that executes two commands
asynchronously. We note the command that runs C0 and C1 in parallel
as follows:
                                    {C0 || C1}
Using the common terminology, we call thread commands (or threads)
the commands C0 and C1. Instead of augmenting our simple language
with locks or other synchronization mechanisms, we let global variables
simulate them. Figure 8.21 displays two parallel programs. Each of
these programs is composed of initialization assignments followed by
the parallel execution of two thread commands. For clarity, the
definitions of the thread commands are shown separately. Besides the
parallel composition, all the constructions used here are standard.
Although these programs are contrived, they show several key issues
raised by the analysis of parallel programs.
   Because of the parallel execution of commands, the format of the
semantics needs to be amended. Indeed, a program state should
capture the configuration of the machine at a given point in the
execution of a program. Thus, when several thread commands are
running in parallel, a state should specify the status of each of these
threads. As a consequence, a state should be made of a set L of
program points in different thread commands, and a memory state m.
Furthermore, we assume that a program execution step describes
either a step in any of the active thread commands, or the beginning of
a parallel section:
     Figure 8.21
     Examples of parallel programs

    If (l, m) ↪ (l′, m′) (where ↪ is the transition relation defined in
    chapter 4), then (L ⊎ {l}, m) ↪ (L ⊎ {l′}, m′).
    If l is the control state preceding a parallel command {C0 || C1}, and
             are the entry control states of C0, C1, then
                                .
This execution model assume that steps described by ↪, are atomic
and that they cannot be decomposed into smaller steps, which can be
executed in parallel. As an example, figure 8.22 presents all the
nonlooping transition steps of the parallel program of figure 8.21(b).
                                      First, we discuss several semantic
Semantic Properties Related to Parallelism
properties specific to parallel programs, which are particularly relevant
in practice. As mentioned above, reaching a deadlock state is a very
serious issue, as it means that none of the parallel components will
progress from that point. As an example, an obvious case of deadlock
is shown in figure 8.21(a), since both variables x, y are initially equal to
0, which prevents both C0 and C1 from progressing. Searching for the
absence of deadlocks boils down to a reachability problem, where the
goal is to prove that some undesirable configurations cannot be
reached. In the case of the program of figure 8.21(a), blocking
configurations are of the form         , m), where m(x) ≤ 0 and m(y) ≤
0. Such a state is obviously reachable, as both variables are initially set
to 0.

    Figure 8.22
    Parallel executions: nonlooping execution steps in the program of figure 8.21(b) (for
    clarity, looping transitions are omitted)

   Data races correspond to pairs of read or write actions to a same
location, which may occur in any order. They are sources of non-
determinism, and while some data races are admissible (or even
desirable), others could cause unwanted or erratic behaviors. We can
identify two interesting static analysis problems related to data races:
one focuses on computing a super-set of the possible data races (either
to prove that there are none, or to verify that they are all admissible with
respect to the specification), and the second attempts only to compute a
superset of the possible effects of races on the semantics of programs
(e.g., to determine if some numerical constraints hold). As an example,
the program of figure 8.21(b) has several races: first, the two
assignments to y may happen in any order; second, the same goes for
the assignments to x in C0 and C1. As a consequence, the final values
of variables x and y depend on the execution order. On the other hand,
the assignments to z are unambiguously sequentialized since C0 cannot
exit the loop until C1 updates x to 1. One may be interested in proving
that the final value of z is indeed 2, which implicitly requires reasoning
over races.
   Fairness is a semantic property that is most relevant for a specific
subclass of parallel programs. The most common example is the case
of a scheduler, which is a thread run in parallel with other thread
commands, and which should manage the access to a resource
(computation time, memory, output device, etc.) by the other thread
commands. Intuitively, a scheduler is said to be fair if it will not cause
any program to starve on the resource that it manages by never letting
the program access the resource.
   Last, all the semantic properties of interest for sequential programs
are also relevant to parallel programs. For instance, distributed
computing systems (e.g., distributed databases) utilize sophisticated
data structures; thus, all the structures and related properties
mentioned in section 8.3 are relevant here. However, in addition to the
problems related to the nature of the data structure, we also have to
face issues related to concurrent accesses, including race conditions.
To verify such properties, we need to address the second analysis
problem mentioned in the paragraph on data races, namely, the sound
over-approximation of the effect of all the possible races.
                                             To discuss the main issues
Abstractions and Analysis Techniques for Parallelism
related to the analysis of parallel programs, we study the extension of
static analyses aimed at numerical properties such as those presented
in chapters 3 and 4. We assume an abstraction of values is fixed (e.g.,
based on the domain of intervals introduced in example 3.7), and we
study two important families of analysis techniques for parallel
programs:
     an approach based on global iteration over all threads; and
     a technique that composes and iterates simpler analyses that are
     local to specific threads.
                               When considering parallel programs, a first
Global Iteration over All Threads
major issue stems from the fact that a state in a parallel program
comprises a state for each of the components that are running in
parallel. This implies that adapting the iteration techniques presented in
chapter 3 (iteration over a syntax tree) and chapter 4 (iteration over a
control flow graph) requires using the extended semantics mentioned
above, so as to account for all possible parallel interleavings. In
particular, a worklist algorithm as shown in chapter 4 can be applied
immediately to the extended relation ↪. As an example, in the case of
figure 8.21(b), this technique can discover that it is not possible to reach
the exit location of C0 before reaching the exit location of C1, and also
that the final value of z is necessarily 2. While this approach retains a
lot of information about the program history, it is also very costly.
Indeed, if the program is composed of only two commands run in
parallel, the number of control states is proportional to the product of
the sizes of these commands, so that even the estimation of the control
flow is quadratic, hence not tractable. Obviously, the situation is even
worse when considering a program made of many components ran in
parallel. Moreover, this approach does not really exploit the modularity
induced by the construction of programs from parallel threads, since it
analyzes all the threads simultaneously.
Iteration of Thread Local Analyses   An alternative approach is to analyze
threads separately. However, threads may interact, so this approach
requires information about the shared variables, which may be read or
written in distinct threads [87]. This is similar to rely-guarantee proof
methods [64, 84] for parallel programs, where precise information on
interactions needs to be set up before reasoning over each separate
thread. It is possible to let a static analysis automate this proof method,
by analyzing each thread separately and letting the analysis of a thread
compute an over-approximation of the write operations over variables
that other threads may read or write [72, 83]. In the case of the program
shown in figure 8.21(b), such shared variables include x, y, and z.
When the analysis of C0 reveals a possible write into variable x, the
other threads need to be reanalyzed under the assumption that x may
have changed at any time. In turn, their analysis may reveal new writes
into shared variables, causing other threads (including C0) be
reanalyzed. When the global interactions that are discovered are stable,
and the analysis of each thread is stable, a sound over-approximation
of the executions of the whole program is produced. Let us unfold the
first steps in the analysis of the program of figure 8.21(b):
   1. Initially, x is equal to 0.
   2. The analysis of C0 shows that only its first line may run (since x =
      0), so that y becomes equal to 1.
   3. The analysis of C1 shows that y is set to 0 before or after C0 sets it
      to 1, so we may assume that y ∈ [0, 1]; moreover, x is set to 1.
   4. At this stage, C0 needs to be analyzed again, as C1 may have
      modified x and y; this time, the analysis progresses beyond the
      loop and shows possible new values for z and x.
   5. At this point, it is necessary to analyze C1 again.
To summarize, this approach boils down to iterating a global
computation over all the thread commands, each step of which consists
of a local post-fixpoint computation over each thread command. Such
an analysis is generally much faster than the approach based on tuples
of program location, but it may also be less precise at first, as it may fail
to take into account that some sequences of actions are impossible.
    There are several ways to make the approach based on separate
analyses of each threads more precise. One technique is to use a
relational domain (section 3.2.3) for the approximation of the values that
the shared variables may take. This allows indirectly ruling out certain
control states. For instance, in the program of figure 8.21(b), the
assignment z ≔ 2 may be executed only in states where x is already
equal to 1, which means that the thread command C1 has reached its
exit point; therefore, it allows showing that when the execution of the
parallel composition terminates, z is equal to 2.
