9 Classes of Semantic Properties and Verification by
Static Analysis

Goal of This Chapter  In section 1.3.1, we introduced several families of
semantic properties that are interesting targets for verification,
including safety, liveness, and information flow properties. In the
subsequent chapters, we focused on state properties, even though
many other kinds of semantic properties are important in practice.
Indeed, state properties not only encompass many semantic properties
of great interest but also provide the most simple starting point for the
definition of static analyses. The goal of this chapter is to discuss
techniques and abstractions dedicated to other semantic properties.
Unlike previous chapters, we do not detail the definition of the
abstractions; instead, we focus on the underlying intuitions and provide
bibliographic references to the interested reader. In particular, we
carefully consider what needs to be abstracted (sets of states,
executions, or others) and how sound abstractions can be derived,
while still reusing the basic techniques presented more thoroughly in
the previous chapters.
Recommended Reading:         [S] (Master), [D] and [U] (2nd reading,
depending on need) Engineers and students may skip this chapter on
first reading and revisit it when dealing with the verification of classes
of properties that are not covered in the previous chapters. Teachers
will also find in this chapter examples to illustrate in classes and
practical sessions.
Chapter Outline In this chapter, we consider two families of properties. We
discuss trace properties in section 9.1. These include not only safety
properties but also liveness properties (as explained in section 1.3.1).
Then section 9.2 presents a few properties based on information flow,
including some classes of security properties. In each case, we
provide examples of properties and of abstractions that allow tackling
them.

9.1 Trace Properties

We call trace property a semantic property P that can be defined by
the data of a set of program execution traces (or, for short, traces),
which are exactly the executions that satisfy P. As an example, the
absence of run-time errors can be described by the set Tok of
executions that do not terminate in an error state. A program p is free
of run-time errors if and only if the set 〚p〛 of all its executions traces
as defined in its operational semantics (chapter 2) is included in Tok:
                              〚p〛 ⊆ Tok
By contrast, a state property can be defined a set of states S that are
considered admissible, and holds for a program p if and only if the
reachable states of p all belong to S.
   As an example of trace property, let us consider a program that is
supposed to sort in place an array of scalars (e.g., using an array-
based implementation of merge sort or insertion sort). A correct
implementation (in the sense of total correctness) of such a sorting
algorithm should meet the conjunction of several basic properties:
     it should not fail with a run-time error;
     it should terminate;
     it should return a sorted array; and
     it should return an array that contains the same elements of its
     argument, with the same multiplicity (if there are duplicates).
An execution that violates this correctness specification is a trace that
ends in an error state or that reaches the program exit with an array
that is not sorted, or that does not contain the same elements as in the
beginning, or that does not terminate. Thus, this total correctness
property is a trace property.
   As a program p satisfies a trace property T if and only if 〚p〛 ⊆ T,
trace properties have a few interesting monotonicity features:
  1. If two programs p0 and p1 are such that p1 satisfies a trace
     property T and 〚p〛 ⊆ 〚p1 〛, or, in other words, if p1 has more
     behaviors than p0, then p0 also satisfies trace property T;
  2. If a program p satisfies a trace property T0, and if T1 is a second
     trace property such that T0 ⊆ T1, then p also satisfies T1; in other
     words, this means that T0 is logically stronger than T0.

9.1.1 Safety
As observed in chapter 1, safety properties essentially state that some
given behavior observable in finite time never occurs. Safety properties
actually account for a large part of the semantic properties that
programmers care for, and we have studied several important
examples throughout the previous chapters.
                                  As a first example, we have remarked
A Few Families of Safety Properties
previously that the absence of run-time errors is a safety property. In
fact, any state property (i.e., semantic property that asserts that some
set of states should not be reachable) is a safety property. The
absence of failure due to a run-time error is a state property, hence a
safety property. In the case of the aforementioned array-sorting
program, reaching the exit point of the program with an array that is
not sorted can also be described by a set of states the programmer
expects not to observe. Thus, the fact that the program should always
produce a sorted array is a state property, hence a safety property.
    Figure 9.1
    Example of state (hence also safety) property: absence of errors

    As an example, figure 9.1 describes graphically a generic state
property, which expresses that a set of error states should not be
encountered during any program execution. Two correct executions
are shown in figure 9.1(a), whereas figure 9.1(b) displays an erroneous
execution. As we can see in figure 9.1(b), showing that a program
does not satisfy this property boils down to exhibiting at least one finite
error trace.
    However, not all safety properties are state properties. As an
example, let us consider an array-sorting program. The partial
correctness of this program is essentially the conjunction of two
properties: first, the output array should be sorted; second, it should
contain the same elements as the input array. Both properties are
safety properties since they can be described by sets of program
executions and because it is possible to find a finite counter-example
execution for any program that violates them (we simply need to
consider an execution where the program returns an incorrect result).
To verify the second property (preservation of the set of elements
stored in the array), one should check that the elements present in the
array when an execution reaches the program exit point exactly match
those in the initial state of that execution. This preservation property is
naturally expressed as a relation between pairs of states formed by the
initial and final states of each execution. On the other hand, it cannot
be captured by the data of a set of states; indeed, if one observes only
the final states, it is impossible to determine whether the set of
elements initially present in the array was preserved (an execution
leading to given observed final states may have either preserved the
set of elements in the array or modified it). In other words, one needs
to observe not only the final states but also some of the executions
that led to them in order to decide whether the program preserves the
elements stored in the array. Moreover, we also observe that this
property fits the definition of safety since a counter-example is
necessarily a finite execution that goes from the entry point to the exit
point (and that modifies the elements present in the array).
                                          Let us now study the verification
Proving Safety Properties by Static Analysis
of safety properties using static analysis techniques. In previous
chapters (e.g., in chapters 3 and 4), we have discussed static analyses
that compute a superset of the set of all the reachable states. Such
analyses are naturally adapted to the verification of state properties;
indeed, since they return an over-approximation of the set of reachable
states, their result may be used to verify that certain states (e.g., error
states, or states at the exit point of the program, and where the array is
not sorted) are unreachable.
   This is actually an instance of a more general verification principle.
In general, the verification of a state property P boils down to the
discovery of an invariant that entails P. Figure 9.1(c) illustrates this
principle in the case of the state property defined by a set of error
states that should never be reached during the execution of a program.
To prove it, one simply needs to identify a set of states that defines an
invariant (i.e., the program always starts from a state in the invariant,
and any computation step starting from a state within the invariant also
leads to another state that belongs to the invariant) and is disjoint with
the set of error states. From the static analysis point of view, this
means that proving the state property P essentially involves computing
an invariant, by abstract interpretation of the program to verify.
   In fact, general safety properties (and not just state properties) can
be reasoned over in a similar manner, using some kind of reachability
analysis. To show this, we consider the preservation of the elements
stored in an array by a sorting program. As noted above, this is a trace
property but not a state property. Despite this, we demonstrate that it is
amenable to reachability analysis techniques that are very similar to
those studied in the previous chapters. In those chapters, we let
program states be pairs made of a control state and a memory state,
and we let abstract states describe sets of memory states. Let us
slightly extend this notion of states so as to account for the changes of
the set of elements stored in the array:
     We enrich each concrete state with a function from values to
     scalars that collects all the values that were added or removed in
     the array with the multiplicity describing the number of times a
     value was added or removed.
     We enrich abstract states with symbolic information that describes
     the number of times each element was added to or removed from
     the array. More precisely, we let a symbolic variable X stand for
     the multiset of elements initially present in the array, and we let an
     abstract state be a symbolic formula that describes the
     modifications to X. As an example, X ⊎ {x} \ {a[i]} expresses that
     the value a[i] was removed once and that the value x was added
     once.
    Although we do not make the formalization of the abstraction
relation fully explicit, we observe that this notion of states slightly
extends the usual one, with some information describing the execution
traces that led to each state. Moreover, it is now very simple to express
the preservation of the elements in the array both in concrete terms
and in abstract terms:
     In an initial state, the function describing the updates to the array
     should describe the identity (no addition, no removal).
     In the final state, the information attached to the exit state should
     also describe the identity transformation; namely, it should boil
     down to X.
Note that we do not need to observe all the information in the
execution traces to verify the property of interest; we only need to
reason over a rather coarse abstraction of the program history.
Moreover, families of trace abstractions were already studied in section
5.1.3, in the context of trace partitioning.
    This example summarizes well how safety properties that are not
state properties can be tackled with analysis techniques based on
reachability that compute invariants expressed in terms of execution
traces (and not just states).

9.1.2 Liveness
As remarked in chapter 1, a liveness property is a trace property that
can be refuted only using infinite counter-examples, that is, that states
a program will never exhibit some specific behavior that can be defined
only with infinite traces. The following paragraphs present important
examples of liveness properties and discuss how static analysis can
be used to prove them automatically.
A Few Families of Liveness PropertiesThe canonical example of a liveness
property is termination. Indeed, a program violates the termination
property if and only if there exists one execution that does not
terminate, which is by definition an infinite execution. In other words, it
should have no infinite execution. On the other hand, observing an
isolated finite execution provides no information on the termination
behavior since it could either reach the program exit point at the next
step and terminate or loop forever. Not only is termination the most
common liveness property, but it also carries a lot of intuition about
liveness properties in general; thus, we discuss it more in detail below.
    We can cite many other useful program properties that are liveness.
Let us consider a program that is supposed to run forever, with at least
one integer variable x and the following specification: the values that x
takes during the execution should not be ultimately forever of the same
sign. Another way to state this is that, for each execution, and at each
time there must exist a future instant where x is positive, and another
future instant where x is negative. This property is similar to the
fairness of a scheduler that manages a resource in a system running
two processes: the scheduler should decide at each instant which
process gets the exclusive right to use the resource, without starving
either of the two processes. If we consider the infinite executions, it is
very easy to identify the traces that are admissible and those that are
not. On the other hand, a given finite execution provides no information
on whether or not the program that produces it satisfies the property:
even if x always has the same sign over a given finite trace, we cannot
rule out that infinitely many sign alternations may occur in the future.
     Figure 9.2
     Example of liveness property: eventually reaching a target state

Proving Liveness Properties by Static AnalysisWe now discuss how it is
possible to reason over liveness properties using static analysis
techniques. While the techniques discussed in the previous chapters
naturally compute an over-approximation for reachable states (or, with
some small additional work, for reachable traces, as discussed in
section 9.1), they do not immediately allow proving that certain infinite
executions do not occur. However, in the following, we show that it is
actually possible to reason over liveness properties using similar
abstractions.
    Before this, we discuss how paper proofs of liveness properties are
usually done. We consider a graphical example shown in figure 9.2. In
this example, we are interested in proving that all executions
eventually reach a set of target states represented by the dotted area
at the top. We observe that termination fits this view; indeed, proving
that a program always terminates is equivalent to showing that all its
executions eventually reach a final state. In figure 9.2(a), we show a
few program executions that are all correct, as they all reach the set of
target states after a finite number of steps. In figure 9.2(b), we present
an execution trace that alternates forever between two given states
and never reaches the set of target states; thus, it violates the property.
The usual way to deal with the proof of such properties is to exhibit a
variant, a quantity that evolves toward the set of target states and
guarantees any execution will eventually reach that set. Usually, it is a
value that is strictly decreasing for some well-founded order relation. A
common example of variant is an expression of integer type that
always takes a positive value, and is strictly decreasing, at each
program execution step. A case where such a variant can be found is
illustrated in figure 9.2(c). Therefore, we show how a variant can be
computed automatically by static analysis.

    Figure 9.3
    Termination example

    To do that, we restrict ourselves to the case of termination, and we
illustrate the discussion with the program shown in figure 9.3(a) that
computes the factorial of n into variable r. In the following, we extend
states with an additional integer component (in addition to memory
states and control states) that describes the number of execution steps
observed since the beginning of the execution of the program. We let
variable c store the value of this “step counter.” To maintain the
consistency of the step counter, we make the following semantic
assumptions:
      When a program execution starts, is equal to zero.
      Each program execution step increments by one.
Essentially, termination states that, over a given execution, this value
should not grow unbounded. However, this does not mean that it
cannot take arbitrarily high values for a given program. As an example,
if we consider the program of figure 9.3(a), and if we let k be a positive
integer, then there exists at least one execution that makes more than
k steps: we simply need to start from a state such that n = k, so that
the program will run for 3k ≥ k execution steps (the condition test and
two assignments are evaluated for each iteration in the loop), since it
will iterate the loop k times.
    Nevertheless, this observation allows deriving a bound on the
number of steps performed by the program; indeed, the number of
iterations is a factor of the value of n. The value of n does not change
along the execution of the program; thus, we write n0 for the initial
value of n for the sake of clarity. During an execution, the value of is
thus smaller than 3n0 +2, which fully expresses the argument that a
paper termination proof would rely on. The important point is that the
inequality             actually defines a state property (assuming we
consider the states extended with the counter) and can be proved
using an invariant. Indeed, we observe that, at loop head, we always
have 0 ≤ i ≤ n0 and                        . This invariant provides the
aforementioned upper bound for . Furthermore, it can be computed
by the static analysis techniques introduced in chapters 3 and 4, and
using a numerical domain such as convex polyhedra [30] applied to
the instrumented version of the program of figure 9.3(a), which we
show in figure 9.3(b) (for clarity, we group the assignments to so as
to account the effect of each basic block).
    We can derive from this example a more general technique to
tackle termination verification using static analysis techniques:
   1. Augment states with a program counter variable.
   2. Augment each state with a copy of the initial values of the other
      program variables.
   3. Use standard static analysis to compute relations between this
      step counter and the current and initial values of the numerical
      variables.
This example can be viewed as a simplified instance of more general
and advanced static analysis techniques to prove termination and
other liveness properties [23, 107], which are able to infer ranking
functions.

9.1.3 General Trace Properties
The previous two subsections considered two interesting categories of
trace properties, namely, safety and liveness properties. We now
consider trace properties that do not necessarily fit either of these two
categories. This includes the total correctness of the array-sorting
program that was introduced at the beginning of section 9.1. As total
correctness does not fall either in the safety category or in the liveness
category, it cannot be tackled directly using the static analysis
techniques shown in sections 9.1.1 and 9.1.2.
   Fortunately, there exists a general theorem [3] that states that any
trace property T can be decomposed as the conjunction of a safety
property Tsafe and a liveness property Tlive:
                            T = Tsafe ∧ Tlive
In terms of verification and static analysis, this entails that the
verification of T can be decomposed into two (possibly independent)
analyses:
      one for the verification of Tsafe, using techniques described in
      section 9.1.1; and
      one for the verification of Tlive, using techniques described in
      section 9.1.2.
Often both analyses may take advantage of certain common facts
about the program executions, so that the two analyses may better be
done together, but this is not a requirement, and one may even opt to
use two independent tools, respectively, dedicated to safety and
liveness.
    This approach based on the decomposition of the verification task
into safety and liveness components is an instance of a long-known
program proof method. In particular, the Floyd proof method [44] also
relies on such a decomposition and uses invariant assertions that
capture both invariance properties to deal with the safety part, and the
existence of a well-founded decreasing entity to deal with the liveness
part.
    As an example, in the case of the array sorting program and of its
total correctness specification, Tlive states that the program should
terminate, whereas Tsafe corresponds to the three other items
mentioned in the beginning of section 9.1: absence of errors,
production of a sorted array, and preservation of the elements initially
stored in the array.

9.2 Beyond Trace Properties: Information Flows and Other
Properties

The goal of this section is twofold. First, we show that some classes of
very important semantic properties (including properties related to
security) fall out of the traces properties studied in section 9.1. Second,
we highlight a few techniques to attack such properties.
Definition of Information Flows   In most of this section, we look at
information flow properties. By definition, an information flow occurs
when the observation of the value of one variable gives information
about the value of another. This sort of property is actually useful in
many contexts.
    A most notable application is security. Indeed, let us imagine a
shared application that deals with secret information, such as an
Internet banking website. Then all customers should be able to watch
the general public information and the information relative to their own
account such as their balance, but not the balance of other customers:
even a partial leak of information (such as “user A is richer than user
B”) would be perceived as a major breach into privacy. Similar
concerns arise in many other kinds of systems as well, such as a
multiuser operating system that manages permissions across users,
and make sure that each user may read and write only into her/his own
private space (except for the superuser who is granted stronger
permissions). More generally, such security properties aim at proving
that information that should be accessible only with a high privilege will
not flow into variables accessible even with low privilege [32]. In this
case, it is often interesting to prove the absence of information flows.
In the abstract non-interference setup [45], the information that should
not be leaked and the observation of program behaviors by attackers
can be formalized as abstractions in the sense of definition 3.2.
    Another application is program understanding. When maintaining
programs, developers often need to know what part of a program to
look at in order to understand how a given feature works, so as to fix it
or augment it with additional functionalities. Then, to understand it,
they need to figure out what other parts of the program may have an
impact on the variables related to this feature. Such a relation between
a program statement and a variable of interest is called a dependence
and corresponds to a form of information flow, where the observed
values of the variable may be different if that program statement
receives different inputs [71, 42, 16]. Program investigation tools such
as slicers [109] need to compute an over-approximation of the
components of a program for which there exists an information flow.
Besides program understanding, dependence information is also often
useful to carry out code optimizations (e.g., independent computations
may be parallelized) or to enable client static analyses (e.g., to
determine program fragments that may be ignored).

    Figure 9.4
    Information flows

    To make information flow properties intuitive, we study a couple of
examples from a security point of view. These are quite contrived
(although representative) so that we can easily represent their inputs
and outputs. We assume a program that operates on two variables p
(as “public variable”) and s (as “secret variable”), and we look for the
existence of flows between the secret variable into the public one. The
absence of flows can be described as follows:
        The observable (related to p) produced by two executions
          the initial states of which differ only by the value of s
                            should be the same.
To make this property more intuitive, we provide graphical examples in
figure 9.4. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that we are
considering only deterministic programs. We use three dimensions
since one accounts for time (from left to right) and two account for the
values of the two variables (the value of the secret variable is
described by the upward axis). Using these conventions, the pair of
executions shown in figure 9.4(a) correspond to a case where some
private information is leaked. Indeed, the initial states differ only in the
value of the secret variable s; however, the public observation in the
output states differ since p takes different values for these two
executions. This means that an attacker may derive from the
observation of the output the initial value of the secret variable. On the
other hand, figure 9.4(b) displays a case where no private information
is leaked. Indeed, the final values of the public variable are the same
for the two executions, even though the initial values of the secret
variable differ. To summarize, a program may leak private information if
and only if there exists a pair of executions such as those shown in
figure 9.4(a). This intuitive view generalizes to non-deterministic
programs easily. Indeed, in this case, we simply need to reason over
sets of initial/final values for p and s.

     Figure 9.5
     Comparing information flows

                                  We now show that information flow is
Characterization of Information Flows
not a trace property, and why it is difficult to reason about. In this
paragraph, we assume that variables s and p may take only values 0
and 1. We consider two programs C0 and C1, which are defined in
figure 9.5. Essentially, C0 writes a non-deterministically chosen value
into p), whereas C1 writes the product of a non-deterministically
chosen value with the secret variable into p. Finally, C2 chooses a
value in [0, 1] in a non-deterministic manner, subtracts s from this
value, and stores the result into p. These programs have the following
input-output tables (we show only the output values of the public
variable p, as the output value of s plays no role in the existence of an
information flow); note that each initial state may correspond to several
possible output values (i.e., the executions may be non-deterministic):

Obviously, observing the value produced for variable p by C0 provides
no information on the initial value of s. On the other hand, C1 has a
more complex behavior. For some values for the secret input it always
returns 0, whereas for others it non-deterministically returns states
where p may be either 0 or 1. Looking at the table, if we run C1 with
from some input state and observe that p is equal to 1 in the end, we
know that s was necessarily equal to 1 in the initial state. That means
that there is a flow of information from the initial value of s into the final
value of p (note that when the final value of p is 0, we do not learn
anything about s). In other words, if p is public and s stores a piece of
secret information, the program C1 is not secure. Furthermore, we note
that the program C2 defined in figure 9.5 has the same semantics as
C0 and is thus secure, even though the computation of p syntactically
reads s.
   These two examples also demonstrate why information flows are
not trace properties in the sense of section 9.1. Indeed, let us consider
the property to “be secure,” namely, that there is no information flow
from s to p. We have shown that C0 is secure whereas C1 is not.
However, we can also see that C0 has more behaviors than C1. As
remarked in section 9.1, this means that, if the absence of information
flow were a trace property (i.e., if it could be defined as a set of
“correct traces”), and since C0 satisfies it and has more behaviors, C1
should also satisfy it. However, C1 does not satisfy information flow, so
the absence of information flows is not a trace property. The
fundamental reason is that trace properties are defined by quantifying
once over execution (i.e., with statements that write down as “for each
execution, some property holds”), whereas the absence of information
flow requires a quantification over a pair of executions (namely, “for
each pair of executions starting from initial states that differ only in the
value of s, the final observations of p are the same”). The term
hyperproperty [22] is often employed to describe a semantic property
that requires to quantify about a number of executions that may be
greater than 1. Therefore, hyperproperties include not only trace
properties but also many semantic properties that cannot be defined
as a trace property. In general, a hyperproperty is defined by a set of
sets of traces.
   This need to quantify over several executions also makes reasoning
about information flow difficult. In the previous chapters, we have
extensively used over-approximation of program behaviors, so as to
design automatic static analyses. In particular, when a program
fragment C is hard to analyze but has no impact on the analysis goal,
we would like to safely ignore it and over-approximate its behaviors in
a coarse manner. When considering trace properties, the simplest and
most imprecise over-approximation is simply to consider that the
fragment C may have any possible behavior, just like the C0 fragment
above. However, this approach would be incorrect and unsound here
since the absence of an information flow is not a trace property.
   As a consequence, instead of directly over-approximating the set of
program traces or states, we need to utilize other methods. We present
three common approaches in the following paragraphs. To do that, we
consider the absence of information flow, and we let it be defined by a
set ℐ of sets of executions, which contains all the semantics such that
there is no information flow from s to p. Intuitively, the absence of
information flow is characterized as the set of all the sets of traces that
are secure, in the sense that they satisfy the statement “for each pair
of execution starting from initial states that differ only in the value of s,
the final observations of p are the same.”
                             A first approach is to actually search for a
Abstraction of Sets of Executions
trace property Tsafe that implies the hyperproperty of interest and to
attempt to verify this property by the static analysis techniques
presented in this book. Formally, Tsafe should be such that:
   1. Tsafe defines a safety property (thus, it is a set of execution
      traces); and
   2. for all programs p, if 〚p〛 ⊆ Tsafe, then 〚p〛 ∈ ℐ.
As an example, many static analyses to compute information flows or
dependences attempt to approximate a kind of taint property that can
intuitively be defined as follows:
      In the case of an assignment x ≔ E, we say that the taints of the
      variables that occur in E may flow into x.
      In the case of a program with a condition if(E){…x ≔ …}, we say
      that the taints of the variables that occur in E may flow into x.
Intuitively, this taint property captures relations between variables
computed using (directly or indirectly) the content of other variables.
As such, it describes a stronger property than the flow property that we
are interested in. For instance, if we consider if(y > 0){x ≔ 1}else{x ≔
1}, then there is no information flow from y to x since x gets assigned
to 1 whatever the value of y. However, the computation of x reads y
since it needs to evaluate the condition, so there is a taint relation
between these two variables even though x is 1 regardless of y. The
same goes for x ≔ 0*y. However, the advantage of this approach is
that the taint property is actually a safety property and can be attacked
with regular abstractions based on set of states or traces. To
summarize, this approach proceeds as follows:
      It replaces the target hyperproperty that does not fit the traces
      property definition with another property that does, and that is
      stronger than it (in other words, this step introduces some steep
      imprecision that the second step cannot recover from, as shown in
      the above examples).
      It performs a static analysis to establish this stronger trace
      property, using techniques seen in section 9.1, and chapters 3 and
      4.
We can apply this technique to the three example programs mentioned
above: C0 is accepted as secure since p receives no taint from s; C1 is
(rightfully) rejected as potentially insecure as there exists such taint;
and finally, C2 is also rejected since the computation of p syntactically
reads the value of the secrete variable s. This last case shows the limit
of the taint approach in terms of precision; indeed, the failure to accept
C2 stems from the imprecision in the first step.

                                        As defined above, the absence of
Static Analysis Based on Self-Composition
information flow from s to p expresses a property over pairs of
execution. In order to adapt techniques that can reason about one
execution, one can encode in a single execution the property over the
pair of executions. This approach is known as self-composition [7, 31].
It reduces the verification that a program p is free of information flows
to the verification of another program p′, which essentially performs
two executions of p in a single run, which start with states that differ
only in the value of the secret variable. When the programs are
deterministic, p′ can be derived from p by duplicating variables and
adding assertions. The property that should be verified on p′ simply
asserts that the public values obtained for each execution should be
the same, so that it is not possible to infer any knowledge about the
secret variable. It is thus a state property.
                                        A second approach is to directly
Abstraction of Sets of Sets of Executions
compute over-approximation of the set of set of executions {〚p〛} and
to use it to establish the absence of information flow (or, more
generally, of the hyperproperty of interest). Formally, this approach lifts
analysis techniques to sets of sets of states and attempts to compute
P such that
   1. it over-approximates the program behaviors in the sense that
      {〚p〛} ⊆ P; and
   2. it implies the absence of information flows, that is, that P ⊆ ℐ.
Overall, the static analysis relies on the principles presented in
chapters 3 or 4, even though it builds on more sophisticated abstract
domains [6] because an abstract element should over-approximate a
set of sets of executions (and not just a set of executions). The
advantage of this approach is that it does not introduce the
irrecoverable imprecision that the previous approach introduces in its
very first step.
    As an example, we consider the following abstraction of sets of sets
of executions, for the programs C0, C1, and C2:
    We let the abstract element a0 stand for the set of sets of traces
    where p may take, regardless of s, any value at the end, whatever
    the input condition.
    We let the abstract element a1 = ⊤ represent any set of sets of
    traces.
Then we may design an analysis that returns a0 both for C0 and C2,
thus accepting them, whereas C1 is still rejected. In this case, this
approach is thus more precise than the taint approach.
Other Families of PropertiesTo conclude this section, we would like to
point out that there are other interesting properties besides information
flows (and the related security and dependence properties) that can be
represented only as sets of sets of executions. As an example, some
such properties quantify over many executions, or even over all
executions, such as average execution time. Indeed, if we would like to
establish that average execution time of some system is less than a
given bound δ (assuming that all its execution traces have the same
probability of occurring), we need to consider all its executions. As we
have shown for information flows, we can actually either try to consider
a stronger trace property instead, or seek for an abstraction that can
describe sets of sets of traces. As an example of the first approach, we
can cite worst-case execution time. Worst-case execution time
analyses aim at computing an upper bound for the time elapsed during
any execution of the program [40]. If such an analysis establishes that
all executions take less than δ, then the average execution time is also
lower than that value.
