10 Specialized Static Analysis Frameworks

Goal of This Chapter We discuss three specialized frameworks that are
less general but simpler than abstract interpretation.
    Specialized frameworks are analogous to domain-specific
programming languages as opposed to general-purpose ones. For a
limited set of target languages and properties, these specialized
frameworks are simple to use yet powerful enough. They can be
practical alternatives to the general abstract interpretation framework
when the target languages and properties are good fits for them. The
burden of soundness proof can be reduced and the special
algorithms can outperform the general worklist-based fixpoint
iteration algorithms.
Recommended Reading   [S], [D] This chapter is targeted at students and
developers who would like to explore specialized static analysis
techniques that can be simple yet powerful enough for specific cases
in hand. This chapter is also a reminder for readers who are already
familiar with the specialized static analysis techniques of limitations,
if any, and how these techniques can be seen from the general
abstract interpretation point of view. This chapter is intended more as
a survey of the specialized frameworks than an in-depth coverage.
Chapter Outline: Three Specialized Static Analysis Frameworks, Theirs Uses, and
Their Limitations  We present three classes of specialized static
analysis frameworks. We discuss their uses and their limitations from
the perspective of the general frameworks presented in chapters 3
and 4.
  1. In section 10.1, we present a specialized framework that has
     long been used in optimizing compilers. We present an example
     called data flow analysis and discuss its limitations.
  2. In section 10.2, we discuss another class of specialized
     framework in which a static analysis computes a monotonic
     closure of facts. We present two examples of this framework
     and discuss their limitations.
  3. In section 10.3, we discuss final class of specialized framework
     where a static analysis constructs a proof about programs. We
     present an example called static typing and discuss its
     limitations.

10.1 Static Analysis by Equations

From the equations point of view, static analysis comprises equation
setup and equation resolution. For an input program, a set of
equations captures all the executions of the program. A solution of
this set of equations is the analysis result.
    Capturing the dynamics of a program by a set of equations is
indeed implicit in the general frameworks of chapters 3 and 4. There,
the concrete semantics of a program (and usually, its finitely
computable abstract version) is defined as a fixpoint of the program’s
semantic function. Note that a function f’s fixpoint c, such that c =
f(c), is nothing but a solution of the equation x = f(x).
    However, the general frameworks of chapters 3 and 4 are
sometimes overkill. When the target programming language is
simple enough, it is rather straightforward to set up correct equations
for programs without formally defining an abstract semantics that
soundly approximates the concrete semantics of the target language
[2].

10.1.1 Data-Flow Analysis
The target programming language is simple enough to be suitable
for this approach to static analysis when the execution order (control
flow) of a program is fixed and explicit from the program text before
the execution and when the execution of each construct is simple.
    The input programs of such languages are represented by
control-flow graphs, and the analysis focuses on the flow of data
over the fixed control-flow graphs. By this reason, this approach to
static analysis is called data-flow analysis.
Program as a Graph    Suppose a simple imperative language with
assignment, sequence, if-branch, while-loop, no pointers, and no
function calls. The control flows of programs are always fixed and
clear from the program source code. The control flow of a program is
represented as a directed control-flow graph. The nodes are the
atomic statements or conditions of the program. The directed edges
determine the execution order (control flow) between the statements.
An if-branch statement has two branches in the graph: one with the
condition expression node followed by the true branch statements,
and the other with the node for the negation of the condition
expression followed by the false branch statements. Similarly for the
while-loop statement.
Equations The equations are about the states that flow at each edge
of the graph. For each node of the form (without loss of generality,
we consider two incoming and outgoing edges, respectively) we
have the following:

The edges describe the control flow, and each node f is a state
transformation function for the corresponding statement of the
program. The function f simulates the statement’s semantics: it
transforms the incoming machine state (pre-state) into the resulting
machine state (post-state). The xi are two incoming pre-states, and yi
are the post-states that flow out along the outgoing edges. Then the
equations are set up as follows:
The value space that the unknowns (xi and yi) range over is a lattice
whose partial order corresponds to the information subsumption: a ⊑
b means that the set implied by a is also implied by b. An expression
of the form a ⊔ b denotes the least upper bound of a and b, the least
element that subsumes both a and b. The function f is a monotonic
function that describes the operation (semantics) of the node’s
statement over the lattice of values.
Example 10.1 (Data-flow analysis) Consider the following program:

     The control-flow graph of this program is shown in figure 10.1. The edges are
numbered. The empty node that does nothing corresponds to the identity transformation
function.
     Suppose that we are interested in the value range of variable x on each edge. Suppose
that we represent value ranges as integer intervals. A set of equations for the values xi
of x at each program label i would be, for example, as in figure 10.2:
       The equation for x0,

                                          x0 = [−∞,+∞]

     describes that x at edge 0 may be any integer because the input is unknown.
     The equation for x1,

                                           x1 = x0 ⊔ x3

     describes the value of x at edge 1 has x’s value at 0 or 3 (because of the while-loop
     iterations).
     The equation for x2,

                                        x2 = x1 ⊓ [−∞,99]

     says the value of x at edge 2 has the value at edge 1 but is less than or equal to 99.
      Figure 10.1
      An example control-flow graph

      Figure 10.2
      A set of equations for the program in figure 10.1

      The equation for x3,

                                            x3 = x2 ⊕ 1

      says the value of x at edge 3 has the value incremented by 1 to the value at edge 2.
      The equation for x4,

                                        x4 = x1 ⊓ [100,+∞]

      says the value of x at line 4 has the value at edge 1 but is greater than 99.
The definitions of the operators (⊔, ⊓, ⊕) in the equations are as follows. The soundness of
these definitions is easy to see:
    It is obvious that the equations in figure 10.2 with the above definitions of the operators
capture all the execution cases of the program. Formally proving this correctness is much
ado for the obvious.
    Computing a solution of the equations can be done by the general fixpoint iterations
such as those in section 4.3 because all operators are monotonic over the lattice space of
the intervals. For finite height lattice, these naive iterations can reach a fixpoint in finite time.

      Figure 10.3
      Another set of sound equations for the program in figure 10.1

    When the lattice is of infinite height, as is the interval lattice, the naive fixpoint iterations
cannot terminate for some programs. In this case we can use a sound finite computation
technique such as the widening operator in chapters 3 and 4 to guarantee the termination
and the soundness (over-approximation) of the result.

Limitation   Though the above equations are simple, so their
correctness is obvious, we cannot rely on the approach for arbitrary
languages. First, the dichotomy of control being fixed and data being
dynamic does not hold in modern languages. If the target language
allows the control flow as values (e.g., jump targets as values,
functions as values, or exceptions as values), the control-flow graph
a priori is not possible. The control flow can generally not be
represented as a static finite graph. Edges are introduced during
program execution. The control flows emerge only during static
analysis.
    Second, the sound transformation functions of each node are not
obvious for modern languages. In example 10.1, though the
operators ⊔, ⊓, and ⊕1 are straightforward for the example program
construct at each node, for complicated languages and value
domains the sound definitions can be error prone. A framework to
check the transformation function’s soundness (e.g., theorems 4.4,
8.1, and 8.2) is necessary so that the equation solution is
guaranteed sound.
   The third issue is about design choices. For a program, the
equations are not unique. There are a vast number of ways to set up
sound equations that over-approximate all the executions of the
program. From this collection of sound equation sets, an analysis
chooses one particular way of setting up equations. For example,
given the program in example 10.1, different equation sets may be
chosen, whose solutions also cover all the possible executions of the
program. One such example is shown in figure 10.3.
   The data flow analysis lacks a systematic approach to explore
various possible choices of sound equations for a given program.
For every choice, though simple, we have to argue the soundness of
the equations from scratch.
   Meanwhile, the semantics-based general frameworks (chapters 3
and 4) work for an arbitrary programming language once the
concrete semantics of the language is defined in the styles
supported by the frameworks. From the point of view of data flow
analysis, the semantic frameworks guide us on what to check
(sections 3.4 and 4.2.3) to set up sound equations from the
programs to analyze. In the semantic frameworks, sound and finitely
computable static analyses with various accuracies can be
systematically defined only if the required properties of the abstract
domains and of the abstract semantic function are ensured.

10.2 Static Analysis by Monotonic Closure

From the monotonic-closure point of view, static analysis comprises
setting up initial facts and then collecting new facts by a kind of chain
reaction. An analysis definition consists of rules for collecting initial
facts and rules for inductively generating new facts from existing
facts. An analysis in action accumulates facts until no more facts are
possible. This collection of facts is an over-approximation of the
program behavior.
   The initial facts are those that are immediate from the program
text. The chain reaction steps generate new facts from existing facts
by simulating the program semantics. The analysis terminates when
no more facts are generated. For the analysis to terminate, the
universe of facts for a given input program must be finite.
   For simple target languages and properties, the soundness of the
analysis—setting up the initial facts and the chain reactions—is
straightforward.
   Formally, let R be the set of the chain-reaction rules, and let X0 be
the initial fact set. Let Facts be the set of all possible facts. Notation
X ⊦R Y denotes that new set Y of facts is generated from X by
applying all possible rules in R. Then the analysis result is

where

Or, equivalently, the analysis result is the least fixpoint

of monotonic function ϕ : P(Facts) → P(Facts) :
                   ϕ(X) = X0 ∪ (Y such that X ⊦R Y).

10.2.1 Pointer Analysis
Let us consider the following simple C-like imperative language. A
program is a collection of assignments.
The left- or right-hand side of an assignment may be a variable(x),
the dereference (*x) of a variable, or the location (&x) of a variable.
Let the semantics of these reference and dereference constructs be
the same as in the C language. A variable may store an integer or
the location of a variable.
Target PropertySuppose that we are interested in the set of locations
that each pointer variable may store during program execution.
Computing such a set is reduced to collecting all possible “points-to”
facts between two variables: which variable can store the location of
which variable. We hence represent each points-to fact by a pair of
two variables: a → b denotes that variable a can point to (can have
the address of) variable b. The set of such points-to facts is finite for
each program because a program has a finite number of variables.
Rules    The analysis globally collects the set of possible points-to
facts that can happen during the program execution. We start from
an initially empty set. We apply the following rules to add new facts
to the global set. This collection (hence the analysis) terminates
when no more addition is possible. The rule has the form

and dictates that, if the program text has component C, and the
current solution set has i1 ⋯ ik, then add j to the solution set [58].
The i1 ⋯ ik part can be omitted.
   The initial facts that are obvious from the program text are
collected by this rule:

That is, for each assignment statement of the form x ≔ &y, add the
fact that x points to y.
   The chain-reaction rules are as follows for other cases of
assignments:
Soundness     It is easy to see that the above rules will collect every
possible points-to fact of the input program. The easiness comes
from the simple semantics of the target language. The six rules
follow, in terms of the points-to information, from the semantics of all
six cases of the assignment statements. Consider the last rule, for
example. The assignment statement *x ≔ &y stores the location &y
of y to the location that x points to. Thus, the rule adds w → y if x
points to w. It is similarly straightforward to see the soundness of
other rules.
    Given the global set of facts, applying all the possible rules to the
set is a monotonic operation; every rule always adds new facts, if
any, to the global set. The analysis result is the least fixpoint of this
applying-all-rules function.
    The over-approximation comes from two sources. First, the rules
ignore the conditional execution of the while-loop. Regardless of the
while-loop condition, the rules are applied to the assignments in the
loop body. Second, we collect the points-to facts into a single global
set. This means that a points-to fact from any statement in the input
program can trigger a new points-to fact at any statement.
Example 10.2 (Pointer analysis) Consider the following program:

Initial facts are from the first two assignments:
                                          x → a, y → x
From y → x and the assignment body of the while-loop, the analysis can apply the last rule
to add
                                          x → b.
For the last assignment and the hitherto collected facts, the analysis can apply the second-
to-the-last rule and add new facts as follows: from x → a and y → x, the analysis can add a
→ a; from x → b and y → x, the analysis can add b → b; from x → a, y → x, and x → b, the
analysis can add a → b; from x → b, y → x, and x → a, the analysis can add b → a.

Limitation Note that the above rules do not take the control flow into
account. The rules are applied for any assignment statement
regardless of where it appears. For example, there is no separate
rule for while-loop statement. Regardless of where an assignment
appears in the program (e.g., whether an assignment appears within
a while-loop body or outside), the analysis blindly collects every
possible points-to facts from the collection of the assignment
statements in the program.
   Similarly, the above analysis is flow-insensitive: the closure rules
are oblivious to the statement order in the input program. Regardless
of where the assignment statement appears in the program,
whenever the premise (numerators) of a rule holds the analysis
applies the rule.
   For example, for a sequence of statements
                             x ≔ &a ; y ≔ x ; x ≔ &b,
the analysis concludes y → a and y → b because x → a and x → b
even though y has x before x → b.
   This flow insensitivity can indeed be avoided by preprocessing
the input program into a static single assignment form where each
variable is defined only once. Two writes to a single variable and its
reads are transformed into writes to two different variables and their
distinctive reads.

10.2.2 Higher-Order Control-Flow Analysis
As an another example, consider the following higher-order call-by-
value functional language. We uniquely label each subexpression of
the program:
A program is defined as an expression that has no free variable.
Program executions are defined by the transition steps, each step
(→) of which is by the beta reduction in the call-by-value order. The
beta-reduction step is
                         (λx.e) e′ → {e′/x}e,
where {e′/x}e denotes the expression obtained by replacing x by e′ in
e. We assume that, during execution, every function’s argument is
uniquely renamed.
   For example, the program
                         (λx.(x(λy.y)))(λz.z)
runs as follows:

During the execution, the first step binds x to λz.z and the second
step binds z to λy.y.
Target PropertySuppose that we are interested in which functions are
called for each application expression. Since functions can be
passed to parameters of other functions, such inter-functional control
flow is not obvious from the program text. For the target property we
need to collect which lambda expression can be bound to which
argument during program execution.
Rules    We let an analysis collect facts about which lambda
expression “λx.e” a sub-expression may evaluate to. Hence, we
represent each fact by a pair L ∋ R, meaning “L can have value R,”
where L is either an expression label or a variable, and R is an
expression label, a variable, or a lambda expression:

For each program the set of the pairs is finite because a program
has a finite number of expressions (l), variables (x), and lambda
expressions (ν).
   From a global set that is initially empty, we apply the following
rules to add facts of the form L ∋ R to the set. The addition (the
analysis) terminates when no more addition is possible. Each rule
has the form

and dictates that, if the program text has component C, and if the
hitherto collected facts include i1 ⋯ im, then add j1 ⋯ jn to the global
set. The i1 ⋯im part may be empty.
   The initial fact setup rules collect facts that are obvious from the
program text only:

A lambda expression is a constant whose value is itself, and a
variable expression contains the value of the variable. The value of a
variable will be later collected when the variable as the parameter of
a function is bound to the actual parameter value at the applications
of the function.
    The propagation rules that collect new facts by simulating
expression evaluations are
As in the points-to analysis case, it is easy to see that the above
rules will collect every possible value of expressions and variables.
For an application expression           , if we knew which function can
be called              with which parameter l2 ∋ ν, we add two new
facts: the first l ∋ l3 about the result of the function application and
the other x ∋ ν about the parameter binding. The second rule
propagates the actual value along the chains of collected facts.
Formally proving the soundness seems again much ado for the
obvious.
Example 10.3 (Control-flow analysis) Consider the following program. Every lambda
expression is identified by its unique parameter name. Each expression of the program is
labeled from 0 to 7.

During the execution, variable x (expression numbered 5) will be bound to λz.z, and
variable z (expression numbered 7) to λy.y.
    Let’s see how this information is collected from the above rules. The initial facts are
collected from the lambda expressions 1, 3, and 4 and variable expressions 5, 6, and 7:
               {1 ∋ λx.(x(λy.y)), 3 ∋ λy.y, 4 ∋ λz.z, 5 ∋ x, 6 ∋ y, 7 ∋ z.}
     From application expression 0, we add x ∋ 4 (parameter binding) and 0 ∋ 2
     (application result) to the above set.
     Then by the last propagation rule from x ∋ 4 and 4 ∋ λz.z, we add x ∋ λz.z, and then
     from 5 ∋ x, 5 ∋ λz.z to the above set.
     Then from application expression 2, we add z ∋ 3 (parameter binding) and 2 ∋ 7
     (application result) to the above set.
     Then by the last propagation rule, we add to the above set z ∋ λy.y; then, from 7 ∋ z,
     we add 7 ∋ λy.y, then 2 ∋ λy.y, and then 0 ∋ λy.y.

Limitation  The above analysis uses a crude abstraction for the
function values. Note that a function value in the concrete semantics
is a pair made of the function code and a table (called environment)
that determines the values of the function’s free variables. The
above analysis completely abstracts away the environment part. In
the concrete semantics, a function expression (λx.E) in a program
may evaluate into distinct values at different contexts (e.g., when the
function’s free variable is the parameter of a function that is multiply
called with different actual parameters). The above analysis collects
only the function code part, with no distinction for the values of the
function’s free variables.
   To employ some degree of context sensitivity in the abstraction of
the function values, the above analysis needs an overhaul, whose
design and soundness assurance will be facilitated by semantic
frameworks such as those in chapters 3 and 4 (see sections 8.2 and
8.4.1).

10.3 Static Analysis by Proof Construction

From the proof construction point of view, static analysis is a proof
construction in a finite proof system. A finite proof system is a finite
set of inference rules for a predefined set of judgments. The
soundness of the analysis corresponds to the soundness of the proof
system. The soundness property of the proof system expresses that,
if the input program is provable, then the program satisfies the
proven judgment. Thus, for a sound proof system, if a program
violates a target judgment, then proving the judgment fails for the
program.

10.3.1 Type Inference
Let us consider a proof system whose judgment is about the types
[91] of program expressions. The set of types corresponds to an
abstract domain of a static analysis. A type over-approximates the
values of an expression. This proof system is called type system,
and the proof construction is called static type inference or static
typing.
   Let us consider the following higher-order language with the call-
by-value evaluation:
   In type systems, the judgment that says expression E has type τ
is written as
                                      Γ ⊦ E : τ,
where Γ is a set of type assumptions for the free variables in E, and τ
is a type. The judgment means that the evaluation of e with its free
variables having values of the types as assumed in Γ is type-safe
(runs without a type error) and returns a value of type τ if it
terminates.

     Figure 10.4
     Proof rules of simple types

Simple Type InferenceThe above language has two kinds of values,
namely, integers and functions. Hence, we use the following types:
                                   τ :≔ int | τ → τ
Type int describes integers, and τ1 → τ2 the type-safe functions from
τ1 to τ2 (functions that, if given a value of type τ1, run without a type
error and return a value of type τ2 if they terminate).
    We say that a program runs without a type error whenever, during
the evaluation of the application expression “E1 E2” in the program,
the value of E1 is always a function value, not an integer.
   The type environment Γ is a finite map from variables to types.
Let us write each entry as x : τ. The notation Γ + x : τ denotes the
same function as Γ except that its entry for x is τ.
   The simple type system is shown in figure 10.4. Each proof rule

is read as follows: whenever all the premises (J1, ⋯ , Jk) are
provable, then the conclusion (J) is provable. A rule with an empty
set of premises is an axiom; that is, its denominator is always
provable.
Example 10.4 (Static type inference) For example, program
                                         (λx.x 1)(λy.y)
is typed int because we can prove
                                    Ø ⊦ (λx.x 1)(λy.y) : int
as follows:

Note that each step of the above proof is an instance of one of the proof rules in figure 10.4.

    The proof rules of figure 10.4 are sound, as indicated by the
following.
Theorem 10.1 (Soundness of the proof rules) Let E be a program, an expression without
free variables. If Ø ⊦ E : τ, then the program runs without a type error and returns a value of
type τ if it terminates.

The soundness proof is done by proving two facts, upon defining the
program execution in the transitional style as a sequence of steps.
The first proof (called progress lemma) shows that a typed program,
unless it is a value, can always progress one step. The second proof
(called preservation lemma) shows that a typed program after its
one-step progress still has the same type. By these two facts, a
typed program runs without a type error and returns a value of its
type if it terminates. The readers can refer to [91] for proofs.
Off-line AlgorithmThe simple type system has a faithful and efficient
algorithm for its proof construction. The algorithm is faithful: it
succeeds for a judgment if and only if the judgment is provable in the
simple type system. The algorithm is efficient: it uses a special
operator called unification that has no iterative computations (or just
a single iteration) as in the fixpoint algorithms of the general
frameworks in chapters 3 and 4.
   The static typing algorithm can be understood as two steps. First,
by scanning the input program, we collect equations about the types
of every subexpression of the program. Then we solve the equations
by the unification procedure. This off-line algorithm can be made
online where we solve the type equations while we scan the
program.
   The following procedure V collects type equations of the form τ ≐
τ from the input program. Types in type equations contain type
variables α (unknowns) (τ :≔ α | int | τ → τ). Given a program e, an
expression without a free variable, the type equations are collected
by calling a function V(Ø, E, α) with the empty type environment Ø
and a fresh type variable α. Procedure V(Γ, e, τ) returns a set of type
equations that must hold in order for the e expression to have type τ
under assumption Γ:

Solving the type equations from V is equivalent to proving the given
program in the simple type system, as shown by the following
theorem.
Theorem 10.2 (Correctness of type equations) Let E be a program (an expression
without a free variable), and let α be a fresh type variable. S is a solution for the collection
V(Ø E, α) of type equations if and only if judgment Ø ⊦ E : Sα is provable.
   Now, the equations are solved by the unification procedure [98].
The unification procedure unify, given two types τ1 and τ2 of a type
equation τ1 ≐ τ2, finds a substitution S (a finite map from type
variables to types) whenever possible that makes both sides of the
equation literally the same: Sτ1 = Sτ2. The following unify indeed
finds the least solution: the most general unifying substitution. The
concatenation S2S1 of two substitutions denotes a substitution that
applies S1 and then S2: (S2S1)τ = S2(S1τ).
   Procedure unify(τ1, τ2) is defined as follows, to do the first match
from the top:

Finding a substitution that satisfies all the equations in collection
                    is a simple accumulation of the substitution that
unifies each type equation:

where “S rest” denotes new type equations after applying the S
substitution to every type variable in rest.
  For a program E the simple type inference is thus
                          Solve(V(Ø, E, α)).
Online Algorithm   The above off-line algorithm that first collects
equations and then solves them can be rephrased as an online
algorithm. For a program E the online simple type inference is
                             M(Ø, E, α),
where
The above algorithm is easy to follow since the call to M(Γ, E, τ)
computes solutions in order for expression E to have type τ under
type assumption Γ for the free variables of E.
   Running the M algorithm is equivalent to constructing a proof in
the type system, as follows.
Theorem 10.3 (Correctness of the M algorithm) Let E be a program (an expression
without a free variable), and let α be a fresh type variable. If M(Ø, E, α) = S, then ⊦ E : Sα.
Conversely, if Ø ⊦ E : τ, then M(Ø ⊦ E, α) = S1 and τ = (S2S1)α for an additional substitution
S2.

Polymorphic Type Inference Recall that, from the static analysis point of
view, the type inference of the sound simple type system over-
approximates the set of values of expressions of the input program.
From the soundness point of view, if the analysis succeeds in typing
the input program, then we can safely conclude that the program will
run without a type error. On the other hand, if the analysis fails to
type the input program, that means we don’t know whether the
program will have a type error or not.
    The accuracy of the simple type system can be improved by
controlling the degree of the over-approximation so that the number
of fail cases for type-safe programs should be reduced.
    A more accurate system than the simple type system is one
called polymorphic type system. The polymorphic type system
reduces the failure cases for type-safe programs but is still sound:
when the type inference succeeds, the input program will run without
a type error.
    The set of polymorphic types is a finer abstract domain than that
of the simple types. The abstract domain is refined because there
exist elements (polymorphic types) that represent special sets of
values that are not precisely singled out as a separate abstract
element in simple types. For example, a polymorphic function type
can represent a set of functions that can run regardless of the types
of arguments. For example, a polymorphic type, written as
                              ∀α.α → int,
denotes a set of functions that, whatever the type of the actual
argument, run without a type error and return an integer if they
terminate.
   One polymorphic type inference system is called let-polymorphic
type system [91]. This polymorphic type system, which is common in
ML-like programming languages, has, as for the simple type system,
sound and complete algorithms [74] using the unification procedure.
The let-polymorphic type system always computes principal types
among multiple polymorphic type candidates for each expression.
From the static analysis point of view, when principal types exist, it
means the existence of best abstractions in their abstract domains.
   During typing, a function that can behave independently of its
argument types has a generalized, polymorphic types. At different
call of the polymorphic function, the polymorphic type of the function
is instantiated into an appropriate type. For a function, the
polymorphic generalization, if possible, and the distinct instantiations
at different calls to the function are analogous to context-sensitive
analysis that analyzes functions differently at different call sites.
Limitation For target programming languages that lack a sound static
type system, we have to invent it. We have to design a finite proof
system and prove its soundness. Then we have to find its algorithm
and prove its soundness. The burden grows if the algorithm has to
solve some constraints that turn out to be unsolvable by the
unification procedure.
   For languages like ML that already has a sound let-polymorphic
static type system, we can use its sound type system to carry an
extra entity (elements of extra abstract domains) of interest other
than just the conventional type [90]. However, again, if the system
derives some constraints that are unsolvable by the unification
procedure, it is our burden to invent a new algorithm and prove its
soundness from scratch.
