11 Summary and Perspectives

We hope that, at this point, readers have been able to build up a
solid knowledge of the foundations of static analysis. While we
cannot cover the topic in an exhaustive manner, we consider that the
very first steps one takes in a new field are often the hardest, and we
intend this book to help readers at that stage. This quick conclusion
summarizes the main concepts, provides some perspectives on how
to continue the learning of static analysis, and discusses some static
analysis challenges ahead.
Summary      The design, the choice, and the configuration of a static
analysis may seem hard at first, but they should be guided with a
general methodology.
    First, the starting point of any formal static analysis has to be a
clear concrete semantics, which expresses in a mathematical way
how programs run. The importance of this semantics is crucial, as it
fixes the foundations of the design and proof of any static analysis.
The semantics has to reflect perfectly well how target programs are
intended to be run.
    Second, the careful definition of the target property is also a very
important step. Not only does it formalize what one intends to
compute, prove, or verify, but it also guides many choices in the
design of the analysis. First of all, it should be possible to express it
with respect to the concrete semantics used as a reference.
Moreover, it should also specify what approximation may be done
during the analysis.
    Third, the choice of an abstraction to use for the analysis is
crucial. In the vast design space of an abstraction, if the target
programs of the analysis are restricted, one has to use the restricted
class as a beacon to zoom in on an abstraction that is effective, at
least for the programming idioms of those target programs. The
abstractions of the semantic domains and the semantic functions
mostly dictate the effectiveness of the resulting analysis. In general,
one has to be well aware of which conservative approximations are
made by the abstraction, so as to understand the limitations of the
resulting analysis and to be able to remedy them. The abstraction
fixes the logical properties that the analysis will be able to use to
check the target property and to compute all the required invariants.
It also defines their representation and greatly impacts the automatic
reasoning algorithms. The abstraction should in general always be
expressive enough to write down a paper proof of the property of
interest. It should also be as lightweight as possible to enable the
quick computation of abstract invariants for the set of target
programs.
    Finally, static analysis algorithms such as the implementation of
the transfer functions, global worklist iterations, and widening
operations define the way the analysis proceeds. Many choices are
left at this stage, too, for example, the choice of the order of works in
the work list and the choice of widening operations. In the
implementation, one has to engineer the algorithms one step further
to strike a cost-effective balance, minding the soundness that is
prescribed in the analysis design.
Perspectives  At this point, we would like to suggest a few routes for
readers to pursue their journey through the land of static analysis.
   First, many topics were not covered in-depth in this book, as they
would often require a book of their own to fully address them. Thus,
we provide bibliographic references for many such topics. These
references should be used as an entry point toward more specialized
content. A good reference would be [25], which provides a deep
insight in the foundations of abstract interpretation.
   Second, readers who are interested in the implementation or in
the practical use of static analyzers should consider starting up their
own implementation or playing with some of the many existing open-
source static analysis tools. While this is a time-consuming activity, it
is also often a very rewarding way to acquire solid knowledge and
experience in the field.
   Finally, readers interested in research should also see plenty of
opportunities, as static analysis is still a topic full of open problems.
There are still few general and solid results on the precision or on
the scalability of static analysis tools. Emerging programming
languages sometimes lack a clean semantics or provide very
expressive and complex features, so they challenge existing
standard static analysis techniques. Hybrid systems combine
discrete and continuous computations, which makes them hard to
reason about. Machine learning techniques based on probabilistic or
connectionist approaches sometimes lack a clear semantics or
generate software at low-level; hence, they challenge language-
centric static analysis techniques. Security properties are often hard
to prove or even formalize; hence, their verification by static analysis
remains very challenging.
