A Reference for Mathematical Notions and Notations

This appendix is meant to be used as a reference for elements of mathematics and general
notations. It does not substitute for a course in discrete mathematics and aims only to make
this book self-contained.

A.1 Sets
In this book, we use sets abundantly, as in standard sets theory. Informally, a set is a
collection of elements that could be finite (as the set of 32-bit machine integers) or infinite
(as the set of non-negative natural integers, denoted by N, or the set of integers, denoted by
Z). When x is an element of a set E, we write x ∈ E. Moreover, when all elements of a set E
belong to a set F, we say that E is included into F, and we write E ⊆ F.
    We use the following notations to construct sets explicitly:
       Ø designates the empty set;
       {x0, …, xn} designates the set that contains exactly the elements x0, … ,xn;
       {x ∈ E | P(x)} is the set of all the elements of E that satisfy the property expressed by
       the formula P.
    Given two sets E and F, we define their union E ∪ F as the set that collects all the
elements that belong to either E or F; using the above notation, it boils down to {x | x ∈ E or
x ∈ F}. Similarly, their intersection is the set of the elements that belong to both E and F and
is denoted by E ∩ F. The set difference E \ F is the set of all elements in E that do not
appear in F. Last, when E and F are disjoint (their intersection is empty), we also denote
their union by E ⊎ F (in other words, when we refer to E ⊎ F, we implicitly state that E and F
are disjoint).
    The Cartesian product of two sets E and F is denoted by E × F and collects the pairs
made of an element of E and of an element of F; such a pair is denoted by (x,y) (where x ∈
E and y ∈ F). It generalizes to arbitrary numbers of sets.
    Sets can be also used as elements; thus, we can also construct sets of sets, which is
very often done in static analysis. Given a set E, the set of all the subsets of E is called the
powerset of E and is denoted by ℘(E). As an example, the powerset of {0, 1} is made of the
four elements Ø, {0}, {1}, and {0, 1}.
    Union and intersection generalize to sets of sets. For instance, we often use ∪ {E ∈ F |
P(E)} to join all the subsets of F that satisfy a property P. Similarly, the following notation
designates a union of sets indexed by natural integers:
A.2 Logical Connectives
The following connectives are used to construct logical formulas:
       If P and Q are logical propositions, we denote the conjunction of P and Q by P ∧ Q,
       namely, a proposition that holds if and only if both P and Q hold.
       Similarly, we denote the disjunction of P and Q by P ∨ Q.
       Last, P ⇒ Q stands for the logical implication that states that if P holds, then so does
       Q.
     Moreover, quantifiers express that some proposition holds for some or all the elements
of a set. If E is a set, and if P is a logical proposition parameterized by an element, then ∀x
∈ E, P(x) is the proposition that states that P(x) holds for all the elements of E. Moreover, ∃x
∈ E, P(x) is the proposition that states that there exists at least one element of E that
satisfies P (it implies that E is not empty). When the set over which we quantify is obvious, it
is sometimes omitted.

A.3 Definitions and Proofs by Induction
In this book, we often consider inductively defined data types (e.g., to describe expressions,
or commands…) or inductively defined properties (e.g., the semantics of a loop or of a
transition system). As an example, in chapter 3 we define expressions by induction. More
precisely, we define them using the grammar E :≔ n |x| E ⊙ E, which means that an
expression is either a constant, or a variable, or a binary operator applied to a pair of
expressions.
     Such inductive definitions naturally call for proofs also done by induction; thus, we recall
the principle underlying such proofs. First, let us consider the case of Peano integers (i.e.,
non-negative mathematical integers). We let P be a unary predicate over integers, and write
P(n) when P holds over integer n. The integer induction proof principle reduces the proof
that all integers satisfy P (i.e., ∀n ∈ N, P(n)) to the proof of the two following properties:
   1. P(0) holds;
   2. for all integers n, if P(n) holds then so does P(n + 1).
Intuitively, to justify P(3), one simply needs to remark that P(0) holds by the first point and to
apply the second point to 0 to derive P(1), then to 1 to derive P(2), and finally to 2 to derive
P(3). The above induction principle generalizes this intuition to all integers. In fact, once the
above two points are proved, we can immediately derive that P holds for any integer.
    This principle generalizes to all data types defined inductively, such as program
expressions as defined above: to prove a property over expressions, one simply needs to
do so for constant values, for variables, and then for expressions made of a binary operator,
under the assumption that the property holds for the sub-expressions.

A.4 Functions
A function is a mathematical object that captures a computation by associating each
element of a set (its domain) to an element of another set (its codomain). When f is a
function with domain E and co-domain F, we denote it by f : E → F, and we write f : x ↦ e
(or f : (x ∈ E) ↦ e), where the expression e defines how the image of x is computed. For
instance, the function f : Z → Z,x ↦ x + 1 maps each integer to its successor. The identity
function over a set E is the function noted id that maps each element to itself.
     Given two functions f : E → F and F → G, we write g ◦ f for their composition, which is
computed by applying f first and then g. If f : E → E, we write fn for the composition of f with
itself n times (if n = 0, it is the identity function).
     A function f : N → E (i.e., that maps integers to elements of the set E) is called a
sequence of elements of E. It is often denoted by (f(n))n∈N.
     We let B = {true, false} denote the set of Booleans. Then, given a set E, a function f : E
→ B uniquely defines a set of elements of E. This set can be defined as {x ∈ E | f (x) =
true}. This principles also defines an extension of sets called multisets. Intuitively, a multiset
is a set where each element is annotated by a positive integer, which describes the number
of occurrences of that element. A multiset M the elements of which are taken from some set
E boils down to a function f : E → N: if x is an element of E, x belongs to M if and only if f (x)
> 0; furthermore, f (x) denotes the number of occurrences of x in M.

A.5 Order Relations and Ordered Sets
In this section, we assume that a set E is given. Intuitively, an order relation over E is a
mathematical object that specifies for which pairs x, y of elements of E we can say that x is
“smaller” than y for some given notion of “smaller.” Formally, an order relation is a binary
relation ≼ over E that is reflexive (≼ is reflexive if and only if ∀x ∈ E, x ≼ x), transitive (≼ is
transitive if and only if ∀x, y, z ∈ E, x ≼ y and y ≼ z ⇒ x ≼ z), and anti-symmetric (≼ is anti-
symmetric if and only if ∀x, y ∈ E, x ≼ y and y ≼ x ⇒ x = y). The ordering over natural
integers is an obvious example of order relation. The lexicographic order used to sort words
in a dictionary or index provides a more complex example of order relation. Another classic
example is set inclusion, which defines an order relation over the powerset of any set.
      An order relation is total when any pair of elements can be compared (i.e., if ∀x, y ∈ E, x
≼ y ∨ y ≼ x). While it is the case for the standard order over integers, it is often not the case
in this book. As a matter of fact, inclusion is not a total order since some pairs of elements
such as {0}, {1} cannot be compared. A chain is a subset of E that is a total ordering. As an
example, Ø, {0}, {0, 2} form a chain for the inclusion order.
      In the following, we assume that ≼ defines an order relation over E. If there exists an
element x0 ∈ E that is smaller than any other element of E for ≼, we call x0 the infimum; to
distinguish it, we usually denote it by ⊥ (read “bottom”). Similarly, the supremum, if it exists,
is the element that is greater than any other element; it is usually denoted by ⊤ (read “top”).
      Let x and y be two elements of E. When it exists, we call least upper bound of x and y
the element x ⊔ y that is greater than x and y and is smaller than any other element with
that property. While the existence of the least upper bound does not always hold, when it
exists it is unique. Dually, the greatest lower bound, if it exists, is the element x ⊓ y that is
smaller than x and y and is greater than any other element with that property. These bounds
generalize to families of elements. In the case of the powerset, the least upper bound is
simply the set union, and the greatest lower bound is the set intersection.
      We say that an ordered set E is a lattice when it has an infimum and a supremum, and
when each pair of elements has both a least upper bound and a greatest lower bound.
Moreover, when any subset of E has both a least upper bound and a greatest lower bound,
it is called a complete lattice. As an example, the powerset of any set is a complete lattice.
      Additionally, we say that E is a complete partial order (for short, CPO) if it has an
infimum and is such that any chain of elements of E has a least upper bound in E.
      Last, let us assume two ordered sets E and F (for simplicity we denote the order
relations over both sets by ≼) and a function f : E → F. We say that f is monotone if and only
if, for all x, y ∈ E such that x ≼ y, we have f(x) ≼ f(y). A stronger property is continuity:
assuming that E and F are CPOs, we say that f is continuous if and only if the image of any
chain G of E by f has a least upper bound, that is, such that ⊔{f(x) | x ∈ G} = f(⊔G). It is very
easy to show that, when a function is continuous, it is also monotone. We say that f is
extensive if and only if, for all x ∈ E, we have x ≼ f(x).

A.6 Operators over Ordered Structures and Fixpoints
In this section, we assume a set E, an order relation ≼ and a function f : E → E.
     We call fixpoint of f an element x such that f (x) = x. Moreover, when it exists, the least
fixpoint of f is the fixpoint of f that is smaller for ≼ than any other fixpoint of f; it is denoted by
lfpf. Fixpoints are useful to define interesting elements and occur naturally in static analysis.
     In general, the existence of a fixpoint, let alone, of a least fixpoint is not guaranteed.
However, there exist theorems under which one can establish the existence of a least
fixpoint, and even provide a constructive definition, that is naturally very close to an
algorithm to compute it. In this book, we use the following such theorem:
Theorem A.1 (Kleene’s fixpoint theorem) If f is continuous, and if E is a CPO with
infimum ⊥, then f has a least fixpoint, that can be expressed as follows:

This theorem underlines the strong link between a least fixpoint and an inductive
definition/computation.
    For the interested reader, we now show the proof of this theorem. In the next few
paragraphs, we assume that E is a CPO.

Proof of Kleene’s Fixpoint Theorem First, we need to justify the existence of the least
upper bound in the right-hand side of the equality. As ⊥ is the infimum of E, we have ⊥ ≼ f
(⊥). Since f is continuous, it is also monotone; thus, we can prove by induction that, for all n
∈ N, we have fn(⊥) ≼ fn+1(⊥). Therefore {fn(⊥) | n ∈ N} forms a chain. As E is a CPO, it has a
least upper bound, which we denote by X.
     Since the set of iterates of f from ⊥ is a chain, we can also apply to it the continuity of f.
This allows us to derive that { fn+1 (⊥) | n ∈ N} has a least upper bound that is equal to f(X):

We have proved that X is a fixpoint for f. To conclude, we simply need to prove that it is the
least one, that is, that any fixpoint of f is greater than it. Let us assume that X′ is another
fixpoint. Then we can prove by induction over n that fn(⊥) ≼ X′, which is easy: it holds at
rank 0 by definition of the infimum, and the property at rank n implies the property at rank n
+ 1 thanks to monotonicity and to the fact that X′ is a fixpoint. Thus, by definition of the least
upper bound,

This concludes the proof.
