B Proofs of Soundness

This appendix contains proofs for the theorems of chapters 3 and 4.

B.1 Properties of Galois Connections
In this section, we prove the fundamental properties of Galois connections listed in section
3.2.1.
Theorem B.1 (Properties of Galois connection) Let (C, ⊆) and (A, ⊑) be, respectively, a
concrete domain and an abstract domain with an abstraction function α and a concretization
function γ that form a Galois connection (definition 3.5)
                       ∀c ∈ C, ∀a ∈ A,     α(c) ⊑ a    ⇔     c ⊆ γ(a)
Then the following properties hold:
     ∀c ∈ C, c ⊆ γ(α(c)) (or, equivalently, id ⊆ γ ◦ α);
     ∀a ∈ A, α(γ(a)) ⊑ a (or, equivalently, α ◦ γ ⊑ id);
     γ and α are monotone; and
     if both C and A are CPOs (any chain has a least upper bound), then α is continuous.
Proof We assume the existence of the Galois connection and prove items one by one:
     id ⊑ γ ◦ α: Let c be a concrete element. By the reflexivity of the order relation ⊑, we
     have α(c) ⊑ α(c). Thus, by the definition of Galois connections, c ⊆ γ(α(c)).
     α ◦ γ ⊑ id: Let a be an abstract element. By the reflexivity of the order relation ⊆, we
     have γ(a) ⊆ γ(a). Thus, by the definition of Galois connections, α(γ(a)) ⊑ a.
     γ is monotone: Let us assume that c0, c1 are concrete elements such that c0 ⊆ c1.
     Then, because id ⊆ γ ◦ α, c0 ⊆ c1 ⊆ γ(α(c1)). Hence, by the definition of Galois
     connections, α(c0) ⊑ α(c1).
     α is monotone: Let us assume that a0, a1 are abstract elements such that a0 ⊑ a1.
     Then, because α ◦ γ ⊑ id, α(γ(a0)) ⊑ a1 ⊑ a1. Hence, by the definition of Galois
     connections, γ(a0) ⊆ γ(a1).
     α is continuous: Let S be a chain in C. Since C is a CPO, the least upper bound
     exists in C. Since α is monotone, for all elements x in the chain S, we have
                    , and thus                     . The function γ ◦ α is monotone, so it
     transforms a chain into a chain; thus, {γ(α(c)) | c ∈ S} is a chain and has its least
     upper bound in CPO C. Moreover, id ⊆ γ ◦ α; thus,
      The function γ is monotone, and for all element c in the chain S, we have
                   and thus                 . Therefore,

      As we compose the two above inequalities, we get

      By the definition of Galois connections, this entails that                      . Hence,
                         . This concludes the proof.

B.2 Proofs of Soundness for Chapter 3
This section shows how to establish the soundness of the basic abstract interpreter, such as
the analysis presented in chapter 3, and the principles of this proof extend to many other
static analyzers. Each of the following subsections formalizes the proof of one of the main
theorems of chapter 3. All together, these theorems establish the soundness of a non-
relational abstract interpreter designed in compositional style (i.e., based on a compositional
semantics), under the assumption that the operations of the value domain are sound (as
defined in section 3.3).

B.2.1 Soundness of the Abstract Interpretation of Expressions
In this section, we consider theorem 3.2, which we recall first.
Theorem B.2 (Soundness of the abstract interpretation of expressions) For all
expressions E, for all non-relational abstract elements M#, and for all memory states m such
that m ∈ γ(M#),

                                 〚E〛(m) ∈ γV(〚E〛#(M#))

Proof     The proof proceeds by induction over the structure of expressions. Indeed,
expressions were defined by induction, so we can apply the induction proof principle shown
in appendix A.3, to prove this property for all expressions. To do this, we consider each kind
of expression and prove each case under the assumption that the property holds for all sub-
expressions, as follows.
      Case of constant expressions: We assume that E is the constant expression defined
      by the value n. Then 〚 E 〛 (m) = n, and 〚 E 〛 #(M#) = ϕV (n). By definition of the
      operation ϕV of the value abstract domain (as stated in section 3.3.1), n ∈ γV (ϕV (n)),
      which concludes this case.
      Case of expressions made of a variable: We assume that E is the expression made of
      the reading of variable x. Then 〚 E 〛 (m) = m(x), and 〚 E 〛 #(M#) = M#(x). By
      assumption, m ∈ γ(M#); thus, m(x) ∈ γV (M#(x)), which concludes this case.
      Case of expressions made of a binary operator applied to two sub-expressions: We
      assume that E is of the form E0 ⊙ E1, where E0 and E1 are sub-expressions and ⊙ is
      a binary operator. We assume that the theorem holds for E0 and E1 since we are
      carrying out the proof by induction over the structure of expressions. Therefore, the
      inductive hypothesis entails that, for all i ∈ {0, 1}, 〚Ei 〛(m) ∈ γV (〚Ei 〛 #(M#)). Then
      〚E〛(m) = f⊙ (〚E0 〛(m), 〚E1 〛(m)) and                                          . By the
      induction hypothesis and by definition of the soundness of the operation of the value
      abstract domain        (as stated in section 3.3.1), we have f⊙ ( 〚 E0 〛 (m),
                                          . This concludes the proof of this case.

Comments        This proof actually shows very well how the analysis progresses, and it
maintains soundness step-by-step over the course of the analysis of expressions: the
inductive cases rely on operations that over-approximate the effect of each concrete
program execution step; moreover, the base cases are also designed so as to start with a
sound over-approximation. For the representation of constants and for binary operations,
we have relied on the soundness of operations in the underlying value abstract domain.
This is actually a key feature of the approach followed in chapters 3 and 4: the soundness
of these operations can be proved separately for each value domain that we may use in the
actual analysis; thus, we get the same benefit in terms of proof modularity as we do for the
modularity of the implementation in chapter 7.
     Because of this dependency, one may argue that a large part of the proof needs to be
done at the value abstract domain level. This is indeed correct, and this part of the proof
heavily depends on the representation of the abstract values and on the algorithms to
manipulate them. We simply provide a few examples, and general guidelines:
      When the abstract lattice of the value abstract domain is finite, the operations can be
      proved correct by straightforward case analysis.
      When there are several kinds of abstract values, case analysis is often helpful and/or
      necessary; for instance, in the case of the interval domain, the soundness of binary
      operations can be proved by considering separately the case of ⊥ and non-⊥ abstract
      values.
      Basic cases can often be proved by simple arithmetic arguments, for example, based
      on interval arithmetics.

B.2.2 Soundness of the Abstract Interpretation of Conditions
We now consider the soundness theorem for the analysis of condition expressions (theorem
3.3).
Theorem B.3 (Soundness of the abstract interpretation of conditions) For all
expressions B, for all non-relational abstract elements M#, and for all memory states m such
that m ∈ γ(M#),

Proof Let B be a condition expression. Let M# be an abstract state, and let m ∈ γ(M#),
such that 〚B〛(m) = true. By definition, the operation of the value abstract domain is
assumed to be sound; thus,                      , where ℱB(M) = {m ∈ M | 〚 B 〛 (m) =
true}. Since 〚B〛(m) = true, m belongs to ℱB(M). This concludes the proof.
Comments The proof heavily relies on the soundness of the filter operation, just like the
proof of the soundness of the abstract interpretation of expressions in appendix B.2.1 relies
on the operations of the underlying value abstract domain.

B.2.3 Soundness of the Abstract Join Operator
In this section, we show the proof of theorem 3.4, which we recall here.

Theorem B.4 (Soundness of abstract join) Let                 and    be two abstract states. Then,
the following inclusion holds.

Proof      We prove only that                         , as the inequality                            is
symmetric and can be proved similarly. Let               . To prove that                     , we need
to establish that, for any variable x, we have                                   . By definition of ⊔#,
                                . The soundness of      guarantees that
, which concludes the proof.

Comments        As in the previous subsections, the soundness of the operation in the non-
relational domain follows from that of the operation in the value abstract domain. This
operation can usually be proved sound by case analysis over the elements of the value
abstract domain and/or basic arithmetic reasoning.

B.2.4 Abstract Iterates with Widening
In this section, we prove theorem 3.5.
Theorem B.5 (Abstract iterates with widening) We assume that ∇ is a widening operator
over the non-relational abstract A domain and that F# is a function from A to itself. Then the
algorithm below terminates and returns an abstract element                :

      Let us denote the abstract element that it returns by .
      Moreover, if we assume that F : M → M is continuous and is such that F ◦ γ ⊆ γ ◦ F# for
the     pointwise   inclusion    (which   means      that,    for   all       abstract   element      ,
                        , then the following inclusion holds.
Proof We first prove the termination part, which implies the existence of the limit element
      . Then we prove the soundness of the limit.
      The loop in the algorithm is essentially computing the following sequence:

Indeed, at the nth iteration of the loop body, T stores    and R stores      . By the definition
of widening operators (definition 3.11), and since ∇ is assumed to be a widening, this
sequence is ultimately stationary. This means that there exists a rank n for which two
iterates are equal, so that the loop exit condition holds true. Thus, the algorithm terminates
and      is well defined.
    We now consider soundness. To establish soundness, we first prove the following
inclusion.

This can be proved by induction over n:
      If n = 0, then       , so both terms are equal to γ(M#) and the property holds.
      Let us now assume that the property holds at rank n and prove the property at rank n
      + 1. Since F is monotone (because it is continuous), we remark that:

        By induction hypothesis, and since ∇ over-approximates set union, we derive that

We have proved above that the sequence of abstract iterates is ultimately stationary, which
means that it eventually converges. We let N be the rank at which the limit is reached. The
above inequality implies that, for any rank k ≥ N,

Thus,

This concludes the proof.
Comments This proof is quite representative of termination and soundness proofs for
abstract iteration sequences: first, it establishes the convergence and the existence of the
limit, based on the properties of widening; second, it ties the computation performed in the
abstract level to the definition of the concrete semantics so as to prove soundness. The
second part is actually quite similar to the other soundness proofs shown in this appendix,
in the sense that it relies on the soundness of the operations it applies, namely F# and ∇.

B.2.5 Soundness of the Abstract Interpretation of Commands
Finally, we prove the main soundness theorem, which states that the analysis of a program
will always produce an over-approximation of the behaviors of the program (theorem 3.6).
Theorem B.6 (Soundness) For all commands C and all abstract states M#, the
computation of            terminates, and

Proof Program commands are defined inductively, so the proof is also unsurprisingly
carried out by induction over the syntax and follows the structure of the definitions of the
concrete semantics (figure 3.4) and of the abstract semantics (figure 3.11). The case where
M# = ⊥ is handled separately, and the analysis then returns ⊥; this is obviously sound since
the concrete semantics also maps γ(⊥) = Ø to itself.
    Let us now assume that M# ≠ ⊥ and consider each case of command:
      Case where C is a skip statement: Then                                         , so the
      property trivially holds.
      Case where C is a sequence: We assume that the property holds for C0 and C1 and
      prove it for C. Under this assumption, theorem 3.1 applies and proves the property.
      Case where C is an assignment x ≔ E : Let m ∈ γ(M#). We need to prove that
                                                        . By the soundness of the analysis of
      expressions (theorem 3.2), we derive that 〚E〛(m) ∈ γV (〚E〛(M#)). By definition of
      γ, that implies the result of the analysis of the assignment is sound.
      Case where C is an input statement input(x): This case is similar to that of a standard
      assignment; indeed, the only difference is that, in the concrete, x may get assigned
      any value, whereas in the abstract, it gets mapped to ⊤V. We observe that ⊤V
      describes any possible value, so that the argument provided for regular assignment
      commands applies here in the same way.
      Case where C is the condition statement if(B){C0}else{C1}: We assume that the
      property holds for C0 and C1 and prove it for C:
      Case where C is the loop statement while(B){C0}: We assume that the property holds
      for C0 and prove that it also holds for C. To do this, we prove the following inclusion
      (we remark that it entails the soundness of the analysis of C because we already
      know that     is sound):

      To prove this inclusion, we need to apply theorem 3.5 (proof in appendix B.2.4) with
      the following definitions for F and F#:

      First, we establish the assumptions of the theorem:
      – First,                          ; indeed, FB is sound, and so is           (by
       induction hypothesis).
      – Second, the function 〚C0〛 P ◦ ℱB is continuous; indeed, ℱB is continuous (trivial
       set property), and 〚C0〛P is continuous (this needs to be proved by induction over
       the syntax of commands; the proof is trivial but a bit long, so we omit it here).
      Thus, theorem 3.5 applies. This concludes the proof.

Comments        While the proof of soundness is fairly lengthy, it actually consists of a
sequence of quite easy steps and merely encapsulates the previous theorems.
    Moreover, the proof of this theorem would remain unchanged if we switched to a
relational abstract domain. In that case, only the proofs of correctness of the basic
operations would differ. Similarly, if we augment the language with additional constructions,
most of this proof could be reused, with additional cases added for the additional language
constructions.

B.3 Proofs of Soundness for Chapter 4
We prove theorems 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4. The proofs rely on some properties of Galois
connection, which are listed and proven in appendix B.1.

B.3.1 Transitional-Style Static Analysis over Finite-Height
Domains
We prove theorem 4.2, which we recall here.
Theorem B.7 (Correct static analysis by F#) Given a program, let F and F# be defined as
in section 4.2.3. If S# is of finite height (every chain in S# is finite), and if F# is monotone or
extensive, then

is finitely computable and over-approximates lfpF:

Proof Proof structure is as follows:

    First, note that       exists in CPO S#, because that F# is monotone or extensive
implies the sequence            , … is a chain.
    (Proof of B.1) From the condition                   follows Step ◦ γ ⊆ γ ◦ Step#.
Recall      that                and      that                        .   Note    that
                            , because the partial order ⊑ is label-wise, and the (id,  )◦ π
operation partitions the result set                  by the labels and returns a safe upper
bound       of abstract memories in each partition. Hence,

Then it follows that F ◦ γ ⊆ γ ◦ F#, because

    (Proof of B.2) From F ◦ γ ⊆ γ ◦ F# it follows that

by induction on n. Basis case n = 0 holds since F0(⊥) = ⊥. For inductive cases, assume that
                 . Then since F is monotone (since F is continuous),
       (Proof of B.3) From                    , we prove the final goal:

Note that               exists because sequence (Fi(⊥))i≥0 is a chain in CPO P(S), and
              also exists in CPO S# because that           is a chain and γ is monotone imply
that              is a chain. Thus, from                       it follows that

This concludes the proof.

B.3.2 Transitional-Style Static Analysis with Widening
We prove theorem 4.3, which we recall here.
Theorem B.8 (Correct static analysis by F# and widening operator ) Given a program,
let F and F# be defined as in section 4.2.3. Let      be a widening operator as defined in
definition 3.11. Then the following chain Y0 ⊑ Y1 ⊑ ⋯

is finite, and its last element Ylim over-approximates lfpF:

Proof       First, the sequence (Yi)i≥0 is a chain. The widening operator’s first condition
                      means that

hence,           . Thus,                        .
     Second, by the second condition of the widening operator         , the chain (Yi)i≥0 is finitely
stationary. Let the last element be Ylim.
     We prove by induction that

which implies, because Ylim is the biggest element of (Yi)i, that

hence,
(Proof of B.4) Base case n = 0 is obvious. For inductive cases, assume that
.

This concludes the proof.

B.3.3 Use Example of the Transitional-Style Static Analysis
We now prove theorem 4.4, which we recall here.
Theorem B.9 (Soundness of ↪#) Consider the one-step transition relation in section 4.4.2
and its abstract version in section 4.4.4. If the semantic operators satisfy the soundness
properties

then                        . (The × is the Cartesian product operator of two sets.)
Proof Without loss of generality, let us consider a singleton set {(l, m#)} ∈ S# and prove for
the set that the conclusion holds. We proceed by case analysis for the command at the l
label.
Case of “if B C1 C2”:

Case of “x ≔ E ”:
Other cases similarly hold. This concludes the proof.

Comments The underlying structure of the proof is fairly simple. Note that the ↪ and ↪#
functions are compositions of semantic operators, both of which are homomorphic to each
other. The only difference is the operators involved: the ↪ uses concrete operators, and the
↪# uses their abstract correspondents. The above proof of each case is basically a replay in
a different guise of the proof that if every pair of concrete and its abstract operators satisfies
the soundness property, then a homomorphic pair of their compositions preserves the
soundness property.
     The soundness preservation over composition is a common property that most of the
abstract interpretations enjoy. For example, this property occurs too in the compositional-
style abstract interpretation (theorem 3.1).
