
      Preface to the First Edition
This primer is intended for readers who have encountered memory consistency and cache co-
herence informally, but now want to understand what they entail in more detail. This audience
includes computing industry professionals as well as junior graduate students.
       We expect our readers to be familiar with the basics of computer architecture. Remember-
ing the details of Tomasulo’s algorithm or similar details is unnecessary, but we do expect readers
to understand issues like architectural state, dynamic instruction scheduling (out-of-order exe-
cution), and how caches are used to reduce average latencies to access storage structures.
       The primary goal of this primer is to provide readers with a basic understanding of consis-
tency and coherence. This understanding includes both the issues that must be solved as well as
a variety of solutions. We present both high-level concepts as well as specific, concrete examples
from real-world systems. A secondary goal of this primer is to make readers aware of just how
complicated consistency and coherence are. If readers simply discover what it is that they do not
know—without actually learning it—that discovery is still a substantial benefit. Furthermore,
because these topics are so vast and so complicated, it is beyond the scope of this primer to cover
them exhaustively. It is not a goal of this primer to cover all topics in depth, but rather to cover
the basics and apprise the readers of what topics they may wish to pursue in more depth.
       We owe many thanks for the help and support we have received during the development
of this primer. We thank Blake Hechtman for implementing and testing (and debugging!) all
of the coherence protocols in this primer. As the reader will soon discover, coherence protocols
are complicated, and we would not have trusted any protocol that we had not tested, so Blake’s
work was tremendously valuable. Blake implemented and tested all of these protocols using the
Wisconsin GEMS simulation infrastructure [http://www.cs.wisc.edu/gems/].
       For reviewing early drafts of this primer and for helpful discussions regarding various top-
ics within the primer, we gratefully thank Trey Cain and Milo Martin. For providing additional
feedback on the primer, we thank Newsha Ardalani, Arkaprava Basu, Brad Beckmann, Bob
Cypher, Singh, Venkatanathan Varadarajan, Derek Williams, and Meng Zhang. While our re-
viewers provided great feedback, they may or may not agree with all of the final contents of this
primer.
       This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation (CNS-
0551401, CNS-0720565, CCF-0916725, CCF-0444516, and CCF-0811290), Sandia/DOE
(#MSN123960/DOE890426), Semiconductor Research Corporation (contract 2009-HJ-
1881), and the University of Wisconsin (Kellett Award to Hill). The views expressed herein
are not necessarily those of the NSF, Sandia, DOE, or SRC.
           Dan thanks Deborah, Jason, and Julie for their love and for putting up with him taking
     the time to work on another Synthesis Lecture. Dan thanks his Uncle Sol for helping inspire
     him to be an engineer in the first place. Lastly, Dan dedicates this book to the memory of Rusty
     Sneiderman, a treasured friend of thirty years who will be dearly missed by everyone who was
     lucky enough to have known him.
           Mark wishes to thank Sue, Nicole, and Gregory for their love and support.
           David thanks his coauthors for putting up with his deadline-challenged work style, his
     parents Roger and Ann Wood for inspiring him to be a second-generation Computer Sciences
     professor, and Jane, Alex, and Zach for helping him remember what life is all about.

     Daniel J. Sorin, Mark D. Hill, and David A. Wood
     November 2011
