
                                 CHAPTER                      1

     Introduction to Consistency
           and Coherence
Many modern computer systems and most multicore chips (chip multiprocessors) support
shared memory in hardware. In a shared memory system, each of the processor cores may read
and write to a single shared address space. These designs seek various goodness properties, such
as high performance, low power, and low cost. Of course, it is not valuable to provide these
goodness properties without first providing correctness. Correct shared memory seems intuitive
at a hand-wave level, but, as this lecture will help show, there are subtle issues in even defining
what it means for a shared memory system to be correct, as well as many subtle corner cases in
designing a correct shared memory implementation. Moreover, these subtleties must be mas-
tered in hardware implementations where bug fixes are expensive. Even academics should master
these subtleties to make it more likely that their proposed designs will work.
       Designing and evaluating a correct shared memory system requires an architect to under-
stand memory consistency and cache coherence, the two topics of this primer. Memory consistency
(consistency, memory consistency model, or memory model) is a precise, architecturally visible
definition of shared memory correctness. Consistency definitions provide rules about loads and
stores (or memory reads and writes) and how they act upon memory. Ideally, consistency def-
initions would be simple and easy to understand. However, defining what it means for shared
memory to behave correctly is more subtle than defining the correct behavior of, for example,
a single-threaded processor core. The correctness criterion for a single processor core partitions
behavior between one correct result and many incorrect alternatives. This is because the pro-
cessor’s architecture mandates that the execution of a thread transforms a given input state into
a single well-defined output state, even on an out-of-order core. Shared memory consistency
models, however, concern the loads and stores of multiple threads and usually allow many cor-
rect executions while disallowing many (more) incorrect ones. The possibility of multiple cor-
rect executions is due to the ISA allowing multiple threads to execute concurrently, often with
many possible legal interleavings of instructions from different threads. The multitude of correct
executions complicates the erstwhile simple challenge of determining whether an execution is
correct. Nevertheless, consistency must be mastered to implement shared memory and, in some
cases, to write correct programs that use it.
       The microarchitecture—the hardware design of the processor cores and the shared mem-
ory system—must enforce the desired consistency model. As part of this consistency model
    support, the hardware provides cache coherence (or coherence). In a shared-memory system
    with caches, the cached values can potentially become out-of-date (or incoherent) when one of
    the processors updates its cached value. Coherence seeks to make the caches of a shared-memory
    system as functionally invisible as the caches in a single-core system; it does so by propagating a
    processor’s write to other processors’ caches. It is worth stressing that unlike consistency which
    is an architectural specification that defines shared memory correctness, coherence is a means to
    supporting a consistency model.
           Even though consistency is the first major topic of this primer, we begin in Chapter 2
    with a brief introduction to coherence because coherence protocols play an important role in
    providing consistency. The goal of Chapter 2 is to explain enough about coherence to understand
    how consistency models interact with coherent caches, but not to explore specific coherence
    protocols or implementations, which are topics we defer until the second portion of this primer
    in Chapters 6–9.

    1.1     CONSISTENCY (A.K.A., MEMORY CONSISTENCY,
            MEMORY CONSISTENCY MODEL, OR MEMORY
            MODEL)
    Consistency models define correct shared memory behavior in terms of loads and stores (mem-
    ory reads and writes), without reference to caches or coherence. To gain some real-world intu-
    ition on why we need consistency models, consider a university that posts its course schedule on-
    line. Assume that the Computer Architecture course is originally scheduled to be in Room 152.
    The day before classes begin, the university registrar decides to move the class to Room 252.
    The registrar sends an e-mail message asking the website administrator to update the online
    schedule, and a few minutes later, the registrar sends a text message to all registered students
    to check the newly updated schedule. It is not hard to imagine a scenario—if, say, the website
    administrator is too busy to post the update immediately—in which a diligent student receives
    the text message, immediately checks the online schedule, and still observes the (old) class lo-
    cation Room 152. Even though the online schedule is eventually updated to Room 252 and the
    registrar performed the “writes” in the correct order, this diligent student observed them in a
    different order and thus went to the wrong room. A consistency model defines whether this be-
    havior is correct (and thus whether a user must take other action to achieve the desired outcome)
    or incorrect (in which case the system must preclude these reorderings).
           Although this contrived example used multiple media, similar behavior can happen in
    shared memory hardware with out-of-order processor cores, write buffers, prefetching, and mul-
    tiple cache banks. Thus, we need to define shared memory correctness—that is, which shared
    memory behaviors are allowed—so that programmers know what to expect and implementors
    know the limits to what they can provide.
           Shared memory correctness is specified by a memory consistency model or, more simply,
    a memory model. The memory model specifies the allowed behavior of multithreaded programs
executing with shared memory. For a multithreaded program executing with specific input data,
the memory model specifies what values dynamic loads may return and, optionally, what possible
final states of the memory are. Unlike single-threaded execution, multiple correct behaviors are
usually allowed, making understanding memory consistency models subtle.
       Chapter 3 introduces the concept of memory consistency models and presents sequential
consistency (SC), the strongest and most intuitive consistency model. The chapter begins by
motivating the need to specify shared memory behavior and precisely defines what a memory
consistency model is. It next delves into the intuitive SC model, which states that a multi-
threaded execution should look like an interleaving of the sequential executions of each con-
stituent thread, as if the threads were time-multiplexed on a single-core processor. Beyond this
intuition, the chapter formalizes SC and explores implementing SC with coherence in both
simple and aggressive ways, culminating with a MIPS R10000 case study.
       In Chapter 4, we move beyond SC and focus on the memory consistency model imple-
mented by x86 and historical SPARC systems. This consistency model, called total store order
(TSO), is motivated by the desire to use first-in–first-out write buffers to hold the results of
committed stores before writing the results to the caches. This optimization violates SC, yet
promises enough performance benefit to inspire architectures to define TSO, which permits
this optimization. In this chapter, we show how to formalize TSO from our SC formalization,
how TSO affects implementations, and how SC and TSO compare.
       Finally, Chapter 5 introduces “relaxed” or “weak” memory consistency models. It moti-
vates these models by showing that most memory orderings in strong models are unnecessary.
If a thread updates ten data items and then a synchronization flag, programmers usually do
not care if the data items are updated in order with respect to each other but only that all data
items are updated before the flag is updated. Relaxed models seek to capture this increased or-
dering flexibility to get higher performance or a simpler implementation. After providing this
motivation, the chapter develops an example relaxed consistency model, called XC, wherein
programmers get order only when they ask for it with a FENCE instruction (e.g., a FENCE
after the last data update but before the flag write). The chapter then extends the formalism of
the previous two chapters to handle XC and discusses how to implement XC (with considerable
reordering between the cores and the coherence protocol). The chapter then discusses a way in
which many programmers can avoid thinking about relaxed models directly: if they add enough
FENCEs to ensure their program is data-race free (DRF), then most relaxed models will appear
SC. With “SC for DRF,” programmers can get both the (relatively) simple correctness model of
SC with the (relatively) higher performance of XC. For those who want to reason more deeply,
the chapter concludes by distinguishing acquires from releases, discussing write atomicity and
causality, pointing to commercial examples (including an IBM Power case study), and touching
upon high-level language models ( Java and CCC).
       Returning to the real-world consistency example of the class schedule, we can observe that
the combination of an email system, a human web administrator, and a text-messaging system
    represents an extremely weak consistency model. To prevent the problem of a diligent student
    going to the wrong room, the university registrar needed to perform a FENCE operation after
    her email to ensure that the online schedule was updated before sending the text message.

    1.2     COHERENCE (A.K.A., CACHE COHERENCE)
    Unless care is taken, a coherence problem can arise if multiple actors (e.g., multiple cores) have
    access to multiple copies of a datum (e.g., in multiple caches) and at least one access is a write.
    Consider an example that is similar to the memory consistency example. A student checks the
    online schedule of courses, observes that the Computer Architecture course is being held in
    Room 152 (reads the datum), and copies this information into her calendar app in her mobile
    phone (caches the datum). Subsequently, the university registrar decides to move the class to
    Room 252, updates the online schedule (writes to the datum) and informs the students via a
    text message. The student’s copy of the datum is now stale, and we have an incoherent situation.
    If she goes to Room 152, she will fail to find her class. Examples of incoherence from the world of
    computing, but not including computer architecture, include stale web caches and programmers
    using un-updated code repositories.
           Access to stale data (incoherence) is prevented using a coherence protocol, which is a
    set of rules implemented by the distributed set of actors within a system. Coherence protocols
    come in many variants but follow a few themes, as developed in Chapters 6–9. Essentially, all
    of the variants make one processor’s write visible to the other processors by propagating the
    write to all caches, i.e., keeping the calendar in sync with the online schedule. But protocols
    differ in when and how the syncing happens. There are two major classes of coherence protocols.
    In the first approach, the coherence protocol ensures that writes are propagated to the caches
    synchronously. When the online schedule is updated, the coherence protocol ensures that the
    student’s calendar is updated as well. In the second approach, the coherence protocol propagates
    writes to the caches asynchronously, while still honoring the consistency model. The coherence
    protocol does not guarantee that when the online schedule is updated, the new value will have
    propagated to the student’s calendar as well; however, the protocol does ensure that the new
    value is propagated before the text message reaches her mobile phone. This primer focuses on
    the first class of coherence protocols (Chapters 6–9) while Chapter 10 discusses the emerging
    second class.
           Chapter 6 presents the big picture of cache coherence protocols and sets the stage for the
    subsequent chapters on specific coherence protocols. This chapter covers issues shared by most
    coherence protocols, including the distributed operations of cache controllers and memory con-
    trollers and the common MOESI coherence states: modified (M), owned (O), exclusive (E),
    shared (S), and invalid (I). Importantly, this chapter also presents our table-driven methodology
    for presenting protocols with both stable (e.g., MOESI) and transient coherence states. Tran-
    sient states are required in real implementations because modern systems rarely permit atomic
    transitions from one stable state to another (e.g., a read miss in state Invalid will spend some
time waiting for a data response before it can enter state Shared). Much of the real complex-
ity in coherence protocols hides in the transient states, similar to how much of processor core
complexity hides in micro-architectural states.
       Chapter 7 covers snooping cache coherence protocols, which initially dominated the com-
mercial market. At the hand-wave level, snooping protocols are simple. When a cache miss oc-
curs, a core’s cache controller arbitrates for a shared bus and broadcasts its request. The shared
bus ensures that all controllers observe all requests in the same order and thus all controllers can
coordinate their individual, distributed actions to ensure that they maintain a globally consis-
tent state. Snooping gets complicated, however, because systems may use multiple buses and
modern buses do not atomically handle requests. Modern buses have queues for arbitration and
can send responses that are unicast, delayed by pipelining, or out-of-order. All of these fea-
tures lead to more transient coherence states. Chapter 7 concludes with case studies of the Sun
UltraEnterprise E10000 and the IBM Power5.
       Chapter 8 delves into directory cache coherence protocols that offer the promise of scal-
ing to more processor cores and other actors than snooping protocols that rely on broadcast.
There is a joke that all problems in computer science can be solved with a level of indirection.
Directory protocols support this joke: A cache miss requests a memory location from the next
level cache (or memory) controller, which maintains a directory that tracks which caches hold
which locations. Based on the directory entry for the requested memory location, the controller
sends a response message to the requestor or forwards the request message to one or more ac-
tors currently caching the memory location. Each message typically has one destination (i.e.,
no broadcast or multicast), but transient coherence states abound as transitions from one stable
coherence state to another stable one can generate a number of messages proportional to the
number of actors in the system. This chapter starts with a basic MSI directory protocol and then
refines it to handle the MOESI states E and O, distributed directories, less stalling of requests,
approximate directory entry representations, and more. The chapter also explores the design of
the directory itself, including directory caching techniques. The chapter concludes with case
studies of the old SGI Origin 2000 and the newer AMD HyperTransport, HyperTransport
Assist, and Intel QuickPath Interconnect (QPI).
       Chapter 9 deals with some, but not all, of the advanced topics in coherence. For ease of
explanation, the prior chapters on coherence intentionally restrict themselves to the simplest
system models needed to explain the fundamental issues. Chapter 9 delves into more compli-
cated system models and optimizations, with a focus on issues that are common to both snoop-
ing and directory protocols. Initial topics include dealing with instruction caches, multilevel
caches, write-through caches, translation lookaside buffers (TLBs), coherent direct memory ac-
cess (DMA), virtual caches, and hierarchical coherence protocols. Finally, the chapter delves
into performance optimizations (e.g., targeting migratory sharing and false sharing) and a new
protocol family called Token Coherence that subsumes directory and snooping coherence.
    1.3     CONSISTENCY AND COHERENCE FOR
            HETEROGENEOUS SYSTEMS
    Modern computer systems are predominantly heterogeneous. A mobile phone processor today
    not only contains a multicore CPU, it also has a GPU and other accelerators (e.g., neural net-
    work hardware). In the quest for programmability, such heterogeneous systems are starting to
    support shared memory. Chapter 10 deals with consistency and coherence for such heteroge-
    neous processors.
          The chapter starts by focusing on GPUs, arguably the most popular accelerators today.
    The chapter observes that GPUs originally chose not to support hardware cache coherence,
    since GPUs are designed for embarrassingly parallel graphics workloads that do not synchronize
    or share data all that much. However, the absence of hardware cache coherence leads to pro-
    grammability and/or performance challenges when GPUs are used for general-purpose work-
    loads with fine-grained synchronization and data sharing. The chapter discusses in detail some of
    the promising coherence alternatives that overcome these limitations—in particular, explaining
    why the candidate protocols enforce the consistency model directly rather than implementing
    coherence in a consistency-agnostic manner. The chapter concludes with a brief discussion on
    consistency and coherence across CPUs and the accelerators.

    1.4     SPECIFYING AND VALIDATING MEMORY
            CONSISTENCY MODELS AND CACHE COHERENCE
    Consistency models and coherence protocols are complex and subtle. Yet, this complexity must
    be managed to ensure that multicores are programmable and that their designs can be validated.
    To achieve these goals, it is critical that consistency models are specified formally. A formal
    specification would enable programmers to clearly and exhaustively (with tool support) under-
    stand what behaviors are permitted by the memory model and what behaviors are not. Second,
    a precise formal specification is mandatory for validating implementations.
          Chapter 11 starts by discussing two methods for specifying systems—axiomatic and
    operational—focusing on how these methods can be applied for consistency models and co-
    herence protocols. Then the chapter goes over techniques for validating implementations—
    including processor pipeline and coherence protocol implementations—against their specifi-
    cation. The chapter discusses both formal methods and informal testing.

    1.5     A CONSISTENCY AND COHERENCE QUIZ
    It can be easy to convince oneself that one’s knowledge of consistency and coherence is sufficient
    and that reading this primer is not necessary. To test whether this is the case, we offer this pop
    quiz.
 Question 1: In a system that maintains sequential consistency, a core must issue coherence
    requests in program order. True or false? (Answer is in Section 3.8)
 Question 2: The memory consistency model specifies the legal orderings of coherence transac-
    tions. True or false? (Section 3.8)
 Question 3: To perform an atomic read–modify–write instruction (e.g., test-and-set), a core
    must always communicate with the other cores. True or false? (Section 3.9)
 Question 4: In a TSO system with multithreaded cores, threads may bypass values out of the
    write buffer, regardless of which thread wrote the value. True or false? (Section 4.4)
 Question 5: A programmer who writes properly synchronized code relative to the high-level
    language’s consistency model (e.g., Java) does not need to consider the architecture’s mem-
    ory consistency model. True or false? (Section 5.9)
 Question 6: In an MSI snooping protocol, a cache block may only be in one of three coherence
    states. True or false? (Section 7.2)
 Question 7: A snooping cache coherence protocol requires the cores to communicate on a bus.
    True or false? (Section 7.6)
 Question 8: GPUs do not support hardware cache coherence. Therefore, they are unable to
    enforce a memory consistency model. True or False? (Section 10.1).
     Even though the answers are provided later in this primer, we encourage readers to try to
answer the questions before looking ahead at the answers.

1.6     WHAT THIS PRIMER DOES NOT DO
This lecture is intended to be a primer on coherence and consistency. We expect this mate-
rial could be covered in a graduate class in about ten 75-minute classes (e.g., one lecture per
Chapter 2 to Chapter 11).
       For this purpose, there are many things the primer does not cover. Some of these include
the following.
   • Synchronization. Coherence makes caches invisible. Consistency can make shared mem-
     ory look like a single memory module. Nevertheless, programmers will probably need
     locks, barriers, and other synchronization techniques to make their programs useful. Read-
     ers are referred to the Synthesis Lecture on Shared-Memory synchronization [2].
   • Commercial Relaxed Consistency Models. This primer does not cover the subtleties of
     the ARM, PowerPC, and RISC-V memory models, but does describe which mechanisms
     they provide to enforce order.
      • Parallel programming. This primer does not discuss parallel programming models,
        methodologies, or tools.
      • Consistency in distributed systems. This primer restricts itself to consistency within a
        shared memory multicore, and does not cover consistency models and their enforcement
        for a general distributed system. Readers are referred to the Synthesis Lectures on Database
        Replication [1] and Quorum Systems [3].

    1.7   REFERENCES
    [1] B. Kemme, R. Jiménez-Peris, and M. Patiño-Martínez. Database Replication. Syn-
        thesis Lectures on Data Management. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2010. DOI:
        10.1007/978-1-4614-8265-9_110. 8
    [2] M. L. Scott. Shared-Memory Synchronization. Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architec-
        ture. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2013. DOI: 10.2200/s00499ed1v01y201304cac023.
        7
    [3] M. Vukolic. Quorum Systems: With Applications to Storage and Consensus. Synthesis Lec-
        tures on Distributed Computing Theory. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2012. DOI:
        10.2200/s00402ed1v01y201202dct009. 8
