
                                CHAPTER                       6

                Coherence Protocols
In this chapter, we return to the topic of cache coherence that we introduced in Chapter 2. We
defined coherence in Chapter 2, in order to understand coherence’s role in supporting consis-
tency, but we did not delve into how specific coherence protocols work or how they are imple-
mented. This chapter discusses coherence protocols in general, before we move on to specific
classes of protocols in the next two chapters. We start in Section 6.1 by presenting the big pic-
ture of how coherence protocols work, and then show how to specify protocols in Section 6.2.
We present one simple, concrete example of a coherence protocol in Section 6.3 and explore the
protocol design space in Section 6.4.

6.1     THE BIG PICTURE
The goal of a coherence protocol is to maintain coherence by enforcing the invariants introduced
in Section 2.3 and restated here.

  1. Single-Writer, Multiple-Read (SWMR) Invariant. For any memory location A, at any given
     (logical) time, there exists only a single core that may write to A (and can also read it) or
     some number of cores that may only read A.

  2. Data-Value Invariant. The value of the memory location at the start of an epoch is the
     same as the value of the memory location at the end of its last read-write epoch.

      To implement these invariants, we associate with each storage structure—each cache and
the LLC/memory—a finite state machine called a coherence controller. The collection of these
coherence controllers constitutes a distributed system in which the controllers exchange mes-
sages with each other to ensure that, for each block, the SWMR and data value invariants are
maintained at all times. The interactions between these finite state machines are specified by the
coherence protocol.
      Coherence controllers have several responsibilities. The coherence controller at a cache,
which we refer to as a cache controller, is illustrated in Figure 6.1. The cache controller must
service requests from two sources. On the “core side,” the cache controller interfaces to the
processor core. The controller accepts loads and stores from the core and returns load values
to the core. A cache miss causes the controller to initiate a coherence transaction by issuing a
coherence request (e.g., request for read-only permission) for the block containing the location
accessed by the core. This coherence request is sent across the interconnection network to one
 or more coherence controllers. A transaction consists of a request and the other message(s) that
 are exchanged in order to satisfy the request (e.g., a data response message sent from another
 coherence controller to the requestor). The types of transactions and the messages that are sent
 as part of each transaction depend on the specific coherence protocol.

                                                    Core

                                     Loads and
                                         Stores            Loaded
                      Core                                 Values
                      Side
                                                                          Cache
                                                   Cache
                                                  Controller
                    Network
                     Side

                                  Issued                   Received
                                  Coherence                Coherence
                                  Requests and             Requests and
                                  Responses                Responses

                                       Interconnection Network

Figure 6.1: Cache controller.

         On the cache controller’s “network side,” the cache controller interfaces to the rest of the
 system via the interconnection network. The controller receives coherence requests and coher-
 ence responses that it must process. As with the core side, the processing of incoming coherence
 messages depends on the specific coherence protocol.
         The coherence controller at the LLC/memory, which we refer to as a memory controller,
 is illustrated in Figure 6.2. A memory controller is similar to a cache controller, except that it
 usually has only a network side. As such, it does not issue coherence requests (on behalf of loads
 or stores) or receive coherence responses. Other agents, such as I/O devices, may behave like
 cache controllers, memory controllers, or both depending upon their specific requirements.
         Each coherence controller implements a set of finite state machines—logically one inde-
 pendent, but identical finite state machine per block—and receives and processes events (e.g.,
 incoming coherence messages) depending upon the block’s state. For an event of type E (e.g.,
 a store request from the core to the cache controller) to block B, the coherence controller takes

                                                                   Memory
                                         LLC/Memory
                                          Controller
                       Network
                        Side
                                    Issued          Received
                                 Coherence          Coherence
                                 Responses          Requests

                                   Interconnection Network

Figure 6.2: Memory controller.

actions (e.g., issues a coherence request for read-write permission) that are a function of E and
of B’s state (e.g., read-only). After taking these actions, the controller may change the state of B.

6.2     SPECIFYING COHERENCE PROTOCOLS
We specify a coherence protocol by specifying the coherence controllers. We could specify co-
herence controllers in any number of ways, but the particular behavior of a coherence controller
lends itself to a tabular specification [9]. As shown in Table 6.1, we can specify a controller as a
table in which rows correspond to block states and columns correspond to events. We refer to
a state/event entry in the table as a transition, and a transition for event E pertaining to block
B consists of (a) the actions taken when E occurs and (b) the next state of block B. We express
transitions in the format “action/next state” and we may omit the “next state” portion if the next
state is the current state. As an example of a transition in Table 6.1, if a store request for block
B is received from the core and block B is in a read-only state (RO), then the table shows that
the controller’s transition will be to perform the action “issue coherence request for read-write
permission (to block B)” and change the state of block B to RW.
       The example in Table 6.1 is intentionally incomplete, for simplicity, but it illustrates the
capability of a tabular specification methodology to capture the behavior of a coherence con-
troller. To specify a coherence protocol, we simply need to completely specify the tables for the
cache controllers and the memory controllers.
       The differences between coherence protocols lie in the differences in the controller speci-
fications. These differences include different sets of block states, transactions, events, and tran-
sitions. In Section 6.4, we describe the coherence protocol design space by exploring the options
for each of these aspects, but we first specify one simple, concrete protocol.
Table 6.1: Tabular specification methodology. This is an incomplete specification of a cache
 coherence controller. Each entry in the table specifies the actions taken and the next state of the
 block.

                                                              Events
                                                                              Incoming coherence
                                Load request from     Store request from
                                                                              request to obtain block
                                core                  core
                                                                              in read-write state
                                Issue coherence re-Issue coherence re-
              Not readable or
     States

                                quest for read-onlyquests for read-write      <No action>
              writeable (N)
                                permission/RO      permission/RW
                                                   Issue coherence re-
                              Give data from cache
              Read-only (RO)                       quest for read-write       <No action>/N
                              to core
                                                   permission/RW
                              Give data from cache                            Send block to
              Read-write (RW)                      Write data to cache
                              to core                                         requestor/N

 6.3             EXAMPLE OF A SIMPLE COHERENCE PROTOCOL
 To help understand coherence protocols, we now present a simple protocol. Our system model
 is the baseline system model from Section 2.1, but with the interconnection network restricted
 to being a shared bus: a shared set of wires on which a core can issue a message and have it
 observed by all cores and the LLC/memory.
        Each cache block can be in one of two stable coherence states: I(nvalid) and V(alid).
 Each block at the LLC/memory can also be in one of two coherence states: I and V. At the
 LLC/memory, the state I denotes that all caches hold the block in state I, and the state V denotes
 that one cache holds the block in state V. There is also a single transient state for cache blocks,
 IVD , discussed below. At system startup, all cache blocks and LLC/memory blocks are in state
 I. Each core can issue load and store requests to its cache controller; the cache controller will
 implicitly generate an Evict Block event when it needs to make room for another block. Loads
 and stores that miss in the cache initiate coherence transactions, as described below, to obtain a
 valid copy of the cache block. Like all the protocols in this primer, we assume a writeback cache;
 that is, when a store hits, it writes the store value only to the (local) cache and waits to write the
 entire block back to the LLC/memory in response to an Evict Block event.
        There are two types of coherence transactions implemented using three types of bus mes-
 sages: Get requests a block, DataResp transfers the block’s data, and Put writes the block back
 to the memory controller. On a load or store miss, the cache controller initiates a Get transac-
 tion by sending a Get message and waiting for the corresponding DataResp message. The Get
transaction is atomic in that no other transaction (either Get or Put) may use the bus between
when the cache sends the Get and when the DataResp for that Get appears on the bus. On an
Evict Block event, the cache controller sends a Put message, with the entire cache block, to the
memory controller.
       We illustrate the transitions between the stable coherence states in Figure 6.3. We use the
prefaces “Own” and “Other” to distinguish messages for transactions initiated by the given cache
controller vs. those initiated by other cache controllers. Note that if the given cache controller
has the block in state V and another cache requests it with a Get message (denoted Other-
Get), the owning cache must respond with a block (using a DataResp message, not shown) and
transition to state I.

                                                  V

                Own-Put or Other-Get                          Own-Get+DataResp

                                                  I

Figure 6.3: Transitions between stable states of blocks at cache controller.

       Tables 6.2 and 6.3 specify the protocol in more detail. Shaded entries in the table denote
impossible transitions. For example, a cache controller should never see its own Put request on
the bus for a block that is in state V in its cache (as it should have already transitioned to state
I).
       The transient state IVD corresponds to a block in state I that is waiting for data (via a
DataResp message) before transitioning to state V. Transient states arise when transitions be-
tween stable states are not atomic. In this simple protocol, individual message sends and receives
are atomic, but fetching a block from the memory controller requires sending a Get message
and receiving a DataResp message, with an indeterminate gap in between. The IVD state indi-
cates that the protocol is waiting for a DataResp. We discuss transient states in more depth in
Section 6.4.1.
       This coherence protocol is simplistic and inefficient in many ways, but the goal in pre-
senting this protocol is to gain an understanding of how protocols are specified. We use this
specification methodology throughout this book when presenting different types of coherence
protocols.
Table 6.2: Cache controller specification. Shaded entries are impossible and blank entries denote
 events that are ignored.

                                                                         Bus Events
                       Core Events                                                    Messages for Other Cores’
                                             Messages for Own Transactions

         States
                                                                                           Transactions
                                                                                              DataResp
                   Load or       Evict       Own-    DataResp for       Own-      Other-                   Other-
                                                                                              for Other-
                    Store        Block        Get     Own-Get            Put       Get                      Put
                                                                                                  Get
     I            Issue Get/
                     IVD
     IVD                                            Copy data into
                  Stall Load                        cache, perform
                               Stall Evict
                   or Store                         Load or Store
                                                    /V
     V             Perform      Issue Put                                         Send
                   Load or     (with data)                                       DataResp
                    Store           /I                                              /I

Table 6.3: Memory controller specification

                                                           Bus Events
                       State
                                             Get                                      Put
                       I        Send data block in DataResp
                                message to requestor/V
                       V                                             Update data block in memory/I

 6.4               OVERVIEW OF COHERENCE PROTOCOL DESIGN
                   SPACE
 As mentioned in Section 6.1, a designer of a coherence protocol must choose the states, transac-
 tions, events, and transitions for each type of coherence controller in the system. The choice of
 stable states is largely independent of the rest of the coherence protocol. For example, there are
 two different classes of coherence protocols called snooping and directory, and an architect can
 design a snooping protocol or a directory protocol with the same set of stable states. We discuss
 stable states, independent of protocols, in Section 6.4.1. Similarly, the choice of transactions is
 also largely independent of the specific protocol, and we discuss transactions in Section 6.4.2.
 However, unlike the choices of stable states and transactions, the events, transitions and spe-
 cific transient states are highly dependent on the coherence protocol and cannot be discussed
in isolation. Thus, in Section 6.4.3, we discuss a few of the major design decisions in coherence
protocols.

6.4.1 STATES
In a system with only one actor (e.g., a single core processor without coherent DMA), the state
of a cache block is either valid or invalid. There might be two possible valid states for a cache
block if there is a need to distinguish blocks that are dirty. A dirty block has a value that has
been written more recently than other copies of this block. For example, in a two-level cache
hierarchy with a write-back L1 cache, the block in the L1 may be dirty with respect to the stale
copy in the L2 cache.
       A system with multiple actors can also use just these two or three states, as in Section 6.3,
but we often want to distinguish between different kinds of valid states. There are four charac-
teristics of a cache block that we wish to encode in its state: validity, dirtiness, exclusivity, and
ownership [10]. The latter two characteristics are unique to systems with multiple actors.
    • Validity: A valid block has the most up-to-date value for this block. The block may be
      read, but it may only be written if it is also exclusive.
    • Dirtiness: As in a single core processor, a cache block is dirty if its value is the most up-to-
      date value, this value differs from the value in the LLC/memory, and the cache controller
      is responsible for eventually updating the LLC/memory with this new value. The term
      clean is often used as the opposite of dirty.
    • Exclusivity: A cache block is exclusive1 if it is the only privately cached copy of that block
      in the system (i.e., the block is not cached anywhere else except perhaps in the shared
      LLC).
    • Ownership: A cache controller (or memory controller) is the owner of a block if it is re-
      sponsible for responding to coherence requests for that block. In most protocols, there is
      exactly one owner of a given block at all times. A block that is owned may not be evicted
      from a cache to make room for another block—due to a capacity or conflict miss—without
      giving the ownership of the block to another coherence controller. Non-owned blocks may
      be evicted silently (i.e., without sending any messages) in some protocols.
        In this section, we first discuss some commonly used stable states—states of blocks that
are not currently in the midst of a coherence transaction—and then discuss the use of transient
states for describing blocks that are currently in the midst of transactions.

    1 The terminology here can be confusing, because there is a cache coherence state that is called “Exclusive,” but there are
other cache coherence states that are exclusive in the sense defined here.
 Stable States
 Many coherence protocols use a subset of the classic five state MOESI model first introduced by
 Sweazey and Smith [10]. These MOESI (often pronounced either “MO-sey” or “mo-EE-see”)
 states refer to the states of blocks in a cache, and the most fundamental three states are MSI;
 the O and E states may be used, but they are not as basic. Each of these states has a different
 combination of the characteristics described previously.

     • M(odified): The block is valid, exclusive, owned, and potentially dirty. The block may be
       read or written. The cache has the only valid copy of the block, the cache must respond to
       requests for the block, and the copy of the block at the LLC/memory is potentially stale.

     • S(hared): The block is valid but not exclusive, not dirty, and not owned. The cache has a
       read-only copy of the block. Other caches may have valid, read-only copies of the block.

     • I(nvalid): The block is invalid. The cache either does not contain the block or it contains a
       potentially stale copy that it may not read or write. In this primer, we do not distinguish
       between these two situations, although sometimes the former situation may be denoted as
       the “Not Present” state.

        The most basic protocols use only the MSI states, but there are reasons to add the O and E
 states to optimize certain situations. We will discuss these optimizations in later chapters when
 we discuss snooping and directory protocols with and without these states. For now, here is the
 complete list of MOESI states:

     • M(odified)

     • O(wned): The block is valid, owned, and potentially dirty, but not exclusive. The cache has
       a read-only copy of the block and must respond to requests for the block. Other caches
       may have a read-only copy of the block, but they are not owners. The copy of the block in
       the LLC/memory is potentially stale.

     • E(xclusive): The block is valid, exclusive, and clean. The cache has a read-only copy of the
       block. No other caches have a valid copy of the block, and the copy of the block in the
       LLC/memory is up-to-date. In this primer, we consider the block to be owned when it
       is in the Exclusive state, although there are protocols in which the Exclusive state is not
       treated as an ownership state. When we present MESI snooping and directory protocols
       in later chapters, we discuss the issues involved with making Exclusive blocks owners or
       not.

     • S(hared)

     • I(nvalid)
       We illustrate a Venn diagram of the MOESI states in Figure 6.4. The Venn diagram shows
which states share which characteristics. All states besides I are valid. M, O, and E are ownership
states. Both M and E denote exclusivity, in that no other caches have a valid copy of the block.
Both M and O indicate that the block is potentially dirty. Returning to the simplistic example
in Section 6.3, we observe that the protocol effectively condensed the MOES states into the V
state.

                                                       Ownership (note: the Exclusive
                                                       state is not always considered an
                           Owned                       ownership state)

                          Modified                        Validity

                                                            Dirtiness
                          Exclusive
                                                         Exclusivity
                                            Invalid
                            Shared

Figure 6.4: MOESI states.

       The MOESI states, although quite common, are not an exhaustive set of stable states.
For example, the F(orward) state is similar to the O state except that it is clean (i.e., the copy
in the LLC/memory is up-to-date). There are many possible coherence states, but we focus our
attention in this primer on the well-known MOESI states.

Transient States
Thus far, we have discussed only the stable states that occur when there is no current coher-
ence activity for the block, and it is only these stable states that are used when referring to a
protocol (e.g., “a system with a MESI protocol”). However, as we saw even in the example in
Section 6.3, there may exist transient states that occur during the transition from one stable
state to another stable state. In Section 6.3, we had the transient state IVD (in I, going to V,
waiting for DataResp). In more sophisticated protocols, we are likely to encounter dozens of
transient states. We encode these states using a notation XYZ , which denotes that the block is
transitioning from stable state X to stable state Y, and the transition will not complete until an
event of type Z occurs. For example, in a protocol in a later chapter, we use IMD to denote that
a block was previously in I and will become M once a D(ata) message arrives for that block.
 States of Blocks in the LLC/Memory
 The states that we have discussed thus far—both stable and transient—pertain to blocks residing
 in caches. Blocks in the LLC and memory also have states associated with them, and there
 are two general approaches to naming states of blocks in the LLC and memory. The choice of
 naming convention does not affect functionality or performance; it is simply a specification issue
 that can confuse an architect unfamiliar with the convention.
      • Cache-centric: In this approach, which we believe to be the most common, the state of a
        block in the LLC and memory is an aggregation of the states of this block in the caches.
        For example, if a block is in all caches in I, then the LLC/memory state for this block is
        I. If a block is in one or more caches in S, then the LLC/memory state is S. If a block is
        in a single cache in M, then the LLC/memory state is M.
      • Memory-centric: In this approach, the state of a block in the LLC/memory corresponds
        to the memory controller’s permissions to this block (rather than the permissions of the
        caches). For example, if a block is in all caches in I, then the LLC/memory state for this
        block is O (not I, as in the cache-centric approach), because the LLC/memory behaves
        like an owner of the block. If a block is in one or more caches in S, then the LLC/memory
        state is also O, for the same reason. However, if the block is in a single cache in M or O,
        then the LLC/ memory state is I, because the LLC/memory has an invalid copy of the
        block.
      All protocols in this primer use cache-centric names for the states of blocks in the LLC
 and memory.

 Maintaining Block State
 The system implementation must maintain the states associated with blocks in caches, the LLC,
 and memory. For caches and the LLC, this generally requires extending the per-block cache
 state by at most a few bits, since the number of stable states is generally small (e.g., 5 states
 for a MOESI protocol requires 3 bits per block). Coherence protocols may have many more
 transient states, but need maintain these states only for those blocks that have pending coherence
 transactions. Implementations typically maintain these transient states by adding additional bits
 to the miss status handling registers (MSHRs) or similar structures that are used to track these
 pending transactions [4].
        For memory, it might appear that the much greater aggregate capacity would pose a signif-
 icant challenge. However, many current multicore systems maintain an inclusive LLC, which
 means that the LLC maintains a copy of every block that is cached anywhere in the system
 (even “exclusive” blocks). With an inclusive LLC, memory does not need to explicitly repre-
 sent the coherence state. If a block resides in the LLC, its state in memory is the same as its
 state in the LLC. If the block is not in the LLC, its state in memory is implicitly Invalid, be-
 cause absence from an inclusive LLC implies that the block is not in any cache. The sidebar
discusses how memory state was maintained in the days before multicores with inclusive LLCs.
The above discussion of memory assumes a system with a single multicore chip, as does most
of this primer. Systems with multiple multicore chips may benefit from explicit coherence state
logically at memory.

6.4.2 TRANSACTIONS
Most protocols have a similar set of transactions, because the basic goals of the coherence con-
trollers are similar. For example, virtually all protocols have a transaction for obtaining Shared
(read-only) access to a block. In Table 6.4 we list a set of common transactions and, for each
transaction, we describe the goal of the requestor that initiates the transaction. These transac-
tions are all initiated by cache controllers that are responding to requests from their associated
cores. In Table 6.5, we list the requests that a core can make to its cache controller and how
these core requests can lead the cache controller into initiating coherence transactions.

           Sidebar: Before Multicores: Maintaining Coherence State at Memory
        Traditional, pre-multicore protocols needed to maintain coherence state for each
  block of memory, and they could not use the LLC as explained in Section 6.4.1. We briefly
  discuss several ways of maintaining this state and the associated engineering tradeoffs.
         Augment Each Block of Memory with State Bits. The most general implementation
  is to add extra bits to each block of memory to maintain the coherence state. If there are
  N possible states at memory, then each block needs log2 N extra bits. Although this design
  is fully general and conceptually straightforward, it has several drawbacks. First, the extra
  bits may increase cost in two ways. Adding two or three extra bits is difficult with modern
  block-oriented DRAM chips, which are typically at least 4-bits wide and frequently much
  wider. Plus any change in the memory precludes using commodity DRAM modules (e.g.,
  DIMMs), which significantly increases cost. Fortunately, for protocols that require only
  a few bits of state per block it is possible to store these using a modified ECC code. By
  maintaining ECC on a larger granularity (e.g., 512 bits rather than 64 bits), it is possible to
  free up enough code space to “hide” a handful of extra bits while using commodity DRAM
  modules [1, 5, 7]. The second drawback is that storing the state bits in DRAM means that
  obtaining the state incurs the full DRAM latency, even in the case that the most recent
  version of the block is stored in some other cache. In some cases, this may increase the
  latency of cache-to-cache coherence transfers. Finally, storing the state in DRAM means
  that all state changes require a DRAM read-modify-write cycle, which may impact both
  power and DRAM bandwidth.
        Add Single State Bit per Block at Memory. A design option used by the Synapse [3]
  was to distinguish the two stable states (I and V) using a single bit that is associated with

      every block of memory. Few blocks are ever in transient states, and those states can be
      maintained with a small dedicated structure. This design is a subset of the more complete
      first design, with minimal storage cost.
             Zero-bit logical OR. To avoid having to modify memory, we can have the caches
      reconstruct the memory state on-demand. The memory state of a block is a function of the
      block’s state in every cache, so, if all of the caches aggregate their state, they can determine
      the memory state. The system can infer whether the memory is the owner of a block by
      having all of the cores send an “IsOwned?”a signal to a logical OR gate (or tree of OR
      gates) with a number of inputs equal to the number of caches. If the output of this OR is
      high, it denotes that a cache is owner; if the output is low, then memory is the owner. This
      solution avoids the need for any state to be maintained in memory. However, implementing
      a fast OR, either with logic gates or a wired-OR, can be difficult.
           a This IsOwned signal is not to be confused with the Owned cache state. The IsOwned signal is asserted by a cache
      in a state of ownership, which includes the Owned, Modified, and Exclusive cache states.

Table 6.4: Common transactions

  Transaction                     Goal of Requestor
  GetShared (GetS)                Obtain block in Shared (read-only) state
  GetModified (GetM)               Obtain block in Modified (read-only) state
  Upgrade (Upg)                   Upgrade block state from read-only (Shared or Owned) to read-write
                                  (Modified); Upg (unlike GetM) does not require data to be sent to re-
                                  questor
  PutShared (PutS)                Evict block in Shared statea
  PutExclusive (PutE)             Evict block in Exclusive statea
  PutOwned (PutO)                 Evict block in Owned state
  PutModified (PutM)               Evict block in Modified state
  a Some protocols do not require a coherence transaction to evict a Shared block and/or an Exclusive block (i.e.,

  the PutS and/or PutE are “silent”).

        Although most protocols use a similar set of transactions, they differ quite a bit in how
 the coherence controllers interact to perform the transactions. As we will see in the next section,
 in some protocols (e.g., snooping protocols) a cache controller initiates a GetS transaction by
 broadcasting a GetS request to all coherence controllers in the system, and whichever controller
 is currently the owner of the block responds to the requestor with a message that contains the
 desired data. Conversely, in other protocols (e.g., directory protocols) a cache controller initi-
Table 6.5: Common core requests to cache controller

 Event                   Response of (Typical) Cache Controller
 Load                    If cache hit, respond with data from cache; else initiate GetS transaction
                         If cache hit in state E or M, write data into cache; else initiate GetM or
 Store
                         Upg transaction
 Atomic read-            If cache hit in state E or M, automically execute RMW semantics; else
 modify-write            GetM or Upg transaction
                         If cache hit (in I-cache), respond with instruction from cache; else initiate
 Instruction fetch
                         GetS transaction
 Read-only
                         If cache hit, ignore; else may optionally initiate GetS transactiona
 prefetch
 Read-Write              If cache hit in state M, ignore; else may optionally initiate GetM or Upg
 prefetch                transactiona
 Replacement             Depending on state of block, initiate PutS, PutE, PutO, or PutM transaction
 a A cache controller may choose to ignore a prefetch request from the core.

ates a GetS transaction by sending a unicast GetS message to a specific, pre-defined coherence
controller that may either respond directly or may forward the request to another coherence
controller that will respond to the requestor.

6.4.3 MAJOR PROTOCOL DESIGN OPTIONS
There are many different ways to design a coherence protocol. Even for the same set of states and
transactions, there are many different possible protocols. The design of the protocol determines
what events and transitions are possible at each coherence controller; unlike with states and
transactions, there is no way to present a list of possible events or transitions that is independent
from the protocol.
      Despite the enormous design space for coherence protocols, there are two primary design
decisions that have a major impact on the rest of the protocol, and we discuss them next.

Snooping vs. Directory
There are two main classes of coherence protocols: snooping and directory. We present a brief
overview of these protocols now and defer in-depth coverage of them until Chapters 7 and 8,
respectively.

    • Snooping protocol: A cache controller initiates a request for a block by broadcasting a
      request message to all other coherence controllers. The coherence controllers collectively
        “do the right thing,” e.g., sending data in response to another core’s request if they are the
        owner. Snooping protocols rely on the interconnection network to deliver the broadcast
        messages in a consistent order to all cores. Most snooping protocols assume that requests
        arrive in a total order, e.g., via a shared-wire bus, but more advanced interconnection net-
        works and relaxed orders are possible.
      • Directory protocol: A cache controller initiates a request for a block by unicasting it to
        the memory controller that is the home for that block. The memory controller maintains
        a directory that holds state about each block in the LLC/memory, such as the identity of
        the current owner or the identities of current sharers. When a request for a block reaches
        the home, the memory controller looks up this block’s directory state. For example, if
        the request is a GetS, the memory controller looks up the directory state to determine the
        owner. If the LLC/memory is the owner, the memory controller completes the transaction
        by sending a data response to the requestor. If a cache controller is the owner, the memory
        controller forwards the request to the owner cache; when the owner cache receives the
        forwarded request, it completes the transaction by sending a data response to the requestor.
        The choice of snooping vs. directory involves making tradeoffs. Snooping protocols are
 logically simple, but they do not scale to large numbers of cores because broadcasting does not
 scale. Directory protocols are scalable because they unicast, but many transactions take more
 time because they require an extra message to be sent when the home is not the owner. In
 addition, the choice of protocol affects the interconnection network (e.g., classical snooping
 protocols require a total order for request messages).

 Invalidate vs. Update
 The other major design decision in a coherence protocol is to decide what to do when a core
 writes to a block. This decision is independent of whether the protocol is snooping or directory.
 There are two options.
      • Invalidate protocol: When a core wishes to write to a block, it initiates a coherence trans-
        action to invalidate the copies in all other caches. Once the copies are invalidated, the
        requestor can write to the block without the possibility of another core reading the block’s
        old value. If another core wishes to read the block after its copy has been invalidated, it
        has to initiate a new coherence transaction to obtain the block, and it will obtain a copy
        from the core that wrote it, thus preserving coherence.
      • Update protocol: When a core wishes to write a block, it initiates a coherence transaction
        to update the copies in all other caches to reflect the new value it wrote to the block.
        Once again, there are tradeoffs involved in making this decision. Update protocols reduce
 the latency for a core to read a newly written block because the core does not need to initi-
 ate and wait for a GetS transaction to complete. However, update protocols typically consume
substantially more bandwidth than invalidate protocols because update messages are larger than
invalidate messages (an address and a new value, rather than just an address). Furthermore, up-
date protocols greatly complicate the implementation of many memory consistency models. For
example, preserving write atomicity (Section 5.5) becomes much more difficult when multiple
caches must apply multiple updates to multiple copies of a block. Because of the complexity of
update protocols, they are rarely implemented; in this primer, we focus on the far more common
invalidate protocols.

Hybrid Designs
For both major design decisions, one option is to develop a hybrid. There are protocols that
combine aspects of snooping and directory protocols [2, 6], and there are protocols that combine
aspects of invalidate and update protocols [8]. The design space is rich and architects are not
constrained to following any particular style of design.

6.5     REFERENCES
 [1] A. Charlesworth. The Sun Fireplane SMP interconnect in the Sun 6800. In Proc. of the 9th
     Hot Interconnects Symposium, August 2001. DOI: 10.1109/his.2001.946691. 101
 [2] P. Conway and B. Hughes. The AMD Opteron northbridge architecture. IEEE Micro,
     27(2):10–21, March/April 2007. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2007.43. 105
 [3] S. J. Frank. Tightly coupled multiprocessor system speeds memory-access times. Electron-
     ics, 57(1):164–169, January 1984. 101
 [4] D. Kroft. Lockup-free instruction fetch/prefetch cache organization. In Proc. of the 8th
     Annual Symposium on Computer Architecture, May 1981. DOI: 10.1145/285930.285979.
     100
 [5] H. Q. Le et al. IBM POWER6 microarchitecture. IBM Journal of Research and Develop-
     ment, 51(6), 2007. DOI: 10.1147/rd.516.0639. 101
 [6] M. M. K. Martin, D. J. Sorin, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood. Bandwidth adaptive snooping.
     In Proc. of the 8th IEEE Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, pp. 251–
     262, January 2002. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2002.995715. 105
 [7] A. Nowatzyk, G. Aybay, M. Browne, E. Kelly, and M. Parkin. The S3.mp scalable shared
     memory multiprocessor. In Proc. of the International Conference on Parallel Processing, vol. I,
     pp. 1–10, August 1995. DOI: 10.1109/hicss.1994.323149. 101
 [8] A. Raynaud, Z. Zhang, and J. Torrellas. Distance-adaptive update protocols for scalable
     shared-memory multiprocessors. In Proc. of the 2nd IEEE Symposium on High-Performance
     Computer Architecture, February 1996. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.1996.501197. 105
      [9] D. J. Sorin, M. Plakal, M. D. Hill, A. E. Condon, M. M. Martin, and D. A. Wood.
          Specifying and verifying a broadcast and a multicast snooping cache coherence protocol.
          IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 13(6):556–578, June 2002. DOI:
          10.1109/tpds.2002.1011412. 93
 [10] P. Sweazey and A. J. Smith. A class of compatible cache consistency protocols and their
      support by the IEEE Futurebus. In Proc. of the 13th Annual International Symposium on
      Computer Architecture, pp. 414–423, June 1986. DOI: 10.1145/17356.17404. 97, 98
