
                                  CHAPTER                        7

Snooping Coherence Protocols
In this chapter, we present snooping coherence protocols. Snooping protocols were the first
widely deployed class of protocols and they continue to be used in a variety of systems. Snoop-
ing protocols offer many attractive features, including low-latency coherence transactions and a
conceptually simpler design than the alternative, directory protocols (Chapter 8).
      We first introduce snooping protocols at a high level (Section 7.1). We then present a
simple system with a complete but unsophisticated three-state (MSI) snooping protocol (Sec-
tion 7.2). This system and protocol serve as a baseline upon which we later add system features
and protocol optimizations. The protocol optimizations that we discuss include the additions of
the Exclusive state (Section 7.3) and the Owned state (Section 7.4), as well as higher perfor-
mance interconnection networks (Sections 7.5 and 7.6). We then discuss commercial systems
with snooping protocols (Section 7.7) before concluding the chapter with a discussion of snoop-
ing and its future (Section 7.8).
      Given that some readers may not wish to delve too deeply into snooping, we have orga-
nized the chapter such that readers may skim or skip Sections 7.3–7.6, if they so choose.

7.1     INTRODUCTION TO SNOOPING
Snooping protocols are based on one idea: all coherence controllers observe (snoop) coherence
requests in the same order and collectively “do the right thing” to maintain coherence. By requir-
ing that all requests to a given block arrive in order, a snooping system enables the distributed
coherence controllers to correctly update the finite state machines that collectively represent a
cache block’s state.
       Traditional snooping protocols broadcast requests to all coherence controllers, including
the controller that initiated the request. The coherence requests typically travel on an ordered
broadcast network, such as a bus. The ordered broadcast ensures that every coherence controller
observes the same series of coherence requests in the same order, i.e., that there is a total order of
coherence requests. Since a total order subsumes all per-block orders, this total order guarantees
that all coherence controllers can correctly update a cache block’s state.
       To illustrate the importance of processing coherence requests in the same per-block order,
consider the examples in Tables 7.1 and 7.2 where both core C1 and core C2 want to get the
same block A in state M. In Table 7.1, all three coherence controllers observe the same per-
block order of coherence requests and collectively maintain the single-writer–multiple-reader
(SWMR) invariant. Ownership of the block progresses from the LLC/memory to core C1 to

 Table 7.1: Snooping coherence example. All activity involves block A (denoted “A:”).

  Time Core C1                         Core C2                      LLC/Memory
    0  A:I                             A:I                          A:I
                                                                    (LLC/memory is owner)
                                                             A:GetM from Core C1/M
      1   A:GetM from Core C1/M A:GetM from Core C1/I
                                                             (LLC/memory is not owner)
      2   A:GetM from Core C2/I        A:GetM from Core C2/M A:GetM from Core C2/M

 Table 7.2: Snooping (In)coherence example. All activity involves block A (denoted “A:”).

  Time Core C1                         Core C2        LLC/Memory
    0  A:I                             A:I            A:I
                                                      (LLC/memory is owner)
                                                      A:GetM from Core C1/M
      1   A:GetM from Core C1/M A:GetM from Core C2/M
                                                      (LLC/memory is not owner)
      2   A:GetM from Core C2/I A:GetM from Core C1/I A:GetM from Core C2/M

 core C2. Every coherence controller independently arrives at the correct conclusion about the
 block’s state as a result of each observed request. Conversely, Table 7.2 illustrates how incoher-
 ence might arise if core C2 observes a different per-block order of requests than core C1 and
 the LLC/memory. First, we have a situation in which both core C1 and core C2 are simultane-
 ously in state M, which violates the SWMR invariant. Next, we have a situation in which no
 coherence controller believes it is the owner and thus a coherence request at this time would not
 receive a response (perhaps resulting in deadlock).
        Traditional snooping protocols create a total order of coherence requests across all blocks,
 even though coherence requires only a per-block order of requests. Having a total order makes it
 easier to implement memory consistency models that require a total order of memory references,
 such as SC and TSO. Consider the example in Table 7.3 which involves two blocks A and B;
 each block is requested exactly once and so the system trivially observes per-block request orders.
 Yet because cores C1 and C2 observe the GetM and GetS requests out-of-order, this execution
 violates both the SC and TSO memory consistency models.
Table 7.3: Per-block order, coherence, and consistency. States and operations that pertain to
address A are preceeded by the prefix “A:”, and we denote a block A in state X with value V as
“A:X[V].” If the value is stale, we omit it (e.g., “A:I”). Note that there are two blocks in this
example, A and B, with A initially in state S at Core C2 and B initially in state M at Core C1.

 Time Core C1                      Core C2                  LLC/Memory
      A:I                          A:S[0]                   A:S[0]
   0
      B:M[0]                       B:I                      B:M
      A:GetM from Core C1/M[0] A:S[0]                       A:S[0]
   1  store A = 1                  B:I                      B:M
      B:M[0]
      A:M[1]                       A:S[0]                   A:GetM from Core C1/M
   2  store B = 1                  B:I                      B:M
      B:M[1]
      A:M[1]                       A:S[0]                   A:M
   3
      B:GetS from Core C2/S[1]     B:I                      B:GetS from Core C2/S[1]
      A:M[1]                       A:S[0]                   A:M
   4  B:S[1]                       B:GetS from Core C2/S[1] B:S[1]
                                   r1 = B[1]
      A:M[1]                       A:S[0]                   A:M
   5  B:S[1]                       r2 = A[0]                B:S[1]
                                   B:S[1]
      A:M[1]                       A:GetM from Core1/I      A:M
   6
      B:S[1]                       B:S[1]                   B:S[1]
                         r1 = 1, r2 = 0 violates SC and TSO

         Sidebar: How Snooping Depends on a Total Order of Coherence Requests
  At first glance, the reader may assume that the problem in Table 7.3 arises because the
  SWMR invariant is violated for block A in cycle 1, since C1 has an M copy and C2 still
  has an S copy. However, Table 7.4 illustrates the same example, but enforces a total order of
  coherence requests. This example is identical until cycle 4, and thus has the same apparent
  SWMR violation. However, like the proverbial “tree in the forest,” this violation does not
  cause a problem because it is not observed (i.e., there is “no one there to hear it”). Specifi-
  cally, because the cores see both requests in the same order, C2 invalidates block A before
  it can see the new value for block B. Thus, when C2 reads block A, it must get the new
  value and therefore yields a correct SC and TSO execution.

            Traditional snooping protocols use the total order of coherence requests to determine
      when, in a logical time based on snoop order, a particular request has been observed. In the
      example of Table 7.4, because of the total order, core C1 can infer that C2 will see the GetM
      for A before the GetS for B, and thus C2 does not need to send a specific acknowledgment
      message when it receives the coherence message. This implicit acknowledgment of request
      reception distinguishes snooping protocols from the directory protocols we study in the
      next chapter.

 Table 7.4: Total order, coherence, and consistency. States and operations that pertain to address
 A are preceded by the prefix “A:”, and we denote a block A in state X with value V as “A:X[V].”
 If the value is stale, we omit it (e.g., “A:I”).

  Time Core C1                      Core C2                  LLC/Memory
       A:I                          A:S[0]                   A:S[0]
    0
       B:M[0]                       B:I                      B:M
       A:GetM from Core C1/M[0] A:S[0]                       A:S[0]
    1  store A = 1                  B:I                      B:M
       B:M[0]
       A:M[1]                       A:S[0]                   A:GetM from Core C1/M
    2  store B = 1                  B:I                      B:M
       B:M[1]
       A:M[1]                       A:S[0]                   A:M
    3
       B:GetS from Core C2/S[1]     B:I                      B:GetS from Core C2/S[1]
       A:M[1]                       A:GetM from Core1/I      A:M
    4
       B:S[1]                       B:I                      B:S[1]
       A:M[1]                       A:I                      A:M
    5  B:S[1]                       B:GetS from Core C2/S[1] B:S[1]
                                    r1 = B[1]
       A:GetS from Core C2/S[1] A:GetS from Core C2/S[1] A:GetS from Core C2/S[1]
    6  B:S[1]                       r2 = A[1]                B:S[1]
                                    B:S[1]
                          r1 = 1, r2 = 1 satisfies SC and TSO

       We discuss some of the subtler issues regarding the need for a total order in the sidebar.
       Requiring that broadcast coherence requests be observed in a total order has important
 implications for the interconnection network used to implement traditional snooping protocols.
 Because many coherence controllers may simultaneously attempt to issue coherence requests,
the interconnection network must serialize these requests into some total order. However the
network determines this order, this mechanism becomes known as the protocol’s serialization
(ordering) point. In the general case, a coherence controller issues a coherence request, the net-
work orders that request at the serialization point and broadcasts it to all controllers, and the
issuing controller learns where its request has been ordered by snooping the stream of requests it
receives from the controller. As a concrete and simple example, consider a system which uses a
bus to broadcast coherence requests. Coherence controllers must use arbitration logic to ensure
that only a single request is issued on the bus at once. This arbitration logic acts as the serial-
ization point because it effectively determines the order in which requests appear on the bus. A
subtle but important point is that a coherence request is ordered the instant the arbitration logic
serializes it, but a controller may only be able to determine this order by snooping the bus to ob-
serve which other requests appear before and after its own request. Thus, coherence controllers
may observe the total request order several cycles after the serialization point determines it.
       Thus far, we have discussed only coherence requests, but not the responses to these re-
quests. The reason for this seeming oversight is that the key aspects of snooping protocols re-
volve around the requests. There are few constraints on response messages. They can travel on a
separate interconnection network that does not need to support broadcast nor have any order-
ing requirements. Because response messages carry data and are thus much longer than requests,
there are significant benefits to being able to send them on a simpler, lower-cost network. No-
tably, response messages do not affect the serialization of coherence transactions. Logically, a
coherence transaction—which consists of a broadcast request and a unicast response—occurs
when the request is ordered, regardless of when the response arrives at the requestor. The time inter-
val between when the request appears on the bus and when the response arrives at the requestor
does affect the implementation of the protocol (e.g., during this gap, are other controllers al-
lowed to request this block? If so, how does the requestor respond?), but it does not affect the
serialization of the transaction.1

7.2        BASELINE SNOOPING PROTOCOL
In this section, we present a straightforward, unoptimized snooping protocol and describe its
implementation on two different system models. The first, simple system model illustrates the
basic approach for implementing snooping coherence protocols. The second, modestly more
complex baseline system model illustrates how even relatively simple performance improvements
may impact coherence protocol complexity. These examples provide insight into the key features
of snooping protocols while revealing inefficiencies that motivate the features and optimizations
presented in subsequent sections of this chapter. Sections 7.5 and 7.6 discuss how to adapt this
baseline protocol for more advanced system models.

    1 This logical serialization of coherence transactions is analogous to the logical serialization of instruction execution in
processor cores. Even when a core performs out-of-order execution, it still commits (serializes) instructions in program order.
 7.2.1 HIGH-LEVEL PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 The baseline protocol has only three stable states: M, S, and I. Such a protocol is typically referred
 to as an MSI protocol. Like the protocol in Section 6.3, this protocol assumes a write-back
 cache. A block is owned by the LLC/memory unless the block is in a cache in state M. Before
 presenting the detailed specification, we first illustrate a higher level abstraction of the protocol
 in order to understand its fundamental behaviors. In Figures 7.1 and 7.2, we show the transitions
 between the stable states at the cache and memory controllers, respectively.
        There are three notational issues to be aware of. First, in Figure 7.1, the arcs are labeled with
 coherence requests that are observed on the bus. We intentionally omit other events, including
 loads, stores, and coherence responses. Second, the coherence events at the cache controller
 are labeled with either “Own” or “Other” to denote whether the cache controller observing the
 request is the requestor or not. Third, in Figure 7.2, we specify the state of a block at memory

                       Other-GetM
                           or
                       Own-PutM                   M                Own-GetM

                                       Other-GetS
                                                                Own-GetM

                                                  S

                                Other-GetM
                               or Replacement      Own-GetS
                                       (silent)

                                                   I

 Figure 7.1: MSI: Transitions between stable states at cache controller.

                                                        M
                                       GetS
                                        or                  GetM
                                       PutM
                                                       I or S

 Figure 7.2: MSI: Transitions between stable states at memory controller.
using a cache-centric notation (e.g., a memory state of M denotes that there exists a cache with
the block in state M).

7.2.2    SIMPLE SNOOPING SYSTEM MODEL: ATOMIC REQUESTS,
         ATOMIC TRANSACTIONS
Figure 7.3 illustrates the simple system model, which is nearly identical to the baseline system
model introduced in Figure 2.1. The only difference is that the generic interconnection network
from Figure 2.1 has been specified as a bus. Each core can issue load and store requests to its
cache controller; the cache controller will choose a block to evict when it needs to make room
for another block. The bus facilitates a total order of coherence requests that are snooped by all
coherence controllers. Like the example in the previous chapter, this system model has atom-
icity properties that simplify the coherence protocol. Specifically, this system implements two
atomicity properties which we define as Atomic Requests and Atomic Transactions. The Atomic
Requests property states that a coherence request is ordered in the same cycle that it is issued.
This property eliminates the possibility of a block’s state changing—due to another core’s coher-
ence request—between when a request is issued and when it is ordered. The Atomic Transactions

            Core                                                Core

          Cache            Private                            Cache           Private
         Controller       Data Cache                         Controller      Data Cache

                                    BUS

                                Last-level
         LLC/Memory
                                 Cache
          Controller
                                 (LLC)
                                                          Multicore Processor Chip

                   Main Memory

Figure 7.3: Simple snooping system mode.
 property states that coherence transactions are atomic in that a subsequent request for the same
 block may not appear on the bus until after the first transaction completes (i.e., until after the
 response has appeared on the bus). Because coherence involves operations on a single block,
 whether or not the system permits subsequent requests to different blocks does not impact the
 protocol. Although simpler than most current systems, this system model resembles the SGI
 Challenge, a successful machine in the 1980s [5].

 Detailed Protocol Specification
 Tables 7.5 and 7.6 present the detailed coherence protocol for the simple system model. Com-
 pared to the high-level description in Section 7.2.1, the most significant difference is the ad-
 dition of two transient states in the cache controller and one in the memory controller. This
 protocol has very few transient states because the atomicity constraints of the simple system
 model greatly limit the number of possible message interleavings.

 Table 7.5: Simple snooping (atomic requests, atomic transactions): Cache controller

                                                                 Bus Events
                  Processor Core Events
      States

                                                Own Transaction          Transactions for Other Cores
                                           Own- Own- Own-                Other-      Other-     Other-
               Load    Store   Replacement                      Data
                                           GetS GetM PutM                 GetS        GetM       PutM
               Issue   Issue
       I       GetS    GetM
               /ISD    /IMD
               Stall   Stall   Stall Evict                     Copy data (A)            (A)         (A)
               Load    Store                                   into cache,
      ISD
                                                               load hit
                                                               /S
               Stall   Stall   Stall Evict                     Copy data (A)            (A)         (A)
               Load    Store                                   into cache,
      IMD
                                                               store hit
                                                               /M
               Load    Issue   -/I                                                      -/I
       S       hit     GetM
                       /SMD
               Load    Stall   Stall Evict                     Copy data (A)            (A)         (A)
               hit     Store                                   into cache,
  SMD
                                                               store hit
                                                               /M
               Load    Store   Issue PutM,                                 Send Data    Send Data
               hit     Hit     send Data to                                to req and   to req
      M
                               memory /I                                   memory       /I
                                                                           /S
Table 7.6: Simple snooping (atomic requests, atomic transactions): Memory controller

                                                                Bus Events
 State
                    GetS                           GetM                            PutM                 Data from Owner
             Send data block in             Send data block in
 IorS        Data message to                Data message to
             requestor/IorS                 requestor/M
             (A)                            (A)                                                        Update data block
 IorSD
                                                                                                       in memory/IorS
 M           -/IorSD                                                      -/IorSD

 Flashback to Quiz Question 6: In an MSI snooping protocol, a cache block may only be in
 one of three coherence states. True or false?
 Answer: False! Even for the simplest system model, there are more than three states, because
 of transient states.
        Shaded entries in the table denote impossible (or at least erroneous) transitions. For exam-
ple, a cache controller should never receive a Data message for a block that it has not requested
(i.e., a block in state I in its cache). Similarly, the Atomic Transactions constraint prevents an-
other core from issuing a subsequent request before the current transaction completes; the table
entries labeled “(A)” cannot occur due to this constraint. Blank entries denote legal transitions
that require no action. These tables omit many implementation details that are not necessary for
understanding the protocol. Also, in this protocol and the rest of the protocols in this chapter,
we omit the event corresponding to Data for another core’s transaction; a core never takes any
action in response to observing Data on the bus for another core’s transaction.
        As with all MSI protocols, loads may be performed (i.e., hit) in states S and M, while
stores hit only in state M. On load and store misses, the cache controller initiates coherence
transactions by sending GetS and GetM requests, respectively.2 The transient states ISD , IMD ,
and SMD indicate that the request message has been sent, but the data response (Data) has not
yet been received. In these transient states, because the requests have already been ordered, the
transactions have already been ordered and the block is logically in state S, M, or M, respectively.
A load or store must wait for the Data to arrive, though.3 Once the data response appears on

     2 We do not include an Upgrade transaction in this protocol, which would optimize the S-to-M transition by not need-
lessly sending data to the requestor. Adding an Upgrade would be fairly straightforward for this system model with Atomic
Requests, but it is significantly more complicated without Atomic Requests. We discuss this issue when we present a protocol
without Atomic Requests.
     3 Technically, a store may be performed as soon as the request is ordered, so long as the newly stored value is not overwritten
when the Data arrives. Similarly, a subsequent load to a newly written value is permitted.
 the bus, the cache controller can copy the data block into the cache, transition to stable state S
 or M, as appropriate, and perform the pending load or store.
        The system model’s atomicity properties simplify cache miss handling in two ways. First,
 the Atomic Requests property ensures that when a cache controller seeks to upgrade permissions
 to a block—to go from I to S, I to M, or S to M—it can issue a request without worrying
 that another core’s request might be ordered ahead of its own. Thus, the cache controller can
 transition immediately to state ISD , IMD , or SMD , as appropriate, to wait for a data response.
 Similarly, the Atomic Transactions property ensures that no subsequent requests for a block will
 occur until after the current transaction completes, eliminating the need to handle requests from
 other cores while in one of these transient states.
        A data response may come from either the memory controller or another cache that has
 the block in state M. A cache that has a block in state S can ignore GetS requests because the
 memory controller is required to respond, but must invalidate the block on GetM requests to
 enforce the coherence invariant. A cache that has a block in state M must respond to both GetS
 and GetM requests, sending a data response and transitioning to state S or state I, respectively.
        The LLC/memory has two stable states, M and IorS, and one transient state IorSD . In
 state IorS, the memory controller is the owner and responds to both GetS and GetM requests
 because this state indicates that no cache has the block in state M. In state M, the memory
 controller does not respond with data because the cache in state M is the owner and has the
 most recent copy of the data. However, a GetS in state M means that the cache controller will
 transition to state S, so the memory controller must also get the data, update memory, and begin
 responding to all future requests. It does this by transitioning immediately to the transient state
 IorSD and waits until it receives the data from the cache that owns it.
        When the cache controller evicts a block due to a replacement decision, this leads to the
 protocol’s two possible coherence downgrades: from S to I and from M to I. In this protocol,
 the S-to-I downgrade is performed “silently” in that the block is evicted from the cache without
 any communication with the other coherence controllers. In general, silent state transitions are
 possible only when all other coherence controllers’ behavior remains unchanged; for example, a
 silent eviction of an owned block is not allowable. The M-to-I downgrade requires communi-
 cation because the M copy of the block is the only valid copy in the system and cannot simply
 be discarded. Thus, another coherence controller (i.e., the memory controller) must change its
 state. To replace a block in state M, the cache controller issues a PutM request on the bus and
 then sends the data back to the memory controller. At the LLC, the block enters state IorSD
 when the PutM request arrives, then transitions to state IorS when the Data message arrives.4
 The Atomic Requests property simplifies the cache controller, by preventing an intervening re-
 quest that might downgrade the state (e.g., another core’s GetM request) before the PutM gets
 ordered on the bus. Similarly, the Atomic Transactions property simplifies the memory controller

      4 We make the simplifying assumption that these messages cannot arrive out of order at the memory controller.
by preventing other requests for the block until the PutM transaction completes and the memory
controller is ready to respond to them.

Running Example
In this section, we present an example execution of the system to show how the coherence
protocol behaves in a common scenario. We will use this example in subsequent sections both to
understand the protocols and also to highlight differences between them. The example includes
activity for just one block, and initially, the block is in state I in all caches and in state IorS at
the LLC/memory.
       In this example, illustrated in Table 7.7, cores C1 and C2 issue load and store instruc-
tions, respectively, that miss on the same block. Core C1 attempts to issue a GetS and core C2
attempts to issue a GetM. We assume that core C1’s request happens to get serialized first and
the Atomic Transactions property prevents core C2’s request from reaching the bus until C1’s
request completes. The memory controller responds to C1 to complete the transaction on cy-
cle 3. Then, core C2’s GetM is serialized on the bus; C1 invalidates its copy and the memory
controller responds to C2 to complete that transaction. Lastly, C1 issues another GetS. C2, the
owner, responds with the data and changes its state to S. C2 also sends a copy of the data to the
memory controller because the LLC/memory is now the owner and needs an up-to-date copy
of the block. At the end of this execution, C1 and C2 are in state S and the LLC/memory is in
state IorS.

7.2.3    BASELINE SNOOPING SYSTEM MODEL: NON-ATOMIC
         REQUESTS, ATOMIC TRANSACTIONS
The baseline snooping system model, which we use for most of the rest of this chapter, dif-
fers from the simple snooping system model by permitting non-atomic requests. Non-atomic
requests arise from a number of implementation optimizations, but most commonly due to in-
serting a message queue (or even a single buffer) between the cache controller and the bus. By
separating when a request is issued from when it is ordered, the protocol must address a window
of vulnerability that did not exist in the simple snooping system. The baseline snooping system
model preserves the Atomic Transactions property, which we do not relax until Section 7.5.
       We present the detailed protocol specification, including all transient states, in Tables 7.8
and 7.9. Compared to the protocol for the simple snooping system in Section 7.2.2, the most
significant difference is the much larger number of transient states. Relaxing the Atomic Requests
property introduces numerous situations in which a cache controller observes a request from
another controller on the bus in between issuing its coherence request and observing its own
coherence request on the bus.
       Taking the I-to-S transition as an example, the cache controller issues a GetS request
and changes the block’s state from I to ISAD . Until the requesting cache controller’s own GetS
is observed on the bus and serialized, the block’s state is effectively I. That is, the requestor’s
 Table 7.7: Simple snooping: Example execution. All activity is for one block.

                                                                                   Request on
      Cycle Core C1                  Core C2                    LLC/memory                    Data on Bus
                                                                                   Bus
      Initial   I                    I                          IorS
        1       Load miss;
                issue GetS/ISD
        2                                                                          GetS (CI)
        3                            Store miss; stall due to   Send response
                                     Atomic Transactions        to C1
        4                                                                                      Data from LLC/
                                                                                               mem
        5       Copy data to cache; Issue GetM/IMD
                perform load/S
        6                                                                          GetM (C2)
        7       -/I                                             Send response to
                                                                C2/M
        8                                                                                      Data from LLC/
                                                                                               mem
        9                            Copy data to cache;
                                     perform store/M
        10      Load miss:
                issue GetS/ISD
        11                                                                         GetS (C1)
        12                           Send data to C1 and        -/IorSD
                                     to LLC/mem/S
        13                                                                                     Data from C2
        14      Copy data from C2;                              Copy data from
                perform load/S                                  C2/IorS

 block is treated as if it were in I; loads and stores cannot be performed and coherence requests
 from other nodes must be ignored. Once the requestor observes its own GetS, the request is
 ordered and block is logically S, but loads cannot be performed because the data has not yet
 arrived. The cache controller changes the block’s state to ISD and waits for the data response
 from the previous owner. Because of the Atomic Transactions property, the data message is the
 next coherence message (to the same block). Once the data response arrives, the transaction is
 complete and the requestor changes the block’s state to the stable S state and performs the load.
 The I-to-M transition proceeds similarly to this I-to-S transition.
Table 7.8: MSI snooping protocol with atomic transactions-cache controller. A shaded entry
labeled “(A)” denotes that this transition is impossible because transactions are atomic on bus.

                                                                                                                             Other-GetM
                                            Replacement

                                                                                                                                          Other-PutM
                                                                                                          Other-GetS
                                                                        Own-GetM

                                                                                         Own-PutM
                                                           Own-GetS

                                                                                                                                          Own Data
                                                                                                                                          Response
                              Store
               Load
                 Issue
      Issue
I             AD GetM/                                                                              -                  -                  -
      GetS/IS
                 IMAD
ISAD Stall       Stall                Stall               -/ISD                                     -                  -                  -
ISD   Stall      Stall                Stall                                                         (A)                (A)                    -/S
IMAD Stall       Stall                Stall                           -/IMD                         -                  -                  -
IMD Stall        Stall                Stall                                                         (A)                (A)                    -/M
                 Issue
S     Hit        GetM/                -/I                                                           -                  -/I                -
                 SMAD
SM AD Hit        Stall                Stall                           -/SMD                      -                     -/IMAD             -
SMD Hit          Stall                Stall                                                      (A)                   (A)                    -/M
                                                                                                 Send data
                                      Issue
                                                                                                 to requestor          Send data to
M      Hit            Hit             PutM/                                                                                         -
                                                                                                 and to                requestor/I
                                      MIA
                                                                                                 memory/S
                                                                                                 Send data
                                                                                    Send data to to requestor          Send data to
MIA    Hit            Hit             Stall
                                                                                    memory/I     and to                requestor/IIA
                                                                                                 memory/IIA
                                                                                    Send
IIA    Stall          Stall           Stall                                         NoData to -                        -
                                                                                    memory/I

       The transition from S to M illustrates the potential for state changes to occur during the
window of vulnerability. If a core attempts to store to a block in state S, the cache controller
issues a GetM request and transitions to state SMAD . The block remains effectively in state S, so
loads may continue to hit and the controller ignores GetS requests from other cores. However,
if another core’s GetM request gets ordered first, the cache controller must transition the state
to IMAD to prevent further load hits. The window of vulnerability during the S-to-M transition
complicates the addition of an Upgrade transaction, as we discuss in the sidebar.
 Table 7.9: MSI snooping protocol with atomic transactions-memory controller. A shaded entry
 labeled “(A)” denotes that this transition is impossible because transactions are atomic on bus.

            GetS                     GetM                  PutM    Data from Owner    NoData
  IorS      Send data to re-         Send data to request- -/IorSD
            questor                  or/M
  IorSD (A)                          (A)                           Write data to LLC/ -/IorS
                                                                   memory/IorS
  M         -/IorSD                  -                     -/M D

  MD        (A)                      (A)                           Write data to LLC/ -/M
                                                                   IorS

                Sidebar: Upgrade Transactions in Systems Without Atomic Requests
      For the protocol with Atomic Requests, an Upgrade transaction is an efficient way for a cache
      to transition from Shared to Modified. The Upgrade request invalidates all shared copies,
      and it is much faster than issuing a GetM, because the requestor needs to wait only until
      the Upgrade is serialized (i.e., the bus arbitration latency) rather than wait for data to arrive
      from the LLC/memory.
             However, without Atomic Requests, adding an Upgrade transaction becomes more
      difficult because of the window of vulnerability between issuing a request and when the
      request is serialized. The requestor may lose its shared copy due to an Other-GetM or
      Other-Upgrade that is serialized during this window of vulnerability. The simplest solution
      to this problem is to change the block’s state to a new state in which it waits for its own
      Upgrade to be serialized. When its Upgrade is serialized, which will invalidate other S
      copies (if any) but will not return data, the core must then issue a subsequent GetM request
      to transition to M.
             Handling Upgrades more efficiently is difficult, because the LLC/memory needs to
      know when to send data. Consider the case in which cores C0 and C2 have a block A
      shared and both seek to upgrade it and, at the same time, core C1 seeks to read it. C0 and
      C2 issue Upgrade requests and C1 issues a GetS request. Suppose they serialize on the bus
      as C0, C1, and C2. C0’s Upgrade succeeds, so the LLC/memory (in state IorS) should
      change its state to M but not send any data, and C2 should invalidate its S copy. C1’s GetS
      finds the block in state M at C0, which responds with the new data value and updates the
      LLC/memory back to state IorS. C2’s Upgrade finally appears, but because it has lost its
      shared copy, it needs the LLC/memory to respond. Unfortunately, the LLC/memory is in
      state IorS and cannot tell that this Upgrade needs data. Alternatives exist to solve this issue,
      but are outside the scope of this primer.
        The window of vulnerability also affects the M-to-I coherence downgrade, in a much more
significant way. To replace a block in state M, the cache controller issues a PutM request and
changes the block state to MIA ; unlike the protocol in Section 7.2.2, it does not immediately
send the data to the memory controller. Until the PutM is observed on the bus, the block’s state
is effectively M and the cache controller must respond to other cores’ coherence requests for the
block. In the case where no intervening coherence requests arrive, the cache controller responds
to observing its own PutM by sending the data to the memory controller and changing the block
state to state I. If an intervening GetS or GetM request arrives before the PutM is ordered, the
cache controller must respond as if it were in state M and then transition to state IIA to wait for
its PutM to appear on the bus. Once it sees its PutM, intuitively, the cache controller should
simply transition to state I because it has already given up ownership of the block. Unfortunately,
doing so will leave the memory controller stuck in a transient state because it also receives the
PutM request. Nor can the cache controller simply send the data anyway because doing so might
overwrite valid data.5 The solution is for the cache controller to send a special NoData message
to the memory controller when it sees its PutM while in state IIA . The NoData message indicates
to the memory controller that it is coming from a non-owner and lets the memory controller
exit its transient state. The memory controller is further complicated by needing to know which
stable state it should return to if it receives a NoData message. We solve this problem by adding
a second transient memory state MD . Note that these transient states represent an exception to
our usual transient state naming convention. In this case, state XD indicates that the memory
controller should revert to state X when it receives a NoData message (and move to state IorS
if it receives a data message).

7.2.4 RUNNING EXAMPLE
Returning to the running example, illustrated in Table 7.10, core C1 issues a GetS and core
C2 issues a GetM. Unlike the previous example (in Table 7.7), eliminating the Atomic Requests
property means that both cores issue their requests and change their state. We assume that core
C1’s request happens to get serialized first, and the Atomic Transactions property ensures that C2’s
request does not appear on the bus until C1’s transaction completes. After the LLC/memory
responds to complete C1’s transaction, core C2’s GetM is serialized on the bus. C1 invalidates
its copy and the LLC/memory responds to C2 to complete that transaction. Lastly, C1 issues
another GetS. When this GetS reaches the bus, C2, the owner, responds with the data and
changes its state to S. C2 also sends a copy of the data to the memory controller because the
LLC/memory is now the owner and needs an up-to-date copy of the block. At the end of this
execution, C1 and C2 are in state S and the LLC/memory is in state IorS.

    5 Consider the case in which core C1 has a block in M and issues a PutM, but core C2 does a GetM and core C3 does a
GetS, both of which are ordered before C1’s PutM. C2 gets the block in M, modifies the block, and then in response to C3’s
GetS, updates the LLC/memory with the updated block. When C1’s PutM is finally ordered, writing the data back would
overwrite C2’s update.
 Table 7.10: Baseline snooping: Example execution

                                                                      Request on
  Cycle Core C1               Core C2                LLC/memory                      Data on Bus
                                                                      Bus
      1    Issue GetS/ISAD
      2                       Issue GetM/IMAD
      3                                                               GetS (C1)
           -/ISD                                     Send data to
      4
                                                     C1/IorS
                                                                                     Data from
      5
                                                                                     LLC/mem
           Copy data from                                             GetM (C2)
      6
           LLC/mem/S
           -/I                -/IMD                  Send data to
      7
                                                     C2/M
                                                                                     Data from
      8
                                                                                     LLC/mem
                              Copy data from
      9
                              LLC/mem/M
      10   Issue GetS/ISAD
      11                                                              GetS (C1)
           -/ISD              Send data to C1 and -/IorSD
      12
                              to LLC/mem/S
                                                                                     Data from
      13
                                                                                     C2
           Copy data from                            Copy data
      14
           C2/S                                      from C2/IorS

 7.2.5 PROTOCOL SIMPLIFICATIONS
 This protocol is relatively straightforward and sacrifices performance to achieve this simplicity.
 The most significant simplification is the use of atomic transactions on the bus. Having atomic
 transactions eliminates many possible transitions, denoted by “(A)” in the tables. For example,
 when a core has a cache block in state IMD , it is not possible for that core to observe a coherence
 request for that block from another core. If transactions were not atomic, such events could occur
 and would force us to redesign the protocol to handle them, as we show in Section 7.5.
      Another notable simplification that sacrifices performance involves the event of a store
request to a cache block in state S. In this protocol, the cache controller issues a GetM and
changes the block state to SMAD . A higher performance but more complex solution would use
an upgrade transaction, as discussed in the earlier sidebar.

7.3     ADDING THE EXCLUSIVE STATE
There are many important protocol optimizations, which we discuss in the next several sections.
More casual readers may want to skip or skim these sections on first reading. One very commonly
used optimization is to add the Exclusive (E) state, and in this section, we describe how to create
a MESI snooping protocol by augmenting the baseline protocol from Section 7.2.3 with the E
state. Recall from Chapter 6 that if a cache has a block in the Exclusive state, then the block
is valid, read-only, clean, exclusive (not cached elsewhere), and owned. A cache controller may
silently change a cache block’s state from E to M without issuing a coherence request.

7.3.1 MOTIVATION
The Exclusive state is used in almost all commercial coherence protocols because it optimizes a
common case. Compared to an MSI protocol, a MESI protocol offers an important advantage
in the situation in which a core first reads a block and then subsequently writes it. This is a typical
sequence of events in many important applications, including single-threaded applications. In
an MSI protocol, on a load miss, the cache controller will initiate a GetS transaction to obtain
read permission; on the subsequent store, it will then initiate a GetM transaction to obtain write
permission. However, a MESI protocol enables the cache controller to obtain the block in state
E, instead of S, in the case that the GetS occurs when no other cache has access to the block.
Thus, a subsequent store does not require the GetM transaction; the cache controller can silently
upgrade the block’s state from E to M and allow the core to write to the block. The E state can
thus eliminate half of the coherence transactions in this common scenario.

7.3.2 GETTING TO THE EXCLUSIVE STATE
Before explaining how the protocol works, we must first figure out how the issuer of a GetS
determines that there are no other sharers and thus that it is safe to go directly to state E instead
of state S. There are at least two possible solutions:
    • Adding a wired-OR “sharer” signal to bus: when the GetS is ordered on the bus, all cache
      controllers that share the block assert the “sharer” signal. If the requestor of the GetS
      observes that the “sharer” signal is asserted, the requestor changes its block state to S;
      else, the requestor changes its block state to E. The drawback to this solution is having
      to implement the wired-OR signal. This additional shared wire might not be problematic
      in this baseline snooping system model that already has a shared wire bus, but it would
      greatly complicate implementations that do not use shared wire buses (Section 7.6).
      • Maintaining extra state at the LLC: an alternative solution is for the LLC to distinguish
        between states I (no sharers) and S (one or more sharers), which was not needed for the
        MSI protocols. In state I, the memory controller responds with data that is specially labeled
        as being Exclusive; in state S, the memory controller responds with data that is unlabeled.
        However, maintaining the S state exactly is challenging, since the LLC must detect when
        the last sharer relinquishes its copy. First, this requires that a cache controller issues a PutS
        message when it evicts a block in state S. Second, the memory controller must maintain
        a count of the sharers as part of the state for that block. This is much more complex and
        bandwidth intensive than our previous protocols, which allowed for silent evictions of
        blocks in S. A simpler, but less complete, alternative allows the LLC to conservatively
        track sharers; that is, the memory controller’s state S means that there are zero-or-more
        caches in state S. The cache controller silently replaces blocks in state S, and thus the LLC
        stays in S even after the last sharer has been replaced. If a block in state M is written
        back (with a PutM), the state of the LLC block becomes I. This “conservative S” solution
        forgoes some opportunities to use the E state (i.e., when the last sharer replaces its copy
        before another core issues a GetM), but it avoids the need for explicit PutS transactions
        and still captures many important sharing patterns.

       In the MESI protocol we present in this section, we choose the most implementable
 option—maintaining a conservative S state at the LLC—to both avoid the engineering problems
 associated with implementing wired-OR signals in high-speed buses and avoid explicit PutS
 transactions.

 7.3.3 HIGH-LEVEL SPECIFICATION OF PROTOCOL
 In Figures 7.4 and 7.5, we show the transitions between stable states in the MESI protocol. The
 MESI protocol differs from the baseline MSI protocol at both the cache and LLC/memory. At
 the cache, a GetS request transitions to S or E, depending upon the state at the LLC/memory
 when the GetS is ordered. Then, from state E, the block can be silently changed to M. In this
 protocol, we use a PutM to evict a block in E, instead of using a separate PutE; this decision
 helps keep the protocol specification concise, and it has no impact on the protocol functionality.
        The LLC/memory has one more stable state than in the MSI protocol. The LLC/memory
 must now distinguish between blocks that are shared by zero or more caches (the conservative
 S state) and those that are not shared at all (I), instead of merging those into one single state as
 was done in the MSI protocol.
        In this primer, we consider the E state to be an ownership state, which has a significant
 effect on the protocol. There are, however, protocols that do not consider the E state to be an
 ownership state, and the sidebar discusses the issues involved in such protocols.

                    Other-GetM                                        Own-GetM
                                                  M
                        or
                    Own-PutM
                                      Other-GetS

                                                             silent
                                                                                Own-GetM
                                                  E

                                          Other-GetS
                        Other-GetM
                            or
                        Own-PutM
                                                                           Own-GetS
                                                  S                        (mem in I)
                                  Other-GetM
                                 or Replacement
                                     (silent)             Own-GetS
                                                          (mem not in I)

                                                  I

Figure 7.4: MESI: Transitions between stable states at cache controller.

                                                  EorM
                                        GetS
                                                           GetM

                                                      S
                                     PutM

                                                                        GetS
                                                      I               or GetM

Figure 7.5: MESI: Transitions between stable states at memory controller.

                   Sidebar: MESI Snooping if E is Non-ownership State
  If the E state is not considered an ownership state (i.e., a block in E is owned by the
  LLC/memory), then the protocol must figure out which coherence controller should re-
  spond to a request after the memory controller has given a block to a cache in state E. Be-

      cause the transition from state E to state M is silent, the memory controller cannot know
      whether the cache holds the block in E, in which case the LLC/memory is the owner, or
      in M, in which case the cache is the owner. If a GetS or GetM is serialized on the bus at
      this point, the cache can easily determine whether it is the owner and should respond, but
      the memory controller cannot make this same determination.
              One solution to this problem is to have the LLC/memory wait for the cache to re-
      spond. When a GetS or GetM is serialized on the bus, a cache with the block in state M
      responds with data. The memory controller waits a fixed amount of time and, if no response
      appears in that window of time, the memory controller deduces that it is the owner and that
      it must respond. If a response from a cache does appear, the memory controller does not
      respond to the coherence request. This solution has a couple drawbacks, including poten-
      tially increased latency for responses from memory. Some implementations hide some or
      all of this latency by speculatively prefetching the block from memory, at the expense of
      increased memory bandwidth, power, and energy. A more significant drawback is having
      to design the system such that the caches’ response latency is predictable and short.

 7.3.4 DETAILED SPECIFICATION
 In Tables 7.11 and 7.12, we present the detailed specification of the MESI protocol, including
 transient states. Differences with respect to the MSI protocol are highlighted with boldface font.
 The protocol adds to the set of cache states just the stable E state and the transient state EIA ,
 but there are several more LLC/memory states, including an extra transient state.
        This MESI protocol shares all of the same simplifications present in the baseline MSI
 protocol. Coherence transactions are still atomic, etc.

 7.3.5 RUNNING EXAMPLE
 We now return to the running example, illustrated in Table 7.13. The execution differs from the
 MSI protocol almost immediately. When C1’s GetS appears on the bus, the LLC/memory is
 in state I and can thus send C1 Exclusive data. C1 observes the Exclusive data on the bus and
 changes its state to E (instead of S, as in the MSI protocol). The rest of the execution proceeds
 similarly to the MSI example, with minor transient state differences.

 7.4        ADDING THE OWNED STATE
 A second important optimization is the Owned state, and in this section, we describe how
 to create a MOSI snooping protocol by augmenting the baseline protocol from Section 7.2.3
 with the O state. Recall from Chapter 6 that if a cache has a block in the Owned state, then
 the block is valid, read-only, dirty, and the cache is the owner, i.e., the cache must respond to

Table 7.11: MESI Snooping protocol—cache controller. A shaded entry labeled “(A)” denotes
that this transition is impossible because transactions are atomic on bus.

                                                                                                                                                Own Data Response

                                                                                                                                                                    Own Data Response
                                                                                                                     Other-GetM
                                      Replacement

                                                                                                                                  Other-PutM
                                                                                                  Other-GetS
                                                                                Own-PutM
                                                                 OwnGetM

                                                                                                                                                                    (exclusive)
                                                     OwnGetS
                        Store
         Load

     Issue      Issue
I    GetS/      GetM/                                                                       -                  -                  -
     ISAD       IMAD
ISAD Stall      Stall           Stall               -/ISD                                   -                  -                  -
ISD  Stall      Stall           Stall                                                       (A)                (A)                (A) -/S -/E
IMAD Stall      Stall           Stall                          -/IMD                        -                  -                  -
IMD Stall       Stall           Stall                                                       (A)                (A)                (A) -/M
                Issue
S     Hit       GetM/           -/I                                                         -                  -/I                -
                SMAD
SMAD Hit        Stall           Stall                          -/SMD                    -                      -/IMAD             -
SMD Hit         Stall           Stall                                                   (A)                    (A)                             -/M
                                                                                        Send data
                                Issue                                                                          Send data
                                                                                        to requestor
E     Hit       Hit/M           PutM/                                                                          to          -
                                                                                        and to
                                EIA                                                                            requestor/I
                                                                                        memory/S
                                                                                        Send data
                                Issue
                                                                                        to requestor           Send data to
M     Hit       Hit             PutM/                                                                                       -
                                                                                        and to                 requestor/I
                                MIA
                                                                                        memory/S
                                                                                        Send data
                                                                                                               Send data to
                                                                           Send data to to requestor
MIA   Hit       Hit             Stall                                                                          requestor/ -
                                                                           memory/I and to
                                                                                                               IIA
                                                                                        memory/IIA
                                                                                        Send data
                                                                           Send No-                            Send data to
                                                                                        to requestor
EIA   Hit       Stall           Stall                                      Data-E to                           requestor/ -
                                                                                        and to
                                                                           memory/I                            IIA
                                                                                        memory/IIA
                                                                           Send No-
IIA   Stall     Stall           Stall                                      Data to      -                      -                  -
                                                                           memory/I
 Table 7.12: MESI Snooping protocol—memory controller. A shaded entry labeled “(A)” de-
 notes that this transition is impossible because transactions are atomic on bus.

          GetS                  GetM                  PutM        Data         NoData NoData-E
          Send data to requestor Send data to requestor
  I                                                     -/ID
          /EorM                  /EorM
                                 Send data to requestor
  S       Send data to requestor                        -/SD
                                 /EorM
  EorM    -/SD                   -                      -/EorMD
                                                                  Write data to
  ID      (A)                   (A)                   (A)                       -/I      -/I
                                                                  memory/I
                                                                  Write data to
  SD      (A)                   (A)                   (A)                       -/S      -/S
                                                                  memory/S
                                                                  Write data to
  EorMD (A)                     (A)                   (A)                       -/EorM   -/I
                                                                  memory/I

 coherence requests for the block. We maintain the same system model as the baseline snooping
 MSI protocol; transactions are atomic but requests are not atomic.

 7.4.1 MOTIVATION
 Compared to an MSI or MESI protocol, adding the O state is advantageous in one specific and
 important situation: when a cache has a block in state M or E and receives a GetS from another
 core. In the MSI protocol of Section 7.2.3 and the MESI protocol of Section 7.3, the cache
 must change the block state from M or E to S and send the data to both the requestor and the
 memory controller. The data must be sent to the memory controller because the responding cache
 relinquishes ownership (by downgrading to state S) and the LLC/memory becomes the owner
 and thus must thus have an up-to-date copy of the data with which to respond to subsequent
 requests.
        Adding the O state achieves two benefits: (1) it eliminates the extra data message to update
 the LLC/memory when a cache receives a GetS request in the M (and E) state, and (2) it
 eliminates the potentially unnecessary write to the LLC (if the block is written again before
 being written back to the LLC). Historically, for multi-chip multiprocessors, there was a third
 benefit, which was that the O state allows subsequent requests to be satisfied by the cache instead
 of by the far-slower memory. Today, in a multicore with an inclusive LLC, as in the system model
 in this primer, the access latency of the LLC is not nearly as long as that of off-chip DRAM
 memory. Thus, having a cache respond instead of the LLC is not as big of a benefit as having a
 cache respond instead of memory.
        We now present a MOSI protocol and show how it achieves these two benefits.
Table 7.13: MESI: Example execution

                                                                Request on
 Cycle Core C1             Core C2              LLC/memory                    Data on Bus
                                                                Bus
   1    Issue GetS/ISAD
   2                       Issue GetM/IMAD
   3                                                            GetS (C1)
                                                Send exclu-
   4    -/ISD                                   sive data to
                                                C1/EorM
                                                                              Exclusive
   5                                                                          data from
                                                                              LLC/mem
        Copy data from
   6                                                            GetM (C2)
        LLC/mem /E
   7    Send data to C2/I -/MD                  -/EorM
   8                                                                           Data from C1
                           Copy data from
   9
                           C1/M
  10    Issue GetS/ISAD
  11                                                            GetS (C1)
                           Send data to C1
  12    -/ISD              and to               -/SD
                           LLC/mem /S
  13                                                                          Data from C2
        Copy data from                          Copy data
  14
        C2/S                                    from C2/S

7.4.2 HIGH-LEVEL PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
We specify a high-level view of the transitions between stable states in Figures 7.6 and 7.7.
The key difference is what happens when a cache with a block in state M receives a GetS from
another core. In a MOSI protocol, the cache changes the block state to O (instead of S) and
retains ownership of the block (instead of transferring ownership to the LLC/memory). Thus,
the O state enables the cache to avoid updating the LLC/memory.

                     Other-GetM                    M
                         or
                     Own-PutM
                                      Other-GetS                              Own-GetM
                                                       Own-GetM

                                                   O

                                  Other-GetM
                                      or
                                  Own-PutM
                                                                   Own-GetM
                                                   S

                                   Other-GetM
                                  or Replacement        Own-GetS
                                      (silent)

                                                   I

 Figure 7.6: MOSI: Transitions between stable states at cache controller.

                                                         MorO

                                                                 GetM
                                       PutM
                                                          IorS

 Figure 7.7: MOSI: Transitions between stable states at memory controller.

 7.4.3 DETAILED PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 In Tables 7.14 and 7.15, we present the detailed specification of the MOSI protocol, including
 transient states. Differences with respect to the MSI protocol are highlighted with boldface font.
 The protocol adds two transient cache states in addition to the stable O state. The transient
 OIA state helps handle replacements of blocks in state O, and the transient OMA state handles
 upgrades back to state M after a store. The memory controller has no additional transient states,
 but we rename what had been the M state to MorO because the memory controller does not
 need to distinguish between these two states.
Table 7.14: MOSI Snooping protocol—cache controller. A shaded entry labeled “(A)” denotes
that this transition is impossible because transactions are atomic on bus.

                                                                                                                                                   Own Data Response
                                                                                                                         Other-GetM
                                            Replacement

                                                                                                                                      Other-PutM
                                                                                                      Other-GetS
                                                                      Own-GetM

                                                                                     Own-PutM
                                                          Own-GetS
                            Store
I            Load
      Issue GetS Issue GetM
                                                                                                -                  -                  -
      /ISAD      /IMAD
ISAD Stall       Stall      Stall      -/ISD                                                    -                  -                  -
ISD   Stall      Stall      Stall                                                               (A)                (A)                (A) -/S
IMAD Stall       Stall      Stall            -/IMD                                              -                  -                  -
IMD Stall        Stall      Stall                                                               (A)                (A)                (A) -/M
                 Issue GetM
S     Hit                   -/I                                                                 -                  -/I                -
                 /SMAD
SM AD Hit        Stall      Stall            -/SMD                                              -                  -/IMAD             -
SM D  Hit        Stall      Stall                                                               (A)          (A)                      (A) -/M
                 Issue GetM Issue PutM                                                          Send data to Send data to
O     Hit                                                                                                                             -
                 /OMA       /OIA                                                                requestor    requestor/I
                                                                                                             Send data to
                                                                                                Send data to
OMA Hit             Stall           Stall                            -/M                                     requestor                -
                                                                                                requestor
                                                                                                             /IMAD
                                    IssuePutM                                                   Send data to Send data to
M      Hit          Hit                                                                                                   -
                                    /MIA                                                        requestor/O requestor/I
                                                                                 Send data Send data to
                                                                                                        Send data to
MIA    Hit          Hit             Stall                                        to memory requestor                   -
                                                                                               A        requestor /IIA
                                                                                 /I        /OI
                                                                                 Send data              Send data to
                                                                                           Send data to
OIA    Hit          Stall           Stall                                        to memory              requestor      -
                                                                                           requestor
                                                                                 /I                     /IIA
                                                                                 Send No-
IIA    Stall        Stall           Stall                                        Data to   -            -              -
                                                                                 memory/I

      To keep the specification as concise as possible, we consolidate the PutM and PutO trans-
actions into a single PutM transaction. That is, a cache evicts a block in state O with a PutM.
This decision has no impact on the protocol’s functionality, but does help to keep the tabular
specification readable.
      This MOSI protocol shares all of the same simplifications present in the baseline MSI
protocol. Coherence transactions are still atomic, etc.
 Table 7.15: MOSI Snooping protocol—memory controller. A shaded entry labeled “(A)” de-
 notes that this transition is impossible because transactions are atomic on bus.

             GetS                 GetM                 PutM         Data from Owner NoData
  IorS       Send data to         Send data to         -/IorSD
             requestor            requestor/MorO
  IorSD      (A)                  (A)                               Write data to        -/IorS
                                                                    memory/IorS
  MorO       -                    -                    -/MorOD
  MorOD      (A)                  (A)                               Write data to        -/MorO
                                                                    memory/IorS

 7.4.4 RUNNING EXAMPLE
 In Table 7.16, we return to the running example that we introduced for the MSI protocol. The
 example proceeds identically to the MSI example until C1’s second GetS appears on the bus.
 In the MOSI protocol, this second GetS causes C2 to respond to C1 and change its state to O
 (instead of S). C2 retains ownership of the block and does not need to copy the data back to the
 LLC/ memory (unless and until it evicts the block, not shown).

 7.5      NON-ATOMIC BUS
 The baseline MSI protocol, as well as the MESI and MOSI variants, all rely on the Atomic Trans-
 actions assumption. This atomicity greatly simplifies the design of the protocol, but it sacrifices
 performance.

 7.5.1 MOTIVATION
 The simplest way to implement atomic transactions is to use a shared-wire bus with an atomic
 bus protocol; that is, all bus transactions consist of an indivisible request-response pair. Having
 an atomic bus is analogous to having an unpipelined processor core; there is no way to overlap
 activities that could proceed in parallel. Figure 7.8 illustrates the operation of an atomic bus.
 Because a coherence transaction occupies the bus until the response completes, an atomic bus
 trivially implements atomic transactions. However, the throughput of the bus is limited by the
 sum of the latencies for a request and response (including any wait cycles between request and
 response, not shown). Considering that a response could be provided by off-chip memory, this
 latency bottlenecks bus performance.
         Figure 7.9 illustrates the operation of a pipelined, non-atomic bus. The key advantage is
 not having to wait for a response before a subsequent request can be serialized on the bus, and
 thus the bus can achieve much higher bandwidth using the same set of shared wires. How-
Table 7.16: MOSI: Example execution

                                                                     Request on
 Cycle Core C1 (C1)          Core C2 (C2)           LLC/memory                      Data on Bus
                                                                     Bus
 1       Issue GetS/ISAD
 2                           Issue GetM/IMAD
 3                                                                   GetS (C1)
                                                    Send data to
 4       -/ISD
                                                    C1/IorS
                                                                                    Data from
 5
                                                                                    LLC/mem
         Copy data from
 6                                                                   GetM (C2)
         LLC/mem /S
                                                    Send data to
 7       -/I                 -/IMD
                                                    C2/MorO
                                                                                    Data from
 8
                                                                                    LLC/mem
                             Copy data from
 9
                             LLC/mem /M
 10      Issue GetS/ISAD
 11                                                                  GetS (C1)
 12      -/ISD               Send data to C1/O -/MorO
 13                                                                                 Data from C2
         Copy data from
 14
         C2/S

ever, implementing atomic transactions becomes much more difficult (but not impossible). The
atomic transactions property restricts concurrent transactions to the same block, but not differ-
ent blocks. The SGI Challenge enforced atomic transactions on a pipelined bus using a fast table
lookup to check whether or not another transaction was already pending for the same block.

7.5.2 IN-ORDER VS. OUT-OF-ORDER RESPONSES
One major design issue for a non-atomic bus is whether it is pipelined or split-transaction. A
pipelined bus, as illustrated in Figure 7.9, provides responses in the same order as the requests. A

      Address Bus       Request 1                  Request 2                Request 3

       Data Bus                      Response 1                Response 2                 Response 3

 Figure 7.8: Atomic bus.

                    Address Bus     Request 1 Request 2 Request 3
                                               Response 1      Response 2    Response 3
                     Data Bus

 Figure 7.9: Pipelined (non-atomic) bus.

        Address Bus        Request 1 Request 2 Request 3

                                                       Response 2     Response 3        Response 1
         Data Bus

 Figure 7.10: Split transaction (non-atomic) bus.

 split-transaction bus, illustrated in Figure 7.10, can provide responses in an order different from
 the request order.
        The advantage of a split-transaction bus, with respect to a pipelined bus, is that a low-
 latency response does not have to wait for a long-latency response to a prior request. For example,
 if Request 1 is for a block owned by memory and not present in the LLC and Request 2 is for a
 block owned by an on-chip cache, then forcing Response 2 to wait for Response 1, as a pipelined
 bus would require, incurs a performance penalty.
        One issue raised by a split-transaction bus is matching responses with requests. With an
 atomic bus, it is obvious that a response corresponds to the most recent request. With a pipelined
 bus, the requestor must keep track of the number of outstanding requests to determine which
 message is the response to its request. With a split-transaction bus, the response must carry the
 identity of the request or the requestor.

 7.5.3 NON-ATOMIC SYSTEM MODEL
 We assume a system like the one illustrated in Figure 7.11. The request bus and the response
 bus are split and operate independently. Each coherence controller has connections to and from
 both buses, with the exception that the memory controller does not have a connection to make
 requests. We draw the FIFO queues for buffering incoming and outgoing messages because
 it is important to consider them in the coherence protocol. Notably, if a coherence controller
 stalls when processing an incoming request from the request bus, then all requests behind it

     Core                                                   Core

   Cache                                                  Cache
                      Cache                                                  Cache
  Controller                                             Controller

                                                                                       Request Bus
                                                                                       Response Bus

                                        Memory
                                        Controller              LLC

Figure 7.11: System model with split-transaction bus.

(serialized after the stalled request) will not be processed by that coherence controller until it
processes the currently stalled request. These queues are processed in a strict FIFO fashion,
regardless of message type or address.

7.5.4 AN MSI PROTOCOL WITH A SPLIT-TRANSACTION BUS
In this section, we modify the baseline MSI protocol for use in a system with a split-transaction
bus. Having a split-transaction bus does not change the transitions between stable states, but it
has a large impact on the detailed implementation. In particular, there are many more possible
transitions.
       In Tables 7.17 and 7.18, we specify the protocol. Several transitions are now possible that
were not possible with the atomic bus. For example, a cache can now receive an Other-GetS for
a block it has in state ISD . All of these newly possible transitions are for blocks in transient states
in which the cache is awaiting a data response; while waiting for the data, the cache first observes
another coherence request for the block. Recall from Section 7.1 that a transaction is ordered
based on when its request is ordered on the bus, not when the data arrives at the requestor.
Thus, in each of these newly possible transitions, the cache has already effectively completed
its transaction but just happens to not have the data yet. Returning to our example of ISD , the

 Table 7.17: MSI Snooping protocol with split-transaction bus—cache controller

                                                                                                                                                                 Own Data Response
                                                                                                                                                                 (for own request)
                                                              Own-GetS or

                                                                                                                                       Other-GetM
                                                Replacement

                                                                                                                                                    Other-PutM
                                                                                                                  Other-GetS
                                                              Own-GetM

                                                                              Own-GetM

                                                                                               Own-PutM
                                    Store
                     Load
             Issue GetS Issue GetM
      I                                                                                                   -                    -                    -
             /ISAD      /IMAD
      ISAD   Stall      Stall      Stall                      -/ISD                                       -                    -                    -            -/ISA
                                                                                                                                                                 Load
      ISD    Stall          Stall           Stall                                                         -                    Stall
                                                                                                                                                                 hit/S
                                                              Load
      ISA    Stall          Stall           Stall                                                         -                    -
                                                              hit/S
      IMAD Stall            Stall           Stall                           -/IMD                         -                    -                    -            -/IMA
                                                                                                                                                                 Store
      IMD    Stall          Stall           Stall                                                         Stall                Stall
                                                                                                                                                                 hit/M
                                                                            Store
      IMA    Stall          Stall           Stall                                                         -                    -
                                                                            hit/M
                            Issue GetM
      S      Hit                       -/I                                                                -                    -/I
                            /SMAD
      SMAD Hit              Stall      Stall                                -/SMD                         -                    -/IMAD                            -/SMA
                                                                                                                                                                 Store
      SMD    Hit            Stall           Stall                                                         Stall                Stall
                                                                                                                                                                 hit/M
                                                                            Store
      SMA    Hit            Stall           Stall                                                         -                    -/IMA
                                                                            hit/M
                                                                                                    Send data to
                                            Issue
                                                                                                    requestor and Send data to
      M      Hit            Hit             PutM
                                                                                                    to memory requestor /I
                                            /MIA
                                                                                                    /S
                                                                                                    Send data to
                                                                                         Send data                Send data to
                                                                                                    requestor and
      MIA    Hit            Hit             Stall                                        to re-                   requestor
                                                                                                    to memory
                                                                                         questor /I               /IIA
                                                                                                    /IIA

      IIA    Stall          Stall           Stall                                        -/I              -                    -                    -
Table 7.18: MSI Snooping protocol with split-transaction bus—memory controller

                                                    PutM from       PutM from
         GetS              GetM                                               Data
                                                    Owner           Non-Owner
         Send data to      Send data to                             -
 IorS    requestor         requestor, set Owner
                           to requestor/M
         Clear Owner       Set Owner to             Clear        -                  Write data to
 M
         /IorSD            requestor                Owner/IorS D                    memory/IorSA
         Stall             Stall                    Stall        -                  Write data to
 IorSD
                                                                                    memory/IorS
         Clear Owner       -                        Clear           -
 IorSA
         /IorS                                      Owner/IorS

cache block is effectively in S. Thus, the arrival of an Other-GetS in this state requires no action
to be taken because a cache with a block in S need not respond to an Other-GetS.
       The newly possible transitions other than the above example, however, are more compli-
cated. Consider a block in a cache in state IMD when an Other-GetS is observed on the bus.
The cache block is effectively in state M and the cache is thus the owner of the block but does
not yet have the block’s data. Because the cache is the owner, the cache must respond to the
Other-GetS, yet the cache cannot respond until it receives the data. The simplest solution to
this situation is for the cache to stall processing of the Other-GetS until the data response ar-
rives for its Own-GetM. At that point, the cache block will change to state M and the cache
will have valid data to send to the requestor of the Other-GetS.
       For the other newly possible transitions, at both the cache controller and the memory
controller, we also choose to stall until data arrives to satisfy the in-flight request. This is the
simplest approach, but it raises three issues. First, it sacrifices some performance, as we discuss
in the next section.
       Second, stalling raises the potential of deadlock. If a controller can stall on a message
while awaiting another event (message arrival), the architect must ensure that the awaited event
will eventually occur. Circular chains of stalls can lead to deadlock and must be avoided. In our
protocol in this section, controllers that stall are guaranteed to receive the messages that un-stall
them. This guarantee is easy to see because the controller has already seen its own request, the
stall only affects the request network, and the controller is waiting for a Data message on the
response network.
       The third issue raised by stalling coherence requests is that, perhaps surprisingly, it enables
a requestor to observe a response to its request before processing its own request. Consider the
 example in Table 7.19. Core C1 issues a GetM for block X and changes the state of X to IMAD .
 C1 observes its GetM on the bus and changes state to IMD . The LLC/memory is the owner of X
 and takes a long time to retrieve the data from memory and put it on the bus. In the meanwhile,
 core C2 issues a GetM for X that gets serialized on the bus but cannot be processed by C1 (i.e.,
 C1 stalls). C1 issues a GetM for block Y that then gets serialized on the bus. This GetM for Y
 is queued up behind the previously stalled coherence request at C1 (the GetM from C2) and
 thus C1 cannot process its own GetM for Y. However, the owner, C2, can process this GetM
 for Y and responds quickly to C1. Thus, C1 can observe the response to its GetM for Y before
 processing its request. This possibility requires the addition of transient states. In this example,
 core C1 changes the state of block Y from IMAD to IMA . Similarly, the protocol also needs to
 add transient states ISA and SMA . In these transient states, in which the response is observed
 before the request, the block is effectively in the prior state. For example, a block in IMA is
 logically in state I because the GetM has not been processed yet; the cache controller does not
 respond to an observed GetS or GetM if the block is in IMA . We contrast IMA with IMD —in
 IMD , the block is logically in M and the cache controller must respond to observed GetS or
 GetM requests once data arrives.
        This protocol has one other difference with respect to the previous protocols in this chap-
 ter, and the difference pertains to PutM transactions. The situation that is handled differently is
 when a core, say, core C1, issues a PutM, and a GetS or GetM from another core for the same
 block gets ordered before C1’s PutM. C1 transitions from state MIA to IIA before it observes
 its own PutM. In the atomic protocols earlier in this chapter, C1 observes its own PutM and
 sends a NoData message to the LLC/memory. The NoData message informs the LLC/memory
 that the PutM transaction is complete (i.e., it does not have to wait for data). C1 cannot send a
 Data message to the LLC/ memory in this situation because C1’s data are stale and the protocol
 cannot send the LLC/memory stale data that would then overwrite the up-to-date value of the
 data. In the non-atomic protocols in this chapter, we augment the state of each block in the
 LLC with a field that holds the identity of the current owner of the block. The LLC updates the
 owner field of a block on every transaction that changes the block’s ownership. Using the owner
 field, the LLC can identify situations in which a PutM from a non-owner is ordered on the bus;
 this is exactly the same situation in which C1 is in state IIA when it observes its PutM. Thus,
 the LLC knows what happened and C1 does not have to send a NoData message to the LLC.
 We chose to modify how PutM transactions are handled in the non-atomic protocols, compared
 to the atomic protocols, for simplicity. Allowing the LLC to directly identify this situation is
 simpler than requiring the use of NoData messages; with a non-atomic protocol, there can be a
 large number of NoData messages in the system and NoData messages can arrive before their
 associated PutM requests.

Table 7.19: Example: Response before request. Initially, block X is in state I in both caches and
block Y is in state M at core C2.

                                                                                   Request on Data on
 Cycle Core C1 (C1)                   Core C2 (C2)             LLC/memory
                                                                                   Bus        Bus
          X:I                         X:I                      X:I
Initial
          Y:I                         Y:M                      Y:M
          X: store miss; issue
   1
          GetM/IMAD
   2                                                                               X: GetM (C1)
                                                               X: process GetM
          X: process GetM (C1) /      X: process GetM (C1)     (C1) - LLC miss,
   3
          IMD                         - ignore                 start accessing X
                                                               from DRAM
                                      X: store miss; issue
   4
                                      GetM/ IMAD
          Y: store miss; issue
   5                                                                               X: GetM (C2)
          GetM/ IMAD
                                      X: process GetM (C2)     X: process GetM
   6      X: stall on GetM (C2)                                                Y: GetM (C1)
                                      / IMD                    (C2) - ignore
                                      Y: process GetM (C1)     Y: process GetM
   7      Y: queue GetM (C1)
                                      - send data to C1/I      (C1) - ignore
                                                                                                  Y: data from
   8
                                                                                                  C2
          Y: write data into cache/
   9
          IMA
                                                               X: LLC miss
  10                                                           completes, send
                                                               data to C1
                                                                                                  X: data from
  11
                                                                                                  LLC
          X: write data into
  12      cache/M;
          Perform store
          X: (unstall) process
  13      GetM (C2) - send data
          to C2/I
          Y: process (in-order)
                                                                                                  X: data from
  14      GetM (C1)/M ; per-
                                                                                                  C1
          form store
                                      X: write data into
  15
                                      cache/M; perform store
 7.5.5     AN OPTIMIZED, NON-STALLING MSI PROTOCOL WITH A
           SPLIT-TRANSACTION BUS
 As mentioned in the previous section, we sacrificed some performance by stalling on the newly
 possible transitions of the system with the split-transaction bus. For example, a cache with a
 block in state ISD stalled instead of processing an Other-GetM for that block. However, it
 is possible that there are one or more requests after the Other-GetM, to other blocks, that
 the cache could process without stalling. By stalling a request, the protocol stalls all requests
 after the stalled request and delays those transactions from completing. Ideally, we would like
 a coherence controller to process requests behind a request that is stalled, but recall that—to
 support a total order of memory requests—snooping requires coherence controllers to observe
 and process requests in the order received. Reordering is not allowed.
         The solution to this problem is to process all messages, in order, instead of stalling. Our
 approach is to add transient states that reflect messages that the coherence controller has received
 but must remember to complete at a later event. Returning to the example of a cache block in
 ISD , if the cache controller observes an Other-GetM on the bus, then it changes the block state
 to ISD I (which denotes “in I, going to S, waiting for data, and when data arrives will go to
 I”). Similarly, a block in IMD that receives an Other-GetS changes state to IMD S and must
 remember the requestor of the Other-GetS. When the data arrive in response to the cache’s
 GetM, the cache controller sends the data to the requestor of the Other-GetS and changes the
 block’s state to S.
         In addition to the proliferation of transient states, a non-stalling protocol introduces a
 potential livelock problem. Consider a cache with a block in IMD S that receives the data in
 response to its GetM. If the cache immediately changes the block state to S and sends the data to
 the requestor of the Other-GetS, it does not get to perform the store for which it originally issued
 its GetM. If the core then re-issues the GetM, the same situation could arise again and again,
 and the store might never perform. To guarantee that this livelock cannot arise, we require that
 a cache in ISD I, IMD I, IMD S, or IMD SI (or any comparable state in a protocol with additional
 stable coherence states) perform one load or store to the block when it receives the data for its
 request.6 After performing one load or store, it may then change state and forward the block to
 another cache. We defer a more in-depth treatment of livelock to Section 9.3.2.
         We present the detailed specification of the non-stalling MSI protocol in Tables 7.20
 and 7.21. The most obvious difference is the number of transient states. There is nothing in-
 herently complicated about any of these states, but they do add to the overall complexity of the
 protocol.
         We have not removed the stalls from the memory controller because it is not feasible.
 Consider a block in IorSD . The memory controller observes a GetM from core C1 and currently
 stalls.

      6 The load or store must be performed if and only if that load or store was the oldest load or store in program order when
 the coherence request was first issued. We discuss this issue in more detail in Section 9.3.2.

Table 7.20: Optimized MSI snooping with split-transaction bus—cache controller

                                                                                                                         Other-GetM
                                            Replacement

                                                                                                                                      Other-PutM
                                                                                                      Other-GetS
                                                                         Own-GetM

                                                                                       Own-PutM
                                                            Own-GetS

                                                                                                                                                        Own Data
                                                                                                                                                        Response
                                  Store
                   Load
           Issue GetS Issue GetM
  I                                                                                               -                -                  -
           /ISAD      /IMAD
      AD                                                         D
  IS       Stall      Stall      Stall                    -/IS                                    -                -                  -            -/ISA
  ISD      Stall      Stall      Stall                                                            -                -/ISDI                          Load hit/S
                                                          Load
  ISA      Stall          Stall           Stall                                                   -                .
                                                          Hit/S
      D
  IS I     Stall          Stall           Stall                                                   -                .                               Load hit/I
  IMAD     Stall          Stall           Stall                        -/IMD                      -                .                  -            -/IMA
  IMD      Stall          Stall           Stall                                                   -/IMDS           -/IMDI                          Store hit/M
                                                                       Store
  IMA      Stall          Stall           Stall                                                   -                -                  -
                                                                       hit/M
                                                                                                                                                   Store hit, send
  IMDI     Stall          Stall           Stall                                                   -                -                               data to GetM
                                                                                                                                                   requestor/I
                                                                                                                                                   Store hit, send data
  IMDS     Stall          Stall           Stall                                                   -                -/IMDSI                         to GetS requestor
                                                                                                                                                   and mem/S
                                                                                                                                                   Store hit, send
  IMDSI Stall             Stall           Stall                                                   -                -                               data to GetS re-
                                                                                                                                                   questor and mem/I
                          Issue GetM/
  S        Hit                        -/I                                                         -                -/I
                          SMAD
  SMAD     Hit            Stall       Stall                            -/SMD                      -                -/IMAD                          -/SMA
  SMD      Hit            Stall       Stall                                                       -/SMDS           -/SMDI                          Store hit/M
                                                                       Store
  SMA      Hit            Stall           Stall                                                   -                -/IMA
                                                                       hit/M
                                                                                                                                                   Store hit, send
  SMDI     Hit            Stall           Stall                                                   -                -                               data to GetM
                                                                                                                                                   requestor/I
                                                                                                                                                   Store hit, send data
  SMDS Hit                Stall           Stall                                                   -                -/SMDSI                         to GetS requestor
                                                                                                                                                   and mem/S
                                                                                                                                                   Store hit, send
  SMDSI Hit               Stall           Stall                                                   -                -                               data to GetS re-
                                                                                                                                                   questor and mem/I
                                          Issue                                               Send data to
                                                                                                                   Send data to
  M        Hit            Hit             PutM/                                               requestor and
                                                                                                                   requestor/I
                                          MIA                                                 to memory/S
                                                                                    Send      Send data to
                                                                                    data to requestor and          Send data to
  MIA      Hit            Hit             Stall
                                                                                    requestor to memory            requestor/IIA
                                                                                    /I        /IIA
  IIA      Stall          Stall           Stall                                     -/I       -                    -                  -
 Table 7.21: Optimized MSI snooping with split-transaction bus—memory controller

                                                         PutM from     PutM from
          GetS             GetM                                                  Data
                                                         Owner         Non-Owner
          Send data to     Send data to requestor, set                 -
  IorS
          requestor        Owner to requestor/M
          Clear Owner      Set Owner to requestor        Clear Owner   -          Write data to
  M
          /IorSD                                         /IorSD                   memory/IorSA
                                                                                  Write data to
  IorSD   Stall            Stall                         Stall         -
                                                                                  memory/IorS
          Clear Owner                                    Clear Owner
  IorSA                    -                                           -
          /IorS                                          /IorS

       However, it would appear that we could simply change the block’s state to IorSD M while
 waiting for the data. Yet, while in IorSD M, the memory controller could observe a GetS from
 core C2. If the memory controller does not stall on this GetS, it must change the block state
 to IorSD MIorSD . In this state, the memory controller could observe a GetM from core C3.
 There is no elegant way to bound the number of transient states needed at the LLC/memory
 to a small number (i.e., smaller than the number of cores) and so, for simplicity, we have the
 memory controller stall.

 7.6      OPTIMIZATIONS TO THE BUS INTERCONNECTION
          NETWORK
 So far in this chapter we have assumed system models in which there exists a single shared-
 wire bus for coherence requests and responses or dedicated shared-wire buses for requests and
 responses. In this section, we explore two other possible system models that enable improved
 performance.

 7.6.1 SEPARATE NON-BUS NETWORK FOR DATA RESPONSES
 We have emphasized the need of snooping systems to provide a total order of broadcast co-
 herence requests. The example in Table 7.2 showed how the lack of a total order of coherence
 requests can lead to incoherence. However, there is no such need to order coherence responses,
 nor is there a need to broadcast them. Thus, coherence responses could travel on a separate net-
 work that does not support broadcast or ordering. Such networks include crossbars, meshes,
 tori, butterflies, etc.
        There are several advantages to using a separate, non-bus network for coherence responses.
   • Implementability: it is difficult to implement high-speed shared-wire buses, particularly
     for systems with many controllers on the bus. Other topologies can use point-to-point
     links.
   • Throughput: a bus can provide only one response at a time. Other topologies can have
     multiple responses in-flight at a time.
   • Latency: using a bus for coherence responses requires that each response incur the latency
     to arbitrate for the bus. Other topologies can allow responses to be sent immediately with-
     out arbitration.

7.6.2 LOGICAL BUS FOR COHERENCE REQUESTS
Snooping systems require that there exist a total order of broadcast coherence requests. A shared-
wire bus for coherence requests is the most straightforward way to achieve this total order of
broadcasts, but it is not the only way to do so. There are two ways to achieve the same totally
ordered broadcast properties as a bus (i.e., a logical bus) without having a physical bus.
   • Other topologies with physical total order: a shared-wire bus is the most obvious topology
     for achieving a total order of broadcasts, but other topologies exist. One notable example
     is a tree with the coherence controllers at the leaves of the tree. If all coherence requests
     are unicasted to the root of the tree and then broadcast down the tree, then each coherence
     controller observes the same total order of coherence broadcasts. The serialization point in
     this topology is the root of the tree. Sun Microsystems used a tree topology in its Starfire
     multiprocessor [3], which we discuss in detail in Section 7.7.
   • Logical total order: a total order of broadcasts can be obtained even without a network
     topology that naturally provides such an order. The key is to order the requests in logical
     time. Martin et al. [6] designed a snooping protocol, called Timestamp Snooping, that
     can function on any network topology. To issue a coherence request, a cache controller
     broadcasts it to every coherence controller and labels the broadcast with the logical time at
     which the broadcast message should be ordered. The protocol must ensure that (a) every
     broadcast has a distinct logical time, (b) coherence controllers process requests in logical
     time order (even when they arrive out of this order in physical time), and (c) no request
     at logical time T can arrive at a controller after that controller has passed logical time T.
     Agarwal et al. proposed a similar scheme called In-Network Snoop Ordering (INSO) [1].

 Flashback to Quiz Question 7: A snooping cache coherence protocol requires the cores to
 communicate on a bus. True or false?
 Answer: False! Snooping requires a totally ordered broadcast network, but that functionality
 can be implemented without a physical bus.
 7.7     CASE STUDIES
 We present two examples of real-world snooping systems: the Sun Starfire E10000 and the IBM
 Power5.

 7.7.1 SUN STARFIRE E10000
 Sun Microsystems’s Starfire E10000 [3] is an interesting example of a commercial system with a
 snooping protocol. The coherence protocol itself is not that remarkable; the protocol is a typical
 MOESI snooping protocol with write-back caches. What distinguishes the E10000 is how it
 was designed to scale up to 64 processors. The architects innovated based on three important
 observations, which we discuss in turn.
         First, shared-wire snooping buses do not scale to large numbers of cores, largely due to
 electrical engineering constraints. In response to this observation, the E10000 uses only point-
 to-point links instead of buses. Instead of broadcasting coherence requests on physical (shared-
 wire) buses, the E10000 broadcasts coherence requests on a logical bus. The key insight behind
 snooping protocols is that they require a total order of coherence requests, but this total order
 does not require a physical bus. As illustrated in Figure 7.12, the E10000 implements a logical
 bus as a tree, in which the processors are the leaves. All links in the tree are point-to-point, thus
 eliminating the need for buses. A processor unicasts a request up to the top of the tree, where
 it is serialized and then broadcast down the tree. Because of the serialization at the root, the
 tree provides totally ordered broadcast. A given request may arrive at two processors at different
 times, which is fine; the important constraint is that the processors observe the same total order
 of requests.
         The second observation made by the E10000 architects is that greater coherence request
 bandwidth can be achieved by using multiple (logical) buses, while still maintaining a total order
 of coherence requests. The E10000 has four logical buses, and coherence requests are address-
 interleaved across them. A total order is enforced by requiring processors to snoop the logical
 buses in a fixed, pre-determined order.
         Third, the architects observed that data response messages, which are much larger than
 request messages, do not require the totally ordered broadcast network required for coherence
 requests.
         Many prior snooping systems implemented a data bus, which needlessly provides both
 broadcasting and total ordering, while limiting bandwidth. To improve bandwidth, the E10000
 implements the data network as a crossbar. Once again, there are point-to-point links instead of
 buses, and the bandwidth of the crossbar far exceeds what would be possible with a bus (physical
 or logical).
         The architecture of the E10000 has been optimized for scalability, and this optimized
 design requires the architects to reason about non-atomic requests and non-atomic transactions.
                                           Root of Logical Bus
                           Broadcast                                Broadcast
                         Request Down              Switch         Request Down

                                        Unicast
                     Switch             Request                           Switch
                                        up to Root

         Switch                   Switch                      Switch                  Switch

  Proc            Proc     Proc             Proc       Proc            Proc    Proc            Proc

                                        Crossbar Data Network

Figure 7.12: Starfire E10000 (drawn with only eight processors for clarity). A coherence request
is unicast up to the root, where it is serialized, before being broadcast down to all processors.

7.7.2 IBM POWER5
The IBM Power5 [8] is a 2-core chip in which both cores share an L2 cache. Each Power5 chip
has a fabric bus controller (FBC) that enables multiple Power5 chips to be connected together to
create larger systems. Large systems contain up to eight nodes, where each node is a multi-chip
module (MCM) with four Power5 chips.
        Viewed abstractly, the IBM Power5 appears to use a fairly typical MESI snooping proto-
col implemented atop a split-transaction bus. However, this simplistic description misses several
unique features that are worth discussing. In particular, we focus on two aspects: the ring topol-
ogy of the interconnection network and the addition of novel variants of the MESI coherence
states.

Snooping Coherence on a Ring
The Power5 uses an interconnection network that is quite different from what we have discussed
thus far, and these differences have important impacts on the coherence protocol. Most signif-
icantly, the Power5 connects nodes with three unidirectional rings, which are used for carrying
three types of messages: requests, snoop responses/decision messages, and data. Unidirectional
rings do not provide a total order, unless all messages are required to start from the same node
on the ring, which the Power5 does not. Rather, the requestor sends a request message around
the ring and then absorbs the request when it sees it arrive back after traveling the entire ring.
Each node observes the request on the ring and every processor in the node determines its snoop
 response. The first node to observe the request provides a single snoop response that is the ag-
 gregated snoop response of all of the processors on that node. A snoop response is not an actual
 data response, but rather a description of the action the chip or node would take. Without a
 totally ordered network, the chips/nodes cannot immediately act because they might not make
 consistent decisions about how to respond. The snoop response travels on the snoop response
 ring to the next node. This node similarly produces a single snoop response that aggregates the
 snoop response of the first node plus the snoop responses of all processors on the second node.
 When the aggregated snoop response of all nodes reaches the requestor chip, the requestor chip
 determines what every processor should do to respond to the request. The requestor chip broad-
 casts this decision along the ring to every node. This decision message is processed by every
 node/chip in the ring, and the node/chip that has been determined to be the one to provide a
 data response sends that data response on the data ring to the requestor.
        This protocol is far more complicated than typical snooping protocols because of the lack
 of a totally ordered interconnection network. The protocol still has a total logical order of co-
 herence requests, but without a totally ordered network, a node cannot immediately respond to
 a request because the request’s position in the total order has not yet been determined by when
 it appears on the network. Despite the complexity, the Power5 design offers the advantages of
 having only point-to-point links and the simplicity of the ring topology (e.g., routing in a ring is
 so simple that switching can be faster than for other topologies). There have been other protocols
 that have exploited ring topologies and explored ordering issues for rings [2, 4, 7].

 Extra Variants of Coherence States
 The Power5 protocol is fundamentally a MESI protocol, but it has several “flavors” of some of
 these states. We list all of the states in Table 7.22. There are two new states that we wish to
 highlight. First, there is the SL variant of the Shared state. If an L2 cache holds a block in
 state SL, it may respond with data to a GetS from a processor on the same node, thus reducing
 this transaction’s latency and reducing off-chip bandwidth demand; this ability to provide data
 distinguishes SL from S.
        The other interesting new state is the T(agged) state. A block enters the T state when it
 is in Modified and receives a GetS request. Instead of downgrading to S, which it would do in
 a MESI protocol, or O, which it would do in a MOSI protocol, the cache changes the state to
 T. A block in state T is similar to the O state, in that it has a value that is more recent than the
 value in memory, and there may or may not be copies of the block in state S in other caches.
 Like the O state, the block may be read in the T state. Surprisingly, the T state is sometimes
 described as being a read-write state, which violates the SWMR invariant. Indeed, a store to
 state T may be performed immediately, and thus indeed violates the SWMR invariant in real
 (physical) time. However, the protocol still enforces the SWMR invariant in a logical time based
 on ring-order. Although the details of this ordering are beyond the scope of this primer, we
 think it helps to think of the T state as a variation on the E state. Recall that the E state allows
Table 7.22: Power5 L2 cache coherence states

 State    Permissions    Description
 I        None           Invalid
 S        Read-only      Shared
 SL       Read-only      Shared local data source, but can respond with data to requests from
                         processors in same node (sometimes referred to as F state, as in Intel
                         QuickPath protocol (Section 8.8.4))
 S(S)     Read-only      Shared
 Me (E)   Read-write     Exclusive
 M (M)    Read-write     Modified
 Mu       Read-write     Modified                             read-write data in response to read-
                         only request
 T        Read-only      T               M, received GetS. T is sometimes described as being a
                         read-write state, which violates the SWMR invariant since there are
                         also blocks in state S. A better way to think of T is that it is like E: it
                         can immediately transition to M. However, unlike E, this transition
                         is not silent: a store to a block in T state immedidately transitions to
                         M but (atomically) issues an invalidation message on the ring. Al-
                         though other caches may race with this request, the T state has prior-
                         ity, and thus is guaranteed to be ordered first and thus does not need
                         to wait for the invalidations to complete.

a silent transition to M; thus a store to a block in state E may be immediately performed, so
long as the state (atomically) transitions to state M. The T state is similar; a store in state T
immediately transitions to state M. However, because there may also be copies in state S, a
store in state T also causes the immediate issue of an invalidation message on the ring. Other
cores may be attempting to upgrade from I or S to M, but the T state acts as the coherence
ordering point and thus has priority and need not wait for an acknowledgment. It is not clear
that this protocol is sufficient to support strong memory consistency models such as SC and
TSO; however, as we discussed in Chapter 5, the Power memory model is one of the weakest
memory consistency models. This Tagged state optimizes the common scenario of producer-
consumer sharing, in which one thread writes a block and one or more other threads then read
that block. The producer can re-obtain read-write access without having to wait as long each
time.
 7.8        DISCUSSION AND THE FUTURE OF SNOOPING
 Snooping systems were prevalent in early multiprocessors because of their reputed simplicity and
 because their lack of scalability did not matter for the relatively small systems that dominated
 the market. Snooping also offers performance advantages for non-scalable systems because every
 snooping transaction can be completed with two messages, which we will contrast against the
 three-message transactions of directory protocols.
        Despite its advantages, snooping is no longer commonly used. Even for small-scale sys-
 tems, where snooping’s lack of scalability is not a concern, snooping is no longer common.
 Snooping’s requirement of a totally ordered broadcast network is just too costly, compared to
 the low-cost interconnection networks that suffice for directory protocols. Furthermore, for scal-
 able systems, snooping is clearly a poor fit. Systems with very large numbers of cores are likely to
 be bottlenecked by both the interconnection network bandwidth needed to broadcast requests
 and the coherence controller bandwidth required to snoop every request. For such systems, a
 more scalable coherence protocol is required, and it is this need for scalability that originally
 motivated the directory protocols we present in the next chapter.
        Snooping could be part of the solution though, even for scalable systems. As we will see in
 Section 9.1.6, one powerful technique for tackling scale is to divide and conquer. For example, a
 system consisting of multiple multicore chips could be kept coherent using a snooping coherence
 protocol within a chip and a scalable directory protocol across the chips.

 7.9        REFERENCES
      [1] N. Agarwal, L.-S. Peh, and N. K. Jha. In-network snoop ordering (INSO): Snoopy
          coherence on unordered interconnects. In Proc. of the 14th International Sympo-
          sium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, pp. 67–78, February 2009. DOI:
          10.1109/hpca.2009.4798238. 143

      [2] L. A. Barroso and M. Dubois. Cache coherence on a slotted ring. In Proc. of the 20th
          International Conference on Parallel Processing, August 1991. 146

      [3] A. Charlesworth. Starfire: Extending the SMP envelope. IEEE Micro, 18(1):39–49, Jan-
          uary/February 1998. DOI: 10.1109/40.653032. 143, 144

      [4] S. Frank, H. Burkhardt, III, and J. Rothnie. The KSR1: Bridging the gap between shared
          memory and MPPs. In Proc. of the 38th Annual IEEE Computer Society Computer Conference
          (COMPCON), pp. 285–95, February 1993. DOI: 10.1109/cmpcon.1993.289682. 146

      [5] M. Galles and E. Williams. Performance optimizations, implementation, and verification
          of the SGI Challenge multiprocessor. In Proc. of the Hawaii International Conference on
          System Sciences, 1994. DOI: 10.1109/hicss.1994.323177. 114
[6] M. M. K. Martin, D. J. Sorin, A. Ailamaki, A. R. Alameldeen, R. M. Dickson, C. J.
    Mauer, K. E. Moore, M. Plakal, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood. Timestamp snooping: An
    approach for extending SMPs. In Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Architectural
    Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pp. 25–36, November 2000.
    DOI: 10.1145/378993.378998. 143
[7] M. R. Marty and M. D. Hill. Coherence ordering for ring-based chip multiprocessors. In
    Proc. of the 39th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, Decem-
    ber 2006. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2006.14. 146
[8] B. Sinharoy, R. N. Kalla, J. M. Tendler, R. J. Eickemeyer, and J. B. Joyner. POWER5 sys-
    tem microarchitecture. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 49(4/5), July/September
    2005. DOI: 10.1147/rd.494.0505. 145
