
                                  CHAPTER                        8

Directory Coherence Protocols
In this chapter, we present directory coherence protocols. Directory protocols were originally
developed to address the lack of scalability of snooping protocols. Traditional snooping systems
broadcast all requests on a totally ordered interconnection network and all requests are snooped
by all coherence controllers. By contrast, directory protocols use a level of indirection to avoid
both the ordered broadcast network and having each cache controller process every request.
       We first introduce directory protocols at a high level (Section 8.1). We then present a
system with a complete but unsophisticated three-state (MSI) directory protocol (Section 8.2).
This system and protocol serve as a baseline upon which we later add system features and protocol
optimizations. We then explain how to add the Exclusive state (Section 8.3) and the Owned
state (Section 8.4) to the baseline MSI protocol. Next we discuss how to represent the directory
state (Section 8.5) and how to design and implement the directory itself (Section 8.6). We
then describe techniques for improving performance and reducing the implementation costs
(Section 8.7). We then discuss commercial systems with directory protocols (Section 8.8) before
concluding the chapter with a discussion of directory protocols and their future (Section 8.9).
       Those readers who are content to learn just the basics of directory coherence protocols can
skim or skip Section 8.3 through Section 8.7, although some of the material in these sections
will help the reader to better understand the case studies in Section 8.8.

8.1     INTRODUCTION TO DIRECTORY PROTOCOLS
The key innovation of directory protocols is to establish a directory that maintains a global view
of the coherence state of each block. The directory tracks which caches hold each block and in
what states. A cache controller that wants to issue a coherence request (e.g., a GetS) sends it
directly to the directory (i.e., a unicast message), and the directory looks up the state of the block
to determine what actions to take next. For example, the directory state might indicate that the
requested block is owned by core C2’s cache and thus the request should be forwarded to C2
(e.g., using a new Fwd-GetS request) to obtain a copy of the block. When C2’s cache controller
receives this forwarded request, it unicasts a response to the requesting cache controller.
        It is instructive to compare the basic operation of directory protocols and snooping proto-
cols. In a directory protocol, the directory maintains the state of each block, and cache controllers
send all requests to the directory. The directory either responds to the request or forwards the
request to one or more other coherence controllers that then respond. Coherence transactions
typically involve either two steps (a unicast request, followed by a unicast response) or three
 steps (a unicast request, K ? 1 forwarded requests, and K responses, where K is the number of
 sharers). Some protocols even have a fourth step, either because responses indirect through the
 directory or because the requestor notifies the directory on transaction completion. In contrast,
 snooping protocols distribute a block’s state across potentially all of the coherence controllers.
 Because there is no central summary of this distributed state, coherence requests must be broad-
 cast to all coherence controllers. Snooping coherence transactions thus always involve two steps
 (a broadcast request, followed by a unicast response).
        Like snooping protocols, a directory protocol needs to define when and how coherence
 transactions become ordered with respect to other transactions. In most directory protocols,
 a coherence transaction is ordered at the directory. Multiple coherence controllers may send
 coherence requests to the directory at the same time, and the transaction order is determined by
 the order in which the requests are serialized at the directory. If two requests race to the directory,
 the interconnection network effectively chooses which request the directory will process first.
 The fate of the request that arrives second is a function of the directory protocol and what types
 of requests are racing. The second request might get (a) processed immediately after the first
 request, (b) held at the directory while awaiting the first request to complete, or (c) negatively
 acknowledged (NACKed). In the latter case, the directory sends a negative acknowledgment
 message (NACK) to the requestor, and the requestor must re-issue its request. In this chapter,
 we do not consider protocols that use NACKs, but we do discuss the possible use of NACKs
 and how they can cause livelock problems in Section 9.3.2.
        Using the directory as the ordering point represents another key difference between di-
 rectory protocols and snooping protocols. Traditional snooping protocols create a total order
 by serializing all transactions on the ordered broadcast network. Snooping’s total order not only
 ensures that each block’s requests are processed in per-block order but also facilitates implement-
 ing a memory consistency model. Recall that traditional snooping protocols use totally ordered
 broadcast to serialize all requests; thus, when a requestor observes its own coherence request this
 serves as notification that its coherence epoch may begin. In particular, when a snooping con-
 troller sees its own GetM request, it can infer that other caches will invalidate their S blocks. We
 demonstrated in Table 7.4 that this serialization notification is sufficient to support the strong
 SC and TSO memory consistency models.
        In contrast, a directory protocol orders transactions at the directory to ensure that con-
 flicting requests are processed by all nodes in per-block order. However, the lack of a total order
 means that a requestor in a directory protocol needs another strategy to determine when its re-
 quest has been serialized and thus when its coherence epoch may safely begin. Because (most)
 directory protocols do not use totally ordered broadcast, there is no global notion of serialization.
 Rather, a request must be individually serialized with respect to all the caches that (may) have a
 copy of the block. Explicit messages are needed to notify the requestor that its request has been
 serialized by each relevant cache. In particular, on a GetM request, each cache controller with a
shared (S) copy must send an explicit acknowledgment (Ack) message once it has serialized the
invalidation message.
       This comparison between directory and snooping protocols highlights the fundamental
trade-off between them. A directory protocol achieves greater scalability (i.e., because it re-
quires less bandwidth) at the cost of a level of indirection (i.e., having three steps, instead of two
steps, for some transactions). This additional level of indirection increases the latency of some
coherence transactions.

8.2        BASELINE DIRECTORY SYSTEM
In this section, we present a baseline system with a straightforward, modestly optimized direc-
tory protocol. This system provides insight into the key features of directory protocols while
revealing inefficiencies that motivate the features and optimizations presented in subsequent
sections of this chapter.

8.2.1 DIRECTORY SYSTEM MODEL
We illustrate our directory system model in Figure 8.1. Unlike for snooping protocols, the topol-
ogy of the interconnection network is intentionally vague. It could be a mesh, torus, or any other
topology that the architect wishes to use. One restriction on the interconnection network that
we assume in this chapter is that it enforces point-to-point ordering. That is, if controller A
sends two messages to controller B, then the messages arrive at controller B in the same order in
which they were sent.1 Having point-to-point ordering reduces the complexity of the protocol,
and we defer a discussion of networks without ordering until Section 8.7.3.
       The only differences between this directory system model and the baseline system model
in Figure 2.1 is that we have added a directory and we have renamed the memory controller
to be the directory controller. There are many ways of sizing and organizing the directory, and
for now we assume the simplest model: for each block in memory, there is a corresponding
directory entry. In Section 8.6, we examine and compare more practical directory organization
options. We also assume a monolithic LLC with a single directory controller; in Section 8.7.1,
we explain how to distribute this functionality across multiple banks of an LLC and multiple
directory controllers.

8.2.2 HIGH-LEVEL PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
The baseline directory protocol has only three stable states: MSI. A block is owned by the di-
rectory controller unless the block is in a cache in state M. The directory state for each block
includes the stable coherence state, the identity of the owner (if the block is in state M), and the

     1 Strictly speaking, we require point-to-point order for only certain types of messages, but this is a detail that we defer
until Section 8.7.3.

              Core                                                   Core

                               Private                                              Private
            Cache                                                 Cache
                              Data (L1)                                            Data (L1)
           Controller                                            Controller
                               Cache                                                Cache

                                     Interconnection Network

         LLC/Directory            Last-level        Directory
           Controller              Cache

                                                                   Multicore Processor Chip

                     Main Memory

Figure 8.1: Directory system model.

 identities of the sharers encoded as a one-hot bit vector (if the block is in state S). We illustrate a
 directory entry in Figure 8.2. In Section 8.5, we will discuss other encodings of directory entries.

          2-bit   Log2N-bit                     N-bit

          State      Owner                      Sharer List (one-hot bit vector)

Figure 8.2: Directory entry for a block in a system with N nodes.

        Before presenting the detailed specification, we first illustrate a higher level abstraction
 of the protocol in order to understand its fundamental behaviors. In Figure 8.3, we show the
 transactions in which a cache controller issues coherence requests to change permissions from
 I to S, I or S to M, M to I, and S to I. As with the snooping protocols in the last chapter, we
 specify the directory state of a block using a cache-centric notation (e.g., a directory state of M
 denotes that there exists a cache with the block in state M). Note that a cache controller may
 not silently evict a Shared block; that is, there is an explicit PutS request. We defer a discussion
of protocols with silent evictions of shared blocks, as well as a comparison of silent vs. explicit
PutS requests, until Section 8.7.4.
       Most of the transactions are fairly straightforward, but two transactions merit further
discussion here. The first is the transaction that occurs when a cache is trying to upgrade per-
missions from I or S to M and the directory state is S. The cache controller sends a GetM to the
directory, and the directory takes two actions. First, it responds to the requestor with a message
that includes the data and the “AckCount;” the AckCount is the number of current sharers of
the block. The directory sends the AckCount to the requestor to inform the requestor of how
many sharers must acknowledge having invalidated their block in response to the GetM. Sec-
ond, the directory sends an Invalidation (Inv) message to all of the current sharers. Each sharer,
upon receiving the Invalidation, sends an Invalidation-Ack (Inv-Ack) to the requestor. Once
the requestor receives the message from the directory and all of the Inv-Ack messages, it com-
pletes the transaction. The requestor, having received all of the Inv-Ack messages, knows that
there are no longer any readers of the block and thus it may write to the block without violating
coherence.
       The second transaction that merits further discussion occurs when a cache is trying to
evict a block in state M. In this protocol, we have the cache controller send a PutM message
that includes the data to the directory. The directory responds with a Put-Ack. If the PutM
did not carry the data with it, then the protocol would require a third message—a data message
from the cache controller to the directory with the evicted block that had been in state M—to be
sent in a PutM transaction. The PutM transaction in this directory protocol differs from what
occurred in the snooping protocol, in which a PutM did not carry data.

8.2.3 AVOIDING DEADLOCK
In this protocol, the reception of a message can cause a coherence controller to send another
message. In general, if event A (e.g., message reception) can cause event B (e.g., message send-
ing) and both these events require resource allocation (e.g., network links and buffers), then
we must be careful to avoid deadlock that could occur if circular resource dependences arise.
For example, a GetS request can cause the directory controller to issue a Fwd-GetS message;
if these messages use the same resources (e.g., network links and buffers), then the system can
potentially deadlock. In Figure 8.4, we illustrate a deadlock in which two coherence controllers
C1 and C2 are responding to each other’s requests, but the incoming queues are already full of
other coherence requests. If the queues are FIFO, then the responses cannot pass the requests.
Because the queues are full, each controller stalls trying to send a response. Because the queues
are FIFO, the controller cannot switch to work on a subsequent request (or get to the response).
Thus, the system deadlocks.
       A well-known solution for avoiding deadlock in coherence protocols is to use separate
networks for each class of message. The networks can be physically separate or logically sepa-
rate (called virtual networks), but the key is avoiding dependences between classes of messages.

                   (1) GetS                              (1) GetS   (2) Fwd-GetS

             Req               Dir               Req             Dir              Owner
             I→S              I→S                I→S            M→S               M→S
                              S→S                                      (3) Data

                   (2) Data
                                                                (3) Data
                                           Transitions from I to S

                   (1) GetM                              (1) GetM (2) Fwd-GetM

             Req               Dir                Req            Dir           Owner
            I→M               I→M                I→M            M→M            M→I

               (2) Data[ack=0]
                                                             (3) Data[ack=0]
                               (3) Inv-Ack
                   (1) GetM          (2) Inv
                                                Sharer
             Req                                 S→I       The only sharer might be the requestor,
            I→M            Dir                             in which case no Invalidation messages
            S→M           S→M                              are sent and the Data message from
                                      (2) Inv   Sharer     the Dir to Req has an AckCount of zero.
                 (2) Data[ack>0]                 S→I

                               (3) Inv-Ack
                                        Transitions from I or S to M

               (1) PutM+data                                                      (1) PutS

                                                                                              Dir
            Req               Dir                                          Req
                                                                                             S→I
            M→I               M→I                                          S→I
                                                                                             S→S

                (2) Put-Ack                                                    (2) Put-Ack
                                        Transitions from M or S to I

Figure 8.3: High-level description of MSI directory protocol. In each transition, the cache con-
 troller that requests the transaction is denoted “Req.”
                      Full of Requests
                                                        Data Response
                                             C1

                                                          Full of Requests
                      Data Response
                                             C2

Figure 8.4: Deadlock example.

                                                        Data Response
                                              C1
                      Full of Requests

                                                          Full of Requests

                                              C2
                      Data Response

Figure 8.5: Avoiding deadlock with separate networks.

Figure 8.5 illustrates a system in which request and response messages travel on separate phys-
ical networks. Because a response cannot be blocked by another request, it will eventually be
consumed by its destination node, breaking the cyclic dependence.
       The directory protocol in this section uses three networks to avoid deadlock. Because a
request can cause a forwarded request and a forwarded request can cause a response, there are
three message classes that each require their own network. Request messages are GetS, GetM,
and PutM. Forwarded request messages are Fwd-GetS, Fwd-GetM, Inv(alidation), and Put-
Ack. Response messages are Data and Inv-Ack. The protocols in this chapter require that the
Forwarded Request network provides point-to-point ordering; other networks have no order-
ing constraints nor are there any ordering constraints between messages traveling on different
networks.
       We defer a more thorough discussion of deadlock avoidance, including more explanation
of virtual networks and the exact requirements for avoiding deadlock, until Section 9.3.
 8.2.4 DETAILED PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 We present the detailed protocol specification, including all transient states, in Tables 8.1
 and 8.2. Compared to the high-level description in Section 8.2.2, the most significant difference
 is the transient states. The coherence controllers must manage the states of blocks that are in
 the midst of coherence transactions, including situations in which a cache controller receives a
 forwarded request from another controller in between sending its coherence request to the direc-
 tory and receiving all of its necessary response messages, including Data and possible Inv-Acks.
 The cache controllers can maintain this state in the miss status handling registers (MSHRs)
 that cores use to keep track of outstanding coherence requests. Notationally, we represent these
 transient states in the form XYAD , where the superscript A denotes waiting for acknowledg-
 ments and the superscript D denotes waiting for data. (This notation differs from the snooping
 protocols, in which the superscript A denoted waiting for a request to appear on the bus.)

Table 8.1: MSI directory protocol—cache controller

                                                                                                                                              Last-Inv-Ack
                                Replacement

                                                         Fwd-GetM

                                                                                            Dir (ack=0)

                                                                                                          Dir (ack>0)
                                              Fwd-GetS

                                                                                            Data from

                                                                                                          Data from

                                                                                                                        Data from
                                                                                  Put-Ack

                                                                                                                                    Inv-Ack
                                                                                                                        Owner
                    Store
           Load

                                                                      Inv
  I       Send GetS Send
          to Dir/ISD GetM to
                     Dir/IMAD
  ISD     Stall      Stall      Stall                                 Stall                 -/S                 -/S
  IMAD    Stall      Stall      Stall      Stall         Stall                              -/M           -/IMA -/M                 ack--
  IMA     Stall      Stall      Stall      Stall         Stall                                                                      ack-- -/M
  S       Hit        Send       Send PutS                             Send Inv-
                     GetM to    to Dir/SIA                            Ack to
                     Dir/SMAD                                         Req/I
  SMAD    Hit        Stall      Stall         Stall      Stall        Send Inv-             -/M           -/SMA                     ack--
                                                                      Ack to
                                                                      Req/IMAD
  SMA     Hit       Stall       Stall     Stall          Stall                                                                      ack-- -/M
  M       Hit       Hit         Send PutM Send data      Send data
                                +data to  to Req and     to Req/I
                                Dir/MIA   Dir/S
  MIA     Stall     Stall       Stall     Send data      Send data                -/I
                                          to Req and     to Req/IIA
                                          Dir/SIA
  SIA     Stall     Stall       Stall                                 Send Inv-   -/I
                                                                      Ack to
                                                                      Req/IIA
  IIA     Stall     Stall       Stall                                             -/I
Table 8.2: MSI directory protocol—directory controller

                                                                        Put M+         PutM+data
                                        PutS-
      GetS             GetM                             PutS-Last       data from      from Non-       Data
                                        NotLast
                                                                        Owner          Owner
 I    Send data to     Send data to     Send Put-Ack    Send Put-Ack                   Send Put-Ack
      Req, add Req     Req, set Owner   to Req          to Req                         to Req
      to Sharers/S     to Req/M
 S    Send data to     Send data to     Remove Req      Remove Req                     Remove Req
      Req, add Req     Req, send Inv    from Sharers,   from Sharers,                  from sharers,
      to Sharers       to Sharers,      sent Put-Ack    send Put-Ack                   send Put-Ack
                       clear Sharers,   to Req          to Req/I                       to Req
                       set Owner to
                       Req/M
 M    Send Fwd-        Send Fwd-        Send Put-Ack    Send Put-Ack    Copy data      Send Put-Ack
      GetS to          GetM to          to Req          to Req          to memory,     to Req
      Owner, add       Owner, set                                       clear Owner,
      Req and          Owner to Req                                     send Put-
      Owner to                                                          Ack to Req/I
      Sharers, clear
      Owner/SD
 SD   Stall            Stall            Remove Req      Remove Req                     Remove Req      Copy data to
                                        from Sharers,   from Sharers,                  from Sharers,   memory/S
                                        send Put-Ack    send Put-Ack                   send Put-Ack
                                        to Req          to Req                         to Req

      Because these tables can be somewhat daunting at first glance, the next section walks
through some example scenarios.

8.2.5 PROTOCOL OPERATION
The protocol enables caches to acquire blocks in states S and M and to replace blocks to the
directory in either of these states.

I to S (common case #1)
The cache controller sends a GetS request to the directory and changes the block state from I to
ISD . The directory receives this request and, if the directory is the owner (i.e., no cache currently
has the block in M), the directory responds with a Data message, changes the block’s state to S
(if it is not S already), and adds the requestor to the sharer list. When the Data arrives at the
requestor, the cache controller changes the block’s state to S, completing the transaction.
 I to S (common case #2)
 The cache controller sends a GetS request to the directory and changes the block state from I
 to ISD . If the directory is not the owner (i.e., there is a cache that currently has the block in M),
 the directory forwards the request to the owner and changes the block’s state to the transient
 state SD . The owner responds to this Fwd-GetS message by sending Data to the requestor and
 changing the block’s state to S. The now-previous owner must also send Data to the directory
 since it is relinquishing ownership to the directory, which must have an up-to-date copy of the
 block. When the Data arrives at the requestor, the cache controller changes the block state to
 S and considers the transaction complete. When the Data arrives at the directory, the directory
 copies it to memory, changes the block state to S, and considers the transaction complete.

 I to S (race cases)
 The above two I-to-S scenarios represent the common cases, in which there is only one transac-
 tion for the block in progress. Most of the protocol’s complexity derives from having to deal with
 the less-common cases of multiple in-progress transactions for a block. For example, a reader
 may find it surprising that a cache controller can receive an Invalidation for a block in state ISD .
 Consider core C1 that issues a GetS and goes to ISD and another core C2 that issues a GetM for
 the same block that arrives at the directory after C1’s GetS. The directory first sends C1 Data in
 response to its GetS and then an Invalidation in response to C2’s GetM. Because the Data and
 Invalidation travel on separate networks, they can arrive out of order, and thus C1 can receive
 the Invalidation before the Data.

 I or S to M
 The cache controller sends a GetM request to the directory and changes the block’s state from I
 to IMAD . In this state, the cache waits for Data and (possibly) Inv-Acks that indicate that other
 caches have invalidated their copies of the block in state S. The cache controller knows how
 many Inv-Acks to expect, since the Data message contains the AckCount, which may be zero.
 Figure 8.3 illustrates the three common-case scenarios of the directory responding to the GetM
 request. If the directory is in state I, it simply sends Data with an AckCount of zero and goes
 to state M. If in state M, the directory controller forwards the request to the owner and updates
 the block’s owner; the now-previous owner responds to the Fwd-GetM request by sending Data
 with an AckCount of zero. The last common case occurs when the directory is in state S. The
 directory responds with Data and an AckCount equal to the number of sharers, plus it sends
 Invalidations to each core in the sharer list. Cache controllers that receive Invalidation messages
 invalidate their shared copies and send Inv-Acks to the requestor. When the requestor receives
 the last Inv-Ack, it transitions to state M. Note the special Last-Inv-Ack event in Table 8.1,
 which simplifies the protocol specification.
        These common cases neglect some possible races that highlight the concurrency of direc-
 tory protocols. For example, core C1 has the cache block in state IMA and receives a Fwd-GetS
from C2’s cache controller. This situation is possible because the directory has already sent Data
to C1, sent Invalidation messages to the sharers, and changed its state to M. When C2’s GetS
arrives at the directory, the directory simply forwards it to the owner, C1. This Fwd-GetS may
arrive at C1 before all of the Inv-Acks arrive at C1. In this situation, our protocol simply stalls
and the cache controller waits for the Inv-Acks. Because Inv-Acks travel on a separate network,
they are guaranteed not to block behind the unprocessed Fwd-GetS.

M to I
To evict a block in state M, the cache controller sends a PutM request that includes the data
and changes the block state to MIA . When the directory receives this PutM, it updates the
LLC/memory, responds with a Put-Ack, and transitions to state I. Until the requestor receives
the Put-Ack, the block’s state remains effectively M and the cache controller must respond to
forwarded coherence requests for the block. In the case where the cache controller receives a for-
warded coherence request (Fwd-GetS or Fwd-GetM) between sending the PutM and receiving
the Put-Ack, the cache controller responds to the Fwd-GetS or Fwd-GetM and changes its
block state to SIA or IIA , respectively. These transient states are effectively S and I, respectively,
but denote that the cache controller must wait for a Put-Ack to complete the transition to I.

S to I
Unlike the snooping protocols in the previous chapter, our directory protocols do not silently
evict blocks in state S. Instead, to replace a block in state S, the cache controller sends a PutS
request and changes the block state to SIA . The directory receives this PutS and responds with a
Put-Ack. Until the requestor receives the Put-Ack, the block’s state is effectively S. If the cache
controller receives an Invalidation request after sending the PutS and before receiving the Put-
Ack, it changes the block’s state to IIA . This transient state is effectively I, but it denotes that
the cache controller must wait for a Put-Ack to complete the transaction from S to I.

8.2.6 PROTOCOL SIMPLIFICATIONS
This protocol is relatively straightforward and sacrifices some performance to achieve this sim-
plicity. We now discuss two simplifications:

    • The most significant simplification, other than having only three stable states, is that the
      protocol stalls in certain situations. For example, a cache controller stalls when it receives
      a forwarded request while in a transient state. A higher performance option, discussed in
      Section 8.7.2, would be to process the messages and add more transient states.

    • A second simplification is that the directory sends Data (and the AckCount) in response
      to a cache that is changing a block’s state from S to M. The cache already has valid data
      and thus it would be sufficient for the directory to simply send a data-less AckCount. We
      defer adding this new type of message until we present the MOSI protocol in Section 8.4.
 8.3     ADDING THE EXCLUSIVE STATE
 As we previously discussed in the context of snooping protocols, adding the Exclusive (E) state
 is an important optimization because it enables a core to read and then write a block with only
 a single coherence transaction, instead of the two required by an MSI protocol. At the highest
 level, this optimization is independent of whether the cache coherence uses snooping or direc-
 tories. If a core issues a GetS and the block is not currently shared by other cores, then the
 requestor may obtain the block in state E. The core may then silently upgrade the block’s state
 from E to M without issuing another coherence request.
         In this section, we add the E state to our baseline MSI directory protocol. As with the
 MESI snooping protocol in the previous chapter, the operation of the protocol depends on
 whether the E state is considered an ownership state or not. And, as with the MESI snooping
 protocol, the primary operational difference involves determining which coherence controller
 should respond to a request for a block that the directory gave to a cache in state E. The block
 may have been silently upgraded from E to M since the directory gave the block to the cache in
 state E.
         In protocols in which an E block is owned, the solution is simple. The cache with the
 block in E (or M) is the owner and thus must respond to requests. A coherence request sent to
 the directory will be forwarded to the cache with the block in state E. Because the E state is an
 ownership state, the eviction of an E block cannot be performed silently; the cache must issue a
 PutE request to the directory. Without an explicit PutE, the directory would not know that the
 directory was now the owner and should respond to incoming coherence requests. Because we
 assume in this primer that blocks in E are owned, this simple solution is what we implement in
 the MESI protocol in this section.
         In protocols in which an E block is not owned, an E block can be silently evicted, but
 the protocol complexity increases. Consider the case where core C1 obtains a block in state E
 and then the directory receives a GetS or GetM from core C2. The directory knows that C1 is
 either (i) still in state E, (ii) in state M (if C1 did a store with a silent upgrade from E to M), or
 (iii) in state I (if the protocol allows C1 to perform a silent PutE). If C1 is in M, the directory
 must forward the request to C1 so that C1 can supply the latest version of the data. If C1 is
 in E, C1 or the directory may respond since they both have the same data. If C1 is in I, the
 directory must respond. One solution, which we describe in more detail in our case study on
 the SGI Origin [10] in Section 8.8.1, is to have both C1 and the directory respond. Another
 solution is to have the directory forward the request to C1. If C1 is in I, C1 notifies the directory
 to respond to C2; else, C1 responds to C2 and notifies the directory that it does not need to
 respond to C2.

 8.3.1 HIGH-LEVEL PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 We specify a high-level view of the transactions in Figure 8.6, with differences from the MSI
 protocol highlighted. There are only two significant differences. First, there is a transition from I

        (1) GetS                               (1) GetS     (2) Fwd-GetS                             (1) GetS

  Req               Dir                 Req            Dir             Owner                   Req               Dir
  I→S              S→S                  I→S           M→S              M→S                     I→E              I→E
                                                               (3) Data E→S
        (2) Data                                                                                     (2) Data
                                                          (3) Data
                   Transitions from I to S                                                   Transitions from I to E

        (1) GetM                               (1) GetM (2) Fwd-GetM

  Req                                                  Dir             Owner
                    Dir                 Req
 I→M                                                  M→M              M→I
                   I→M                 I→M            E→M              E→I

   (2) Data[ack=0]
                                                   (3) Data[ack=0]
                   (3) Inv-Ack
        (1) GetM          (2) Inv
                                      Sharer
  Req                                  S→I       The only sharer might be the requestor,
 I→M             Dir                             in which case no Invalidation messages
 S→M            S→M                              are sent and the Data message from
                           (2) Inv    Sharer     the Dir to Req has an AckCount of zero.
      (2) Data[ack>0]                  S→I

                   (3) Inv-Ack
         Transitions from I or S to M. Transition from E to M is silent
    (1) PutM+data                    (1) PutE (no data)                    (1) PutS

                                                                                       Dir
 Req               Dir               Req           Dir               Req
                                                                                      S→I
 M→I               M→I               E→I           E→I               S→I
                                                                                      S→S

     (2) Put-Ack                        (2) Put-Ack                    (2) Put-Ack
                          Transitions from M or E or S to I

Figure 8.6: High-level description of MESI directory protocol. In each transition, the cache
controller that requests the transaction is denoted “Req.”
 to E that can occur if the directory receives a GetS for a block in state I. Second, there is a PutE
 transaction for evicting blocks in state E. Because E is an ownership state, an E block cannot
 be silently evicted. Unlike a block in state M, the E block is clean, and thus the PutE does not
 need to carry data; the directory already has the most up-to-date copy of the block.

 8.3.2 DETAILED PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 In Tables 8.3 and 8.4, we present the detailed specification of the MESI protocol, including
 transient states. Differences with respect to the MSI protocol are highlighted with boldface
 font. The protocol adds to the set of cache states both the stable E state as well as transient
 states to handle transactions for blocks initially in state E.
        This protocol is somewhat more complex than the MSI protocol, with much of the added
 complexity at the directory controller. In addition to having more states, the directory controller
 must distinguish between more possible events. For example, when a PutS arrives, the directory
 must distinguish whether this is the “last” PutS; that is, did this PutS arrive from the only current
 sharer? If this PutS is the last PutS, then the directory’s state changes to I.

 8.4     ADDING THE OWNED STATE
 For the same reason we added the Owned state to the baseline MSI snooping protocol in Chap-
 ter 7, an architect may want to add the Owned state to the baseline MSI directory protocol pre-
 sented in Section 8.2. Recall from Chapter 2 that if a cache has a block in the Owned state, then
 the block is valid, read-only, dirty (i.e., it must eventually update memory), and owned (i.e., the
 cache must respond to coherence requests for the block). Adding the Owned state changes the
 protocol, compared to MSI, in three important ways: (1) a cache with a block in M that observes
 a Fwd-GetS changes its state to O and does not need to (immediately) copy the data back to
 the LLC/memory, (2) more coherence requests are satisfied by caches (in O state) than by the
 LLC/memory, and (3) there are more 3-hop transactions (which would have been satisfied by
 the LLC/memory in an MSI protocol).

 8.4.1 HIGH-LEVEL PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 We specify a high-level view of the transactions in Figure 8.7, with differences from the MSI
 protocol highlighted. The most interesting difference is the transaction in which a requestor of a
 block in state I or S sends a GetM to the directory when the block is in the O state in the owner
 cache and in the S state in one or more sharer caches. In this case, the directory forwards the
 GetM to the owner, and appends the AckCount. The directory also sends Invalidations to each
 of the sharers. The owner receives the Fwd-GetM and responds to the requestor with Data and
 the AckCount. The requestor uses this received AckCount to determine when it has received
 the last Inv-Ack. There is a similar transaction if the requestor of the GetM was the owner (in

Table 8.3: MESI directory protocol—cache controller

                                                                          Exclusive Data

                                                                          Data from Dir

                                                                          Data from Dir

                                                                                                              Last-Inv-Ack
                          Replacement

                                                   Fwd-GetM
                                        Fwd-GetS

                                                                                                Data from
                                                                          from Dir
                                                                          Put-Ack

                                                                                                Inv-Ack
                                                                          (ack=0)

                                                                          (ack>0)

                                                                                                Owner
                Store
      Load

                                                              Inv
I    Sent GetS Send
     to Dir/ISD GetM to
                Dir/IMAD
ISD  Stall      Stall    Stall                                Stall         -/E   -/S         -/S
IMAD Stall      Stall    Stall     Stall           Stall                          -/M   -/IMA -/M ack--
IMA Stall       Stall    Stall     Stall           Stall                                          ack-- -/M
S    Hit        Send     Send PutS                            Send Inv-
                GetM to to Dir/SIA                            Ack to
                Dir/SMAD                                      Req/I
SMAD Hit        Stall    Stall     Stall           Stall      Send                -/M   -/SMA         ack--
                                                              Inv-Ack
                                                              to Req/
                                                              IMAD
SMA   Hit       Stall     Stall     Stall      Stall                                                  ack-- -/M
M     Hit       Hit       Send PutM Send data Send data
                          +data to  to Req and to Req/I
                          Dir/MIA   Dir/S
E     Hit       Hit/M     Send PutE Send data Send data
                          (no data) to Req and to Req/I
                          to Dir/   Dir/S
                          EIA
MIA   Stall     Stall     Stall     Send data Send data             -/I
                                    to Req and to Req/IIA
                                    Dir/SIA
EIA   Stall     Stall     Stall     Send data Send data             -/I
                                    to Req and to Req/
                                    Dir/SIA    IIA
SIA   Stall     Stall     Stall                           Send Inv- -/I
                                                          Ack to
                                                          Req/IIA
IIA   Stall     Stall     Stall                                     -/I

Table 8.4: MESI directory protocol—directory controller

                                                                           Non-Owner

                                                                                                     Non-Owner
                                                              from Owner
                                                              PutM+data

                                                                           PutM from

                                                                                                     PutE from
                                                                                        data) from
                                                 PutS-Last

                                                                                        PutE (no-
                                    NotLast

                                                                                        Owner
                      GetM

                                    PutS-
        GetS

                                                                                                                  Data
  I    Send Ex-       Send data     Sent Put-  Send Put-                   Send Put-                 Send Put-
       clusive data   to Req, set   Ack to Req Ack to Req                  Ack to Req                Ack to Req
       to Req, set    Owner to
       Owner to       Req/M
       Req/E
  S    Send data      Send data    Remove        Remove                    Remove                    Remove
       to Req,        to Req, send Req from      Req from                  Req from                  Req from
       add Req to     Inv to Shar- Sharers,      Sharers,                  Sharers,                  Sharers,
       Sharers        ers, clear   send Put-     send Put-                 send Put-                 send Put-
                      Sharers, set Ack to Req    Ack to                    Ack to Req                Ack to Req
                      Owner to                   Req/I
                      Req/M
  E    Forward        Forward      Send Put-     Send Put- Copy data Send Put-          Send Put- Send Put-
       GetS to        GetM to      Ack to Req    Ack to Req to mem,     Ack to Req      Ack to Req, Ack to Req
       Owner,         Owner, set                            send Put-                   clear
       make           Owner to                              Ack to Req,                 Owner/I
       Owner          Req/M                                 clear
       sharer,                                              Owner/I
       add Req
       to Shar-
       ers, clear
       Owner /SD
  M    Forward     Forward          Sent Put-  Sent Put-  Copy data Send Put-                        Send Put-
       GetS to     GetM to          Ack to Req Ack to Req to mem,     Ack to Req                     Ack to Req
       Owner,      Owner, set                             send Put-
       make        Owner to                               Ack to Req,
       Owner       Req                                    clear
       sharer, add                                        Owner/I
       Req to
       Sharers,
       clear Owner
       /SD
  SD   Stall       Stall            Remove       Remove                    Remove                    Remove     Copy data
                                    Req from     Req from                  Req from                  Req from   to LLC/
                                    Sharers,     Sharers,                  Sharers,                  Sharers,   mem/S
                                    send Put-    send Put-                 send Put-                 send Put-
                                    Ack to Req   Ack to Req                Ack to Req                Ack to Req
        (1) GetS                               (1) GetS     (2) Fwd-GetS
                    Dir                                Dir              Owner
  Req              I→S                  Req           M→O
  I→S                                   I→S                             M→O
                   S→S                                O→O               O→O

        (2) Data
                                                          (3) Data
                           Transitions from I to S
        (1) GetM                               (1) GetM (2) Fwd-GetM

  Req               Dir                 Req            Dir              Owner
 I→M               I→M                 I→M            M→M               M→I

   (2) Data[ack=0]
                                                   (3) Data[ack=0]
                                                                      (3) Data[ack>=0]
                   (3) Inv-Ack
                                                                             (2) Fwd-GetM[ack>=0]
        (1) GetM          (2) Inv                                 (1) GetM
                                      Sharer                                               Owner
  Req                                  S→I                    Req                          O→I
 I→M            Dir                                          I→M             Dir
 S→M           S→M                                           S→M            O→M
                           (2) Inv    Sharer                                       (2) Inv Sharer
      (2) Data[ack>0]                  S→I                                                  S→I
                                                                           (3) Inv-Ack
                   (3) Inv-Ack
                                     Transitions from I or S to M
                                                                                            (1) PutS
                   (3) Inv-Ack
                                                                                                        Dir
        (1) GetM                                                                      Req
                                                               (1) PutO+data                           S→I
                                      Sharer                                          S→I
                           (2) Inv                                                                     S→S
                Dir                    S→I                                  Dir
  Req                                                       Req
 O→M           O→M                                                         O→I            (2) Put-Ack
                                                            O→I            O→S
                           (2) Inv    Sharer                                            (1) PutM+data
        (2) AckCount                   S→I
                                                                (2) Put-Ack          Req               Dir
                   (3) Inv-Ack                                                       M→I               M→I

        Transitions from O to M                                                           (2) Put-Ack
                                                              Transitions from M or O or S to I

Figure 8.7: High-level description of MOSI directory protocol. In each transition, the cache
controller that requests the transaction is denoted “Req.”
 state O). The difference here is that the directory sends the AckCount directly to the requestor
 because the requestor is the owner.
       This protocol has a PutO transaction that is nearly identical to the PutM transaction. It
 contains data for the same reason that the PutM transaction contains data, i.e., because both M
 and O are dirty states.

 8.4.2 DETAILED PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
 Tables 8.5 and 8.6 present the detailed specification of the MOSI protocol, including transient
 states. Differences with respect to the MSI protocol are highlighted with boldface font. The
 protocol adds to the set of cache states both the stable O state as well as transient OMAC ,
 OMA , and OIA states to handle transactions for blocks initially in state O. The state OMAC
 indicates that the cache is waiting for both Inv-Acks (A) from caches and an AckCount (C)
 from the directory, but not data. Because this block started in state O, it already had valid data.
        An interesting situation arises when core C1’s cache controller has a block in OMAC or
 SMAD and receives a Fwd-GetM or Invalidation from core C2 for that block. C2’s GetM must
 have been ordered at the directory before C1’s GetM, for this situation to arise. Thus, the direc-
 tory state changes to M (owned by C2) before observing C1’s GetM. When C2’s Fwd-GetM or
 Invalidation arrives at C1, C1 must be aware that C2’s GetM was ordered first. Thus, C1’s cache
 state changes from either OMAC or SMAD to IMAD . The forwarded GetM or Invalidation from
 C2 invalidated C1’s cache block and now C1 must wait for both Data and Inv-Acks.

 8.5     REPRESENTING DIRECTORY STATE
 In the previous sections, we have assumed a complete directory; that is, the directory maintains
 the complete state for each block, including the full set of caches that (may) have shared copies.
 Yet this assumption contradicts the primary motivation for directory protocols: scalability. In
 a system with a large number of caches (i.e., a large number of potential sharers of a block),
 maintaining the complete set of sharers for each block requires a significant amount of storage,
 even when using a compact bit-vector representation. For a system with a modest number of
 caches, it may be reasonable to maintain this complete set, but the architects of larger-scale
 systems may wish for more scalable solutions to maintaining directory state.
        There are many ways to reduce how much state the directory maintains for each block.
 Here we discuss two important techniques: coarse directories and limited pointers. We discuss
 these techniques independently, but observe that they can be combined. We contrast each so-
 lution with the baseline design, illustrated in the top entry of Figure 8.8.

 8.5.1 COARSE DIRECTORY
 Having the complete set of sharers enables the directory to send Invalidation messages to exactly
 those cache controllers that have the block in state S. One way to reduce the directory state is

Table 8.5: MOSI directory protocol—cache controller

                                                                                                AckCount from
                                                                            Data from Dir

                                                                            Data from Dir

                                                                                                                          Last-Inv-Ack
                          Replacement

                                                   Fwd-GetM
                                        Fwd-GetS

                                                                                                Data from
                                                                            Put-Ack

                                                                                                                Inv-Ack
                                                                            (ack=0)

                                                                            (ack>0)

                                                                                                Owner
                Store
       Load

                                                                                                Dir
                                                                 Inv
I      Sent GetS Send
       to Dir/   GetM to
       ISD       Dir/IMAD
ISD    Stall     Stall    Stall                                  Stall            -/S         -/S
IMAD   Stall     Stall    Stall     Stall          Stall                          -/M   -/IMA -/M               ack--
IMA    Stall     Stall    Stall     Stall          Stall                                                        ack-- -/M
S      Hit       Send     Send PutS                              Send
                 GetM     to Dir/                                Inv-Ack
                 to Dir/  SIA                                    to Req/I
                 SMAD
SMAD   Hit       Stall    Stall     Stall          Stall         Send             -/M   -/SMA                   ack--
                                                                 Inv-Ack
                                                                 to Req/
                                                                 IMAD
SMA    Hit      Stall     Stall         Stall     Stall                                                         ack-- -/M
M      Hit      Hit       Send          Send data Send data
                          PutM          to Req/O to Req/I
                          +data to
                          Dir/MIA
MIA    Stall    Stall     Stall         Send data Send data                 -/I
                                        to Req/   to Req/IIA
                                        OIA
O      Hit      Send      Send          Send data Send data
                GetM      PutO          to Req    to Req/I
                to Dir/   +data to
                OMAC      Dir/OIA
OMAC Hit        Stall     Stall         Send data Send data                                            -/OMA ack--
                                        to Req    to Req/
                                                  IMAD
OMA    Hit      Stall     Stall         Send data Stall                                                         ack-- -/M
                                        to Req
OIA    Stall    Stall     Stall         Send data Send data                 -/I
                                        to Req    to Req/
                                                  IIA
SIA    Stall    Stall     Stall                                  Send       -/I
                                                                 Inv-Ack
                                                                 to Req/
                                                                 IIA
IIA    Stall    Stall     Stall                                             -/I
Table 8.6: MOSI directory protocol—directory controller

                                                                                  Non-Owner

                                                                                                            Non-Owner
                                                                     from Owner

                                                                                               from Owner
                   GetM from

                               GetM from
                               NonOwner

                                                                     PutM+data

                                                                                  PutM+data

                                                                                               PutO+data

                                                                                                            PutO+data
                                                        PutS-Last
                                           NotLast
                   Owner

                                           PutS-
      GetS

                                                                                  from

                                                                                                            from
  I   Send data             Send data      Send Put- Send Put-                    Send Put-                 Send Put-
      to Req,               to Req, set    Ack to Req Ack to Req                  Ack to Req                Ack to Req
      add Req to            Owner to
      Sharer/S              Req/M
  S   Send data             Send data      Remove       Remove                    Remove                    Remove
      to Req,               to Req,        Req from     Req from                  Req from                  Req from
      add Req to            send Inv to    Sharers,     Sharers,                  Sharers,                  Sharers,
      Sharers               Sharers, set   send Put-    send Put-                 send Put-                 send Put-
                            Owner to       Ack to Req   Ack to                    Ack to Req                Ack to Req
                            Req, clear                  Req/I
                            Sharers/M
  O Forward    Send Ack- Forward           Remove       Remove       Remove       Remove       Copy data Remove
    GetS to    Count to     GetM to        Req from     Req from     Req from     Req from     to mem,     Req from
    Owner,     Req, send    Owner,         Sharers,     Sharers,     Sharers,     Sharers,     send Put-   Sharers,
    add Req to Inv to Shar- send Inv to    send Put-    send Put-    copy data to send Put-    Ack to Req, send Put-
    Sharers    ers, clear   Sharers,set    Ack to Req   Ack to Req   mem, send Ack to Req      clear Own- Ack to Req
               Sharers/M Owner to                                    Put-Ack to                er/S
                            Req, clear                               Req, clear
                            Sharers,                                 Owner/S
                            send Ack-
                            Count to
                            Req/M
  M Forward                 Forward        Sent Put-  Sent Put-  Copy data Sent Put-                        Sent Put-
    GetS to                 GetM to        Ack to Req Ack to Req to mem,     Ack to Req                     Ack to Req
    Owner,                  Owner, set                           send Put-
    add Req to              Owner to                             Ack to Req,
    Sharers/O               Req                                  clear Own-
                                                                 er/I

 to conservatively maintain a coarse list of sharers that is a superset of the actual set of sharers.
 That is, a given entry in the sharer list corresponds to a set of K caches, as illustrated in the
 middle entry of Figure 8.8. If one or more of the caches in that set (may) have the block in state
 S, then that bit in the sharer list is set. A GetM will cause the directory controller to send an
 Invalidation to all K caches in that set. Thus, coarse directories reduce the directory state at the
 expense of extra inter-connection network bandwidth for unnecessary Invalidation messages,
 plus the cache controller bandwidth to process these extra Invalidation messages.
 2-bit    Log2C-bit                             C-bit
                                                                                       Complete Directory—
 State     Owner                       Complete Sharer List
                                                                                       each bit in sharer list
                                        (one-hot bit vector)
                                                                                       represents one cache

 2-bit    Log2C-bit              C/K-bit

                             Coarse Sharer List         Coarse Directory—each bit in sharer list
 State     Owner
                            (one-hot bit vector)        represents K caches

 2-bit    Log2C-bit              i*log2C-bit

 State     Owner            Pointers to i Sharers       Limited Directory—sharer list is divided into i
                                                        entries, each of which is a pointer to a cache

Figure 8.8: Representing directory state for a block in a system with C nodes.

8.5.2 LIMITED POINTER DIRECTORY
In a chip with C caches, a complete sharer list requires C entries, one bit each, for a total
of C bits. However, studies have shown that many blocks have zero sharers or one sharer. A
limited pointer directory exploits this observation by having i (i<C) entries, where each entry
requires log2 C bits, for a total of i * log2 C bits, as illustrated in the bottom entry of Figure 8.8. A
limited pointer directory requires some additional mechanism to handle (hopefully uncommon)
situations in which the system attempts to add an i+1t h sharer. There are three well-studied
options for handling these situations, denoted using the notation Diri X [2, 8], where i refers
to the number of pointers to sharers, and X refers to the mechanism for handling situations in
which the system attempts to add an i+1th sharer.
    • Broadcast (Diri B): If there are already i sharers and another GetS arrives, the directory
      controller sets the block’s state to indicate that a subsequent GetM requires the directory
      to broadcast the Invalidation to all caches (i.e., a new “too many sharers” state). A draw-
      back of Diri B is that the directory could have to broadcast to all C caches even when
      there are only K sharers (i<K<C), requiring the directory controller to send (and the cache
      controllers to process) C-K unnecessary Invalidation messages. The limiting case, Dir0 B,
      takes this approach to the extreme by eliminating all pointers and requiring a broadcast on
      all coherence operations. The original Dir0 B proposal maintained two state bits per block,
      encoding the three MSI states plus a special “Single Sharer” state [3]. This new state helps
      eliminate a broadcast when a cache tries to upgrade its S copy to an M copy (similar to the
        Exclusive state optimization). Similarly, the directory’s I state eliminates broadcast when
        memory owns the block. AMD’s Coherent HyperTransport [6] implements a version of
        Dir0 B that uses no directory state, forgoing these optimizations but eliminating the need
        to store any directory state. All requests sent to the directory are then broadcast to all
        caches.
      • No Broadcast (Diri NB): If there are already i sharers and another GetS arrives, the di-
        rectory asks one of the current sharers to invalidate itself to make room in the sharer list
        for the new requestor. This solution can incur significant performance penalties for widely
        shared blocks (i.e., blocks shared by more than i nodes), due to the time spent invalidat-
        ing sharers. Diri NB is especially problematic for systems with coherent instruction caches
        because code is frequently widely shared.
      • Software (Diri SW): If there are already i sharers and another GetS arrives, the system traps
        to a software handler. Trapping to software enables great flexibility, such as maintaining a
        full sharer list in software-managed data structures. However, because trapping to software
        incurs significant performance costs and implementation complexities, this approach has
        seen limited commercial acceptance.

 8.6      DIRECTORY ORGANIZATION
 Logically, the directory contains a single entry for every block of memory. Many traditional
 directory-based systems, in which the directory controller was integrated with the memory
 controller, directly implemented this logical abstraction by augmenting memory to hold the
 directory. For example, the SGI Origin added additional DRAM chips to store the complete
 directory state with each block of memory [10].
        However, with today’s multicore processors and large LLCs, the traditional directory de-
 sign makes little sense. First, architects do not want the latency and power overhead of a directory
 access to off-chip memory, especially for data cached on chip. Second, system designers balk at
 the large off-chip directory state when almost all memory blocks are not cached at any given
 time. These drawbacks motivate architects to optimize the common case by caching only a sub-
 set of directory entries on chip. In the rest of this section, we discuss directory cache designs,
 several of which were previously categorized by Marty and Hill [13].
        Like conventional instruction and data caches, a directory cache [7] provides faster access
 to a subset of the complete directory state. Because directories summarize the states of coherent
 caches, they exhibit locality similar to instruction and data accesses, but need only store each
 block’s coherence state rather than its data. Thus, relatively small directory caches achieve high
 hit rates. Directory caching has no impact on the functionality of the coherence protocol; it
 simply reduces the average directory access latency. Directory caching has become even more
 important in the era of multicore processors. In older systems in which cores resided on separate
 chips and/or boards, message latencies were sufficiently long that they tended to amortize the
directory access latency. Within a multicore processor, messages can travel from one core to
another in a handful of cycles, and the latency of an off-chip directory access tends to dwarf
communication latencies and become a bottleneck. Thus, for multicore processors, there is a
strong incentive to implement an on-chip directory cache to avoid costly off-chip accesses.
       The on-chip directory cache contains a subset of the complete set of directory entries.
Thus, the key design issue is handling directory cache misses, i.e., when a coherence request
arrives for a block whose directory entry is not in the directory cache.
       We summarize the design options in Table 8.7 and describe them next.

Table 8.7: Comparing directory cache designs

                                    Inclusive Directory Caches (Section 8.6.2)
                  Directory
                                                                                                           Null
                  Cache Backed      Inclusive Directory Cache
                                                                       Standalone Inclusive Directory      Directory
                  by DRAM           Embedded in Inclusive LLC
                                                                       Cache (Section 8.6.2)               Cache
                  Directory         (Section 8.6.2)
                                                                                                           (Section 8.6.3)
                  (Section 8.6.1)
                                    No Recalls        With Recalls     No Recalls         With Recalls
 Directory        DRAM                            LLC                                 LLC                  None
 location
 Uses DRAM        Yes                             No                                   No                  No
 Miss at direc-   Must access               Block must be I                      Block must be I           Block could be
 tory implies     DRAM                                                                                     in any state→
                                                                                                           must broadcast
 Inclusion        None                     LLC includes L1s              Directory cache includes L1s      None
 requirements
 Implementation   DRAM plus         Larger LLC        Larger LLC       Highly associa-    Storage for      None
 costs            separate on-      blocks; highly    blocks           tive storage for   redundant tags
                  chip cache        associative LLC                    redundant tags
 Replacement      None              None              Desirable        Required           Desirable        None
 notification

8.6.1 DIRECTORY CACHE BACKED BY DRAM
The most straightforward design is to keep the complete directory in DRAM, as in traditional
multi-chip multiprocessors, and use a separate directory cache structure to reduce the average
access latency. A coherence request that misses in this directory cache leads to an access of this
DRAM directory. This design, while straightforward, suffers from several important drawbacks.
First, it requires a significant amount of DRAM to hold the directory, including state for the
vast majority of blocks that are not currently cached on the chip. Second, because the directory
cache is decoupled from the LLC, it is possible to hit in the LLC but miss in the directory
cache, thus incurring a DRAM access even though the data is available locally. Finally, directory
 cache replacements must write the directory entries back to DRAM, incurring high latency and
 power overheads.

 8.6.2 INCLUSIVE DIRECTORY CACHES
 We can design directory caches that are more cost-effective by exploiting the observation that
 we need only cache directory states for blocks that are being cached on the chip. We refer to
 a directory cache as an inclusive directory cache if it holds directory entries for a superset of all
 blocks cached on the chip. An inclusive directory cache serves as a “perfect” directory cache that
 never misses for accesses to blocks cached on chip. There is no need to store a complete directory
 in DRAM. A miss in an inclusive directory cache indicates that the block is in state I; a miss is
 not the precursor to accessing some backing directory store.
       We now discuss two inclusive directory cache designs, plus an optimization that applies
 to both designs.

 Inclusive Directory Cache Embedded in Inclusive LLC
 The simplest directory cache design relies on an LLC that maintains inclusion with the upper-
 level caches. Cache inclusion means that if a block is in an upper-level cache then it must also
 be present in a lower-level cache. For the system model of Figure 8.1, LLC inclusion means that
 if a block is in a core’s L1 cache, then it must also be in the LLC.
        A consequence of LLC inclusion is that if a block is not in the LLC, it is also not in an L1
 cache and thus must be in state I for all caches on the chip. An inclusive directory cache exploits
 this property by embedding the coherence state of each block in the LLC. If a coherence request
 is sent to the LLC/directory controller and the requested address is not present in the LLC, then
 the directory controller knows that the requested block is not cached on-chip and thus is in state
 I in all the L1s.
        Because the directory mirrors the contents of the LLC, the entire directory cache may be
 embedded in the LLC simply by adding extra bits to each block in the LLC. These added bits
 can lead to non-trivial overhead, depending on the number of cores and the format in which
 directory state is represented. We illustrate the addition of this directory state to an LLC cache
 block in Figure 8.9, comparing it to an LLC block in a system without the LLC-embedded
 directory cache.
        Unfortunately, LLC inclusion has several important drawbacks. First, while LLC inclu-
 sion can be maintained automatically for private cache hierarchies (if the lower-level cache has
 sufficient associativity [4]), for the shared caches in our system model, it is generally necessary
 to send special “Recall” requests to invalidate blocks from the L1 caches when replacing a block
 in the LLC (discussed later in this section). More importantly, LLC inclusion requires main-
 taining redundant copies of cache blocks that are in upper-level caches. In multicore processors,
 the collective capacity of the upper-level caches may be a significant fraction of (or sometimes,
 even larger than) the capacity of the LLC.

                       Tag                            Data

                                                  (a) Typical LLC block

       Directory
                       Tag                            Data
        State

                                         (b) LLC block with LLC-Embedded Directory Cache

Figure 8.9: The cost of implementing the LLC-embedded directory cache.

Standalone Inclusive Directory Cache
We now present an inclusive directory cache design that does not rely on LLC inclusion. In this
design, the directory cache is a standalone structure that is logically associated with the directory
controller, instead of being embedded in the LLC itself. For the directory cache to be inclusive,
it must contain directory entries for the union of the blocks in all the L1 caches because a block
in the LLC but not in any L1 cache must be in state I. Thus, in this design, the directory cache
consists of duplicate copies of the tags at all L1 caches. Compared to the previous design, this
design is more flexible, by virtue of not requiring LLC inclusion, but it has the added storage
cost for the duplicate tags.
       This inclusive directory cache has some significant implementation costs. Most notably,
it requires a highly associative directory cache. (If we embed the directory cache in an inclusive
LLC, then the LLC must also be highly associative.) Consider the case of a chip with C cores,
each of which has a K-way set-associative L1 cache. The directory cache must be C*K-way
associative to hold all L1 cache tags, and the associativity unfortunately grows linearly with core
count. We illustrate this issue for K=2 in Figure 8.10.

             Core 0          Core 1                                                      Core C-1
Set 0   Set 0 Set 0 Set 0 Set 0                                                        Set 0 Set 0
        Way 0 Way 1 Way 0 Way 1                                                       Way 0 Way 1
        Set 1 Set 1 Set 1 Set 1                                                        Set 1 Set 1
        Way 0 Way 1 Way 0 Way 1                                                       Way 0 Way 1
            .        .       .        .                                                   .       .
            .        .       .        .                                                   .       .
            .        .       .        .                                                   .       .
            .        .       .        .                                                   .       .
            .        .       .        .                                                   .       .
Set S-1 Set  S-1 Set  S-1 Set S-1 Set  S-1                                            Set S-1 Set S-1
        Way 0 Way 1 Way 0 Way 1                                                       Way 0 Way 1

Figure 8.10: Inclusive directory cache structure (assumes 2-way L1 caches). Each entry is the
tag corresponding to that set and way for the core at the top of the column.
        The inclusive directory cache design also introduces some complexity, in order to keep
 the directory cache up-to-date. When a block is evicted from an L1 cache, the cache controller
 must notify the directory cache regarding which block was replaced by issuing an explicit PutS
 request (e.g., we cannot use a protocol with a silent eviction, as discussed in Section 8.7.4). One
 common optimization is to piggy-back the explicit PutS on the GetS or GetX request. Since
 the index bits must be the same, the PutS can be encoded by specifying which way was replaced.
 This is sometimes referred to as a “replacement hint,” although in general it is required (and not
 truly a “hint”).

 Limiting the Associativity of Inclusive Directory Caches
 To overcome the cost of the highly associative directory cache in the previous implementation,
 we present a technique for limiting its associativity. Rather than design the directory cache for
 the worst-case situation (C*K associativity), we limit the associativity by not permitting the
 worst-case to occur. That is, we design the directory cache to be A-way set associative, where
 A<C*K, and we do not permit more than A entries that map to a given directory cache set
 to be cached on chip. When a cache controller issues a coherence request to add a block to
 its cache, and the corresponding set in the directory cache is already full of valid entries, then
 the directory controller first evicts one of the blocks in this set from all caches. The directory
 controller performs this eviction by issuing a “Recall” request to all of the caches that hold this
 block in a valid state, and the caches respond with acknowledgments. Once an entry in the
 directory cache has been freed up via this Recall, then the directory controller can process the
 original coherence request that triggered the Recall.
        The use of Recalls overcomes the need for high associativity in the directory cache but,
 without careful design, it could lead to poor performance. If the directory cache is too small, then
 Recalls will be frequent and performance will suffer. Conway et al. [6] propose a rule of thumb
 that the directory cache should cover at least the size of the aggregate caches it includes, but it
 can also be larger to reduce the rates of recalls. Also, to avoid unnecessary Recalls, this scheme
 works best with non-silent evictions of blocks in state S. With silent evictions, unnecessary
 Recalls will be sent to caches that no longer hold the block being recalled.

 8.6.3 NULL DIRECTORY CACHE (WITH NO BACKING STORE)
 The least costly directory cache is to have no directory cache at all. Recall that the directory
 state helps prune the set of coherence controllers to which to forward a coherence request. But
 as with Coarse Directories (Section 8.5.1), if this pruning is done incompletely, the protocol
 still works correctly, but unnecessary messages are sent and the protocol is less efficient than it
 could be. Taken to the extreme, a Dir0 B protocol (Section 8.5.2) does no pruning whatsoever,
 in which case it does not actually need a directory at all (or a directory cache). Whenever a
 coherence request arrives at the directory controller, the directory controller simply forwards
 it to all caches (i.e., broadcasts the forwarded request). This directory cache design, which we
call the Null Directory Cache, may seem simplistic, but it is popular for small-to medium-scale
systems because it incurs no storage cost.
       One might question the purpose of a directory controller if there is no directory state, but
it serves two important roles. First, as with all other systems in this chapter, the directory con-
troller is responsible for the LLC; it is, more precisely, an LLC/directory controller. Second,
the directory controller serves as an ordering point in the protocol; if multiple cores concur-
rently request the same block, the requests are ordered at the directory controller. The directory
controller resolves which request happens first.

8.7     PERFORMANCE AND SCALABILITY
        OPTIMIZATIONS
In this section, we discuss several optimizations to improve the performance and scalability of
directory protocols.

8.7.1 DISTRIBUTED DIRECTORIES
So far we have assumed that there is a single directory attached to a single monolithic LLC.
This design clearly has the potential to create a performance bottleneck at this shared, central
resource. The typical, general solution to the problem of a centralized bottleneck is to distribute
the resource. The directory for a given block is still fixed in one place, but different blocks can
have different directories.
       In older, multi-chip multiprocessors with N nodes—each node consisting of multiple
chips, including the processor core and memory—each node typically had 1/N of the mem-
ory associated with it and the corresponding 1/Nth of the directory state.
       We illustrate such a system model in Figure 8.11. The allocation of memory addresses
to nodes is often static and often easily computable using simple arithmetic. For example, in
a system with N directories, block B’s directory entry might be at directory B modulo N. Each
block has a home, which is the directory that holds its memory and directory state. Thus, we end
up with a system in which there are multiple, independent directories managing the coherence
for different sets of blocks. Having multiple directories provides greater bandwidth of coher-
ence transactions than requiring all coherence traffic to pass through a single, central resource.
Importantly, distributing the directory has no impact on the coherence protocol.
       In today’s world of multicore processors with large LLCs and directory caches, the ap-
proach of distributing the directory is logically the same as in the traditional multi-chip multi-
processors. We can distribute (bank) the LLC and directory cache. Each block has a home bank
of the LLC with its associated bank of the directory cache.
                     Node                                                  Node

                                              Directory

                                                                                                    Directory
      Core                      Memory                      Core                      Memory

   Cache                         Directory                 Cache                       Directory
                    Cache                                                 Cache
  Controller                     Controller               Controller                   Controller

                                       Interconnection Network

Figure 8.11: Multiprocessor system model with distributed directory.

 8.7.2 NON-STALLING DIRECTORY PROTOCOLS
 One performance limitation of the protocols presented thus far is that the coherence controllers
 stall in several situations. In particular, the cache controllers stall when they receive forwarded
 requests for blocks in certain transient states, such as IMA . In Tables 8.8 and 8.9, we present a
 variant of the baseline MSI protocol that does not stall in these scenarios. For example, when a
 cache controller has a block in state IMA and receives a Fwd-GetS, it processes the request and
 changes the block’s state to IMA S. This state indicates that after the cache controller’s GetM
 transaction completes (i.e., when the last Inv-Ack arrives), the cache controller will change the
 block state to S. At this point, the cache controller must also send the block to the requestor of
 the GetS and to the directory, which is now the owner. By not stalling on the Fwd-GetS, the
 cache controller can improve performance by continuing to process other forwarded requests
 behind that Fwd-GetS in its incoming queue.
         A complication in the non-stalling protocol is that, while in state IMA S, a Fwd-GetM
 could arrive. Instead of stalling, the cache controller processes this request and changes the
 block’s state to IMA SI (in I, going to M, waiting for Inv-Acks, then going to S and then to I). A
 similar set of transient states arises for blocks in SMA . Removing stalling leads to more transient
 states, in general, because the coherence controller must track (using new transient states) the
 additional messages it is processing instead of stalling.
         We did not remove the stalls from the directory controller. As with the memory controllers
 in the snooping protocols in Chapter 7, we would need to add an impractically large number of
 transient states to avoid stalling in all possible scenarios.
Table 8.8: Non-stalling MSI directory protocol—cache controller

                                                                                                                              Last-Inv-Ack
                            Replacement

                                                         Fwd-GetM

                                                                                    Dir (ack=0)

                                                                                                  Dir (ack>0)
                                              Fwd-GetS

                                                                                    Data from

                                                                                                  Data from

                                                                                                                Data from
                                                                                    Put-Ack

                                                                                                                Inv-Ack
                                                                                                                Owner
                  Store
        Load

                                                                      Inv
 I      Send      Send
        GetS to   GetM to
        Dir/ISD   Dir/IMAD
 ISD    Stall     Stall    Stall                                      Send Inv-           -/S                   -/S
                                                                      Ack to Req
                                                                      /ISDI
 ISDI   Stall     Stall     Stall                                                         -/I           -/I
 IMAD   Stall     Stall     Stall             Stall      Stall                            -/M     -/IMA -/M           ack--
 IMA    Stall     StallD    Stall             -/IMAS     -/IMAI                                                       ack-- -/M
 IMAS   Stall     Stall     Stall                                     Send                                            ack-- Send
                                                                      Inv-Ack                                               data to
                                                                      to Req/                                               Req and
                                                                      IMASI                                                 Dir/S
 IMASI Stall      Stall     Stall                                                                                     ack-- Send
                                                                                                                            data to
                                                                                                                            Req and
                                                                                                                            Dir/I
 IMAI   Stall     Stall     Stall                                                                                     ack-- Send
                                                                                                                            data to
                                                                                                                            Req/I
 S      Hit       Send      Send PutS                                 Send Inv-
                  GetM      to Dir                                    Ack to
                  to Dir/   /SIA                                      Req/I
                  SMAD
 SMAD Hit         Stall     Stall             Stall      Stall        Send Inv-           -/M     -/SMA               ack--
                                                                      Ack to Req/
                                                                      IMAD
 SMA    Hit       Stall     Stall             -/SMAS     -/SMAI                                                       ack-- -/M
 SMAS   Stall     Stall     Stall                                     Send                                            ack-- Send
                                                                      Inv-Ack                                               data to
                                                                      to Req/                                               Req and
                                                                      SMASI                                                 Dir/S
 SMASI Stall      Stall     Stall                                                                                     ack-- Send
                                                                                                                            data to
                                                                                                                            Req and
                                                                                                                            Dir/I
 SMAI   Stall     Stall     Stall                                                                                     ack-- Send
                                                                                                                            data to
                                                                                                                            Req/I
 M      Hit       Hit       Send              Send data Send data
                            PutM              to Req and to Req/I
                            +data to          Dir/S
                            Dir/MIA
 MIA    Stall     Stall     Stall             Send data Send data                   -/I
                                              to Req and to Req/IIA
                                              Dir/SIA
 SIA    Stall     Stall     Stall                                     Send Inv- -/I
                                                                      Ack to Req/
                                                                      IIA
 IIA    Stall     Stall     Stall                                                 -/I
Table 8.9: Non-stalling MSI directory protocol—directory controller

                                                                                          Non-Owner
                                                                          from Owner
                        GetM from

                                                                          PutM+data

                                                                                          PutM+data
                                                         PutS-Last
                                        NotLast
                        Owner

                                        PutS-
         GetS

                                                                                                          Data
                                                                                          from
  I     Send data to    Send data to      Send Put-Ack   Send Put-Ack                     Send Put-Ack
        Req, add Req to Req, set Owner to Req            to Req                           to Req
        Sharer/S        to Req/M
  S     Send data to    Send data to      Send Put-Ack   Send Put-Ack                     Remove Req
        Req, add Req to Req, set Owner to Req, remove    to Req, remove                   from Sharers,
        Sharers         to Req, send Inv Req from        Req from Shar-                   send Put-Ack
                        to Sharers, clear Sharers        ers/I                            to Req
                        Sharers/M
  M     Forward GetS Forward GetM Send Put-Ack           Send Put-Ack     Copy data       Send Put-Ack
        to Owner, add to Owner, set       to Req         to Req           to memory,      to Req
        Req to Sharers, Owner to Req                                      send Put-Ack
        clear Owner/SD                                                    to Req, clear
                                                                          Owner/I
  SD    Stall           Stall           Sent Put-Ack     Sent Put-Ack                     Remove Req      Copy data to
                                        to Req, remove   to Req, remove                   from Sharers,   memory/S
                                        Req from         Req from                         send Put-Ack
                                        Sharers          Sharers                          to Req

 8.7.3   INTERCONNECTION NETWORKS WITHOUT POINT-TO-POINT
         ORDERING
 We mentioned in Section 8.2, when discussing the system model of our baseline MSI directory
 protocol, that we assumed that the interconnection network provides point-to-point ordering for
 the Forwarded Request network. At the time, we claimed that point-to-point ordering simplifies
 the architect’s job in designing the protocol because ordering eliminates the possibility of certain
 races.
        We now present one example race that is possible if we do not have point-to-point or-
 dering in the interconnection network. We assume the MOSI protocol from Section 8.4. Core
 C1’s cache owns a block in state M. Core C2 sends a GetS request to the directory and core
 C3 sends a GetM request to the directory. The directory receives C2’s GetS first and then C3’s
 GetM. For both requests, the directory forwards them to C1.

       • With point-to-point ordering (illustrated in Figure 8.12): C1 receives the Fwd-GetS, re-
         sponds with Data, and changes the block state to O. C1 then receives the Fwd-GetM,
         responds with Data, and changes the block state to I. This is the expected outcome.

       • Without point-to-point ordering (illustrated in Figure 8.13): The Fwd-GetM from C3
         may arrive at C1 first. C1 responds with Data to C3 and changes the block state to I. The
                                               Fwd-GetM
                                                                       2
                                               (C3)       Dir
                                       5                                   GetM
                                                                1
       Time C1’s state                         Fwd-GetS         GetS
                 M                             (C2)
         1                         3
                         C1                               C2                      C3
         4       O
                               4 Data
         6        I
                                                                    Data
                               6

Figure 8.12: Example with point-to-point ordering.

                                               GetM
                                                                       2
                                               (C3)       Dir
                                           3
                                                                1          GetM
       Time C1’s state                            5             GetS
                                           GetS
         1       M                         (C2)
                         C1                               C2                      C3
         4       I
                              4

                                                                    Data

Figure 8.13: Example without point-to-point ordering. Note that C2’s Fwd-GetS arrives at C1
in state I and thus C1 does not respond.

     Fwd-GetS from C2 then arrives at C1. C1 is in I and cannot respond. The GetS request
     from C2 will never be satisfied and the system will eventually deadlock.

      The directory protocols we have presented thus far are not compatible with interconnec-
tion networks that do not provide point-to-point order for the Forwarded Request network. To
make the protocols compatible, we would have to modify them to correctly handle races like
the one described above. One typical approach to eliminating races like these is to add extra
handshaking messages. In the example above, the directory could wait for the cache controller
 to acknowledge reception of each forwarded request sent to it before forwarding another request
 to it.
        Given that point-to-point ordering reduces complexity, it would seem an obvious design
 decision. However, enforcing point-to-point ordering prohibits us from implementing some
 potentially useful optimizations in the interconnection network. Notably, it prohibits the unre-
 stricted use of adaptive routing.
        Adaptive routing enables a message to dynamically choose its path as it traverses the
 network, generally to avoid congested links or switches. Adaptive routing, although useful for
 spreading traffic and mitigating congestion, enables messages between endpoints to take differ-
 ent paths and thus arrive in a different order than that in which they were sent. Consider the
 example in Figure 8.14, in which Switch A sends two messages, M1 and then M2, to Switch D.
 With adaptive routing, they take different paths, as shown in the figure. If there happens to be
 more congestion at Switch B than at Switch C, then M2 could arrive at Switch D before M1,
 despite being sent after M1.

                                                  Message M1

                                   A                            B

                                   C                            D

                                Message M2

Figure 8.14: Adaptive routing example.

 8.7.4 SILENT VS. NON-SILENT EVICTIONS OF BLOCKS IN STATE S
 We designed our baseline directory protocol such that a cache cannot silently evict a block in
 state S (i.e., without issuing a PutS to notify the directory). To evict an S block, the cache must
 send a PutS to the directory and wait for a Put-Ack. Another option would be to allow silent
 evictions of S blocks. (A similar discussion could be made for blocks in state E, if one considers
 the E state to not be an ownership state, in which case silent evictions of E blocks are possible.)
Advantages of Silent PutS
The drawback to the explicit PutS is that it uses interconnection network bandwidth—albeit for
small data-free PutS and Put-Ack messages—even in cases when it ends up not being helpful.
For example if core C1 sends a PutS to the directory and then subsequently wants to perform
a load to this block, C1 sends a GetS to the directory and re-acquires the block in S. If C1
sends this second GetS before any intervening GetM requests from other cores, then the PutS
transaction served no purpose but did consume bandwidth.

Advantages of Explicit PutS
The primary motivation for sending a PutS is that a PutS enables the directory to remove the
cache no longer sharing the block from its list of sharers. There are three benefits to having a
more precise sharer list. First, when a subsequent GetM arrives, the directory need not send an
Invalidation to this cache. The GetM transaction is accelerated by eliminating the Invalidation
and having to wait for the subsequent Inv-Ack. Second, in a MESI protocol, if the directory is
precisely counting the sharers, it can identify situations in which the last sharer has evicted its
block; when the directory knows there are no sharers, it can respond to a GetS with Exclusive
data. Third, recall from Section 8.6.2 that directory caches that use Recalls can benefit from
having explicit PutS messages to avoid unnecessary Recall requests.
       A secondary motivation for sending a PutS, and the reason our baseline protocol does send
a PutS, is that it simplifies the protocol by eliminating some races. Notably, without a PutS, a
cache that silently evicts a block in S and then sends a GetS request to re-obtain that evicted
block in S can receive an Invalidation from the directory before receiving the data for its GetS.
In this situation, the cache does not know if the Invalidation pertains to the first period in which
it held the block in S or the second period (i.e., whether the Invalidation is serialized before or
after the GetS). The simplest solution to this race is to pessimistically assume the worst case (the
Invalidation pertains to the second period) and always invalidate the block as soon as its data
arrives. More efficient solutions exist, but complicate the protocol.

8.8     CASE STUDIES
In this section, we discuss several commercial directory coherence protocols. We start with a
traditional multi-chip system, the SGI Origin 2000. We then discuss more recently developed
directory protocols, including AMD’s Coherent HyperTransport and the subsequent Hyper-
Transport Assist. Last, we present Intel’s QuickPath Interconnect (QPI).

8.8.1 SGI ORIGIN 2000
The Silicon Graphics Origin 2000 [10] was a commercial multi-chip multiprocessor designed in
the mid-1990s to scale to 1024 cores. The emphasis on scalability necessitated a scalable coher-
ence protocol, resulting in one of the first commercial shared-memory systems using a directory
 protocol. The Origin’s directory protocol evolved from the design of the Stanford DASH mul-
 tiprocessor [11], as the DASH and Origin had overlapping architecture teams.
       As illustrated in Figure 8.15, the Origin consists of up to 512 nodes, where each node
 consists of two MIPS R10000 processors connected via a bus to a specialized ASIC called the
 Hub. Unlike similar designs, Origin’s processor bus does not exploit coherent snooping and
 simply connects the processors to each other and to the node’s Hub. The Hub manages the
 cache coherence protocol and interfaces the node to the interconnection network. The Hub also
 connects to the node’s portion of the distributed memory and directory. The network does not
 support any ordering, even point-to-point ordering between nodes. Thus, if Processor A sends
 two messages to Processor B, they may arrive in a different order than that in which they were
 sent.

                                                               MIPS       MIPS
                                                               R10000     R10000

        Node       Node               Node
                                                                      Bus (not coherent)

                                                                    Hub             Memory &
               Interconnection Network                                              Directory
                                                                       to network

Figure 8.15: SGI Origin.

         The Origin’s directory protocol has a few distinguishing features that are worth discussing.
 First, because of its scalability, each directory entry contains fewer bits than necessary to rep-
 resent every possible cache that could be sharing a block. The directory dynamically chooses,
 for each directory entry, to use either a coarse bit vector representation or a limited pointer
 representation (Section 8.5).
         A second interesting feature in the protocol is that because the network provides no or-
 dering, there are several new coherence message race conditions that are possible. Notably, the
 examples from Section 8.7.3 are possible. To maintain correctness, the protocol must consider
 all of these possible race conditions introduced by not enforcing ordering in the network.
         A third interesting feature is the protocol’s use of a non-ownership E state. Because the
 E state is not an ownership state, a cache can silently evict a block in state E (or state S).
         A fourth interesting feature of the Origin is that is provides a special Upgrade coherence
 request to transition from S to M without needlessly requesting data, which is not unusual but
 does introduce a new race. There is a window of vulnerability between when processor P1 sends
 an Upgrade and when the Upgrade is serialized at the directory; if another processor’s GetM or
 Upgrade is serialized first, then P1’s state is I when its Upgrade arrives at the directory, and P1
in fact needs data. In this situation, the directory sends a negative acknowledgment (NACK) to
P1, and P1 must send a GetM to the directory.
       Another interesting feature of the Origin’s E state is how requests are satisfied when a
processor is in E. Consider the case where processor P1 obtains a block in state E. If P2 now
sends a GetS to the directory, the directory must consider that P1 (a) might have silently evicted
the block, (b) might have an unmodified value of the block (i.e., with the same value as at
memory), or (c) might have a modified value of the block. To handle all of these possibilities,
the directory responds with data to P2 and also forwards the request to P1. P1 sends P2 either
new data (if in M) or just an acknowledgment. P2 must wait for both responses to arrive to
know which message’s data to use.
       One other quirk of the Origin is that it uses only two networks (request and response)
instead of the three required to avoid deadlock. A directory protocol has three message types
(request, forwarded request, and response) and thus nominally requires three networks. Instead,
the Origin protocol detects when deadlock could occur and sends a “backoff ” message to a
requestor on the response network. The backoff message contains the list of nodes that the
request needs to be sent to, and the requestor can then send to them on the request network.

8.8.2 COHERENT HYPERTRANSPORT
Directory protocols were originally developed to meet the needs of highly scalable systems, and
the SGI Origin is a classic example of such a system. Recently, however, directory protocols
have become attractive even for small- to medium-scale systems because they facilitate the use
of point-to-point links in the interconnection network. This advantage of directory protocols
motivated the design of AMD’s Coherent HyperTransport (HT) [5]. Coherent HT enables
glueless connections of AMD processors into small-scale multiprocessors. Perhaps ironically,
Coherent HT actually uses broadcasts, thus demonstrating that the appeal of directory protocols
in this case is the use of point-to-point links, rather than scalability.
       AMD observed that systems with up to eight processor chips can be built with only three
point-to-point links per chip and a maximum chip-to-chip distance of three links. Eight pro-
cessor chips, each with 6 cores, means a system with a respectable 48 cores. To keep the protocol
simple, Coherent HT uses a variation on a Dir0 B directory protocol (Section 8.5.2) that stores
no stable directory state. Any coherence request sent to the directory is forwarded to all cache
controllers (i.e., broadcast). Coherent HT can also be thought of as an example of a null direc-
tory cache: requests always miss in the (null) directory cache, so it always broadcasts. Because
of the broadcasts, the protocol does not scale to large-scale systems, but that was not the goal.
       In a system with Coherent HT, each processor chip contains some number of cores, one
or more integrated memory controllers, one or more integrated HyperTransport controllers,
and between one and three Coherent HT links to other processor chips. A “node” consists of a
processor chip and its associated memory for which it is the home.
       There are many viable interconnection network topologies, such as the four-node system
 shown in Figure 8.16. Significantly, this protocol does not require a total order of coherence
 requests, which provides greater flexibility for the interconnection network.

                  DRAM                 DRAM

                                                                   Core                Core
                 Multicore            Multicore
                 Processor            Processor

                                                                                              Controller
      Coherent

                                                                                              Memory
      HT Link
                                                                            Crossbar

                 Multicore            Multicore
                 Processor            Processor

                                                                        Control

                                                                                   Control
                                                                         HT

                                                                                    HT
                  DRAM                 DRAM

Figure 8.16: Four-node coherent HyperTransport system (adapted from [5]).

         A coherence transaction works as follows. A core unicasts a coherence request to the di-
 rectory controller at the home node, as in a typical directory protocol. Because the directory has
 no state and thus cannot determine which cores need to observe the request, the directory con-
 troller then broadcasts the forwarded request to all cores, including the requestor. (This broadcast
 is like what happens in a snooping protocol, except that the broadcast is not totally ordered and
 does not originate with the requestor.) Each core then receives the forwarded request and sends
 a response (either data or an acknowledgment) to the requestor. Once the requestor has received
 all of the responses, it sends a message to the directory controller at the home node to complete
 the transaction.
         Looking at this protocol, one can view it as the best or worst of both worlds. Optimisti-
 cally, it has point-to-point links with no directory state or complexity, and it is sufficiently scal-
 able for up to eight processors. Pessimistically, it has the long three-hop latency of directories—
 or four hops, if you consider the message from the requestor to the home to complete the trans-
 action, although this message is not on the critical path—with the high broadcast traffic of
 snooping. In fact, Coherent HT uses even more bandwidth than snooping because all broad-
 casted forwarded requests generate a response. The drawbacks of Coherent HT motivated an
 enhanced design called HyperTransport Assist [6].
8.8.3 HYPERTRANSPORT ASSIST
For the 12-core AMD Opteron processor-based system code-named Magny Cours, AMD de-
veloped HyperTransport Assist [6]. HT Assist enhances Coherent HT by eliminating the need
to broadcast every forwarded coherence request. Instead of the Dir0 B-like protocol of Coherent
HT, HT Assist uses a directory cache similar to the design described in Section 8.6.2. Each
multicore processor chip has an inclusive directory cache that has a directory entry for every
block (a) for which it is the home and (b) that is cached anywhere in the system. There is no
DRAM directory, thus preserving one of the key features of Coherent HT. A miss in the di-
rectory cache indicates that the block is not cached anywhere. HT Assist’s directory cache uses
Recall requests to handle situations in which the directory cache is full and needs to add a new
entry. Although HT Assist appears from our description thus far to be quite similar to the design
in Section 8.6.2, it has several distinguishing features that we present in greater detail.
       First, the directory entries provide only enough information to determine whether a co-
herence request must be forwarded to all cores, forwarded to a single core, or satisfied by the
home node’s memory. That is, the directory does not maintain sufficient state to distinguish
needing to forward a request to two cores from needing to forward the request to all cores. This
design decision eliminated the storage cost of having to maintain the exact number of sharers of
each block; instead, two directory states distinguish “one sharer” from “more than one sharer.”
       Second, the HT Assist design is careful to avoid incurring a large number of Recalls.
AMD adhered to a rule of thumb that there should be at least twice as many directory entries as
cached blocks. Interestingly, AMD chose not to send explicit PutS requests; their experiments
apparently convinced them that the additional PutS traffic was not worth the limited benefit in
terms of a reduction in Recalls.
       Third, the directory cache shares the LLC. The LLC is statically partitioned by the BIOS
at boot time, and the default is to allocate 1 MB to the directory cache and allocate the remaining
5 MB to the LLC itself. Each 64-byte block of the LLC that is allocated to the directory cache
is interpreted as 16 4-byte directory entries, organized as four 4-way set-associative sets.

8.8.4 INTEL QPI
Intel developed its QuickPath Interconnect (QPI) [9, 12] for connecting processor chips starting
with the 2008 Intel Core microarchitecture, and QPI first shipped in the Intel Core i7-9xx
processor. Prior to this, Intel connected processor chips with a shared-wire bus called the Front-
Side Bus (FSB). FSB evolved from a single shared bus to multiple buses, but the FSB approach
was fundamentally bottlenecked by the electrical signaling limits of the buses. To overcome
this limitation, Intel designed QPI to connect processor chips with point-to-point (i.e., non-
bus) links. QPI specifies multiple levels of the networking stack, from physical layer to protocol
layer. For purposes of this primer, we focus on the protocol layer here.
       QPI supports five stable coherence states, the typical MESI states and the F(orward) state.
The F state is a clean, read-only state, and it is distinguished from the S state because a cache
 with a block in F may respond with data (i.e., forward the data) to coherence requests. Only
 one cache may hold a block in F at a given time. The F state is somewhat similar to the O state,
 but differs in that a block in F is not dirty and can thus be silently evicted; a cache that wishes
 to evict a block in O must copy the block back to memory. The benefit of the F state is that it
 allows read-only data to be sourced from a cache, which is often faster than sourcing it from
 memory (which usually responds to requests when a block is read-only).
         QPI provides two different protocol modes, depending on the size of the system: “home
 snoop” and “source snoop.”
         QPI’s Home Snoop mode is effectively a scalable directory protocol (i.e., do not be con-
 fused by the word “snoop” in its name2 ). As with typical directory protocols, a core C1 issues a
 request to the directory at the home node C2, and the directory forwards that request to only
 the node(s) that need to see it, say C3 (the owner in M). C3 responds with data to C1 and also
 sends a message to C2 to notify the directory. When the directory at C2 receives the notification
 from C3, it sends a “completion” message to C1, at which point C1 may use the data it received
 from C3. The directory serves as the serialization point in the protocol and resolves message
 races.
         QPI’s Source Snoop protocol mode is designed to have lower-latency coherence transac-
 tions, at the expense of not scaling well to large systems with many nodes. A core C1 broadcasts
 a request to all nodes, including the home. Each core responds to the home with a “snoop re-
 sponse” that indicates what state the block was in at that core; if the block was in state M, then
 the core sends the block to the requestor in addition to the snoop response to the home. Once
 the home has received all of the snoop responses for a request, the request has been ordered. At
 this point, the home either sends data to the requestor (if no core owned the block in M) or a
 non-data message to the requestor; either message, when received by the requestor, completes
 the transaction.
         Source Snoop’s use of broadcast requests is similar to a snooping protocol, but with the
 critical difference of the broadcast requests not traveling on a totally ordered broadcast network.
 Because the network is not totally ordered, the protocol must have a mechanism to resolve races
 (i.e., when two broadcasts race, such that core C1 sees broadcast A before broadcast B and core
 C2 sees B before A). This mechanism is provided by the home node, albeit in a way that differs
 from typical race ordering in directory protocols. Typically, the directory at the requested block’s
 home orders two racing requests based on which request arrives at the home first. QPI’s Source
 Snoop, instead, orders the requests based on which request’s snoop responses have all arrived at
 the home.
         Consider the race situation in which block A is initially in state I in the caches of both
 C1 and C2. C1 and C2 both decide to broadcast GetM requests for A (i.e., send a GetM to
 the other core and to the home). When each core receives the other core’s GetM, it sends a
 snoop response to the home. Assume that C2’s snoop response arrives at the home before C1’s

      2 Intel uses the word “snoop” to refer to what a core does when it receives a coherence request from another node.
snoop response. In this case, C1’s request is ordered first and the home sends data to C1 and
informs C1 that there is a race. C1 then sends an acknowledgment to the home, and the home
subsequently sends a message to C1 that both completes C1’s transaction and tells C1 to send
the block to C2. Handling this race is somewhat more complicated than in a typical directory
protocol in which requests are ordered when they arrive at the directory.
       Source Snoop mode uses more bandwidth than Home Snoop, due to broadcasting, but
Source Snoop’s common case (no race) transaction latency is less. Source Snoop is somewhat
similar to Coherent HyperTransport, but with one key difference. In Coherent HT, a request
is unicasted to the home, and the home broadcasts the request. In Source Snoop, the requestor
broadcasts the request. Source Snoop thus introduces more complexity in resolving races because
there is no single point at which requests can be ordered; Coherent HT uses the home for this
purpose.

8.9     DISCUSSION AND THE FUTURE OF DIRECTORY
        PROTOCOLS
Directory protocols have come to dominate the market. Even in small-scale systems, directory
protocols are more common that snooping protocols, largely because they facilitate the use of
point-to-point links in the interconnection network. Furthermore, directory protocols are the
only option for systems requiring scalable cache coherence. Although there are numerous opti-
mizations and implementation tricks that can mitigate the bottlenecks of snooping, fundamen-
tally none of them can eliminate these bottlenecks. For systems that need to scale to hundreds
or even thousands of nodes, a directory protocol is the only viable option for coherence. Because
of their scalability, we anticipate that directory protocols will continue their dominance for the
foreseeable future.
       It is possible, though, that future highly scalable systems will not be coherent or at least not
coherent across the entire system. Perhaps such systems will be partitioned into subsystems that
are coherent, but coherence is not maintained across the subsystems. Or perhaps such systems
will follow the lead of supercomputers, like those from Cray, that have either not provided
coherence [14] or have provided coherence but restricted what data can be cached [1].

8.10 REFERENCES
 [1] D. Abts, S. Scott, and D. J. Lilja. So many states, so little time: Verifying memory coher-
     ence in the Cray X1. In Proc. of the International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sympo-
     sium, 2003. DOI: 10.1109/ipdps.2003.1213087. 189

 [2] A. Agarwal, R. Simoni, M. Horowitz, and J. Hennessy. An evaluation of directory schemes
     for cache coherence. In Proc. of the 15th Annual International Symposium on Computer Ar-
     chitecture, pp. 280–89, May 1988. DOI: 10.1109/isca.1988.5238. 171
      [3] J. K. Archibald and J.-L. Baer. An economical solution to the cache coherence problem.
          In Proc. of the 11th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 355–62,
          June 1984. DOI: 10.1145/800015.808205. 171
      [4] J.-L. Baer and W.-H. Wang. On the inclusion properties for multi-level cache hierarchies.
          In Proc. of the 15th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 73–80,
          May 1988. DOI: 10.1109/isca.1988.5212. 174
      [5] P. Conway and B. Hughes. The AMD Opteron northbridge architecture. IEEE Micro,
          27(2):10–21, March/April 2007. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2007.43. 185, 186
      [6] P. Conway, N. Kalyanasundharam, G. Donley, K. Lepak, and B. Hughes. Cache hierar-
          chy and memory subsystem of the AMD Opteron processor. IEEE Micro, 30(2):16–29,
          March/April 2010. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2010.31. 172, 176, 186, 187
      [7] A. Gupta, W.-D. Weber, and T. Mowry. Reducing memory and traffic requirements for
          scalable directory-based cache coherence schemes. In Proc. of the International Conference
          on Parallel Processing, 1990. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4615-3604-8_9. 172
      [8] M. D. Hill, J. R. Larus, S. K. Reinhardt, and D. A. Wood. Cooperative shared mem-
          ory: Software and hardware for scalable multiprocessors. ACM Transactions on Computer
          Systems, 11(4):300–18, November 1993. DOI: 10.1145/161541.161544. 171
      [9] Intel Corporation. An Introduction to the Intel QuickPath Interconnect. Document
          Number 320412–001US, January 2009. 187
 [10] J. Laudon and D. Lenoski. The SGI Origin: A ccNUMA highly scalable server. In Proc. of
      the 24th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 241–51, June 1997.
      DOI: 10.1145/264107.264206. 162, 172, 183
 [11] D. Lenoski, J. Laudon, K. Gharachorloo, W.-D. Weber, A. Gupta, J. Hennessy, M.
      Horowitz, and M. Lam. The Stanford DASH multiprocessor. IEEE Computer, 25(3):63–
      79, March 1992. DOI: 10.1109/2.121510. 184
 [12] R. A. Maddox, G. Singh, and R. J. Safranek. Weaving High Performance Multiprocessor
      Fabric: Architecture Insights into the Intel QuickPath Interconnect. Intel Press, 2009. 187
 [13] M. R. Marty and M. D. Hill. Virtual hierarchies to support server consolidation. In Proc.
      of the 34th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, June 2007. DOI:
      10.1145/1250662.1250670. 172
 [14] S. L. Scott. Synchronization and communication in the Cray T3E multiprocessor. In Proc.
      of the 7th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
      Operating Systems, pp. 26–36, October 1996. 189
