
                                 CHAPTER                       9

Advanced Topics in Coherence
In Chapters 7 and 8, we have presented snooping and directory coherence protocols in the con-
text of the simplest system models that were sufficient for explaining the fundamental issues of
these protocols. In this chapter, we extend our presentation of coherence in several directions. In
Section 9.1, we discuss the issues involved in designing coherence protocols for more sophisti-
cated system models. In Section 9.2, we describe optimizations that apply to both snooping and
directory protocols. In Section 9.3, we explain how to ensure that a coherence protocol remains
live (i.e., avoids deadlock, livelock, and starvation). In Section 9.4, we present token coherence
protocols [12], a class of protocols that subsumes both snooping and directory protocols. We
conclude in Section 9.5 with a brief discussion of the future of coherence.

9.1     SYSTEM MODELS
Thus far, we have assumed a simple system model, in which each processor core has a single-level
write-back data cache that is physically addressed. This system model omitted numerous fea-
tures that are typically present in commercial systems, such as instruction caches (Section 9.1.1),
translation lookaside buffers (Section 9.1.2), virtually addressed caches (Section 9.1.3), write-
through caches (Section 9.1.4), coherent DMA (Section 9.1.5), and multiple levels of caches
(Section 9.1.6).

9.1.1 INSTRUCTION CACHES
All modern cores have at least one level of instruction cache, raising the question of whether and
how to support instruction cache coherence. Although truly self-modifying code is rare, cache
blocks containing instructions may be modified when the operating system loads a program or
library, a just-in-time ( JIT) compiler generates code, or a dynamic run-time system re-optimizes
a program.
       Adding instruction caches to a coherence protocol is superficially straightforward; blocks
in an instruction cache are read-only and thus in either stable state I or S. Furthermore, the core
never writes directly to the instruction cache; a core modifies code by performing stores to its
data cache. Thus, the instruction cache’s coherence controller takes action only when it observes
a GetM from another cache (possibly its own L1 data cache) to a block in state S and simply
invalidates the block.
       Instruction cache coherence differs from data cache coherence for several reasons. Most
importantly, once fetched, an instruction may remain buffered in the core’s pipeline for many
 cycles (e.g., consider a core that fills its 128-instruction window with a long sequence of loads,
 each of which misses all the way to DRAM). Software that modifies code needs some way to
 know when a write has affected the fetched instruction stream. Some architectures, such as the
 AMD Opteron, address this issue using a separate structure that tracks which instructions are in
 the pipeline. If this structure detects a change to an in-flight instruction, it flushes the pipeline.
 However, because instructions are modified far less frequently than data, other architectures re-
 quire the software to explicitly manage coherence. For example, the Power architecture provides
 the icbi (instruction cache block invalidate) instruction to invalidate an instruction cache entry.

 9.1.2 TRANSLATION LOOKASIDE BUFFERS (TLBs)
 Translation lookaside buffers (TLBs) are caches that hold a special type of data: translations from
 virtual to physical addresses. As with other caches, they must be kept coherent. Like instruction
 caches, they have not historically participated in the same all-hardware coherence protocols
 that handle data caches. The traditional approach to TLB coherence is TLB shootdown [18],
 a software-managed coherence scheme that may or may not have some hardware support. In
 a classic implementation, a core invalidates a translation entry (e.g., by clearing the page table
 entry’s PageValid bit) and sends an inter-processor interrupt to all cores. Each core receives
 its interrupt, traps to a software handler, either invalidates the specific translation entry from
 its TLBs or flushes all entries from its TLBs (depending upon the platform). Each core must
 also ensure that there are no instructions in flight which are using the now-stale translation,
 typically by flushing the pipeline. Each core then sends an acknowledgment back to the initiating
 core, using an interprocessor interrupt. The initiating core waits for all of the acknowledgments,
 ensuring that all stale translation entries have been invalidated, before modifying the translation
 (or reusing the physical page). Some architectures provide special support to accelerate TLB
 shootdown. For example, the Power architecture eliminates costly inter-processor interrupts
 by using a special tlbie (TLB invalidate entry) instruction; the initiating core executes a tlbie
 instruction, which broadcasts the invalidated virtual page number to all the cores and completes
 only once all cores have completed the invalidation.
        Recent research proposed eliminating TLB shootdown and instead incorporating the
 TLBs into the existing all-hardware coherence protocol for the data and instruction caches [16].
 This all-hardware solution is more scalable than TLB shootdown, but it requires a modification
 to the TLBs to enable them to be addressable in the same way as the data and instruction
 caches. That is, the TLBs must snoop the physical addresses of the blocks that hold translations
 in memory.

 9.1.3 VIRTUAL CACHES
 Most caches in current systems—and all caches discussed thus far in this primer—are accessed
 with physical addresses, yet caches can also be accessed with virtual addresses. We illustrate both
 options in Figure 9.1. A virtually addressed cache (“virtual cache”) has one key advantage with

                              virtual address
                 Core                                    Cache

                                (a) Virtually addressed cache

                              virtual address                        physical address
                 Core                                   TLB                                     Cache

                               (b) Physically addressed cache

Figure 9.1: Physical vs. virtual addressed caches.

respect to a physically addressed cache (“physical cache”): the latency of address translation is
off the critical path.1 This latency advantage is appealing for level-one caches, where latency
is critical, but generally less compelling for lower level caches where latencies are less critical.
Virtual caches, however, pose a few challenges to the architect of a coherence protocol:
    • Coherence protocols invariably operate on physical addresses, for compatibility with main
      memory, which would otherwise require its own TLB. Thus, when a coherence request
      arrives at a virtual cache, the request’s address must undergo reverse translation to obtain
      the virtual address with which to access the cache.
    • Virtual caches introduce the problem of synonyms. Synonyms are multiple virtual addresses
      that map to the same physical address. Without mechanisms in place to avoid synonyms,
      it is possible for synonyms to simultaneously exist in a virtual cache. Thus, not only does
      a virtual cache requires a mechanism for reverse translation but also any given reverse
      translation could result in multiple virtual addresses.
      Because of the complexity of implementing virtual caches, they are rarely used in current
systems. However, they have been used in a number of earlier systems, and it is possible that
they could become more relevant again in the future.

9.1.4 WRITE-THROUGH CACHES
Our baseline system model assumes writeback L1 data caches and a shared writeback LLC.
The other option, write-through caches, has several advantages and disadvantages. The obvious
disadvantages include significantly greater bandwidth and power to write data through to the
    1 A cache that is virtually indexed and physically tagged has this same advantage without the shortcomings of virtual
caches.
 next lower level of the memory hierarchy. In modern systems, these disadvantages effectively
 limit the write-through/writeback decision to the L1 cache.
        The advantages of write-through L1s include the following.

      • A significantly simpler two-state VI (Valid and Invalid) coherence protocol. Stores write
        through to the LLC and invalidate all Valid copies in other caches.

      • An L1 eviction requires no action, besides changing the L1 state to Invalid, because the
        LLC always holds up-to-date data.

      • When the LLC handles a coherence request, it can respond immediately because it always
        has up-to-date data.

      • When an L1 observes another core’s write, it needs only to change the cache block’s state
        to Invalid. Importantly, this allows the L1 to represent each block’s state with a single,
        clearable flip-flop, eliminating complex arbitration or dual-ported state RAMs.

      • Finally, write-through caches also facilitate fault tolerance. Although a detailed discussion
        is outside the scope of this primer, a write-through L1 cache never holds the only copy of
        a block because the LLC always holds a valid copy. This allows the L1 to use only parity
        because it can always just invalidate a block with a parity error.

       Write-through caches pose some challenges with multithreaded cores and shared L1
 caches. Recall that TSO requires write atomicity, and thus all threads (except the thread per-
 forming the store) must see the store at the same time. Thus, if two threads T0 and T1 share the
 same L1 data cache, T0’s store to block A must prevent T1 from accessing the new value until all
 copies in other caches have been invalidated (or updated). Despite these complications and dis-
 advantages, several designs use write-through L1 caches, including the Sun Niagara processors
 and AMD Bulldozer.

 9.1.5 COHERENT DIRECT MEMORY ACCESS (DMA)
 In Chapter 2, when we first introduced coherence, we observed that incoherence can arise only if
 there are multiple actors that can read and write to caches and memory. Today, the most obvious
 collection of actors are the multiple cores on a single chip, but the cache coherence problem first
 arose in systems with a single core and direct memory access (DMA). A DMA controller is an
 actor that reads and writes memory under explicit system software control, typically at the page
 granularity. A DMA operation that reads memory should find the most recent version of each
 block, even if the block resides in a cache in state M or O. Similarly, a DMA operation that
 writes memory needs to invalidate all stale copies of the block.
        It is straightforward to provide coherent DMA by adding a coherent cache to the DMA
 controller, and thus having DMA participate in the coherence protocol. In such a model, a
DMA controller is indistinguishable from a dedicated core, guaranteeing that DMA reads will
always find the most recent version of a block and DMA writes will invalidate all stale copies.
       However, adding a coherent cache to a DMA controller is undesirable for several reasons.
First, DMA controllers have very different locality patterns than conventional cores, and they
stream through memory with little, if any, temporal reuse. Thus, DMA controllers have little use
for a cache larger than a single block. Second, when a DMA controller writes a block, it generally
writes the entire block. Thus, fetching a block with a GetM is wasteful, since the entire data will
be overwritten. Many coherence protocols optimize this case using special coherence operations.
We could imagine adding a new GetM-NoData request to the protocols in this primer, which
seeks M permission but expects only an acknowledgment message rather than a Data message.
Other protocols use a special PutNewData message, which updates memory and invalidates all
other copies including those in M and O.
       DMA can also be made to work without hardware cache coherence, by requiring the
operating system to selectively flush caches. For example, before initiating a DMA to or from a
page P, the operating system could force all caches to flush page P using a protocol similar to TLB
Shootdown (or using some other page flushing hardware support). This approach is inefficient,
and thus generally only seen in some embedded systems, because the operating system must
conservatively flush a page even if none of its blocks are in any cache.

9.1.6    MULTI-LEVEL CACHES AND HIERARCHICAL COHERENCE
         PROTOCOLS
Our baseline system assumes a single multicore chip with two levels of cache: private level-
one data (L1) caches for each core and a shared last-level memory-side cache that holds both
data and instructions (LLC). But many other combinations of chips and caches are possible. For
example, Intel Nehalem and AMD Opteron processors support systems with multiple multicore
chips as well as an additional level of private (per core) L2 caches. Figure 9.2 illustrates a system
with two multicore processors, each having two cores with private L2 caches between the private
L1s and shared LLC.
      We next discuss multiple levels of caches on a single multicore chip, systems with multiple
multicore processors, and hierarchical coherence protocols.

Multi-Level Caches
With multiple levels of caches, the coherence protocol must be sure to keep all of these caches
coherent. Perhaps the most straightforward solution is to treat each cache completely inde-
pendently. For example, the L1, L2, and LLC could each independently process all incoming
coherence requests; this is the approach taken by the AMD Opteron [1].
      However, we can also design the cache hierarchy such that not every cache needs to snoop
every coherence request. As discussed in Section 8.6, a key design option is whether and which
caches to make inclusive. An L2 is inclusive if it contains a superset of the blocks in the L1
                            Multicore Chip                      Multicore Chip

                           Core         Core                    Core         Core

                            L1          L1                       L1          L1

                            L2          L2                       L2          L2

       Memory                     LLC                                  LLC                   Memory

                                    Inter-Chip Interconnection Network

 Figure 9.2: System with multiple multicore chips.

 caches. Consider the case of an inclusive L2 when the L2 snoops a GetM for block B from
 another core. If B is not in the L2, then there is no need to also snoop the L1 caches because
 B cannot be in any of them. Thus, an inclusive L2 cache can serve as a filter that reduces the
 amount of coherence request traffic that must be snooped by the L1 caches. If instead B is in the
 L2, then B might also be in the L1 caches and then the L1 caches must also snoop the request.
 This is the approach taken by the AMD Bulldozer.
        Inclusion’s benefit—the reduction in L1 snoop bandwidth—must be traded off against the
 space wasted by redundant storage of inclusive blocks. The cache hierarchy can hold a greater
 number of distinct blocks if it is exclusive (i.e., if a block is in the L2 then it is not in the L1 caches)
 or non-inclusive (neither inclusive nor exclusive). Another reason not to provide inclusion is to
 avoid the complexity of maintaining inclusion (i.e., invalidating a block from the L1 when an
 L2 evicts that block).

 Multiple Multicore Processors
 Larger systems can be built by composing multiple multicore processor chips. While a full treat-
 ment of scalable systems is beyond the scope of this primer, we examine one key issue: how to
 use the LLC. In single-chip systems, the LLC is a memory-side cache logically associated with
 memory and thus can be largely ignored as far as coherence is concerned. In multi-chip systems,
 the LLC can alternatively be viewed as another level of the memory hierarchy. We present the
 options from the perspective of a given chip (the “local” chip) and its local memory; other chips
 are “remote” chips. The LLC could be used as:
   • A memory-side cache that holds blocks recently requested from the local memory. The
     requests could be either from only the local chip or from both local and remote chips.
   • A core-side cache that holds blocks recently requested by the cores on the chip. The blocks
     in the LLC could have homes on either this chip or other chips. In this case, the coherence
     protocol must usually operate among the LLCs and memories of the multiple multicore
     chips.
      The LLC could also be used for both purposes, in a hybrid scheme. In a hybrid approach,
the architects would have to decide how to allocate the LLC to these different demands.

Hierarchical Coherence Protocols
The protocols described in previous chapters are flat protocols, in that there was a single coher-
ence protocol that every cache controller treats identically. However, once we introduce multiple
levels of caches, we introduce the possible need for hierarchical coherence protocols.
       Some systems are naturally hierarchical, including systems comprised of multiple mul-
ticore chips. Within each chip, there could be an intra-chip protocol, and there could be an
inter-chip protocol across the chips. Coherence requests that can be satisfied by the intra-chip
protocol do not interact with the inter-chip protocol; only when a request cannot be satisfied by
another node on the chip does the request get promoted to the inter-chip protocol.
       The choice of protocol at one level is largely independent of the choice at another level. For
example, an intra-chip snooping protocol can be made compatible with an inter-chip directory
protocol. Each chip would require a single directory controller that considers the entire chip to be
a single node in the directory protocol. The inter-chip directory protocol could be identical to one
of the directory protocols presented in Chapter 8, with the directory state naturally represented
in a coarse fashion. Another possible hierarchical system could have directory protocols for both
the intra- and inter-chip protocols, and the two directory protocols could be the same or even
different from each other.
       An advantage of hierarchical protocols for hierarchical systems is that it enables the design
of a simple, potentially non-scalable intra-chip design for the commodity chip. When designing
a chip, it would be beneficial to not have to design a single protocol that scales to the largest
possible number of cores that could exist in a system. Such a protocol is likely to be overkill for
the vast majority of systems that are comprised of a single chip.
       There are numerous examples of hierarchical protocols for hierarchical systems. The Sun
Wildfire prototype [5] connects multiple snooping systems together with a higher level direc-
tory protocol. The AlphaServer GS320 [4] has two levels of directory protocols, one within
each quad-processor block and another across these blocks. The Stanford DASH machine [10]
consisted of multiple snooping systems connected by a higher level directory protocol.
       In a system with hundreds or thousands of cores, it might not make much sense to have
a single coherence protocol. The system may be more likely to be divided, either statically or
dynamically, into domains that each run a separate workload or separate virtual machine. In
 such a system, it may make sense to implement a hierarchical protocol that optimizes for intra-
 domain sharing yet still permits inter-domain sharing. Recent work by Marty and Hill [13]
 superposes a hierarchical coherence protocol on top of a multicore chip with a flat design. This
 design enables the common case—intra-domain sharing—to be fast while still allowing sharing
 across domains.

 9.2      PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATIONS
 There is a long history of research into optimizing the performance of coherence protocols.
 Rather than present a high-level survey, we focus on two optimizations that are largely inde-
 pendent of whether the underlying coherence protocol is snooping or directory. Why these two
 optimizations? Because they can be effective and they illustrate the kinds of optimizations that
 are possible.

 9.2.1 MIGRATORY SHARING OPTIMIZATION
 In many multithreaded programs, a common phenomenon is migratory sharing. For example,
 one core may read and then write a data block, then a second core may read and write it, and so
 on. This pattern commonly arises from critical sections (e.g., the lock variable itself ) in which the
 data block migrates from one core to another. In a typical protocol, each core performs a GetS
 transaction to read the data and then a subsequent GetM transaction to get write permission for
 the same block. However, if the system can predict that the data conforms to a migratory sharing
 pattern, cores could get an exclusive copy of the block when they first read it, thus reducing both
 the latency and bandwidth to access the data [2, 15, 17]. The migratory optimization is similar
 to the E state optimization, except that it also needs to return an exclusive copy when the block
 is in state M in some cache, not just when the block is in state I in all caches.
         There are two basic approaches to optimizing migratory sharing. First, one can use some
 hardware predictor to predict that a particular block exhibits a migratory sharing pattern and
 issue a GetM rather than a GetS on a load miss. This approach requires no change to the co-
 herence protocol but introduces a few challenges:

      • Predicting migratory sharing: we must design a hardware mechanism to predict when
        a block is undergoing migratory sharing. A simple approach is to use a table to record
        which blocks were first obtained with a GetS and then subsequently written, requiring a
        GetM. On each load miss, the coherence controller could consult the predictor to deter-
        mine whether a block exhibits a migratory sharing pattern. If so, it could issue a GetM
        request, rather than a GetS.

      • Mispredictions: if a block is not migrating, then this optimization can hurt performance.
        Consider the extreme case of a system in which cores issue only GetM requests. Such a
        system would never permit multiple cores to share a block in a read-only state.
       Alternatively, we can extend the coherence protocol with an additional Migratory M
(MM) state. The MM state is equivalent to the state M, from a coherence perspective (i.e.,
dirty, exclusive, owned), but it indicates that the block was obtained by a GetS in response to
a predicted migratory sharing pattern. If the local core proceeds to modify a block in MM, re-
inforcing the migratory sharing pattern, it changes the block to state M. If a core in state M
receives a GetS from another core, it predicts that the access will be migratory and sends ex-
clusive data (invalidating its own copy). If the Other-GetS finds the block in state MM, the
migratory pattern has been broken and the core sends a shared copy and reverts to S (or possibly
O). Thus, if many cores make GetS requests (without subsequent stores and GetM requests),
all cores will receive S copies.
       Migratory sharing is just one example of a phenomenon that, if detected, can be exploited
to improve the performance of coherence protocols. There have been many schemes that target
specific phenomena, as well as more general approaches to predicting coherence events [14].

9.2.2 FALSE SHARING OPTIMIZATIONS
One performance problem that can plague coherence protocols is false sharing. False sharing
occurs when two cores are reading and writing different data that happen to reside on the same
cache block. Even though the cores are not actually sharing the data on the block (i.e., the
sharing is false), there can be a significant amount of coherence traffic between the cores for the
block. This coherence traffic hurts performance when a core is waiting for coherence permissions
to access a block, and it increases the load on the interconnection network. The likelihood of
false sharing occurring is a function of the block size—a larger block can hold more unrelated
pieces of data and thus larger blocks are more prone to false sharing—and the workload. There
are at least two optimizations to mitigate the impact of false sharing.

Sub-Block Coherence
Without reducing the block size, we can perform coherence at a finer, sub-block granularity [7].
Thus, it is possible for a block in a cache to have different coherence states for different sub-
blocks. Sub-blocking reduces false sharing, but it requires extra state bits for each block to hold
the sub-block states.

Speculation
An architect can develop a hardware mechanism to predict when a block that is invalid in a
cache is the victim of false sharing [6]. If the predictor believes the block is invalid due to false
sharing, the core can speculatively use the data in the block until it obtains coherence permissions
to the block. If the prediction was correct, this speculation overcomes the latency penalty of false
sharing, but it does not reduce the traffic on the interconnection network.
 9.3     MAINTAINING LIVENESS
 In Chapter 2, we defined coherence and the invariants that must be maintained by a coherence
 protocol. These invariants are safety invariants; if these invariants are maintained, then the proto-
 col will never allow unsafe (incorrect) behavior. Facetiously, it is easy to provide safety because
 an unplugged computer never does anything incorrect! The key is to provide both safety and
 liveness, where providing liveness requires the prevention of three classes of situations: deadlock,
 livelock, and starvation.

 9.3.1 DEADLOCK
 As discussed briefly in Section 8.2.3, deadlock is the situation in which two or more actors wait
 for each other to perform some action, and thus never make progress. Typically, deadlock results
 from a cycle of resource dependences. Consider the simple case of two nodes A and B and two
 resources X and Y. Assume A holds resource Y and B holds resource X. If A requests X and B
 requests Y, then unless one node relinquishes the resource it already holds, these two nodes will
 deadlock. We illustrate this cyclical dependence graph in Figure 9.3. More generally, deadlock
 can result from cycles involving many nodes and resources. Note that partial deadlocks (e.g.,
 the simple case of deadlock between only nodes A and B) can quickly become complete system
 deadlocks when other nodes wait for deadlocked nodes to perform some action (e.g., node C
 requests resource X).

                                              A requests X
                                          A                  X

                              A holds Y                          B holds X

                                          Y                  B
                                              B requests Y

 Figure 9.3: Example of deadlock due to cyclical resource dependences. Circles are nodes and
 squares are resources. An arc that ends at a resource denotes a request for that resource. An arc
 that starts at a resource denotes the holder of that resource.

 Protocol Deadlocks
 In coherence protocols, deadlock can arise at the protocol level, at cache resource allocation, and
 in the network. Protocol deadlocks arise when a coherence controller waits for a message that
 will never be sent. For example, consider a (buggy) directory protocol that does not wait for a
 Put-Ack after sending a PutS, and instead immediately transitions to state I. If the directory
 controller sends an Inv (e.g., in response to core C1’s GetM request) to core C0 at the same
time that core C0 sends a PutS to the directory, then C1 will never get an Inv-Ack from core
C0 and will deadlock waiting for it. Such deadlocks represent protocol errors and usually arise
from untested race conditions.

Cache Resource Deadlocks
Cache resource deadlocks arise when a cache controller must allocate a resource before perform-
ing some action. These deadlocks typically arise either when handling another core’s request or
on writebacks. For example, consider a cache controller that has a set of shared buffers (e.g.,
transaction buffer entries, or TBEs) that may be allocated both when the core initiates a co-
herence request and when servicing another core’s request. If the core issues enough coherence
requests to allocate all the buffers, then it cannot process another core’s request until it completes
one of its own. If all cores reach this state, then the system deadlocks.

Protocol-Dependent Network Deadlocks
There are two causes of network deadlocks: deadlocks due to buggy routing algorithms, which
are independent of the types of messages and the coherence protocol, and network deadlocks
that arise because of the particular messages being exchanged during coherence protocol opera-
tion. We focus here on this latter category of protocol-dependent network deadlocks. Consider
a directory protocol in which a request message may lead to a forwarded request and a for-
warded request may lead to a response. The protocol must ensure three invariants to avoid cyclic
dependences and thus deadlock.

                                    Sidebar: Virtual Networks
  Instead of using physically distinct networks, we can use distinct virtual networks. Consider
  two cores that are connected with a single point-to-point link. At the end of each link
  is a FIFO queue to hold incoming messages before the receiving core can process them.
  This single network is shown in Fig. 9.4a. To add another physical network, as shown in
  Fig. 9.4b, we duplicate the links and the FIFO queues. Requests travel on one physical
  network, and replies travel on the other physical network.
         To avoid the cost of replicating the links and switches (switches not shown in figures),
  we can add a virtual network, as illustrated in Fig. 9.4c. The only cost of a virtual network is
  an additional FIFO queue at each switch and endpoint in the network. Adding the second
  virtual network in this example allows requests to not get stuck behind replies.
         Virtual networks are related to virtual channels [3], and some papers use the terms
  interchangeably. However, we prefer to distinguish between them because they address
  different types of deadlocks. Virtual networks prevent messages of different classes from
  blocking each other and thus avoid message-level deadlocks.
         Virtual channels are used at the network level to avoid deadlocks due to routing,
  regardless of the message types. To avoid routing deadlock, messages travel on multiple

      virtual channels (e.g., a message traveling west in a 2D torus might be required to use
      virtual channel 2). A virtual channel, like a virtual network, is implemented as an extra
      FIFO queue at each switch and end point in the network. Virtual channels are orthogonal
      to virtual networks; each virtual network may have some number of virtual channels to avoid
      routing deadlock.

                                                                     Request
                                                                      for A

                                                                     Reply               Core C1
          Reply    Request                                           for B
                                    Core C1
          for B     for A
                                                                               Request
                                                           Core C2
                                                                                for B
         Core C2
                          Request   Reply
                           for B    for A                                        Reply
                                                                                 for A
              One Network                                     Two Physical Networks
                  (a)                                                  (b)

                                            Requests              Request
                                                                   for A

                                              Replies             Reply               Core C1
                                                                  for B

                                                                            Request             Requests
                                                        Core C2
                                                                             for B

                                                                             Reply
                                                                                                Replies
                                                                             for A
                                                          Two Virtual Networks
                                                                   (c)

 Figure 9.4: Virtual networks.

       • As explained in Section 8.2.3, each message class must travel on its own network. The
         networks may be physical or virtual (see sidebar on “virtual networks”), but the key is
         avoiding situations in which a message of one class becomes stuck behind a message of
         another class in a FIFO buffer. In this example, requests, forwarded requests, and responses
     all travel on separate networks. A coherence controller thus has three incoming FIFOs,
     one for each network.

   • Message classes must have a dependence order. If a message of class A can cause a co-
     herence controller to issue a message of class B, then a coherence controller may not stall
     the processing of an incoming class B message while waiting for a class A message. In
     the directory example, a coherence controller cannot stall the processing of a forwarded
     request while waiting for a request to arrive, nor can it stall the processing of a response
     while waiting for a forwarded request.

   • The last message class in this chain of dependences—the response message, in this direc-
     tory example—must always be “sunk.” That is, if a coherence controller receives a response
     message, there must be no message class than can prevent it from being removed from its
     incoming queue.

       These three invariants eliminate the possibility of a cycle. Even though a request can be
stalled while waiting for responses or forwarded requests, every request will eventually be pro-
cessed because the number of responses and forwarded requests is bounded by the number of
outstanding transactions.

9.3.2 LIVELOCK
Livelock is a situation in which two or more actors perform actions and change states, yet never
make progress. Livelock is a special case of starvation, discussed next. Livelock occurs most
frequently in coherence protocols that use negative acknowledgment messages (NACKs). A
node may issue a coherence request, but receive a NACK, prompting a retry. If contention or
some repeatable race with another node causes this case to recur indefinitely, then the nodes
livelock. The protocols in this primer do not use NACKs, so we focus on another well-known
livelock scenario involving coherence permissions that can arise in these protocols.
       This cause of livelock is the so-called “window of vulnerability” problem [8], an example
of which is illustrated in Table 9.1. Consider a snooping protocol in which Core C1 issues a
GetS request for block B and changes B’s state to ISAD (in I, going to S, waiting for Own-GetS
and data). At some point later, C1 observes its Own-GetS on the bus and changes B’s state to
state ISD . Between when B goes to state ISD and when C1 receives the data response, C1 is
vulnerable to observing a GetM request for B from another core on the bus. In an optimized
protocol, like the protocol in Section 7.5.5, if a GetM arrives for B in state ISD , C1 will change
B’s state to ISD I. In this transient state, when C1 later receives the data response, C1 changes
B’s state to I. Because C1 cannot perform a load to a block in I, it must issue another GetS for
B. However, this next GetS is just as susceptible to the window of vulnerability problem, and
thus C1 may never make forward progress. The core is still active, and thus the system is not
deadlocked, but it never makes forward progress. Somewhat perversely, this situation is most
 Table 9.1: Livelock example for Core C1 trying to load block B in a snooping protocol

                 Cycle   Event (all for block B)                  Core C1’s State for B
                  0      Initial state                                      I
                  1      Load request, issue GetS to bus                 ISAD
                  2      Observe Own-GetS on bus                          ISD
                  3      Observe Other-GetM on bus                       ISDI
                  4      Receive data for Own-GetS                          I
                  5      Re-issue GetS to bus                            ISAD
                  6      Observe Own-GetS on bus                          ISD
                  7      Observe Other-GetM on bus                       ISDI
                  8      Receive data for Own-GetS                          I
                  9      Etc. (never completing the load)

 likely to arise for highly contended blocks, which means that most or all of the cores are likely
 to simultaneously be stuck and thus the system can livelock.
        This window of vulnerability can be closed by requiring that C1 perform at least one load
 when it receives the data response. This load logically appears to occur at the time at which C1’s
 GetS is ordered (e.g., on the bus in a snooping protocol) and thus does not violate coherence.
 However, if certain conditions are not satisfied, performing this load could violate the memory
 consistency model. Satisfying these conditions is sometimes known as the Peekaboo problem,
 and we discuss it in more detail in the sidebar.

                                 Sidebar: Peekaboo Coherence Problem
             Table 9.2 illustrates what is sometimes called the Peekaboo Coherence problem. In
      this example, the locations A and B are initially zero, core C0 writes A first and then B, and
      core C1 reads B first and then A. Under both the SC and TSO memory consistency mod-
      els, the only illegal outcome is r1=1 and r2=0. This example execution uses the optimized
      directory protocol from Section 8.7.2, but elides the directory controller’s actions (which are
      not pertinent to the example). PrefetchS is the one new operation in this example, which
      issues a GetS request if a readable block does not already reside in the cache.
             The Peekaboo problem arises when a block is prefetched, invalidated before permis-
      sion is received, and then a demand reference (demanded by a load or store, not a prefetch)
      occurs. If we perform the demand reference when the prefetched but already invalidated
      Data arrives, then the demand reference is effectively ordered at the time the block was in-
      validated. In this example, C1’s load A is effectively ordered at time 4 (when C1 receives the

  Inv for block A), while C1’s earlier (in program order) load B is ordered at time 7. Reorder-
  ing these two loads violates both SC and TSO. Note that this problem can arise whether
  the prefetch operation results from an explicit prefetch instruction, hardware prefetcher, or
  speculative execution. This problem can also arise in optimized snooping protocols, such as
  the one in Section 7.5.5.
          The simplest solution to the Peekaboo problem is to perform the load in the window
  of vulnerability if and only if that load was the oldest load in program order when the
  coherence request was first issued. In other words, the Peekaboo load is allowed to access
  the invalidated data only if all previous loads and stores before the Peekaboo load in program
  order were already performed before the coherence request for the Peekaboo load was first
  issued [11]. A complete analysis of why this solution is sufficient can be found in Manerkar
  et al. [11], but intuitively the problem cannot arise if a core issues coherence requests one
  at a time in the order of demand misses.

Table 9.2: Example of Peekaboo Coherence problem

      Core C0                                        Core C1
      A = B = 0 initially                            Prefetch A (prefetch for read-only access)
 Time
      Store A = 1                                    Load r1 = B
      Store B = 1                                    Load r2 = A
      A:M[0]                                         A:I
   0
      B:M[0]                                         B:I
   1                                                 A: prefetchS miss, issue GetS/ISD
   2    A: Receive Fwd-GetS, send Data[0]/S
   3    A: store miss; issue GetM/SMAD
   4    A: receive Data[0](ack=1)/SMA                A: receive Inv, send Inv-Ack/ISDI
   5    A: receive Inv-Ack, perform store/M[1]
   6    B: store hit/M[1]
   7                                                 B: load miss, issue GetS/ISD
   8    B: receive Fwd-GetS, send Data[1]/S[1]
   9                                              B: receive Data[1], perform load r1=1/S[1]
  10                                              A: load miss, stall/ISDI
  11                                              A: receive Data[0], perform load r2=0/I
                  Core C1 observes A = 0 and B = 1, effectively reordering the loads.
        This same window of vulnerability exists for stores to blocks in IMD S, IMD SI, or IMD I.
 In these cases, the store to the block is never performed because the block’s state at the end of
 the transaction is either I or S, which is insufficient for performing a store. Fortunately, the same
 solution we presented for the load in ISD I applies to stores in these states. A core that issues a
 GetM must perform at least one store when it receives the data, and the core must forward this
 newly written data to the other core(s) that requested the block in S and/or M between when
 it observes its own GetM and when it receives the data in response to its GetM. Note that the
 same restriction needed to avoid the Peekaboo problem still applies: namely, perform the store
 if and only if the store was the oldest load or store in program order at the time the coherence
 request was issued.

 9.3.3 STARVATION
 Starvation is a situation in which one or more cores fail to make forward progress while other
 cores are still actively making forward progress. The cores not making progress are considered to
 be starved. There are several root causes of starvation, but they tend to fall into two categories:
 unfair arbitration and incorrect use of negative acknowledgments.
        Starvation can arise when at least one core cannot obtain a critical resource because the
 resource is always obtained or held by other cores. A classic example of this is an unfair bus
 arbitration mechanism in a bus-based snooping protocol. Consider a bus in which access to the
 bus is granted in a fixed priority order. If Core C1 wishes to make a request, it can make a request.
 If C2 wishes to make a request, it may make the request only if C1 has not first requested the
 bus. C3 must defer to C1 and C2, etc. In such a system, a core with a low priority may never
 gain permission to make a request and will thus starve. This well-known problem also has a
 well-known solution: fair arbitration.
        The other main class of starvation causes is the incorrect use of negative acknowledgments
 (NACKs) in coherence protocols. In some protocols, a coherence controller that receives a co-
 herence request may send a NACK to the requestor (often used in verb form as “the controller
 NACKed the request”), informing the requestor that the request was not satisfied and must be
 re-issued. NACKs are generally used by protocols to simplify situations in which there is an-
 other transaction in progress for the requested block. For example, in some directory protocols,
 the directory can NACK a request if the requested block is already in the midst of a transaction.
 Solving these protocol race conditions with NACKs appears, at least at first blush, to be concep-
 tually easier than designing the protocol to handle some of these rare and complicated situations.
 However, the challenge is ensuring that a NACKed request eventually succeeds. Guaranteeing
 a lack of starvation, regardless of how many cores are requesting the same block at the same
 time, is challenging; one of the authors of this primer confesses to having designed a protocol
 with NACKs that led to starvation.
9.4       TOKEN COHERENCE
Until fairly recently, coherence protocols could be classified as either snooping or directory or
perhaps a hybrid of the two. There were many variants of each class and several hybrids, but
protocols were fundamentally some combination of snooping and directory. In 2003, Martin et
al. proposed a third protocol classification called Token Coherence [12]. There are two key ideas
behind Token Coherence (TC).
       TC protocols associate tokens with each block instead of state bits. There is a fixed number
of tokens per block, and the cores can exchange—but not create or destroy—these tokens. A core
with one or more tokens for a block can read the block, and a core with all of the tokens for a
block can read or write to the block.
       A TC protocol consists of two distinct parts: a correctness substrate and a performance
protocol. The correctness substrate is responsible for ensuring safety (tokens are conserved) and
liveness (all requests are eventually satisfied). The performance protocol specifies what a cache
controller does on a cache miss. For example, in the TokenB performance protocol, all coherence
requests are broadcast. In the TokenM protocol, coherence requests are multicast to a predicted
set of sharers.
       Token Coherence subsumes snooping and directory protocols, in that snooping and di-
rectory protocols can be interpreted as TC protocols. For example, an MSI snooping protocol is
equivalent to a TC protocol with a broadcast performance protocol. The MSI states are equiv-
alent to a core having all/some/none of the tokens for a block.

9.5       THE FUTURE OF COHERENCE
Almost since coherence’s invention, some have predicted that it will soon go away because it adds
hardware cost to store extra state, send extra messages, and verify that all is correct. However,
we predict that coherence will remain commonly implemented because, in our judgment the
software cost of dealing with incoherence is often substantial and borne by a broader group of
software engineers rather than the few hardware designers that confront implementing coher-
ence. One piece of evidence for this claim is the adoption of coherence in recent heterogeneous
systems, as we discuss in the next chapter. Differently from the protocols we discussed in Chap-
ters 6–9, however, we will see that heterogeneous systems are suited to consistency-directed
rather than consistency-agnostic coherence protocols.2

9.6       REFERENCES
 [1] P. Conway and B. Hughes. The AMD Opteron northbridge architecture. IEEE Micro,
     27(2):10–21, March/April 2007. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2007.43. 195

    2 Recall that in a consistency-directed coherence protocol (Section 2.3) there is no clean separation of coherence from
consistency.
      [2] A. L. Cox and R. J. Fowler. Adaptive cache coherency for detecting migratory shared data.
          In Proc. of the 20th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 98–108,
          May 1993. DOI: 10.1109/isca.1993.698549. 198
      [3] W. J. Dally. Virtual channel flow control. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
          Systems, 3(2):194–205, March 1992. DOI: 10.1109/71.127260. 201
      [4] K. Gharachorloo, M. Sharma, S. Steely, and S. V. Doren. Architecture and design of
          AlphaServer GS320. In Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Architectural Support
          for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pp. 13–24, November 2000. DOI:
          10.1145/378993.378997. 197
      [5] E. Hagersten and M. Koster. WildFire: A scalable path for SMPs. In Proc. of the 5th IEEE
          Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, pp. 172–81, January 1999. DOI:
          10.1109/hpca.1999.744361. 197
      [6] J. Huh, J. Chang, D. Burger, and G. S. Sohi. Coherence decoupling: Making use of inco-
          herence. In Proc. of the 11th International Conference on Architectural Support for Program-
          ming Languages and Operating Systems, October 2004. DOI: 10.1145/1024393.1024406.
          199
      [7] M. Kadiyala and L. N. Bhuyan. A dynamic cache sub-block design to reduce false
          sharing. In Proc. of the International Conference on Computer Design, 1995. DOI:
          10.1109/iccd.1995.528827. 199
      [8] J. Kubiatowicz, D. Chaiken, and A. Agarwal. Closing the window of vulnerability in multi-
          phase memory transactions. In Proc. of the 5th International Conference on Architectural Sup-
          port for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pp. 274–84, October 1992. DOI:
          10.1145/143365.143540. 203
      [9] H. Q. Le et al. IBM POWER6 microarchitecture. IBM Journal of Research and Develop-
          ment, 51(6), 2007. DOI: 10.1147/rd.516.0639.
 [10] D. Lenoski, J. Laudon, K. Gharachorloo, A. Gupta, and J. Hennessy. The directory-
      based cache coherence protocol for the DASH multiprocessor. In Proc. of the 17th An-
      nual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 148–59, May 1990. DOI:
      10.1109/isca.1990.134520. 197
 [11] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. CCICheck: using μhb graphs
      to verify the coherence-consistency interface. In Proc. of the 48th International Symposium
      on Microarchitecture, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2830772.2830782. 205
 [12] M. M. K. Martin, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood. Token coherence: Decoupling perfor-
      mance and correctness. In Proc. of the 30th Annual International Symposium on Computer
      Architecture, June 2003. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2003.1206999. 191, 207
[13] M. R. Marty and M. D. Hill. Virtual hierarchies to support server consolidation. In Proc.
     of the 34th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, June 2007. DOI:
     10.1145/1250662.1250670. 198
[14] S. S. Mukherjee and M. D. Hill. Using prediction to accelerate coherence protocols. In
     Proc. of the 25th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp. 179–90, June
     1998. DOI: 10.1109/isca.1998.694773. 199
[15] J. Nilsson and F. Dahlgren. Improving performance of load-store sequences for transaction
     processing workloads on multiprocessors. In Proc. of the International Conference on Parallel
     Processing, pp. 246–55, September 1999. DOI: 10.1109/icpp.1999.797410. 198
[16] B. F. Romanescu, A. R. Lebeck, D. J. Sorin, and A. Bracy. UNified instruc-
     tion/translation/data (UNITD) coherence: One protocol to rule them all. In Proc. of the
     15th International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, January 2010.
     DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2010.5416643. 192
[17] P. Stenström, M. Brorsson, and L. Sandberg. An adaptive cache coherence protocol opti-
     mized for migratory sharing. In Proc. of the 20th Annual International Symposium on Com-
     puter Architecture, pp. 109–18, May 1993. DOI: 10.1109/isca.1993.698550. 198
[18] P. J. Teller. Translation-lookaside buffer consistency. IEEE Computer, 23(6), pp. 26–36,
     June 1990. DOI: 10.1109/2.55498. 192
