
                                CHAPTER                      10

Consistency and Coherence for
  Heterogeneous Systems
This is the age of specialization. Today’s server, mobile, and desktop processors contain not only
conventional CPUs, but also various flavors of accelerators. The most prominent among the ac-
celerators are Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). Other types of accelerators including Digital
Signal Processors (DSPs), AI accelerators (e.g., Apple’s Neural Engine, Google’s TPU), crypto-
graphic accelerators, and field-programmable-gate-arrays (FPGAs) are also becoming common.
       Such heterogeneous architectures, however, pose a programmability challenge. How to
synchronize and communicate within and across the accelerators? And, how to do this effi-
ciently? One promising trend is to expose a global shared memory interface across the CPUs
and the accelerators. Recall that shared memory helps not only with programmability by pro-
viding an intuitive load-store interface for communication, but also helps in reaping the benefits
of locality via programmer-transparent caching.
       CPUs, GPUs, and other accelerators can either be tightly integrated and actually share the
same physical memory, as is the case in mobile systems-on-chips, or they may have physically
independent memories with a runtime that provides a logical abstraction of shared memory.
Unless specified otherwise, we assume the former. As shown in Figure 10.1, each of the CPUs,
GPUs, and accelerators may have multiple cores with private per-core L1s and a shared L2. The
CPUs and the accelerators also may share a memory-side last-level cache (LLC) that, unless
specified otherwise, is non-inclusive. (Recall that a memory-side LLC does not pose coherency
issues). The LLC also serves as an on-chip memory controller.
       Shared memory automatically raises questions. What is the consistency model? How is the
consistency model (efficiently) enforced? In particular, how are the caches within an accelerator
(the L1s) and across the CPUs and accelerators (L1s and L2s) kept coherent?
       In this chapter, we discuss potential answers to these questions in this fast moving area.
We first study consistency and coherence within an accelerator, focusing on GPUs. We then
consider consistency and coherence across the accelerators and the CPU.

10.1 GPU CONSISTENCY AND COHERENCE
We start this section by briefly summarizing early GPU architectures and their programming
model. This will help us appreciate the design choices with regard to consistency and coherence
in such GPUs, which were primarily targeted toward graphics workloads. We then discuss the

                     CPU                                  GPU                                Accelerator
             Core            Core               SM                SM                  Core                 Core
              L1     …        L1                 L1        …      L1                  L1          …        L1

                                              CTA Scope

                     L2                                   L2                                      L2

                                            GPU Scope

                                            LLC + Memory Controller

      System Scope

Figure 10.1: System model of a heterogeneous system-on-chip containing a CPU, GPU, and
 accelerator. SM refers to a streaming multi-processor; CTA refers to cooperative thread array.

 trend of using GPU-like architectures to run general-purpose workloads in so-called General-
 Purpose Graphics Processing Units (GPGPUs) [5]. Specifically, we discuss the new demands
 that GPGPUs place on consistency and coherence. We then discuss in detail some of the recent
 proposals for fulfilling these demands.

 10.1.1 EARLY GPUS: ARCHITECTURE AND PROGRAMMING MODEL
 Early GPUs were primarily tailored toward embarrassingly parallel graphics workloads. Roughly
 speaking, the workloads involve computing independently each of the pixels that constitute the
 display. Thus, the workloads are characterized by a very high degree of data-parallelism and low
 degrees of data sharing, synchronization, and communication.

 GPU Architecture
 To exploit the abundance of parallelism, GPUs typically have tens of cores called Streaming
 Multiprocessors (SMs)1 , as shown in Figure 10.1. Each SM is highly multithreaded, capable of
 running on the order of a thousand threads. The threads mapped to an SM share the L1 cache
 and a local scratchpad memory (not shown). All of the SMs share an L2 cache.
       In order to amortize the cost of fetching and decoding instructions for all of these threads,
 GPUs typically execute threads in groups called warps.2 All of the threads in a warp share the
 program counter (PC) and the stack, but can still execute independent thread-specific paths
 using mask-bits that specify which threads among the warps are active and which threads
 should not execute. This style of parallelism is known as “Single-Instruction-Multiple-Threads”
        1 SM in NVIDIA parlance. Also known as Compute Units (CUs) in AMD parlance.
        2 Warp in NVIDIA parlance. Also known as Wavefront in AMD parlance.
(SIMT). Because all of the threads in a warp share the PC, traditionally the threads in a warp
were scheduled together. Recently, however, GPUs are starting to allow for threads within a
warp to have independent PCs and stacks, and consequently allow for the threads to be inde-
pendently scheduled. For the rest of the discussion, we assume that threads can be independently
scheduled.
      Because graphics workloads do not share data or synchronize frequently—
synchronization and communication typically happening infrequently at a coarser level
of granularity—early GPUs chose not to implement hardware cache coherence for the L1
caches. (They did not enforce the SWMR invariant.) The absence of hardware cache coherence
makes synchronization a trickier prospect for the programmer, as we see next.

GPU Programming model
Analogously to the CPU instruction set architecture (ISA), the GPUs also have virtual ISAs.
NVIDIA’s virtual ISA, for example, is known as Parallel Thread Execution (PTX). In addi-
tion, there are higher-level language frameworks. Two such frameworks are especially popular:
CUDA and OpenCL. The high-level programs in these frameworks are compiled down to vir-
tual ISAs, which in turn are translated into native binaries at kernel installation time. A kernel
refers to a unit of work offloaded by the CPU onto the GPU and typically consists of a large
number of software threads.
       GPU virtual ISAs as well as language frameworks choose to expose the hierarchical nature
of GPU architectures to the programmer via a thread hierarchy known as scopes [15]. In contrast
to CPU threads where all threads are “equal”, GPU threads from a kernel are grouped into
clusters called Cooperative Thread Arrays (CTA).3 A CTA scope refers to the set of threads
from the same CTA. Such threads are guaranteed to be mapped to the same SM and hence
share the same L1. Thus, the CTA scope also implicitly refers to the memory hierarchy level
(L14 ) that all of these threads share. A GPU scope refers to the set of threads from the same
GPU. These threads could be from the same or different CTAs from that GPU. All of these
threads share the L2. Thus, the GPU scope implicitly refers to the L2. Finally, System scope
refers to the set of all threads from the whole system. These threads can be from the CPU,
GPU, or other accelerators that constitute the system. All of these threads may share a cache
(LLC). Thus, the System scope implicitly refers to the LLC, or unified shared memory if there
is no shared LLC.
       Why expose the thread and memory hierarchy to the software? In the absence of hardware
cache coherence, this allows for programmers and hardware to cooperatively achieve synchro-
nization efficiently. Specifically, if the programmer ensures that two synchronizing threads are
within the same CTA, the threads can synchronize and communicate efficiently via the L1
cache.

   3 CTA in PTX parlance. Also known as Workgroups in OpenCL and as thread blocks in CUDA.
   4 and the local scratchpad memory, if present
       How can two threads belonging to different CTAs from the same GPU kernel synchro-
 nize? Somewhat surprisingly, early GPU consistency models did not explicitly allow this. In
 practice, though, programmers could achieve GPU-scoped synchronization via specially crafted
 loads and stores that bypass the L1 and synchronize at the shared L2. Needless to say, this was
 causing a great deal of confusion among the programmers [8]. In the next section, we explore
 GPU consistency in detail with examples.

 GPU Consistency
 GPUs support relaxed memory consistency models. Like relaxed consistency CPUs, GPUs en-
 force only the memory orderings indicated by the programmer, e.g., via FENCE instructions.
        However, because of the absence of hardware cache coherence in GPUs, the semantics
 of a FENCE instruction is different. Recall that a FENCE instruction in a multicore CPU
 ensures that loads and stores before the FENCE are performed, with respect to all threads,
 before the loads and stores following the FENCE. A GPU FENCE provides similar semantics,
 but only with respect to other threads belonging to the same CTA. A corollary of this is that
 GPU stores lack atomicity. Recall that store atomicity (Section 5.5.2) mandates that a thread’s
 store is logically seen by all other threads at once. In GPUs, however, a store may become visible
 to a thread belonging to the same CTA before other threads.
        Consider the message-passing example shown in Table 10.1 where the programmer in-
 tends for load Ld2 to read NEW and not the old value of 0. How does one ensure this?

Table 10.1: Message passing example. T1 and T2 belong to the same CTA.

            Thread T1                         Thread T2                        Comments
  St1: St data = NEW;              Ld1: Ld r1 = flag;                // Initially data and flag are 0.
  FENCE;                           B1: if (r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
  St2: St flag = SET;               FENCE;
                                   Ld2: Ld r2 = data;               Can r2==0?

        First of all, note that without the two FENCE instructions, Ld2 can read the old value
 of 0—GPUs, being relaxed, may perform loads and stores out of order.
        Now, let us suppose that the two threads T1 and T2 belong to the same CTA, and are
 hence mapped to the same SM. At the microarchitectural level, a GPU FENCE works sim-
 ilarly to a FENCE in XC, as we discussed in Chapter 5. The reorder unit ensures that the
 Load/Store!FENCE and FENCE!Load/Store orderings are enforced. Because T1 and T2
 share an L1, honoring the above rules is sufficient to ensure that the two stores from T1 are
 made visible to T2 in program order, ensuring that load L2 reads NEW.
Table 10.2: Message passing example. T1 and T2 belong to different CTAs.

          Thread T1                          Thread T2                        Comments
 St1: St.GPU data = NEW;          Ld1: Ld.GPU r1 = flag;            // Initially data and flag are 0.
 FENCE;                           B1: if (r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
 St2: St.GPU flag = SET;           FENCE;
                                  Ld2: Ld.GPU r2 = data;           Can r2==0?

      On the other hand, if the two threads T1 and T2 belong to different CTAs, and hence
are mapped to different SMs (SM1 and SM2), it is possible for load Ld2 to read 0. To see how,
consider the following sequence of events.

   • Initially, both data and flag are cached in both L1s.

   • St1 and St2 perform in program order, writing NEW and SET, respectively, in SM1’s L1
     cache.

   • The cache line holding flag is evicted from SM1’s L1, and flag=SET is written to the L2.

   • The cache line holding flag in SM2’s L1 is evicted.

   • The load Ld1 performs and misses in SM2’s L1, so the line from the L2 is fetched and
     reads SET.

   • The load Ld2 performs, hits in SM2’s L1, and reads 0.

      Thus, although the FENCE ensures that the two stores are written to SM1’s L1 in the
correct order, they may become visible to T2 in a different order in the absence of hardware
cache coherence. That is why early GPU programming manuals explicitly disallow this type of
inter-CTA synchronization between threads of the same kernel.
      Is inter-CTA synchronization then impossible to achieve? In practice, a workaround is
possible, leveraging special load and store instructions that directly target specific levels of the
memory hierarchy. As we can see in Table 10.2, the two stores in T1 explicitly write to the GPU
scope (i.e., to the L2) bypassing the L1. Likewise, the two loads from T2 bypass the L1 and
read directly from the L2. Thus, the two threads of GPU scope, T1 and T2, are explicitly made
to synchronize at the L2 by using loads and stores that bypass the L1.
      However, there are problems with the above workaround—the primary issue being per-
formance inefficiency owing to loads and stores bypassing the L1. In this simple example, the
two variables in question must be communicated across SMs, so bypassing is a necessary evil.
However, bypassing may be problematic with more variables, only some of which are commu-
nicated across SMs. In such a situation, the programmer is confronted with the onerous task
 of carefully directing loads/stores to the appropriate memory hierarchy level in order to make
 effective use of the L1.

      Flashback to Quiz Question 8: GPUs do not support hardware cache coherence. Therefore,
      they are unable to enforce a memory consistency model. True or false?
      Answer: False! Early GPUs did not support cache coherence in hardware, yet supported
      scoped relaxed consistency models.

 Summary: Limitations and Requirements
 Early GPUs were primarily targeted toward embarrassingly parallel workloads that neither syn-
 chronized nor shared data frequently. Therefore, such GPUs chose not to support hardware
 cache coherence for keeping the local caches coherent, at the cost of a scoped memory con-
 sistency model that permitted only intra-CTA synchronization. More flexible inter-CTA syn-
 chronization was either too inefficient or placed a huge burden on programmers.
        Programmers are starting to use GPUs for general purpose workloads. Such workloads
 tend to involve relatively frequent fine-grained synchronization and more general sharing pat-
 terns. Thus, it is desirable for a GPGPU to have:

        • a rigorous and intuitive memory consistency model that permits synchronization across all
          threads; and

        • a coherence protocol that enforces the consistency model while allowing for efficient data
          sharing and synchronization, while at the same time keeping the simplicity of the conven-
          tional GPU architecture, as GPUs will still cater to graphic workloads predominantly.

 10.1.2 BIG PICTURE: GPGPU CONSISTENCY AND COHERENCE
 We already outlined the desired properties for GPGPU consistency and coherence. One
 straightforward approach to meeting these demands is to use a multicore CPU-like approach to
 coherence and consistency, i.e., use one of the consistency-agnostic coherence protocols (that
 we covered at length in Chapters 6–9) to ideally enforce a strong consistency model such as se-
 quential consistency (SC). Despite ticking almost all boxes—the consistency model is certainly
 intuitive (without the notion of scopes) and the coherence protocol allows for the efficient shar-
 ing of data—the approach is ill-suited for a GPU. There are two major reasons for this [30].
        First, a CPU-like coherence protocol that invalidates sharers upon a write would incur
 a high traffic overhead in the GPU context. This is because the aggregate capacity of the local
 caches (L1s) in GPUs is typically comparable to, or even greater than, the size of the L2. The
 NVIDIA Volta GPU, for example, has an aggregate capacity of about 10 MB of L1 cache
 and only 6 MB of L2 cache. A standalone inclusive directory would not only incur a large area
 overhead owing to the duplicate tags, but also significant complexity because the directory would
need to be highly associative. On the other hand, an embedded inclusive directory would result
in a significant amount of recall traffic upon L2 evictions, given the size of the aggregate L1s.
       Second, because GPUs maintain thousands of active hardware threads, there is a need to
track a correspondingly high number of coherence transactions, which would cost significant
hardware overhead.
       Without writer-initiated invalidations, how can a store be propagated to other non-local
L1 caches? (I.e., how can the store be made visible to threads belonging to other CTAs?) With-
out writer-initiated invalidations, how can a consistency model—let alone a strong consistency
model—be enforced?
       In Sections 10.1.3 and 10.1.4, we discuss two proposals that employ self-invalidation [18],
whereby a processor invalidates lines in its local cache to ensure that stores from other threads
become visible.
       What consistency model can the self-invalidation protocols enforce efficiently? We argue
that such protocols are amenable to efficiently enforcing relaxed consistency models directly,
rather than enforcing consistency-agnostic invariants such as the SWMR invariant.
       Whether or not the consistency model should include scopes is under debate [15, 16, 23].
Whereas scopes adds complexity for programmers, they arguably simplify coherence implemen-
tations. Because scopes cannot be ruled out, we outline a scoped consistency model that does not
limit synchronization to within a subset of scopes in Section 10.1.4. It is worth noting that the
consistency model we introduce is similar in spirit to the ones used in today’s industrial GPUs
(which all use scoped models that do not limit synchronization to within a subset of scopes).

10.1.3 TEMPORAL COHERENCE
In this section, we discuss a self-invalidation based approach for enforcing coherence called tem-
poral coherence [30]. The key idea is that each reader brings in a cache block for a finite period of
time called the lease, at the end of which time the block is self-invalidated. We discuss two vari-
ants of temporal coherence: (1) a consistency-agnostic variant that enforces SWMR, in which
a writer stalls until all of the leases for the block expire; and (2) a more efficient consistency-
directed variant that directly enforces a relaxed consistency model, in which FENCEs, rather
than writers, stall. For the following discussion, we assume that the shared cache (L2) is inclu-
sive: a block not present in the shared L2 implies that it is not present in any of the local L1s.
We also assume that the L1s use a write-through/no write-allocate policy: writes are directly
written to the L2 (write-through) and a write to a block that is not present in the L1 does not
allocate a block in the L1 (no write-allocate).

Consistency-agnostic Temporal Coherence
Instead of a writer invalidating all sharers in non-local caches, as is common with CPU coher-
ence, consider a protocol in which the writer is made to wait until all of the sharers have evicted
 the block. By making the write wait until there are no sharers, the protocol ensures that there
 are no concurrent readers at the instant when the write succeeds—thereby enforcing SWMR.
        How can the writer know how long to wait? That is, how can the writer ascertain that
 there are no more sharers for the block? Temporal coherence achieves this by leveraging a global
 notion of time. Specifically, it requires that each of the L1s and the L2 have access to a register
 that keeps track of global time.
        On an L1 miss, the reader predicts how long it expects to hold the block in the L1, and
 informs the L2 of this time duration known as the lease. Every L1 cache block is tagged with
 a timestamp (TS) that holds the lease for that block. A read for an L1 block with current time
 greater than its lease is treated as a miss.
        Furthermore, each block in the L2 is tagged with a timestamp. When a reader consults
 the L2 on an L1 cache miss, it informs the L2 of its desired lease; the L2 updates the timestamp
 for the block subject to the invariant that the timestamp holds the latest lease for that block
 across all L1s.
        Every write—even if the block is present in the L1 cache—is written through to the L2;
 the write request accesses the block’s timestamp held in the L2, and if the timestamp corresponds
 to a time in the future, the write stalls until this time. This stalling ensures that there are no
 sharers of the blocks when the write performs in the L2, thereby ensuring SWMR.
 Example. In order to understand how temporal coherence works, let us consider the message
 passing example in Table 10.3, ignoring the FENCE instructions for now. Let us assume that
 threads T1 and T2 are from two different CTAs mapped to two different SMs (SM1 and SM2)
 with separate local L1s.

Table 10.3: Message passing example. T1 and T2 belong to different CTAs.

            Thread T1                        Thread T2                        Comments
  St1: St data1 = NEW;            Ld1: Ld r1 = flag;                // Initially all variables are 0.
  St2: St data2 = NEW;            B1: if (r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
  FENCE;                          FENCE;
  St3: St flag = SET;              Ld2: Ld r2 = data2;              Can r2==0?

        We illustrate a timeline of events at SM1, SM2, and the shared L2 in Table 10.4. Initially,
 let us assume that flag, data1, and data2 are cached in the local L1 of SM2 with lease values of
 35, 30, and 20, respectively. At time=1, St1 is performed. Since the L1s use a write-through/no
 write-allocate policy, a write request is issued to the L2. Since data1 is valid in the L1 cache
 of SM2 until time=30, the write stalls until this time. At time=31, the write performs at the
 L2. St2 then issues a write request to the L2 at time=37 that reaches the L2 at time=42. By
 this time the lease for data2 (20) would have already expired, and so the write performs at the
 L2 without any stalling. Similarly, St3 issues a write request at time=48, and flag is written to

Table 10.4: Temporal coherence: Timeline of events for example in Table 10.3

             /* T1 and T2 (belonging to different CTAs) are mapped to SM1 and SM2, respectively.
         flag = 0 (lease = 35), data1 = 0 (lease = 30) and data2 = 0 (lease = 20) are cached in L1 of SM2 */
     Time SM1                              SM2                              L2
     1    St1 issues write request
     6                                                                      write for data1 stalled until
                                                                            lease for data1 (30)
     31                                                                     data1 = NEW written; Ack
                                                                            sent to SM1
     36        St1 completes
     37        St2 issues write request
     42                                                                     data2 = NEW written with-
                                                                            out stalling since current
                                                                            time>lease for data2 (20);
                                                                            Ack sent to SM1
     47        St2 completes
     48        St3 issues write request
     50                                    L1 lease for flag (35) has
                                           expired, so Ld1 issues read
                                           request
     53                                                                     flag = SET written with-
                                                                            out stalling since current
                                                                            time>lease for flag (35); Ack
                                                                            sent to SM1
     55                                                                     flag = SET read; get new
                                                                            lease; sent to L1 of SM2
     58        St3 completes
     60                                    Ld1 completes
     61                                    L1 lease for data2 (20) has
                                           expired, Ld2 issues read re-
                                           quest
     66                                                                     data2 = NEW read; gets new
                                                                            lease; sent to L1 of SM2
     71                                    Ld2 completes
 the L2 at time=53 without any stalling, since the lease for flag would have expired by this time.
 Meanwhile, at time=50, Ld1 checks its L1 and finds that the lease for flag has expired, so a
 read request is issued to the L2 and completes at time=60. Likewise, Ld2 also issues a read
 request to the L2 at time=61, reads the expected value of NEW from the L2 and completes at
 time=71. Because this variant of temporal coherence enforces SWMR, as long as GPU threads
 issue memory operations in program order, SC5 is enforced.
 Protocol Specification. We present the detailed protocol specification for the L1 and L2 con-
 trollers in Tables 10.5 and 10.6, respectively. The L1 has two stable states: (I)nvalid and (V)alid.
 The L1 communicates with the L2 using the GetV(t), Write, and WriteV(t) requests. GetV(t),
 which carries a timestamp as a parameter, asks for the specified block to be brought into the L1
 in valid state for the requested lease period, at the end of which time the block is self-invalidated.
 The Write request asks for the specified value to be written through to the L2 without bring-
 ing the block into the L1. The WriteV(t) request is used for writing to a block that is already
 valid in L1, and carries a timestamp holding its current lease as a parameter. For presentational
 reasons, we present only a high-level specification of the protocol (and for all other protocols
 in this chapter). Specifically, we show only stable states and the transitions between the stable
 states.
         A load in state I causes a GetV(t) request to be sent to the L2; upon the receipt of data
 from the L2, the state transitions to V. A store in state I causes a Write request to be sent to the
 L2. Upon the receipt of an ack from the L2—indicating that the L2 has written the data—the
 store completes. Since the L1 uses a no-write-allocate policy, data is not brought to the L1 and
 the state of the block remains in state I.
         Recall that a block becomes invalid if the global time advances past the lease for that
 block—this is represented logically by the V to I transition upon lease expiry.6 Upon a store to
 a block in state V, a WriteV(t) request is sent to the L2. The purpose of WriteV(t) is to exploit
 the fact that if the block is held privately in the L1 of the writer, there is no need for the write
 to stall at the L2. Instead, the write can simply update the L2 as well as the L1, and continue to
 cache the block in the L1 until its lease runs out. The reason why the WriteV(t) request carries
 a timestamp is to determine whether or not the block is held privately in the L1 of the writer,
 as we will see next.
         We now describe the L2 controller. The L2 has four stable states: (I)nvalid, indicating
 that the block is neither present in the L2 nor in any of the L1s; (P)rivate, indicating that the
 block is present in exactly one of the L1s; (S)hared, indicating that the block may be present
 in one or more L1s; and (Exp)ired, indicating that the block is present in the L2, but not valid
 in any of the L1s. Upon receiving a GetV(t) request in state I, the L2 fetches the block from
      5 The original paper [30] considered a warp as equivalent to a thread, whereas we consider a more modern GPU setting
 where threads can be individually scheduled. Consistency in our setting is therefore subtly different from their setting.
      6 It is worth noting that in the actual implementation it is not necessary for hardware to proactively detect that a block
 has expired and transition it to I state—the fact that a block has expired may be discovered lazily on a subsequent transaction
 to the block.
memory, updates the block’s timestamp in accordance with the requested lease, and transitions
to P. Upon receiving a Write in state I, it fetches the block from memory, updates the value in
the L2, sends back an ack, and transitions to Exp, as it is not valid in any of the L1s.
       Upon receiving a GetV(t) request in state P, the L2 responds with the data, extends the
timestamp if the requested lease is greater than the current timestamp, and transitions to S.
For a WriteV(t) request received in state P, there are two cases. In the straightforward case, the
only SM holding the block privately writes to it; in this case, the L2 can simply update the

Table 10.5: Enforcing SWMR via Temporal Coherence: L1 Controller

                                                                                    Eviction
                             Load                                Store
                                                                                    /Expiry
                  send GetV(t) to L2
                                                 send Write to L2
              I   rec. Data from L2
                                                 rec. Write-Ack from L2
                  /V
                                                 send WriteV(t) to L2
             V    read hit                                                        -/I
                                                 rec. Write-Ack from L2

Table 10.6: Enforcing SWMR via Temporal Coherence: L2 Controller

                                                                                                   L2:
          GetV(t)                Write                WriteV(t)                L2: Eviction
                                                                                                  Expiry
      send Fetch to Mem send Fetch to Mem
      rec. Data from Mem rec. Data from Mem
  I   send Data to L1    write
      TS←t               send Write-Ack to L1
      /P                 /Exp
                                                                         stall
                                                if(t = TS)
                                                                         (until expiry)           /Exp
      send Data to L1                              write
 P    TS←max(TS,t)       stall (until expiry)      send Write-Ack to L1
      /S                                        else
                                                    stall (until expiry)

      send Data to L1                           stall                    stall
  S                      stall (until expiry)                                                      /Exp
      TS←max(TS,t)                              (until expiry)           (until expiry)
                                                                         if(dirty)
    send Data to L1
                         write                write                         send Write-back to Mem
Exp TS←t
                         send Write-Ack to L1 send Write-Ack to L1           rec. Ack from Mem
    /P
                                                                         /I
 block without any stalling and reply with an ack. But there is a tricky corner case in which the
 WriteV(t) message from a private block is delayed such that the block is now held privately, but
 in a different SM! In order to disambiguate these two cases, every WriteV(t) message carries a
 timestamp with the lease for that block, and a match with the timestamp held in the L2 indicates
 the former straightforward case. A mismatch indicates the latter, in which case the WriteV(t)
 request stalls until the block expires, at which time the L2 is updated and an ack is sent back
 to the L1. A WriteV(t) or a Write request received in state S, on the other hand, will have to
 always wait until the block’s lease at the L2 expires. Finally, an L2 block is allowed to be evicted
 only in Exp state because writes must know how long to stall in order to enforce SWMR.
        In summary, we saw how temporal coherence enforces SWMR using leased reads and
 stalling writes. In combination with a processor that presents memory operations in program
 order, temporal coherence can be used to enforce sequential consistency (SC).

 Consistency-directed Temporal Coherence
 Temporal coherence as described previously enforces SWMR but at a significant cost, with every
 write to an unexpired shared block needing to stall at the L2 controller. Since the L2 is shared
 across all threads, stalling at the L2 can indirectly affect all of the threads, thereby reducing
 overall GPU throughput.
        Recall that in Section 2.3 we discussed two classes of coherence interfaces: consistency-
 agnostic and consistency-directed. A consistency-agnostic coherence interface enforces SWMR
 by propagating writes to other threads synchronously before the write returns. Given the cost
 of enforcing SWMR in the GPU setting, can we explore consistency-directed coherence? That
 is, instead of making writes visible to other threads synchronously, can we make them visible
 asynchronously without violating consistency? Specifically, a relaxed consistency model such as
 Chapter 5’s XC7 mandates only the memory orderings indicated by the programmer via FENCE
 instructions. Such a model allows for writes to propagate to other threads asynchronously.
        Considering the message-passing example shown in Table 10.3, XC merely requires that
 St1 and St2 become visible to T2 before St3 becomes visible. It does not mandate that by the
 time St1 performs it must have propagated to T2. In other words, XC does not require SWMR.
 Consequently, XC permits a variant of temporal coherence in which only FENCEs, rather than
 writes, require stalling. When a write request reaches the L2 and the block is shared, the L2
 simply replies back to the thread initiating the write with the timestamp associated with the
 block. We refer to this time as the Global Write Completion Time (GWCT), as this indicates
 the time until which the thread must stall upon hitting a FENCE in order to ensure that the
 write has become globally visible to all threads.
        For each thread mapped to an SM, the SM keeps track of the maximum of GWCTs
 returned for the writes in the per-thread stall-time register. Upon hitting a FENCE, stalling the

      7 For now, let us assume there are no scopes in the memory model.
thread until this time ensures that all of the writes before the FENCE have become globally
visible.
Example. We illustrate a timeline of events in Table 10.7 for the same message-passing example
(Table 10.3), but now taking into account the effect of FENCE instructions, because we are
seeking to enforce a relaxed XC-like model.
       At time=1, a write request due to St1 is issued to the L2. At time=6, the write is performed
at the L2 without any stalling although its lease (30) would not have expired then; L2 replies
with a GWCT of 30 which is remembered at SM1 in its per-thread stall-time register. In a
similar vein, a write request due to St2 is issued at time=12. At time=17, the write is performed
at the L2 and the L2 replies back with a GWCT of 20. Upon receiving the GWCT, SM1 does
not update its stall-time because the current value (30) is higher. The FENCE instruction is
executed at time=23 and blocks thread T1 until its stall-time of 30. At time=31, a write-request
due to St3 is issued to the L2 and the write is performed at the L2 at time=36. Because the lease
for flag (35) would have expired, the L2 does not respond with a GWCT, and St3 completes
at time=41. Meanwhile, at time=40, Ld1 attempts to read flag from the L1 but its lease would
have expired at time=35. Therefore, a read request for flag is issued to the L2, reads SET from
the L2 at time=45, and completes at time=50. In a similar vein, a read request due to Ld2 is
issued at time=51, reads from L2 at time=56 and completes at time=57, returning the expected
value of NEW.
Protocol Specification. The consistency-directed temporal coherence protocol specifications
are mostly similar to the consistency-agnostic variant—we highlight the differences in bold in
Table 10.8 (L1 controller) and Table 10.9 (L2 controller).
       The main difference with the L1 controller (Table 10.8) is due to the fact that Write-Acks
from the L2 now carry GWCTs. Accordingly, upon receiving a Write-Ack, the L1 controller
extends the stall-time if the incoming GWCT is greater than the currently held stall-time for
that thread. (Recall that upon hitting a FENCE, the thread is stalled until the time held in the
stall-time register.)
       The main difference with the L2 controller (Table 10.9) is that Write requests do not
induce a stall; instead, the write is performed and a GWCT is returned along with the Write-
Ack. In a similar vein, a WriteV(t) request in state S also does not stall.

Temporal Coherence: Summary and Limitations
We saw how temporal coherence can either be used to enforce SWMR or directly enforce a
relaxed consistency model such as XC.8 The key benefit with the latter approach is that it elim-
inates expensive stalling at the L2; instead writes stall at the SM upon hitting a FENCE. More
optimizations are possible that further reduce stalling [30]. However, there are some critical
limitations with temporal coherence.
   8 Temporal coherence [30] enforces a variant of XC in which writes are not atomic.
Table 10.7: Consistency-directed Temporal coherence: Timeline for Table 10.3

       /* T1 and T2 (belonging to different CTAs) are mapped to SM1 and SM2, respectively.
   flag = 0 (lease = 35), data1 = 0 (lease = 30), and data2 = 0 (lease = 20) are cached in L1 of SM2 */
  Time SM1                            SM2                               L2
    1   St1 issues write request
    6                                                                   data1=NEW written although
                                                                        current time < lease for data1
                                                                        (30); Ack sent to SM1 with
                                                                        GWCT=30
   11 St1 completes, stall-time
        ←30
   12 St2 issues write request
   17                                                                   data2=NEW written although
                                                                        current time < lease for data2
                                                                        (20); Ack sent to SM1 with
                                                                        GWCT=20
   22 St2 completes; GWCT
        (20)< stall-time(30), so
        stall-time unchanged
   23 FENCE stalls thread
        until stall-time (30)
   31 St3 issues write request
   36                                                                   flag=SET written since current
                                                                        time > lease for flag (35); Ack
                                                                        sent to SM1
   40                                 L1 lease for flag (35) has ex-
                                      pired, so Ld1 issues read re-
                                      quest
   41 St3 completes
   45                                                                   flag=SET read; gets new lease;
                                                                        sent to L1 of SM2
   50                                 Ld1 completes
   51                                 L1 lease for data2 (20) has
                                      expired so Ld1 issues read
                                      request
   56                                                                   data2=NEW read; gets new
                                                                        lease; sent to L1 of SM2
   57                                 Ld2 completes

Table 10.8: Consistency-directed Temporal Coherence: L1 Controller (diffs in bold)

                                                                                                         Eviction/
                   Load                                              Store
                                                                                                          Expiry
     send GetV(t) to L2                  send Write to L2
 I   rec. Data from L2                   rec. Write-Ack+GWCT from L2
     /V                                  stall-time←max(stall-time,GWCT)
                                         send WriteV(t) to L2
 V read hit                              rec. Write-Ack+GWCT from L2                                     -/I
                                         stall-time←max(stall-time,GWCT)

Table 10.9: Consistency-directed Temporal Coherence: L2 Controller (diffs in bold)

                                                                                                                L2:
          GetV(t)                    Write                        WriteV(t)             L2: Eviction
                                                                                                               Expiry
     send Fetch to Mem
                          send Fetch to Mem
     rec. Data from Mem
                          rec. Data from Mem Write
 I   send Data to L1
                          send Write-Ack to L1
     TS←t
                          /Exp
     /P
                                                                                stall
                                                     if(t = TS)
                                                                                (until expiry)                  /Exp
     send Data to L1      stall                        write
 P TS←max(TS,t)           write                        send Write-Ack to L1
     /S                   send Write-Ack+GWCT to L1 else
                                                        stall (until expiry)

                          stall                      stall
     send Data to L1                                                            stall
 S                        write                      write                                                      /Exp
     TS←max(TS,t)                                                               (until expiry)
                          send Write-Ack+GWCT to L1 send Write-Ack+GWCT to L1
                                                                                if(dirty)
     send Data to L1
                          write                      write                           send Write-back to Mem
Exp TS←t
                          send Write-Ack to L1       send Write-Ack to L1            rec. Ack from Mem
     /P
                                                                                /I
      • Supporting a non-inclusive L2 cache is cumbersome. This is because temporal coherence
        requires that a block that is valid in one or more L1s must have its lease time available
        at the L2. A complex workaround is possible wherein an unexpired block may be evicted
        from the L2 provided the evicted block’s lease is held someplace, for instance along with
        the L2 miss status holding register (MSHR) [30].

      • It requires global timestamps. With modern GPUs being relatively large area-wise, main-
        taining globally synchronized timestamps could be hard. A recent proposal, however, has
        shown how a variant of temporal coherence can be implemented without using global
        timestamps [25].

      • Performance could be sensitive to the choice of the lease period. A lease period that is
        too short increases the L1 miss rate; a lease period that is too long causes the writes (or
        FENCEs) to stall more.

      • Temporal coherence cannot directly take advantage of scoped synchronization. For in-
        stance, stores involved in CTA-scoped synchronization (intuitively) need not be written
        to the L2s—but in temporal coherence every store is written to the L2 since it is designed
        under the assumption of write-through/no-write-allocate L1 caches.

      • Temporal coherence involves timestamps. Timestamps introduce complexities (e.g.,
        timestamp rollover) in the design and verification process.

 In summary, although workarounds are possible for most of the above limitations, they do tend
 to add complexity to an already unconventional timestamp-based coherence protocol.

 10.1.4 RELEASE CONSISTENCY-DIRECTED COHERENCE
 Temporal coherence, which is based on the powerful idea of leases, is versatile enough to enforce
 both consistency-agnostic and consistency-directed variants of coherence. On the other hand,
 protocols involving leases and timestamps are arguably cumbersome. In this section, we discuss
 an alternative approach to GPGPU coherence called release consistency-directed coherence (RCC)
 that directly enforces release consistency (RC), which differs from XC by distinguishing acquires
 from releases, whereas XC treats all synchronization the same.
        RCC compromises on flexibility, in that it can only enforce variants of RC. But in return
 for this reduced flexibility, RCC is arguably simpler, can naturally exploit scope information,
 and can be made to work with non-inclusive L2 caches. In the following, we start by briefly
 recapping the RC memory model and then extend it with scopes. We then describe a simple
 RCC protocol followed by two optimizations. Each of the protocols can enforce both the scoped
 and non-scoped variants of RC.
Release Consistency: Non-scoped and scoped variants
In this section, we discuss the RC memory model starting with the non-scoped variant, and
then extend it with scopes.
      Recall that RC (introduced in Section 5.5.1) has special atomic operations that or-
der memory accesses in one direction as opposed to the bidirectional ordering enforced by a
FENCE. Specifically, RC has a release (Rel) store and an acquire (Acq) load that enforce the
following orderings.
   • Acq Load ! Load/Store
   • Load/Store ! Rel Store
   • Rel Store/Acq Load ! Rel Store/Acq Load
       Consider the message-passing example shown in Table 10.10. Marking St2 as a release
ensures St1!St2; marking Ld1 as an acquire ensures Ld1!Ld2 orderings. The acquire9 (Ld1)
reads the value written by the release (St2). In doing so, the release synchronizes with the acquire,
ensuring St2!Ld1 in the global memory order. Combining all of the above orderings implies
St1!Ld2, thus ensuring that Ld2 sees the new value and not 0.

Table 10.10: Message passing example. Non-scoped RC.

           Thread T1                                 Thread T2                                  Comments
 St1: St data1 = NEW;                     Ld1: Acq Ld r1 = flag;                      // Initially all variables are 0.
 St2: Rel St flag = SET;                   B1: if (r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
                                          Ld2: Ld r2 = data1                         Can r2==0?

      In the variant of the memory model without scopes, a release synchronizes with an acquire
as long as the acquire returns the value written by the release, irrespective of whether the threads
to which they belong are from the same scope or different scope. Thus, in the above example,
Ld2 will see the new value irrespective of whether T1 and T2 belong to the same CTA or
different CTAs.
A Scoped RC Model.
In a scoped RC model, each atomic operation is associated with a scope. A release is said to
synchronize with an acquire if: (1) the acquire load returns the value written by the release store
and (2) the scope of each atomic operation includes the thread executing the other operation.
       For instance, a release of CTA scope is said to synchronize with an acquire of CTA scope
only if the two threads executing the acquire and release belong to the same CTA. On the other
hand, a release of GPU scope is said to synchronize with an acquire of GPU scope irrespective
   9 Acquire refers to the load marked acquire and release refers to a store marked release.
 of whether the two threads are from the same CTA or different CTAs (as long as they are issued
 on the same GPU).

Table 10.11: Message passing example. Scoped RC.

            Thread T1                         Thread T2                        Comments
  St1: St data1 = NEW;             Ld1: CTA Acq Ld r1 = flag;        // Initially all variables are 0.
  St2: GPU Rel St flag = SET;       B1: if (r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
                                   Ld2: Ld r2 = data1               Can r2==0? (could be 0, if
                                                                    T1 and T2 are from different
                                                                    CTAs)

        For more intuition, consider the scoped variant of the message-passing example shown in
Table 10.11. As we can see, the release St2 carries a GPU scope whereas the acquire Ld1 carries
 only a CTA scope. If T1 and T2 are from different CTAs, then the scope of the acquire (Ld1)
 does not include T1. Therefore, in such a situation the release is said not to synchronize with
 the acquire, which means that r2 could in fact read the old value of 0. On the other hand, if T1
 and T2 are from the same CTA, r2 cannot read a 0.
        One approach to formalizing scoped RC is to employ a variant of Shasha and Snir’s for-
 malism [28] and use a partial order, instead of a global memory order, to order conflicting
 operations. More specifically, not all conflicting operations are ordered—only releases and ac-
 quires that synchronize with each other are ordered. It is worth noting that NVIDIA adopted
 this approach to formalizing its PTX memory consistency model [20].

 Release Consistency-directed Coherence (RCC)
 In this section, we introduce a protocol that directly enforces RC instead of enforcing SWMR.
 Specifically, the protocol does not eagerly propagate writes to other threads—i.e., it does not
 enforce SWMR. Instead, writes are written to the L2 upon a release and become visible to
 another thread when that thread self-invalidates the L1 on an acquire and pulls in new values
 from the L2.
        For the following discussion let us assume write-back/write-allocate L1 caches. Also, for
 now let us ignore scopes and assume that synchronization is between threads from two different
 CTAs. We will describe later how RCC can handle intra-CTA synchronization efficiently. The
 main steps involved in RCC are as follows.

      • Loads and stores that are not marked acquire or release behave like normal loads and stores
        in a write-back/write-allocate L1 cache.
Table 10.12: RCC: L1 controller

         Load/                Store/          Acq.scope = GPU/            Rel.scope = GPU/                  L1:
   Acq.scope = CTA Rel.scope = CTA              Acq (no scope)              Rel (no scope)               Eviction
                                                                        forall dirty blocks
                                            send GetV to L2               send Write-back to L2
                                            rec. Data from L2             rec. Ack
  send GetV to L2       send GetV to L2
                                            read/V                      send GetV to L2
I rec. Data from L2     rec. Data from L2
                                            forall other valid blocks   rec. Data from L2
  read/V                write/V
                                              Invalidate                write/V
                                                                        send Write-back to L2
                                                                        rec. Ack
                                                                        forall dirty blocks
                                            send GetV to L2
                                                                          send Write-back to L2   if(dirty)
                                            rec. Data from L2
                                                                          rec. Ack                  send Write-back to L2
V read hit              write hit           read
                                                                        write hit                   rec. Ack from L2
                                            forall other valid blocks
                                                                        send Write-back to L2     /I
                                              Invalidate
                                                                        rec. Ack

Table 10.13: RCC: L2 controller

                                                                                       L2:
                            GetV                    Write-back
                                                                                     Eviction
                      send Fetch to Mem     allocate block
                      rec. Data from Mem    write
                 I
                      send Data to L1       send Ack to L1
                      /V                    /V
                                                                            if(dirty)
                                            write                              send Write-back to Mem
               V send Data to L1
                                            send Ack to L1                     rec. Ack from Mem
                                                                            /I

   • Upon a store marked release, all dirty blocks in the L1, except the one written by the
     release, are written to the L2. Then, the block written by the release is written to the L2,
     ensuring Load/Store ! Rel Store.

   • A load marked acquire reads a fresh copy of the block from the L2. Then, all valid blocks
     in the L1, other than the one read by the acquire, are self-invalidated, thereby ensuring
     Acq Load ! Load/Store.

Example. Consider the message-passing example in Table 10.10, assuming that T1 and T2 are
from different CTAs, mapped to two different SMs (SM1 and SM2). Initially let us assume
Table 10.14: RCC: Timeline of events (for Table 10.10)

       /* T1 and T2 (belonging to different CTAs) are mapped to SM1 and SM2, respectively.
                  flag = 0 and data1 = 0 are cached in L1s of both SM1 and SM2 */
  Time SM1/L1                       SM2/L1                             L2
    t1 St1 writes data1=NEW
          and completes
    t2 Rel St2 issues Write-
          back of data1
    t3                                                                 data1=NEW written and Ack
                                                                       sent back to L1 of SM1
    t4 Ack received; flag=SET
          written and its Write-
          back initiated
    t5                                                                 flag=SET written and Ack sent
                                                                       back to L1 of SM1
    t6 Rel St2 completes
    t7                              Acq Ld1 issues read for flag
    t8                                                                 flag=SET read and sent to L1
                                                                       of SM2
    t9                              value received; data1 self-invali-
                                    dated; Acq Ld1 completes
   t10                              Ld2 issues read for data1
   t11                                                                 data1=NE W read and sent to
                                                                       L1 of SM2
   t12                              Ld2 completes

 the cache blocks containing data1 and flag are cached in the L1s of both SM1 and SM2. We
 illustrate a timeline of events in Table 10.14. At time=t1 , St1 is performed, causing NEW to be
 written to data1 cached in SM1’s L1. At time=t2 , St2 (marked release) causes all of the dirty
 blocks in SM1’s L1 to be written to the L2. Therefore, data1 is written to the L2 at time=t3 . Then,
 at time=t4 , the release write is performed, causing SET to be written to flag cached in SM1’s L1
 and subsequently written back to the L2 at time=t5 . At time=t7 , Ld1 (marked acquire) issues a
 read for flag, causing flag=SET to be read from the L2. At time=t9 , when the value is received,
 all of the valid blocks in SM2’s L1, except the block read by the acquire, are self-invalidated.
 Thus, data1 is self-invalidated. At time=t10 , Ld2 causes a read request for data1 to be sent to the
 L2 and the up-to-date value of NEW is read.
Exploiting Scopes. If all atomic operations are of GPU scope, the protocol described above
is applicable as is. This is because the protocol already pushes all of the dirty data to the L2
(the cache level corresponding to GPU scope) on a release, and pulls data from the L2 upon an
acquire. Notably, the RCC protocol can take advantage of CTA scopes: a CTA-scoped release
need not write-back dirty blocks to the L2; a CTA-scoped acquire need not self-invalidate any
of the valid blocks in the L1.
Protocol Specification. We present the detailed specifications of the L1 and L2 controllers in
Tables 10.12 and 10.13. There are two stable states: (I)nvalid and V(alid). The L1 communicates
with the L2 using the GetV and the Write-back requests. GetV asks for the specified block to
be brought into the L1 in Valid state. Differently from GetV(t) used in temporal coherence,
GetV does not carry a timestamp as a parameter; a block brought into the L1 via GetV is self-
invalidated upon an acquire. The Write-back request copies the specified block from the L1 into
the L2, without evicting the block from the L1.
       Table 10.12 shows the L1 controller. If the release and acquire are of GPU scope (or if the
releases and acquire carry no scope information), the protocol must write-back all dirty blocks
on a release and self-invalidate all valid blocks on an acquire. Releases and acquires of CTA
scope behave like ordinary stores and loads in a write-back/write-allocate cache.
       Finally, it is worth noting that the protocol does not rely on cache inclusion. Indeed,
as shown in Table 10.13, a valid L2 block can be silently evicted without informing the L1.
Intuitively, this is because the L2 does not hold any critical metadata such as sharers or ownership
information.
Summary. In summary, RCC is a simple protocol that directly enforces RC. Because it does not
hold any protocol metadata at the L2, it does not require the L2 to be inclusive and allows for L2
blocks to be evicted silently. The protocol can take advantage of scope information—specifically,
if the release and acquire are of CTA scope it does not require expensive write-backs or self-
invalidations. On the other hand, without knowledge of scopes, intra-CTA synchronization is
inefficient: RCC has to assume conservatively that releases and acquires are of GPU scope and
write-back/self-invalidate data from the L1 even if the synchronization is within one CTA.

Exploiting Ownership: RCC-O
Releases (which cause all dirty lines to be written back to the L2) and acquires (which cause
all valid lines to be self-invalidated) are expensive operations in the simple protocol described
above. One approach to reduce the cost of releases and acquires is to track ownership [13, 16], so
that owned blocks need not be self-invalidated on an acquire nor written-back upon a release.
       The key idea is to add an O(wned) state—every store must obtain ownership of the L1
cache line before a subsequent release. For each block, the L2 maintains the owner, which refers
to the identity of the L1 that owns the block. Upon a request for ownership, the L2 first down-
grades the previous owner (if there is one), causing the previous owner to write-back dirty data
Table 10.15: RCC-O: L1 controller. In non-scoped version, scope=GPU.

           Load/            Store/             Acq.scope = GPU/        Rel.scope = GPU/             L1:               From L2:
      Acq.scope = CTA Rel.scope = CTA          Acq (no scope)            Rel (no scope)          Eviction          Req-Write-back
                                        send GetV to L2
      send GetV to L2 send GetO to L2 rec. Data from L2                send GetO to L2
  I rec. Data from L2 rec. Data from L2 read/V                         rec. Data from L2
      read/V          write/O           forall other valid non-O blocks write/O
                                           Invalidate
                                        send GetV to L2
                      send GetO to L2 rec. Data from L2                send GetO to L2
  V read hit          rec. Data from L2 read                           rec. Data from L2 /I
                      write/O           forall other valid non-O blocks write/O
                                           Invalidate
                                                                                           send Write-back to L2
  O read hit          write hit         read hit                       write hit                                   send Data to L2/V
                                                                                           rec. Ack from L2/I

 to the L2. After sending the current data to the new owner, the L2 changes ownership. Because
 a block in state O implies the absence of remote writers, there is no need to self-invalidate an
 Owned block on an acquire. Because the L2 tracks owners, there is no need to write-back an
 Owned block upon a release.
        There is yet another benefit to ownership tracking: even in the absence of scope infor-
 mation, ownership tracking can help in reducing the cost of intra-CTA acquires. Consider the
 message passing example shown in Table 10.10, assuming now that the threads T1 and T2 be-
 long to the same CTA. In the absence of scope information, recall that RCC will have to treat
 both releases and acquires conservatively, writing back all of the dirty data on a release, and
 self-invalidating all valid blocks on an acquire. With RCC-O, releases still have to be treated
 conservatively; all of the stores before the release will still have to obtain ownership. If a block
 that is acquired is in Owned state, it implies that the corresponding release must have been
 from a thread that is within the same CTA. Consequently, the acquire can be treated like a
 CTA-scoped acquire and the self-invalidation of valid blocks can be obviated.
 Protocol Specification. We present the detailed specification of the L1 controller in Table 10.15
 and the L2 controller in Table 10.16. The main change is the addition of the O state. Every store
 in V (or I) state has to contact the L2 controller and request ownership. Having obtained own-
 ership, any subsequent store to that line can simply update the line in the L1 without contacting
 the L2. Thus, a block in O state is potentially stale at the L2. For this reason, when the L2
 receives a request for ownership of a line already in O state, the L2 first requests the previous
 owner to write-back the block, sends the up-to-date data to the current requester, and then
 changes ownership.
Table 10.16: RCC-O: L2 controller

                   GetV                             GetO                      Write-back                L2: Eviction
     send Fetch to Mem                send Fetch to Mem
                                                                           allocate block
     rec. Data from Mem               rec. Data from Mem
 I                                                                         write
     send Data to L1                  send Data to L1
                                                                           send Ack to L1/V
     /V                               set owner/O
                                      send Data to L1                      write
 V   send Data to L1                                                                          /I
                                      set owner/O                          send Ack to L1
                                                                                              send Req-Write-back to L1 (owner)
     send Req-Write-back to L1 (owner) send Req-Write-back to L1 (owner)
                                                                                              rec. Data from L1 (owner)
     rec. Data from L1 (owner)        rec. Data from L1 (owner)            write
 O                                                                                            send Write-back to Mem
     write/V                          send Data to L1 (requestor)          send Ack to L1/V
                                                                                              rec. Ack from Mem
     send Data to L1 (requestor)      update owner/O
                                                                                              /I

      Upon hitting a release (CTA-scoped, GPU-scoped, or non-scoped), there is no need to
write-back dirty data from the L1 to the L2. Instead, the protocol merely requires that all previ-
ous stores must have obtained ownership. Upon an acquire (GPU-scoped or non-scoped), only
non-owned valid blocks need to be self-invalidated. If the acquire is of CTA scope or if the
acquire is to a block that is already owned, it implies that the synchronization is intra-CTA and
hence there is no need for self-invalidation.
      Finally, because the protocol hinges on the L2 maintaining ownership information, an L2
block in O state cannot be silently evicted; instead, it must first downgrade the current owner,
requesting it to write-back the block in question.
Summary. By tracking ownership, RCC-O allows for a reduced number of self-invalidations
in comparison to RCC. In the absence of scopes, ownership tracking also enables the detection
of intra-CTA acquires and obviates the need for self-invalidation in such a situation. However,
intra-CTA releases are treated conservatively—each store to a previously unowned block still
obtains ownership before a subsequent release. Finally, RCC-O cannot allow for blocks in state
O to be evicted from the L2 silently; it has to first downgrade the current owner.

Lazy Release Consistency-directed Coherence: LRCC
In the absence of scope information, RCC treats both releases and acquires conservatively. In
RCC-O, intra-CTA acquires can be detected and efficiently handled but releases are treated
conservatively.
       Is there a way for intra-CTA releases to also be efficiently handled? Lazy release
consistency-directed coherence (LRCC) enables this. In LRCC, ordinary stores do not obtain
ownership. Only release stores obtain ownership, on behalf of the stores before it in program
order. When a block that is released is later acquired, the state of the block at the time of the
acquire determines the coherence actions.
        If the block is owned by the L1 of the acquiring thread, it implies that the synchronization
 is intra-CTA; hence, there is no need for self-invalidation. If the block instead is owned by a
 remote L1, it implies that the synchronization is inter-CTA. In that case, dirty cache blocks in
 that remote L1 are first written back and the valid blocks in the acquiring L1 are self-invalidated.
 Thus, by delaying coherency actions until an acquire, LRCC is able to handle intra-CTA syn-
 chronization very efficiently.

Table 10.17: LRCC: Timeline of events (for Table 10.10), inter-CTA synchronization

           /* T1 and T2 (belonging to different CTAs) are mapped to SM1 and SM2, respectively.
                       flag = 0 and data1 = 0 are cached in L1s of both SM1 and SM2 */
      Time              SM1/L1                      SM2/L1                            L2
        t1 St1 writes data1=NEW
              and completes
        t2 Rel St2 issues ownership
              request for flag
        t3                                                              ownership for flag obtained;
                                                                        and sent to SM1
        t4 ownership received;
              flag=SET written and St2
              completes
        t5                               Acq Ld1 issues read for flag
        t6                                                              write-back request for flag
                                                                        issued to L1 of SM1 (since it
                                                                        owns flag)
        t7 (before responding with
              flag) write-back of data1
              initiated
        t8                                                              data1=NEW written and Ack
                                                                        sent to L1 of SM1
        t9 Ack received; flag=SET
              sent to L2
       t10                                                              flag value written and sent to
                                                                        L1 of SM2
       t11                               Acq Ld1 completes
       t12                               Ld2 issues read for data1
       t13                                                              data1=NEW read; sent to L1
                                                                        of SM2
       t14                               Ld2 completes
Example: Inter-CTA synchronization. Consider the message passing example shown in Ta-
ble 10.10, assuming that the threads T1 and T2 belong to different CTAs. Initially, let us assume
the cache blocks containing data1 and flag are cached in the L1s of both SM1 and SM2. We
illustrate a timeline of events in Table 10.17. At time=t1 , St1 is performed causing NEW to be
written to data1 cached in SM1’s L1, without obtaining ownership. At time=t2 , St2 (marked
release) is performed, causing an ownership request for flag to be sent to the L2. With flag pre-
viously unowned by any SM, the L2 grants ownership by simply setting the owner to SM1 and
responds to SM1. Upon receiving the response, SET is written to flag at SM1’s L1, and St2
completes at time=t4 . At time=t5 , Ld1 (marked acquire) is performed, causing a read request for
flag to be sent to the L2. At the L2, the block containing flag is found to be owned by SM1’s
L1; therefore, the L2 requests for SM1’s L1 to write-back flag. Upon receiving this request at
time=t7 , SM1’s L1 first writes back all dirty non-owned blocks (including data1=NEW); then,
at time=t9 , it writes back flag=SET. At time=t10 , L2 receives flag, writes it locally and forwards
the value to SM2. At time=t11 , SM2 receives flag=SET and Ld1 completes. Finally, at time=t12 ,
Ld2 causes a read request for data1 to be sent to the L2 and the up-to-date value of NEW is
read.

Table 10.18: LRCC: Timeline of events (for Table 10.10), intra-CTA synchronization

          /* Both T1 and T2, belonging to the same CTAs, are mapped to SM1.
                      flag = 0 and data1 = 0 are cached in SM1’s L1. */
Time      T1 (SM1/L1)                 T2 (SM1/L1)                         L2
 t1 St1 writes data1=NEW
     and completes
 t2 Rel St2 issues ownership
     request
 t3                                                         ownership for flag obtained
                                                            and sent to SM1
 t4 ownership received;
     flag=SET written and St2
     completes
 t5                           Acq Ld1 reads flag=SET from
                              L1 and completes
 t6                           Ld2 reads data1=NEW from
                              L1 and completes

Example: Intra-CTA synchronization. Let us consider the message passing example shown in
Table 10.10, now assuming that the threads T1 and T2 belong to the same CTA, and hence are
mapped to the same SM, SM1. We illustrate a timeline of events in Table 10.18. At time=t1 , St1
 is performed, causing NEW to be written to data1 cached in the L1. At time=t2 , St2 (marked
 release) is performed, causing an ownership request for flag to be sent to the L2. Upon obtain-
 ing ownership, SET is written to flag cached in the L1. At time=t5 , Ld1 (marked acquire) is
 performed. Since flag is owned by SM1, there are no self-invalidations and flag=SET is simply
 read from the L1. At time=t6 , Ld2 is performed, reading data1=NEW from the L1.
 Protocol Specification. We present the detailed specification of the L1 controller in Ta-
 ble 10.19. The L2 controller is identical to the one for RCC-O (Table 10.16). In contrast to
 RCC-O, not all stores obtain ownership; only non-scoped/GPU-scoped releases obtain own-
 ership. Like in RCC-O, a CTA-scoped acquire or an acquire for a block owned at the L1 im-
 plies intra-CTA synchronization; hence, there are no self-invalidations. Conversely, a GPU-
 scoped/non-scoped acquire for a block not owned by the L1 implies inter-CTA synchroniza-
 tion and involves self-invalidations. Specifically, a GetV request is sent to the L2 to obtain the
 up-to-date value of the block that is acquired. (If at the L2, the requested block is owned by a
 different L1, the L2 causes that L1 to write back all of its dirty, non-owned blocks before writ-
 ing back the requested block.) Then all valid non-owned L1 blocks, except the block just read by
 the acquire, are self-invalidated. Finally, like in RCC-O, LRCC hinges on the L2 maintaining
 ownership information. Therefore, an L2 block in state O cannot be evicted silently; instead, it
 must downgrade the current owner, asking it to write-back not only the block in question but
 also any other non-owned dirty blocks in that L1.

Table 10.19: LRCC: L1 controller. In non-scoped version scope is set to GPU.

          Load/              Store/              Acq.scope = GPU/         Rel.scope = GPU/                L1:                          From L2:
      Acq.scope = CTA Rel.scope = CTA              Acq (no scope)           Rel (no scope)             Eviction                    Req-Write-back
                                        send GetV to L2
    send GetV to L2 send GetV to L2 rec. Data from L2                    send GetO to L2
  I rec. Data from L2 rec. Data from L2 read/V                           rec. Data from L2
    read/V            write/V           for all other valid non-O blocks write/O
                                          Invalidate
                                        send GetV to L2
                                                                                           if(dirty)
                                        rec. Data from L2                send GetO to L2
                                                                                              send Write-back to L2
  V read hit          write hit         read                             rec. Data from L2
                                                                                              rec. Ack from L2
                                        for all other valid non-O blocks write/O
                                                                                           /I
                                          Invalidate
                                                                                           for all other dirty non-O blocks
                                                                                                                            for all other dirty non-O blocks
                                                                                               send Write-back to L2
                                                                                                                               send Write-back to L2
  O read hit          write hit         read hit                         write hit             rec. Ack from L2/V
                                                                                                                               rec. Ack from L2/V
                                                                                           send Write-back to L2
                                                                                                                            send Data to L2/V
                                                                                           rec. Ack from L2/I

 Summary. By delaying coherence actions until the acquire, LRCC allows for intra-CTA syn-
 chronization to be detected and handled efficiently even in the absence of scope information.
 LRCC cannot allow for blocks in state O to be silently evicted from the L2, but the impact of
 this is limited to synchronization objects, since only release stores obtain ownership.
Release Consistency-directed Coherence: Summary
In this section, we discussed three variants of release consistency-directed coherence that can be
used to enforce both scoped and non-scoped flavors of release consistency. While all of the vari-
ants can exploit knowledge of scopes, LRCC can handle intra-CTA synchronization efficiently
even in the absence of scopes.
       Given that LRCC can handle synchronization efficiently even in the absence of scopes,
can we get rid of scoped memory consistency models? Not quite, in our opinion. Whereas lazi-
ness helps in avoiding wasteful write-backs in case of intra-CTA synchronization, it makes inter-
CTA acquires slower. This is because laziness forces all of the write-backs from the L1 of the
releasing thread to be performed on the critical path of the acquire. This effect becomes more
pronounced in the case of synchronization between two devices, e.g., between a CPU and a
GPU.
       Thus, whether or not GPU and heterogeneous memory models must involve scopes is a
complex programmability vs. performance tradeoff.

10.2 MORE HETEROGENEITY THAN JUST GPUS
In this section, we consider the problem of how to expose a global shared memory interface
across multiple multicore devices consisting of CPUs, GPUs, and other accelerators.
       What makes the problem challenging is that each of the devices might guarantee a distinct
consistency model enforced via a distinct coherence protocol. For instance, a CPU may choose
to enforce a relatively strong consistency model such as TSO, using a consistency-agnostic pro-
tocol that enforces SWMR. On the other hand, a GPU may choose to enforce scoped RC, by
employing a consistency-directed lazy release consistency protocol.
       When two or more devices with distinct consistency models are integrated, what is the
resulting consistency model of the heterogeneous device? How can it be programmed? How to
integrate the coherence protocols of the two devices? Most of these questions are being actively
researched by academia and industry. In the following section, we attempt to understand these
questions better and outline the design space.

10.2.1 HETEROGENEOUS CONSISTENCY MODELS
Let us first understand the semantics of composing two distinct consistency models. Suppose
two component multicore devices A and B are integrated such that they share memory—what
is the resulting consistency model?
       A seemingly straightforward answer is to declare the weaker of the two memory models
to be the overall model. However, this simple solution will not work if the two memory models
are incomparable as we saw in Section 5.8.1. Even if one of the models subsumes the other, a
more efficient solution is possible.
       For example, suppose multicore A enforces SC and multicore B satisfies TSO, how does
the heterogeneous multicore made up of A and B behave?
         Figure 10.2 shows the operational model of the heterogeneous multicore processor. Intu-
 itively, operations coming out of a thread from A should satisfy the memory ordering rules of A
 (which in our example is SC) and operations coming out of B should satisfy the memory model
 ordering rules of B (TSO).

                          C1           C2            C3                C4

                                                 loads             loads
                                                          stores              stores
                                              Switch

                                            Memory

Figure 10.2: Semantics of a heterogeneous architecture in which cores C1 and C2 support SC,
 whereas C3 and C4 support TSO.

        Consider the Dekker’s example in Table 10.20. Is it possible for both Ld1 and Ld2 to
 read zeroes? This is indeed possible since TSO does not enforce the St2!Ld2 ordering. As
 shown in Table 10.21, once a FENCE instruction is inserted between St2 and Ld2, this is
 rendered impossible, since the FENCE now enforces the St2!Ld2 ordering. Note, however,
 that a FENCE is not needed between St1 and Ld1 since SC already enforces St1!Ld1.

Table 10.20: Dekker’s example. Combined SC + TSO memory model. Thread T1 is mapped to
 an SC core whereas T2 is mapped to a TSO core.

         Thread T1 (SC)                Thread T2 (TSO)                                Comments
  St1: St1 flag1 = NEW;           St2: St flag2 = NEW;                       // Initially all variables are 0.
  Ld1: Ld1 r1 = flag2;            Ld2: Ld r2 = flag1;                        // Can both r1 and r2 read 0?
                                                                           // Yes!

       Thus, a heterogeneous shared memory architecture that is formed by composing compo-
 nent multicores with distinct consistency models results in a compound consistency model such
 that memory operations originating from each component satisfy the memory ordering rules
 of that component. Although this notion seems intuitive, to our knowledge this has not been
 formalized yet.
Table 10.21: Dekker’s example with a FENCE inserted on the TSO side. Combined SC + TSO
memory model.

        Thread T1 (SC)                Thread T2 (TSO)                     Comments
 St1: St flag1 = NEW;            St2: St flag2 = NEW;            // Initially all variables are 0.
 Ld1: Ld r1 = flag2;             FENCE                          // Can both r1 and r2 read 0?
                                Ld2: Ld r2 = flag1;
                                                               // No!

Programming with Heterogeneous Consistency Models
How do we program such a heterogeneous shared memory architecture in which not all devices
support the same consistency model? As we saw above, one approach is to simply target the
compound consistency model. However, as one can imagine, programming with compound
memory models can quickly get tricky, especially if very different memory consistency models
are involved.
       A more promising approach is to program with languages such as HSA or OpenCL with
formally specified (scoped) synchronization primitives. Recall that C11 is a language model
based on Sequential Consistency for data-race-free (“SC for DRF”) that we saw in Section 5.4.
HSA and OpenCL extend the SC for DRF paradigm with scopes, dubbed Sequential Consis-
tency for Heterogeneous-Race-Free (SC for HRF) [15].
       HRF is conceptually similar to the scoped RC model we introduced in the previous sec-
tion, but with a couple of differences. First, HRF is at the language-level, whereas the scoped
RC model is at the virtual ISA level. Second, whereas HRF does not provide any semantics for
programs with races, the scoped RC model provides semantics for such codes. Thus, the rela-
tionship between HRF and scoped RC is akin to the relationship between DRF-based language
models and RC.
       HRF has two variants: HRF-direct and HRF-indirect. In HRF-direct, two threads can
synchronize only if the synchronization operations (releases and acquires) have the same exact
scope. HRF-indirect, on the other hand, allows for transitive synchronization using different
scopes. For example, in HRF-indirect, if thread T1 synchronizes with T2 using scope S1, and
subsequently T2 synchronizes with T3 using scope S2, T1 is said to transitively synchronize
with T3. HRF-direct, which does not allow this transitivity, could be restrictive for program-
mers. It is worth noting that the scoped RC model, like HRF-indirect, allows for transitive
synchronization.
       The language level scoped-synchronization primitives are mapped to hardware instruc-
tions; each device with a unique hardware consistency model has separate mappings. Lustig et
al. [21] provide a framework dubbed ArMOR for algorithmically deriving correct mappings
based on their precise way to specify different memory consistency models.
        The third approach toward programming with heterogeneity is to program with one of
 the component hardware memory consistency models, while instrumenting the code running in
 each of the other components with FENCE instructions and other instructions to ensure they
 are compatible with the chosen memory model. Again, the ArMOR framework can be used to
 translate between memory consistency models.

 10.2.2 HETEROGENEOUS COHERENCE PROTOCOLS
 Consider two multicore devices A and B with each device adhering to a distinct consistency
 model enforced via a distinct coherence protocol. As we can see in Figure 10.3, each of the
 devices has a local coherence protocol for keeping its local L1s coherent. How do we integrate the
 two devices into one heterogeneous shared memory machine? In particular, how do we stitch the
 two coherence protocols together correctly? Correctness hinges on whether the heterogeneous
 machine satisfies the compound consistency model, i.e., memory operations from each device
 must satisfy the memory ordering rules of the device’s consistency model.
        We first discuss hierarchical coherence, wherein the two intra-device coherence protocols
 are stitched together via a higher-level inter-device coherence protocol. We then discuss how
 coarse-grained coherence tracking can help in mitigating the bandwidth demands of hierarchical
 coherence when used for multi-chip CPU-GPU systems. Finally, we will conclude with a simple
 approach to CPU-GPU coherence wherein blocks cached by the CPU are not cached in the
 GPU.

                                 Device-A                            Device-B
                      Core                  Core           Core                 Core
                       L1           …        L1            L1           …        L1

                                     Local coherence                     Local coherence
                            L2       controller A               L2       controller B
                                         Shim                                Shim

                             Global Coherence Controller + Optional LLC

                                                  Memory

Figure 10.3: Integrating two or more devices into one heterogeneous machine via hierarchical
 coherence involves composing the two local coherence protocols together via a global coherence
 protocol.
A Hierarchical Approach to Heterogeneous Coherence
Recall that in Section 9.1.6, we introduced hierarchical coherence for integrating two separate
yet homogeneous coherence protocols. The same idea also can be extended for supporting het-
erogeneous coherence.
       More specifically, hierarchical coherence works as follows. A local coherence controller,
upon receiving a coherence request, attempts to fulfill the request locally within the device.
Requests that cannot be completely fulfilled locally—e.g., a GetM request with sharers present
in the other device—are forwarded to the global coherence controller, which in turn forwards
the request to the other device’s local coherence controller. Upon serving the forwarded request,
that local controller responds back to the global coherence controller, which in turn forwards
the response to the requestor.
       To accomplish all of this:
   • the global controller must be designed with an interface that is rich enough to handle
     coherence requests initiated by the devices’ local controllers; and
   • each of the local controllers must be extended with shims that not only serve as transla-
     tors between the local and the global coherence controller interfaces, but also choose the
     appropriate global coherence requests to make, and interpret global coherence responses
     appropriately.
      In order to better understand what the global coherence interface must look like, and the
task of the shims, let us consider the following scenarios.
Scenario1: consistency-agnostic + consistency-agnostic.
Suppose we want to connect a multicore CPU with a CPU-like accelerator. Let us assume that
both devices employ consistency-agnostic, SWMR-enforcing coherence protocols; however, the
actual protocols employed by the two devices are different: the CPU uses a directory protocol
whereas the accelerator uses snooping on a bus. Further, let us assume that the two protocols are
stitched together via a global directory protocol with a coarse-grained sharer list, maintaining
whether or not a cache block is present in one or more of the devices.
       Now, suppose a CPU core performs a store to a block that is globally shared across the
CPU and the accelerator. As shown in Fig. 10.4, the CPU core 1 would send an Upg(rade)
request to the local directory which must not only invalidate sharers within the CPU, but also
 2 send an Upg request to the global directory for invalidating sharers in the accelerator. Upon
receiving the Upg, the global directory 3 must forward an Inv(alidation) request to the lo-
cal snooping controller of the accelerator. The local snooping controller must interpret the Inv
request as a GetM, because the GetM request is the one that invalidates sharers in a snoop-
ing protocol. 4 The local snooping controller would then issue the GetM on its local bus to
invalidate sharers.
       Thus, for stitching together consistency-agnostic protocols, the global coherence con-
troller must have an interface that can handle requests and responses similar to Table 6.4 from
               1.Upg                 2.Upg                    3.Inv                         4. GetM
       CPU              Local                    Global                    Local                       Accelerator
       Core            Directory                Directory             Snoop Controller                   Core
              8. Ack                 7. Ack                  6. Ack                          5. Data

Figure 10.4: Stitching together two consistency-agnostic protocols: Coherence transactions for
 a store from a CPU core.

 Chapter 6. Further, the shims must issue requests to the global controller as per its interface,
 and interpret forwarded requests and responses from the global controller in accordance with the
 local controller’s interface. For example, the snooping controller must interpret an Inv request
 from the global directory as a GetM.
 Scenario2: consistency-directed + consistency-directed
 Suppose we want to connect a GPU with another GPU-like accelerator via a shared LLC that
 serves as the global coherence controller. Let us assume that both the GPU and the accelerator
 enforce non-scoped release consistency using variants of release consistency-directed coherence
 protocols: the GPU employs the LRCC protocol whereas the accelerator employs the RCC
 protocol.

              1. Send GetV (flag)              2. GetV(flag)            3. Req-Write-back           4. Req-Write-back
   Accel.                            L2                      Global                         L2                          L1
  Core (T2)                        (Accel.)                  LLC                          (GPU)                       (GPU)
                8. Data(flag)                  7. Data(flag)               6. Write-back               5. Write-back
                                                                         (data1/flag)                 (data1/flag)

Figure 10.5: Stitching together two consistency-directed protocols.

        Consider the message passing example shown in Table 10.10, assuming that T1 is on the
 GPU and T2 is on the accelerator. Let us assume that St1 and St2 have already been performed
 and the cache lines containing flag and data are in one of the GPU’s L1s, with flag in O(wned)
 state. We show in Fig. 10.5 the sequence of coherence transactions that must be generated
 when T2 performs the acquire Ld1 in the accelerator. 1 The accelerator would send a GetV
 request for flag to its local L2 controller. Since the accelerator’s local L2 does not have the block
 containing flag, 2 its shim must forward the GetV to the global LLC controller. The global
 LLC controller, upon finding flag to be owned by the GPU, 3 must send a request to the
 GPU’s local L2 controller for writing back all dirty blocks. The GPU’s L2 controller would 4
 forward this request to the GPU L1 that owns the block. 5 The GPU L1 controller would
 then write back all of the dirty blocks (including flag and data) to the GPU’s L2. 6 The GPU’s
 L2, in turn, must write back the dirty blocks to the LLC, which is now the point of coherence.
 Then, 7 the global LLC controller must respond to the accelerator’s L2 controller with the
block containing flag. 8 Finally, the accelerator’s L2 would respond to the requester, thereby
completing the request.
      Thus, with regard to stitching together consistency-directed protocols, the global LLC
controller serves as the point of coherence. Therefore, the shims must forward requests (e.g.,
write-backs) to the LLC.
Scenario3: consistency-agnostic + consistency-directed.
Suppose we want to connect a CPU and a GPU together. Let us assume that the CPU enforces
SC using a consistency-agnostic MSI directory protocol; the GPU enforces non-scoped RC
using a consistency-directed LRCC protocol. Further, let us assume we want to connect the two
via a global directory that is embedded in a globally shared LLC (Figure 10.3). How should the
two coherence protocols be stitched together?
       Consider the message passing example shown in Table 10.22, assuming that T1 is from
the CPU and T2 is from the GPU. Initially, let us assume that both data and flag are cached in
the L1s of the GPU as well as the CPU with initial values of 0.
Table 10.22: T1 from CPU adheres to SC. T2 from GPU adheres to non-scoped RC.

       Thread T1 (CPU)                  Thread T2 (GPU)                          Comments
 St1: St data1 = NEW;            Ld1: Acq Ld r1 = flag;                // Initially all variables are 0.
 St2: St flag = SET;              B1: if(r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
                                 Ld2: Ld r2 = data1                   Can r2==0?

      When St1 is performed by the CPU, as shown in Figure 10.6, it would 1 send an Upg
request for data1 to the local directory controller which in turn 2 must forward the request to
the global directory. Importantly, the global directory need not forward the Upg to the GPU
despite the GPU caching data1. This is because the LRCC protocol on the GPU does not
require sharers to be invalidated upon a write since sharers are self-invalidated upon an acquire.
Therefore, the global directory 3 can simply respond with an Ack. When the release (St2) is
performed in the CPU, it must result in a similar sequence of coherence transactions.

                             1.Upg (data1)               2.Upg (data1)
                   CPU                        Local                         Global
                 Core (T1)                   Directory                     Directory
                                 4. Ack                      3. Ack

Figure 10.6: Stitching together a consistency-agnostic protocol with a consistency-directed one:
Coherence transactions for St1 from the CPU.

     When the acquire Ld1 from T2 is performed by the GPU, as shown in Fig. 10.7, it would
1 send a GetV for flag to the GPU L2 controller which in turn 2 must forward the request
 to the global LLC/directory. The global directory, upon finding that the block containing flag is
 in M(odified) state in the CPU, 3 must send a Fwd-GetS request to the CPU’s directory. The
 CPU’s directory must 4 forward that request to the CPU L1 that contains the block in state
 M. The CPU L1 would then 5 respond with the block containing flag, which must eventually
 be forwarded to the requestor.

              1. Send GetV (flag)           2. GetV (flag)             3. Fwd-GetS (flag)             4. Fwd-GetS (flag)
   GPU                               L2                     Global                     Directory                         L1
  Core (T2)                        (GPU)                    LLC                         (CPU)                          (CPU)
                8. Data (flag)               7. Data (flag)              6. Data (flag)                  5. Data (flag)

Figure 10.7: Stitching together a consistency-agnostic protocol with a consistency-directed one:
 Coherence transactions for Acquire Ld1 from the GPU.

       Let us consider the same message passing example, assuming now that T1 is on the GPU
 and T2 is on the CPU, as shown in Table 10.23. When St1 is performed by the GPU, it simply
 writes data1 to its local L1.

Table 10.23: T1 from GPU adheres to non-scoped RC. T2 from CPU adheres to SC.

        Thread T1 (GPU)                       Thread T2 (CPU)                                     Comments
  St1: St data1 = NEW;                 Ld1: Ld r1 = flag;                               // Initially all variables are 0.
  St2: Rel St flag = SET;               B1: if(r1 ≠ SET) goto Ld1;
                                       Ld2: Ld r2 = data1                              Can r2==0?

        When the release St2 is performed by the GPU, as shown in Fig. 10.8, the GPU would 1
 issue a GetO request for flag to the GPU L2 controller which in turn 2 must forward it to the
 global directory. Because flag is cached in the CPU, the global directory 3 must forward an Inv
 request to the local directory controller of the CPU which would 6 respond after invalidating
 the cached copies of flag.

              1. GetO (flag)                  2. GetO                       3. Inv                      4. Inv
   GPU                               L2                       Global                   Directory                         L1
  Core (T1)                        (GPU)                      LLC                       (CPU)                          (CPU)
                8. Data (flag)               7. Data (flag)                   6. Ack                     5. Ack

Figure 10.8: Stitching together a consistency-directed protocol with a consistency-agnostic one:
 Coherence transactions for St1 from the GPU.

      When Ld1 is performed by the CPU, as shown in Figure 10.9, 1 a GetS request for flag
 would be sent to the local directory controller which in turn 2 must forward it to the global
LLC/directory controller. The global directory controller, upon finding that the block containing
flag is owned by the GPU, 3 must send a request to the GPU’s local L2 controller for writing
back all dirty blocks. The GPU L2 controller must, in turn, 4 request a write-back of all dirty
blocks from that L1. The GPU L1 controller, upon receiving the request, would 5 perform a
write-back of its dirty blocks (including data1 and flag) to the GPU L2 controller. The GPU
L2 controller must in turn 6 write back these blocks to the global directory/LLC. When the
write-back for data1 reaches the global directory/LLC, the LLC upon finding that the block
has sharers in the CPU, must 7 forward an Inv request for data1 to the CPU local directory,
which in turn would 8 invalidate the L1 cached copy of data1 and respond with an ack. When
the write-back for flag reaches the global directory/LLC, it must 9 forward the value to the L2
of the CPU, which in turn would 10 forward it to the L1, thereby completing the Ld1 request.
Since data1 is now invalid in the L1 of the CPU, when Ld2 is performed by the CPU, it would
get the correct value of NEW from the LLC.

            1. GetS (flag)              2. GetS                  3. Req-Write-back        4. Req-Write-back
  CPU                           L2                     Global                      L2                          L1
Core (T1)                     (CPU)                    LLC                       (GPU)                       (GPU)
             8. Inv (data1)           7. Inv (data1)             6. Write-back             5. Write-back
             10. Data (flag)           9. Data (flag)               (data1/flag)               (data1/flag)

Figure 10.9: Stitching together a consistency-directed protocol with a consistency-agnostic one:
Coherence transactions for Acquire Ld1 from the CPU.

       The examples we considered in Scenario3 shed light on how the global coherence interface
should behave. Any coherence request due to a GPU store must invalidate CPU sharers of that
block. Therefore, for such requests, the global coherence interface must forward invalidations to
the CPU, if there are any sharers. In contrast, any coherence request due to a CPU store need not
invalidate GPU sharers since the GPUs are responsible for self-invalidating their cache blocks
upon an acquire. In other words, the global coherence interface must disambiguate CPU sharers
from GPU sharers. One way to realize this is to have two types of Read requests as part of the
interface: (1) GetS, that requests a block for reading and asks the directory to track the block, so
that the block can be invalidated upon a remote write; and (2) GetV [10], that requests a block
for reading and is responsible for self-invalidating the block, and so the directory need not track
the block.
Summary. Hierarchical coherence is an elegant solution to integrating heterogeneous coherence
protocols. Hierarchical coherence requires: (1) a global coherence protocol with an interface
that is rich enough to handle a range of coherence protocols; and (2) extensions to the original
coherence protocols (shims) for interfacing with the global coherence protocol.
       Is there a universal coherence interface that can be used to stitch together any two coher-
ence protocols? Whereas the interface specified in Table 6.4 from Chapter 6 can handle any type
 of consistency-agnostic protocol, it falls short of handling a consistency-directed coherence pro-
 tocol. Specifically, consistency-directed coherence protocols are characterized by read requests
 where the onus of invalidating the line lies with the requestor itself. A GetV, as opposed to a
 GetS, is a good match for such a read request. It is worth noting that a number of such coher-
 ence interfaces have been proposed both in academia (Crossing guard [22] and Spandex [10])
 and industry (CCIX [2], OpenCAPI [4], Gen-Z [3], and AMBA CHI [1]).

 Mitigating Bandwidth Demands of Heterogeneous Coherence
 One problem with hierarchical coherence—especially for CPU-GPU multi-chip systems—is
 that the inter-chip coherent interconnect can become a bottleneck.
        As the name suggests, in multi-chip systems the CPU and GPU are in separate chips and
 hence the global directory has to be accessed by the GPU via an off-chip coherent interconnect.
 Because GPU workloads typically incur high cache miss ratios, the global directory needs to be
 accessed frequently, which explains why the coherent interconnect can become saturated.
        One approach [24] to mitigating this bandwidth demand is to employ coarse-grained
 coherence tracking [12], wherein coherence state is tracked at a coarse granularity (e.g., at page
 size granularity) locally in the GPU (as well as the CPU). When the GPU incurs a miss and the
 page corresponding to the location is known to be private to the GPU or read-only, there is no
 need to access the global directory. Instead the block may be directly accessed from memory via
 a high-bandwidth bus.

 A Low-Complexity Solution to Heterogeneous CPU-GPU Coherence
 CPUs and GPUs are not always designed by the same vendor. Unfortunately, hierarchical coher-
 ence typically requires modest extensions (shims) to both the CPU as well as the GPU protocol.
        One simple approach to CPU-GPU coherence in multi-chip systems is selective GPU
 caching [7]. Any data that is mapped to CPU memory is not cached in the GPU. Furthermore,
 any data from the GPU memory that is currently cached in the CPU is also not cached in the
 GPU. This simple policy trivially enforces coherence. To enforce this policy, the GPU maintains
 a coarse-grained remote directory that maintains the data that is currently cached by the CPU.
 Whenever a block from the GPU memory is accessed by the CPU, that coarse-grained region
 is inserted into the remote directory. (If the GPU was caching the line, that line is flushed.) Any
 location present in the remote directory is not cached in the GPU.
        Unfortunately, the above naive scheme can incur a significant penalty because any loca-
 tion that is cached in the CPU must be retrieved from the CPU. To offset the cost, several
 optimizations including GPU request coalescing (multiple requests to the CPU are coalesced),
 and CPU-side caching (a special CPU-side cache for GPU remote requests) have been pro-
 posed [7].
10.3 FURTHER READING
In this chapter we saw how consistency-directed coherence protocols are used for keeping GPUs
coherent. Although most of the literature on CPU coherence uses the consistency-agnostic def-
inition, there have been some classic works that have targeted coherence protocols to the con-
sistency model.
       Afek et al. [6] proposed lazy coherence that directly enforces SC without satisfying
SWMR. Lebeck and Wood proposed dynamic self invalidation [18], the first self-invalidation
based coherence protocol that targets both SC as well as weaker models directly without satis-
fying SWMR. Kontothanassis [17] proposed lazy release consistency for CPU processors, the
precursor to similar such protocols proposed for the GPU.
       The advent of multicores sparked renewed interest in consistency-directed coherence pro-
tocols. DeNovo [13] showed that targeting coherence toward DRF models can lead to simpler
and scalable coherence protocols. VIPS [26] proposed a directory-less approach for directly
enforcing release consistency, relying on TLBs for tracking private and read-only data. TSO-
CC [14] and Tardis [31] are consistency-directed coherence protocols that directly target TSO
and SC respectively.
       A number of proposals for GPU coherence were adaptations of CPU coherence proto-
cols. Temporal coherence [30] was the first to propose coherence for GPUs by adapting library
coherence [19], a timestamp-based protocol for CPU coherence. HRF [15] extended DRF to
a heterogeneous context and showed how scoped consistency models can be enforced. Mean-
while, Sinclair et al. [16, 29] adapted DeNovo for GPUs—specifically, by obtaining ownership
for stores—and showed that non-scoped memory models can perform almost as well as scoped
consistency models [16]. Alsop et al. [9] improved upon this by adapting lazy release consis-
tency for GPUs. Finally, Ren and Lis [25] adapted Tardis for GPUs and showed that SC can
be enforced efficiently on GPUs.
       One challenge that we have not explicitly addressed is that accelerators, especially GPUs,
often have programmer-controlled memories called scratchpads in addition to caches. There has
been a body of work that has looked at integrating scratchpads as well as caches into the global
address space [11, 16, 27].

10.4 REFERENCES
 [1] The AMBA CHI Specification.     https://developer.arm.com/architectures/
     system-architectures/amba/amba-5 246

 [2] The CCIX Consortium. https://www.ccixconsortium.com/ 246

 [3] The GenZ Consortium. https://genzconsortium.org/ 246

 [4] The OpenCAPI Consortium. https://opencapi.org/ 246
      [5] T. M. Aamodt, W. W. L. Fung, and T. G. Rogers. General-Purpose Graphics Processor Ar-
          chitectures. Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architecture. Morgan & Claypool Publishers,
          2018. DOI: 10.2200/s00848ed1v01y201804cac044 212
      [6] Y. Afek, G. M. Brown, and M. Merritt. Lazy caching. ACM Transactions on Programming
          Languages and Systems, 15(1):182–205, 1993. DOI: 10.1145/151646.151651 247
      [7] N. Agarwal, D. W. Nellans, E. Ebrahimi, T. F. Wenisch, J. Danskin, and S. W. Keckler.
          Selective GPU caches to eliminate CPU-GPU HW cache coherence. In IEEE Inter-
          national Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), Barcelona, Spain,
          March 12–16, 2016. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2016.7446089 246
      [8] J. Alglave, M. Batty, A. F. Donaldson, G. Gopalakrishnan, J. Ketema, D. Poetzl,
          T. Sorensen, and J. Wickerson. GPU concurrency: Weak behaviours and programming
          assumptions. In Proc. of the 20th International Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-
          gramming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 577–591, Istanbul, Turkey,
          March 14–18, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2775054.2694391 214
      [9] J. Alsop, M. S. Orr, B. M. Beckmann, and D. A. Wood. Lazy release consistency
          for GPUs. In 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
          (MICRO), pages 26:1–26:13, Taipei, Taiwan, October 15–19, 2016. DOI: 10.1109/mi-
          cro.2016.7783729 247
 [10] J. Alsop, M. D. Sinclair, and S. V. Adve. Spandex: A flexible interface for efficient het-
      erogeneous coherence. In ISCA, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2018.00031 245, 246
 [11] L. Alvarez, L. Vilanova, M. Moretó, M. Casas, M. González, X. Martorell, N. Navarro,
      E. Ayguadé, and M. Valero. Coherence protocol for transparent management of scratch-
      pad memories in shared memory manycore architectures. In Proc. of the 42nd Annual Inter-
      national Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages 720–732, Portland, OR, June 13–17,
      2015. DOI: 10.1145/2749469.2750411 247
 [12] J. F. Cantin, J. E. Smith, M. H. Lipasti, A. Moshovos, and B. Falsafi. Coarse-grain
      coherence tracking: RegionScout and region coherence arrays. IEEE Micro, 26(1):70–79,
      2006. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2006.8 246
 [13] B. Choi, R. Komuravelli, H. Sung, R. Smolinski, N. Honarmand, S. V. Adve, V. S.
      Adve, N. P. Carter, and C. Chou. DeNovo: Rethinking the memory hierarchy for
      disciplined parallelism. In International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compi-
      lation Techniques (PACT), pages 155–166, Galveston, TX, October 10–14, 2011. DOI:
      10.1109/pact.2011.21 231, 247
 [14] M. Elver and V. Nagarajan. TSO-CC: Consistency directed cache coherence for TSO. In
      20th IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
     pages 165–176, Orlando, FL, February 15–19, 2014. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2014.6835927
     247

[15] D. R. Hower, B. A. Hechtman, B. M. Beckmann, B. R. Gaster, M. D. Hill, S. K. Rein-
     hardt, and D. A. Wood. Heterogeneous-race-free memory models. In Architectural Support
     for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 427–440, Salt Lake
     City, UT, March 1–5, 2014. DOI: 10.1145/2541940.2541981 213, 217, 239, 247

[16] R. Komuravelli, M. D. Sinclair, J. Alsop, M. Huzaifa, M. Kotsifakou, P. Srivastava, S. V.
     Adve, and V. S. Adve. Stash: Have your scratchpad and cache it too. In Proc. of the 42nd
     Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages 707–719, Portland, OR,
     June 13–17, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2872887.2750374 217, 231, 247

[17] L. I. Kontothanassis, M. L. Scott, and R. Bianchini. Lazy release consistency for
     hardware-coherent multiprocessors. In Proc. Supercomputing, page 61, San Diego, CA,
     December 4–8, 1995. DOI: 10.21236/ada290062 247

[18] A. R. Lebeck and D. A. Wood. Dynamic self-invalidation: Reducing coherence overhead
     in shared-memory multiprocessors. In Proc. of the 22nd Annual International Symposium on
     Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 48–59, Santa Margherita Ligure, Italy, June 22–24,
     1995. DOI: 10.1109/isca.1995.524548 217, 247

[19] M. Lis, K. S. Shim, M. H. Cho, and S. Devadas. Memory coherence in the age of multi-
     cores. In IEEE 29th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), Amherst, MA,
     October 9–12, 2011. DOI: 10.1109/iccd.2011.6081367 247

[20] D. Lustig, S. Sahasrabuddhe, and O. Giroux. A formal analysis of the NVIDIA PTX
     memory consistency model. In Proc. of the 24th International Conference on Architec-
     tural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2019. DOI:
     10.1145/3297858.3304043 228

[21] D. Lustig, C. Trippel, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. ArMOR: Defending against mem-
     ory consistency model mismatches in heterogeneous architectures. In Proc. of the 42nd
     Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages 388–400, Portland, OR,
     June 13–17, 2015. 239
     DOI: 10.1145/2749469.2750378

[22] L. E. Olson, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood. Crossing guard: Mediating host-accelerator
     coherence interactions. In Proc. of the 22nd International Conference on Architectural Sup-
     port for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 163–176, Xi’an,
     China, April 8–12, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3093336.3037715 246
 [23] M. S. Orr, S. Che, A. Yilmazer, B. M. Beckmann, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood. Syn-
      chronization Using Remote-Scope Promotion. In Proc. of the 22nd International Confer-
      ence on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS),
      pages 73–86, Istanbul, Turkey, March 14–18, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2694344.2694350 217
 [24] J. Power, A. Basu, J. Gu, S. Puthoor, B. M. Beckmann, M. D. Hill, S. K. Reinhardt, and
      D. A. Wood. Heterogeneous system coherence for integrated CPU-GPU systems. In
      The 46th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO-46),
      pages 457–467, Davis, CA, December 7–11, 2013. DOI: 10.1145/2540708.2540747 246
 [25] X. Ren and M. Lis. Efficient sequential consistency in GPUs via relativistic cache co-
      herence. In IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
      (HPCA), pages 625–636, Austin, TX, February 4–8, 2017. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2017.40
      226, 247
 [26] A. Ros and S. Kaxiras. Complexity-effective multicore coherence. In International Con-
      ference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT), pages 241–252, Min-
      neapolis, MN, September 19–23, 2012. DOI: 10.1145/2370816.2370853 247
 [27] Y. S. Shao, S. L. Xi, V. Srinivasan, G. Wei, and D. M. Brooks. Co-designing accelerators
      and SOC interfaces using gem5-aladdin. In 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Sym-
      posium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 48:1–48:12, Taipei, Taiwan, October 15–19,
      2016. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2016.7783751 247
 [28] D. E. Shasha and M. Snir. Efficient and correct execution of parallel programs that share
      memory. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 10(2):282–312, 1988.
      DOI: 10.1145/42190.42277 228
 [29] M. D. Sinclair, J. Alsop, and S. V. Adve. Chasing away RAts: Semantics and evaluation
      for relaxed atomics on heterogeneous systems. In Proc. of the 44th Annual International
      Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 161–174, New York, NY, ACM, 2017.
      DOI: 10.1145/3079856.3080206 247
 [30] I. Singh, A. Shriraman, W. W. L. Fung, M. O’Connor, and T. M. Aamodt. Cache coher-
      ence for GPU architectures. In 19th IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
      Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 578–590, Shenzhen, China, February 23–27, 2013.
      DOI: 10.1109/mm.2014.4 216, 217, 220, 223, 226, 247
 [31] X. Yu and S. Devadas. Tardis: Time traveling coherence algorithm for distributed shared
      memory. In International Conference on Parallel Architecture and Compilation (PACT),
      pages 227–240, San Francisco, CA, October 18–21, 2015. DOI: 10.1109/pact.2015.12
      247
