
                                 CHAPTER                       11

    Specifying and Validating
   Memory Consistency Models
     and Cache Coherence
By now we have hopefully convinced you that consistency models and cache coherence protocols
are complex and subtle. In this chapter we discuss methods for rigorously specifying consistency
models and coherence protocols and exploring their allowed behaviors. We also discuss methods
for specifying their implementations and validating their correctness.
       We start by briefly overviewing two methods for specifying concurrent systems—
operational and axiomatic—focusing on how these methods can be used to specify consistency
models and coherence protocols (Section 11.1). Given a formal consistency specification, we
discuss how its behaviors can be explored automatically (Section 11.2). Finally, we will pro-
vide a whistle-stop tour of validating implementations, covering both formal and testing-based
methods (Section 11.3)

11.1 SPECIFICATION

A specification serves as a contract between the user of the system and its implementer by defin-
ing precisely the set of legal behaviors of the system. A specification answers the question: What
are the allowed behaviors of the system? In contrast, an implementation answers the question:
How does the system enforce the prescribed behaviors?
       What do we mean by behavior? A system interacts with its user (or environment) through
a set of actions: (1) input actions: actions from the user to the system; (2) internal actions: those
that happen within the system; and (3) output actions: actions from the system to the user. Among
these only the input and the output actions are observable to the user—the internal actions are
not. Thus, a sequence of (observable) input and output actions defines the behavior of the system.
Of interest are two classes of behavioral properties: safety and liveness.
       A safety property asserts that bad things should not happen—i.e., it specifies what se-
quences of observable actions are legal. For concurrent systems there are usually multiple legal
sequences because of non-determinism. Safety is not enough to fully specify a system, however.
Consider a system which accepts an input action and simply halts; although it has not exhibited
 anything bad, such a system is clearly not useful. That is why specifications also include liveness,
 which asserts that good things must eventually happen.
       Before we explain how behaviors can be formally specified, let us consider what the ob-
 servable actions are for consistency models and coherence protocols.
 Consistency models: Observable actions and behavior
 A memory consistency model is a contract between the software (user) and the hardware (imple-
 menter). Given a multithreaded program containing per-thread sequences of loads and stores,
 the memory model specifies what value each load must return. Thus, the relevant input actions
 are loads and stores (and their associated parameters including the processor core ID, address,
 and value to be stored in case of a store). The output actions are the values returned in response
 to the loads. A sequence of these observable actions (stores, loads, and the values returned)
 represents the behavior of a memory consistency model.
 Coherence protocols: Observable actions and behavior
 Recall that the processor core pipeline interacts with the coherence protocol to jointly enforce
 the desired memory consistency model. Thus, the “user” of the coherence protocol is the pipeline
 that interacts with it via two input actions: (1) read-request for every load in the program; and (2)
 write-request for every store in the program. The output actions from the coherence protocol are:
 (1) read-return that returns a value for every read-request; and (2) write-return that is simply an
 acknowledgment for the write. (The pipeline must know when a write completes.) A sequence
 of these observable actions represents the externally observable behavior of a coherence protocol.
        It is important to note here the difference between what is observable in a coherence
 protocol vs. a consistency model. In the former, the instant when a read-request or write-request
 returns is observable. However, for a consistency model, the instant when a load or store returns
 is not observable—only the values returned for loads are observable.
        Next, we discuss two major ways to specify the behavior of a system: operational and
 axiomatic. In the former, the system is described using an abstract reference implementation,
 whereas in the latter, mathematical axioms are used to describe the system’s behaviors.

 11.1.1 OPERATIONAL SPECIFICATION
 An operational specification describes the behavior of a system using a reference implementa-
 tion, typically expressed in the form of a state machine. The behaviors—i.e., the sequence of
 input/output actions—exhibited by the reference implementation define the set of all legal be-
 haviors of the system. Operational models typically use internal states and internal actions to
 constrain the behavior of the system, thereby ensuring safety. Liveness in operational models
 hinges on the fact that state changes must eventually happen. Typically, liveness is expressed
 externally (outside of the state machine specification) using mathematical axioms written in
 temporal logic [31].
Specifying consistency models and coherence protocols operationally
Consistency models can be specified operationally using abstract implementations. Like their re-
alistic counterparts, the abstract implementations typically have both the processor core pipeline
component and the memory system component. Recall that the memory system component,
which has the same interface as that of the coherence protocol (i.e., the same set of observable
actions: read-request, read-return, write-request, write-return), specifies the coherence protocol.
        In the following, we will describe two operational models for sequential consistency
(SC). Both models have identical pipeline components but differ in their memory system
components—the former specifies a consistency-agnostic coherence protocol whereas the latter
specifies a consistency-directed coherence protocol. This will allow us to operationally charac-
terize the differences between the two.
SC Operational Spec1: In-order pipeline + atomic memory
An example of an operational SC specification is similar to the naive SC implementation de-
scribed in Chapter 3.6 (the switch). In addition to the observable actions—stores, loads and the
values returned—the model employs internal state (memory) to constrain the values that can be
read by the loads.
      The operational specification works as follows. (It is assumed that each core has a program
counter, pointing to the next instruction to be fetched.)
Step 1: Fetch: One of the processor cores is non-deterministically selected; it fetches its next
        instruction and inserts it into a local instruction queue.

Step 2: Issue from the pipeline. Again one core is non-deterministically selected; it decodes the
        next instruction from its instruction queue. If it is a memory instruction, the pipeline
        issues a read-request (for a load) or a write-request (for a store) and blocks.

Step 3: Atomic memory system. Upon receiving a read-request, it reads the location from memory
        and responds with the value; upon receiving a write-request, the memory system writes
        it to memory and responds with an ack.

Step 4: Return to the pipeline: The pipeline unblocks upon receiving a response: ack (in case of a
        store) or value (in case of a load).
      The behaviors produced by this specification are sequences of input actions in program
order (load/store at Step 1) and output actions (value returned for a load at Step 4). It is easy to
see that its behaviors satisfy SC. For example, in the message passing example in Table 11.1 the
following sequence is observable:
                               «S1, S2, L1:r1=SET, L2:r2=NEW»
Likewise, several other sequences in which L1 repeats one or more time until it sees a value of
SET are possible. But the following SC violation is not observable:
Table 11.1: Message passing example

             Core C1                           Core C2                           Comments
  S1: St data = NEW;                L1: Ld r1 = flag;                 // Initially data and flag are 0.
  S2: St flag = SET;                 B1: if(r1 ≠ SET) goto L1;        L1, B1 may repeat many times.
                                    L2: Ld r2 = data;

                                   «S1, S2, L1:r1=SET, L2:r2=0»

 SC Operational Spec2: In-order pipeline + buffered memory
 Now let us consider another SC operational model in which the atomic memory is now front-
 ended by a global FIFO store queue to form a buffered memory system. Each entry in the store
 queue contains the address, the value to be stored, and the ID of the core that issued the write
 request. The buffered memory system responds to a write request with two types of acks: an ack
 to denote that the request has been inserted into the write queue and another late-ack when
 the write has been written to memory. More specifically, the buffered memory system works as
 follows. (Steps 1 and 4 are identical to the previous spec and hence omitted.)
 Step 2’: Issue from the pipeline. One core is non-deterministically selected; it decodes the next
          instruction from its instruction queue. If it is a store instruction, the pipeline issues a
          write-request and blocks; if it is a load instruction, the pipeline waits for the latest write
          to be late-acked, then issues a read-request and blocks.
 Step 3’: Buffered memory system. Upon receiving a write-request, the buffered memory system
          inserts it into the global store queue and responds to the pipeline with an ack. (When
          the write eventually gets written to memory, a late-ack is sent to the processor core that
          initiated the write.) Upon receiving a read-request, the value is read from memory and
          returned to the pipeline.
      Despite the buffering, the behavior produced by the model satisfies SC. Returning to the
 example shown in Table 11.1:
                                   «S1, S2, L1:r1=SET, L2:r2=0»
 The above SC violation is not observable because the global store queue is a FIFO and hence
 commits stores to memory without violating per-core program order.
 Consistency-agnostic vs. Consistency-directed coherence
 Recall that in Chapter 2 we classified coherence interfaces into two categories: consistency-
 agnostic and consistency-directed. The atomic memory system (Step 3 from Spec1) specifies a
 consistency-agnostic protocol since writes happen synchronously—whereas the buffered mem-
 ory system (Step 3’) is one example of a consistency-directed protocol specification since writes
are asynchronous. (More aggressive specifications of the latter are possible [3].) Although both
of these specification combine with an in-order pipeline to enforce SC, the two protocols show
different behaviors. Consider the sequence of externally observable actions shown in Table 11.2.
          «write-request(X,1), write-return(X,1),read-request(X), read-return(X,0)»

Table 11.2: Linearizability vs. SC: whereas SC allows for the read to return a 0, linearizability
does not.

             Time                          Core C1                           Core C2
 t0                              Write-request (X,1)
 t1                              Write-return (X,1)→ok
 t2                                                               Read-request (X)
 t3                                                               Read-return (X)→0

The above sequence cannot be observed in an atomic memory system although the sequence
does not violate SC. This is because the atomic memory specification ensures that the write is
actually written to memory between its invocation (t0 ) and response (t1 ), ensuring that the read
will return a 1 and not a 0. However, the buffered memory specification allows this behavior
because the write to X can be buffered in the global queue when the read happens, allowing the
read to see a 0.
       The atomic memory system (or consistency-agnostic coherence) can be modeled using a
correctness condition that is stronger than SC called linearizability [16]. In addition to the SC
rules, linearizability requires that a write must take effect in real time between its invocation
and response. Linearizability is a composable property: an object is linearizable iff its components
are linearizable. Translating to our setting, a memory system is linearizable iff each of its lo-
cations are individually linearizable. Thus, consistency-agnostic coherence can be specified on
a per-memory location basis, i.e., per-memory location linearizability. This also explains why
coherence of individual locations can be enforced independently using, for example, distributed
directories.
       In contrast, SC is not a composable property. Even if all memory locations satisfy SC
independently (and the pipeline does not reorder memory operations), it does not imply that
the whole system is SC. Recall that in Chapter 2 (sidebar) we looked at consistency-like defi-
nitions of coherence, where coherence was defined as SC on a per-memory location basis. Such
a definition of coherence, however, does not completely specify a coherence protocol. (Because
linearizability is stronger than SC, per-location SC is not strong enough to specify consistency-
agnostic coherence. Because SC is not compositional, per-location SC is not strong enough
to specify consistency-directed coherence as well.) Nevertheless, per-memory location SC is
a useful safety check for coherence. Any consistency-agnostic protocol—recall that it satisfies
 per-memory location linearizability—will necessarily satisfy per-memory location SC . Even for
 a consistency-directed coherence protocol, per-location SC is a useful safety check since most
 consistency models explicitly mandate SC on a per-location basis (and call it the “coherence”
 axiom! [4]).
       In summary, whereas consistency-agnostic coherence exposes an atomic (linearizable)
 memory interface, consistency-directed coherence exposes an interface of the target consistency
 model.

 Specifying implementations operationally
 Until now, we saw how consistency models and coherence protocols can be specified opera-
 tionally. One of the benefits of the operational method is that lower level implementations (e.g.,
 detailed coherence protocols) can be modeled naturally by refining the base specification with
 implementation-specific internal states and actions.
        For example, let us add caches to the SC operational specification (Spec1) described above,
 with each processor now holding a local cache and its associated coherence controller. Each
 read/write request from the pipeline is now sent first to the local cache controller that checks
 for a hit or a miss. If it is a miss, the cache controller contacts the directory/memory controller
 with a GetS or GetM request (as we saw in the earlier chapters on coherence protocols). The
 exact state transitions naturally depend on the specifics of the coherence protocol employed, but
 the takeaway here is that the coherence protocols discussed earlier in table format are essentially
 operational models obtained by refining the memory system (Step 3 or Step 3’). In a similar vein,
 it is possible to refine the pipeline specification to model additional pipeline stages to faithfully
 model the pipeline implementation.

 Tool support
 Operational models can be directly expressed in any language for expressing state machines such
 as Murphi (http://mclab.di.uniroma1.it/site/index.php/software/18-cmurphi) or
 TLA (https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html). In particular, each of the co-
 herence protocol tables in the book are easily expressed as state machines.

 11.1.2 AXIOMATIC SPECIFICATION
 Axiomatic specification is a more abstract way of specifying the behavior of a concurrent sys-
 tem, whereby mathematical axioms composed of observable actions (and relations between these
 actions) are used to constrain the set of allowed behaviors.

 Specifying consistency models axiomatically
 The formalism we used to describe the SC, TSO, and XC memory models in the earlier chapters
 corresponds to the axiomatic method. Recall that the formalism is composed of the following
 components.
   • Observable actions: These are the loads, stores and the values returned for the loads.
   • Relations: The program order relation is defined as the per-core total order representing the
     order in which loads and stores appear in each core. The global memory order is defined
     as a total order on the memory operations from all cores.
   • Axioms: There are two categories of axioms—safety and liveness—that specify the safety
     and liveness properties, respectively. For SC there are three safety axioms: (1) preserved
     program order axiom—the global memory order respects program order of each core; (2)
     load value axiom—the load gets the value written by the most recent store before it in global
     memory order; and (3) the atomicity axiom—the load and store of an RMW instruction
     occur consecutively in global memory order. In addition to these safety axioms, there is also
     a liveness axiom that states that no memory operations must be preceded by an infinite
     sequence of other memory operations; informally, this means that a memory operation
     must eventually perform and cannot be delayed indefinitely.
      For any sequence of observable actions—if we are able to construct a global memory order
that adheres to the above axioms, then it said to be a legal behavior of the memory model.

Specifying coherence protocols axiomatically
We saw earlier how coherence protocols can be specified operationally. Here, we see how they
can be specified at a more abstract level axiomatically, which can be useful for verification pur-
poses. Specifically, we focus on specifying a consistency-agnostic coherence protocol that satis-
fies linearizability. (Consistency-directed coherence protocols can be specified similarly to how
consistency models are specified axiomatically.) Recall that linearizability is stronger than SC,
e.g., it disallows the sequence of actions shown in Table 11.2. Therefore, the specification adds
an additional axiom over and above SC to constrain such behavior.
   • Observable actions: Because we are specifying a coherence protocol, the relevant actions
     are the read-request, read-return, write-request, and write-return events (the coherence
     protocol interface as seen by the processor pipeline).
   • Internal action: In addition to the observable actions, we add two internal actions—read-
     perform and write-perform—the instants in which a read or a write takes effect.
   • Relations: Like SC, the global memory order is defined to be a total order on the read-
     perform and write-perform events from all cores.
   • Axioms: In addition to the three safety axioms that are associated with SC there is a fourth
     axiom that says that a read or write must perform between its invocation and response;
     more formally, a write-perform (read-perform) action must appear in between the write-
     request (read-request) and write-return (read-return) actions in the global memory order.
     Finally, like in SC there is a liveness axiom that says that any read or write request must
     eventually return.
 Specifying implementations axiomatically
 We saw earlier how implementations (e.g., coherence protocol implementations) can be natu-
 rally expressed operationally by extending the base operational specification with internal states
 and actions. In a similar vein, implementations can also be expressed axiomatically by extending
 the base axiomatic specification. In this section, we focus on how a processor core pipeline can
 be specified axiomatically following Lustig et al. [20].
        Recall the abstract nature of the axiomatic specification, where a load/store is modeled as
 a single instantaneous action. Our goal now is different though. It is not to specify correctness—
 rather, the goal is to faithfully model a realistic processor core in which each load or store goes
 through several pipeline stages. Therefore, a single load or store action is now expanded into
 multiple internal pipeline sub-actions with each sub-action representing a pipeline stage.
        For example, let us consider the classic five-stage pipeline. Here, a load is split into five
 sub-actions: fetch, decode, execute, memory, and writeback. A store is split into seven actions:
 fetch, decode, execute, memory, writeback, exit-store-buffer and memory-write. (“Memory”
 refers to the memory stage in the pipeline, whereas “memory-write” refers to the sub-action in
 which the value is actually written to memory.)
        Recall that a key component of the axiomatic consistency specification is the preserved
 program order (ppo) axiom, that mandates that program order must be preserved in the global
 memory order. Analogous to ppo, the idea is to use pipeline ordering axioms for specifying micro-
 architectural happens-before—i.e., specifying whether or not the pipeline preserves the ordering
 between sub-actions of different instructions. Again, it is important to understand the subtle
 difference between ppo and the pipeline ordering axioms. Whereas the goal of the former is to
 specify correctness, the goal with the latter is to faithfully model the pipeline. In fact, whether
 or not the pipeline implementation honors the ppo axioms (for the intended consistency model)
 is an important validation question, which we address in the next section.
        For the five-stage pipeline the pipeline ordering axioms are as follows.
      • Fetch honors program order. If instruction i1 occurs before i2 in program order (po), then
                                                       po
        the fetch of i1 happens before i2 . That is: i1 ! i2 H) i1 :fetch ! i2:fetch
      • Decode is in order. If fetch of i1 happens before i2 , then decode of i1 happens before i2 .
        That is: i1 :fetch ! i2:fetch H) i1 :decode ! i 2:decode
      • In a similar vein, execute, memory and writeback stages preserve ordering (elided).
      • FIFO store buffer. If writeback of store i1 happens before that of store i2 , then i1 exits the
        store buffer before i2 . That is: i1 :writeback ! i 2:writeback H) i1 :exits-store-buffer !
        i2:exits-store-buffer
      • Ordered writes. If i1 exits the store buffer before i2 , then i1 writes to memory
        before i2 . That is: i1 :exits-store-buffer ! i 2:exits-store-buffer H) i1 :memory-write !
        i2 :memory-write.
      Finally, the load value axiom specifies the constraints under which a load can read the
value from a store of the same address.

   • Load value axiom. If a store i1 writes to memory before load i2 ’s memory stage (and there
     are no other memorywrites in the middle from other stores), then i2 reads the value written
     by i1 .

      Any sequence of pipeline actions (and load values returned) that adhere to the above ax-
ioms are legal behaviors. In order to understand this better, consider the message passing ex-
ample shown in Table 11.3. When L1 sees the new value SET, can L2 see the old value 0?
The five-stage pipeline would permit this behavior if a global sequence of pipeline actions can
be constructed that satisfies the axioms above. If not—i.e., if the constraints lead to a cycle, the
behavior is not permitted. Let us attempt to construct a global sequence.

   • S1:memory-write ! S2:memory-write (the pipeline ordering axioms ensure that S1 writes
     to memory before S2).

   • S2:memory-write ! L1:memory (S2 has to be written to memory before L1’s memory
     stage—only then, will L1 be able to read from S2).

   • L1:memory ! L2:memory (the pipeline ordering axioms ensure that L1 performs its
     memory stage before L2).

   • L2:memory ! S1:memory-write (if L2 must read the old value, and not the one produced
     by S1, its memory stage must have happened before S1’s memory write).

Table 11.3: Message passing example

            Core C1                         Core C2                         Comments
 S1: St data = NEW;               L1: Ld r1 = flag;                 L1 reads SET
 S2: St flag = SET;                L2: Ld r2 = data;                Can L2 read initial value 0?

      As we can see, the constraints listed above are impossible to satisfy as it results in a cycle.
Thus, the five-stage pipeline does not permit this behavior for this example.
      In the above discussion, we had not modeled caches or cache coherence explicitly. Man-
erkar et al. [24] show how the axiomatic specification of the pipeline can be extended to model
the coherence protocol/pipeline interactions.
      In summary, we saw how pipeline implementations can be specified axiomatically. The
primary benefit of modeling implementations is so that they can be validated. In Section 11.3.1
we will see how axiomatic models of the implementation can be validated against its consistency
specifications.
 Tool support.
 Specification languages such as Alloy (http://alloy.mit.edu) or Cat, associated with the Herd
 tool (http://diy.inria.fr/herd/), can be used to express axiomatic specifications of consis-
 tency models. The μspec domain specific language allows for pipeline and coherence protocol
 implementations to be specified axiomatically (http://check.cs.princeton.edu/#tools).

 11.2 EXPLORING THE BEHAVIOR OF MEMORY
      CONSISTENCY MODELS
 Because consistency models define shared memory behavior, it is crucial for programmers and
 middleware writers—e.g., compiler writers and kernel developers—to be able to understand
 what behaviors are permitted by the memory model and what behaviors are not. Typically,
 memory consistency models are specified by processor vendors in prose, which can often be
 ambiguous [1]. A formally specified memory consistency model is not only unambiguous, but
 also enables behaviors to be explored automatically. But before delving into how this exploration
 can be carried out, let us briefly discuss litmus tests—simple programs that reveal the properties
 of a memory model.

 11.2.1 LITMUS TESTS
 A memory consistency model is likely not very relevant to a high-level programmer who uses
 libraries for synchronization. It is, however, important for low-level programmers who develop
 synchronization constructs—be it a compiler writer who implements language level synchro-
 nization or a kernel writer who develops kernel level synchronization or an application program-
 mer who develops lock-free data structures. Such low-level programmers will want to know the
 behaviors exhibited by the memory model so that they can get the desired behavior for their
 hand-crafted synchronization situation. Litmus tests are simple multithreaded code sequences
 that abstract synchronization situations; the behavior(s) exhibited by the memory model in these
 tests are thus instructive to the low-level programmer. For instance, they may reveal whether or
 not a particular FENCE is required to get the desired behavior. These litmus tests are also used
 in processor vendor manuals to explain the properties of the memory consistency model.
 Examples.
 Recall that we used such litmus tests to explain the behavior of memory models in an earlier
 chapter. Table 3.3 for instance is dubbed Dekker’s litmus test since it abstracts the synchroniza-
 tion situation in Dekker’s algorithm for mutual exclusion; Table 3.1 is often referred to as the
 message passing test. Consider another example shown in Table 11.4 which is referred to as the
 “coherence” litmus test. An execution that results in r1 reading the NEW value but r2 reading
 the old value of 0 violates the data-value invariant and hence violates the coherence litmus test.
Table 11.4: Can r1 be NEW while r2 is 0?

                     Core C1                Core C2               Comments
               S1: x = NEW;           L1: r1 = x;            // Initially x = 0
                                      L2: r2 = x

11.2.2 EXPLORATION
Given a formal specification of a memory model and a litmus test, can we automatically explore
all possible behaviors of the memory model for that litmus test? Fortunately, there are tools that
do this. Intuitively, once a memory model is formalized—axiomatically or operationally—it is
possible to exhaustively enumerate every possible schedule of the litmus test and, for each such
execution, employ the mathematical axioms (in case of axiomatic) or execute the state machine
(in case of operational) to determine the output of the execution (the values returned by loads).

Tool support
Recall that the herd tool provides a language to express consistency models mathematically;
the tool also has a built-in simulator for exploring behaviors of litmus tests. The ppcmem
tool (https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~pes20/ppcmem/help.html) does something similar but
is specialized for POWER and ARM memory models, while the CppMem tool (http://svr-
pes20-cppmem.cl.cam.ac.uk/cppmem/) is geared toward the C/C++ language-level memory
model. As far as operational models are concerned, the RMEM tool (https://www.cl.cam.
ac.uk/~sf502/regressions/rmem/) has built-in operational models for ARM (multiple vari-
ants), POWER (multiple variants), x86-TSO and RISC-V, and also allows for their behaviors
to be explored.
       How to generate litmus tests? They can of course be generated manually to test any
interesting memory model feature or synchronization situation. There is also tool support.
Litmus tests can be generated randomly via a test generator [14, 15]. The diy tool (http:
//diy.inria.fr/doc/gen.html) helps generate a litmus test given the shape of the test
(the program order relations and the shared memory dependencies). Finally, litmusttestgen
(https://github.com/nvlabs/litmustestgen) is a more automated method to generate a
comprehensive set of litmus tests for a memory model specification expressed axiomatically.
       While litmus tests are a good way to convey intuition about a memory model, they cannot
normally serve as a complete specification of the memory model, since they leave some potential
behaviors (those that are not covered in the tests) unspecified. But given a sufficient number of
tests, and a syntactic template of the memory model (with missing pieces), MemSynth (http:
//memsynth.uwplse.org/) shows how a complete memory model satisfying the litmus tests
can be synthesized.
 11.3 VALIDATING IMPLEMENTATIONS
 Memory consistency enforcement spans multiple sub-systems including the processor pipeline
 and the cache and memory sub-systems. All of these sub-systems must cooperate with each
 other to enforce the promised memory consistency model. Validating that they do so correctly
 is the topic of this section.
        Exhaustively validating that the complete implementation satisfies the promised memory
 model is the end goal. But the sheer complexity of modern multiprocessors makes this a very hard
 problem. Therefore there is a gamut of validation techniques, ranging from formal verification
 to informal testing. This is a huge topic in itself and probably worthy of its own book. Here, we
 provide a flavor of some of these techniques with pointers for further study.

 11.3.1 FORMAL METHODS
 In this category, a formal model of an implementation is validated against a specification. We
 classify these methods based on whether the specification and the implementation are expressed
 axiomatically or operationally. We then explain each category by considering one or two exam-
 ples of techniques belonging to that class. We conclude this section with some closing thoughts
 on operational vs. axiomatic methods.

 Operational Implementation against Axiomatic Specification

 Manual proof
 Given an implementation in the form of an operational model and the specification in the form
 of an axiomatic model, one can show via a manual proof that the implementation satisfies each
 of the axioms of the specification.
        For example, consider a system in which the processor pipeline presents loads and stores
 in program order and a cache coherence protocol that ensures SWMR and data-value invariants.
 Meixner and Sorin [26] showed that such a system enforces SC by proving that it satisfies each
 of the SC axioms.
        One powerful template [30] for coming up with a proof follows Lamport’s method for
 totally ordering the events of a distributed system [18]. The idea is to assign hypothetical times-
 tamps for every independent action (e.g., a fetch of a store instruction at the pipeline) and derive
 timestamps of causally related events (e.g., a GetM request due to the store gets a higher times-
 tamp). In doing so, a global order of all memory operations is derived. Then every value loaded
 is checked to determine whether it returns a value consistent with the load value axiom.
 Model checking
 Operational specifications of coherence protocols are commonly verified against axiomatic in-
 variants using model checkers. Model checkers, such as Murphi [12], allow for coherence pro-
 tocols similar to those described in tabular format in the earlier chapters to be expressed in a
 domain specific language. The language also allows for axioms such as SWMR to be expressed.
Then the model checker explores the entire state space of the protocol to either ensure that
the invariants hold or report a counter example (a sequence of states that violates the invari-
ant). However, such explicit-state model checking can only be carried out for limited models of
the implementation (e.g., two or three addresses, values, and processors) because of state-space
explosion.
       There are a number of approaches for countering state-space explosion. Symbolic model
checkers [7] use logic for manipulating sets of states (rather than single states), thereby enabling
the scaling of the models. Bounded model checkers [6] compromise on exhaustiveness by only
looking for counter examples of a limited length in the sequence of states. Finally, one approach
for a complete proof is to model-check exhaustively for a limited system and then employ pa-
rameterization [11, 17] to generalize for an arbitrary number of processors, addresses etc.
       The following is a concrete example of how a non-trivial coherence protocol can be model-
checked using Murphi: (https://github.com/icsa-caps/c3d-protocol)

Operational Implementation against Operational Specification
Suppose there are two state machines: Q (the implementation) and S (the specification) with
the same set of observable actions. How do we prove that Q implements S faithfully? In order to
establish this, we need to prove that all of the behaviors—the sequences of observable actions—
of Q are contained in S .
Refinement
One stylized proof technique that allows one to reason about pairs of states in Q and S (rather
than sequences) is called refinement [2] (also known as simulation [27]). The key idea is to
identify an abstraction function F (also known as refinement mapping or simulation relation)
that maps every reachable state of the implementation to that of the specification, such that:

    • initial states (q0 2 Q; s0 2 S ) are part of the mapping. That is, F(q0 ) = s0 ; and

    • the abstraction function preserves state transitions. That is, for every state transition in the
                                                                                                 a
      implementation between two states qi and qj with some observable action a, i.e., qi ! qj ,
      the abstraction function will lead to two states in the specification with the same observable
                            a
      action, i.e., F .qi / ! F .qj /.

       For example, consider a cache coherent system containing caches and global memory kept
coherent using an MSI coherence protocol on an atomic bus (the implementation). Recall that
the overall state of the implementation includes the states of all the caches (value and the MSI
state for every location) as well as the state of the global memory. We can show that the cache
coherent memory implements atomic memory (the specification) using refinement. To this end,
we identify an abstraction function relating the state of cache coherent memory to the state of
atomic memory. Specifically, the value of an atomic memory block for a given location is given
by: (1) the value of the cache block for that location, if the block is in M state; (2) otherwise, it is
 identical to the values in each of the blocks that are in S state and the global memory. The proof
 would then look at all possible state transitions in the protocol to check whether the abstraction
                                                             W ri t e.X;1/
 function holds. For example, consider the S            ! M transition for some cache block X
 whose initial value is 0. For the cache block that goes into M state the abstraction function
 holds, as it will cache the up-to-date value of 1. For the other cache blocks that were in state
 S, the abstraction functions holds provided the MSI protocol correctly enforces SWMR and
 invalidates all those blocks.
        Thus, a refinement proof not only requires the identification of an abstraction function, it
 also requires subsequent reasoning about the state transitions in the implemented system; that
 process might reveal other invariants (e.g., SMWR revealed above) that need to be proven. The
 Kami framework [10] uses a refinement proof to show that an operational specification of a
 processor combined with a cache coherent memory system satisfies SC.
 Model checking
 One way to show that an implementation satisfies the specification is to run the two state ma-
 chines side by side with the same sequence of input actions, and observe whether they produce
 the same output actions. While this simple strategy is sound, it may not always succeed. (When
 the method says that the state machines are equivalent they are definitely equivalent—but when
 it says they are not equivalent, they may yet turn out to be equivalent.) This is because of the
 non-determinism inherent in concurrent systems—sometimes, the specification and the imple-
 mentation may show identical behavior, but with different schedules. Having said this, this is
 quite a useful strategy, especially when the implementation and specification are conceptually
 similar. Banks et al. [5] employed this strategy to show that a cache coherence protocol satisfies
 the promised consistency model.

 Axiomatic Implementation Against Axiomatic Specification
 We saw how implementations (such as the core pipeline implementation) can be specified ax-
 iomatically. How to formally validate that such an axiomatic model satisfies the axiomatic spec-
 ification1 of the consistency model?
        The Check line of work [20, 21, 24], leverages the idea of exhaustive exploration for this
 purpose. Given a litmus test and an axiomatic specification of the memory model, we saw in
 Section 11.2 how all of the behaviors of the memory model on the litmus test can be exhaus-
 tively explored. Such an exhaustive exploration can be carried out for axiomatic specifications
 of implementations as well. The behaviors on the litmus test can then be compared against the
 behaviors on the abstract axiomatic model. If the implementation shows more behavior, it indi-
 cates a bug in the implementation. On the other hand, if the implementation shows less behavior
 than the specification, it indicates that the implementation is conservative. The same process is
 then repeated for other litmus tests that are part of the suite.
     1 This section assumes validation against an axiomatic specification. A similar approach validating an axiomatic model of
 an implementation against operational specification is possible, although we know of no such proposal in this category.
       One limitation of the above approach is that the validation is exhaustive only for the litmus
tests explored. A complete verification requires exploring all possible programs. PipeProof [22]
accomplishes this with an induction style proof on a symbolic abstraction of a program which
allows for programs of any number of instructions and all possible addresses and values to be
modeled.

Summary: Operational vs. Axiomatic
Generally speaking, axiomatic specifications are declarative; they describe what behaviors are
permitted without fully describing how the system is implemented. Typically, they are more
abstract and more easily expressed in mathematics; thus, it is faster to explore their behaviors.
On the other side of the coin, operational models are closer to implementations and more intu-
itive for an architect; thus, it is arguably easier to model detailed implementations operationally.
Recall that we were able to naturally describe fairly complex coherence protocols in the earlier
chapter in table format. In summary, whether to go down the axiomatic or operational route is
not a question that has a simple answer.
       Finally, it is important to understand that hybrid axiomatic/operational models are also
possible. For example, let us consider a multiprocessor with caches kept coherent using a co-
herence protocol. Instead of describing the coherence protocol operationally, it is also possible
to abstract it axiomatically using the SWMR and the data-value invariants. Such an approach
might be attractive when breaking down a complex verification problem into simpler ones—for
example, when verifying that the combination of the pipeline and the memory system correctly
enforces the consistency model, it might make sense to verify the coherence protocol indepen-
dently and then abstract it axiomatically via SMWR.

11.3.2 TESTING
Formally proving that the implementation satisfies the specification provides high confidence
that the implementation is indeed correct. Yet, formal verification is not a panacea. The reasons
are threefold. First, formal verification is hard to scale. Automatic techniques such as model
checking may not be able to handle the humongous state spaces of complex implementations;
on the other hand, techniques that can handle such large state spaces are not fully automated
and are not easy for architects. Second, formally specifying an implementation correctly is not
straightforward and may be error prone. Third, even if the model is accurate, it may be incom-
plete, in the sense that there might be parts of the implementation that the model does not
consider. That is why testing the final implementation thoroughly is extremely important. We
classify testing into two categories: offline testing and online testing. In the former (also known
as static testing), a real or simulated multiprocessor is tested for consistency violations prior to
being deployed. With the latter, violations are detected at runtime after deployment.
 Offline Testing
 The idea is to run test programs on a real (or simulated) machine, observe their behaviors, and
 validate them. The approach raises two questions: How are the test programs generated? How
 are their behaviors validated?
        One of the earlier works on memory consistency testing, TSOtool [15], uses a pseudo-
 random generator to generate short test programs. Given a previously unseen randomly gener-
 ated program, how to validate its observed behavior (values returned by reads)? This is the key
 challenge that TSOtool addresses. Intuitively, this demands a consistency checker that dynami-
 cally reconstructs a global order from the observations and checks whether the order is allowed
 by the consistency model While reconstructing a global order from values returned by reads is
 an NP-complete problem, TSOtool comes up with a polynomial algorithm that trades off ac-
 curacy for performance (it might miss some violations). MTraceCheck [19] improves upon this
 checker further.
        Instead of using randomly generated programs, one can use litmus tests (Section 11.2.1).
 With litmus tests, the advantage is that a suite of tests is already available for most memory
 models; moreover, for each litmus test the expected behavior is known, which obviates the
 need for a sophisticated checker that reconstructs the global memory order. The litmus tool diy
 (http://diy.inria.fr/doc/litmus.html) is a framework for testing real processors using
 this approach.
        While litmus testing and random testing are effective in a post-silicon environment, they
 may not be that effective in a slow simulator environment. McVersi [14] proposes a genetic-
 programming-based approach that leverages the white-box nature of the simulator environment
 to come up with test programs that are likely to reveal consistency violations faster.

 Online Testing
 Offline testing is certainly beneficial but, because of the fundamental limitation of testing, it
 may fail to uncover some bugs. Furthermore, even if offline testing did not miss any bugs, hard-
 ware transient errors and fabrication errors may yet cause consistency violations in the wild. In
 online testing (also known as dynamic testing), hardware support is added to a multiprocessor
 for detecting such violations during execution. One conceptually straightforward way to do this
 is to implement a consistency checker as in TSOtool, but in hardware. However, a naive imple-
 mentation of such a scheme would be impractically expensive in terms of memory (metadata)
 and communication overhead. Chen et al. [9] propose a scheme to reduce these costs signifi-
 cantly, leveraging the fact that not all memory operations need to be tracked (e.g., loads and
 stores to local variables need not be tracked). Meixner and Sorin [25] propose an alternative
 strategy that reduces the verification task into that of verifying two invariants: (a) checking that
 the cache coherence protocol correctly enforces SWMR; and (b) checking that the pipeline cor-
 rectly interacts with the coherence protocol. Notably, they show that these two invariants can
 be efficiently checked in hardware.
11.4 HISTORY AND FURTHER READING
In the same paper that Lamport defined SC, he also provided (its first) operational specifi-
cation. The specification is a variant of, and semantically equivalent to, our SC Operational
Spec1 in Section 11.1.1. It is interesting to note that the very first operational specification of
SC employed a linearizable memory system. (Herlihy and Wing [16] formalized linearizability
a decade later.) The first operational specification of SC that used a consistency-directed (i.e.,
non-linearizable) coherence protocol was proposed by Afek et al. [3]. Shasha and Snir [34] were
the first to provide an axiomatic specification of SC.
       The 1990s and early 2000s saw significant research on formally verifying coherence pro-
tocols, not only against invariants such as SWMR but also against memory consistency mod-
els [32]. Park and Dill [29] showed how the protocol used in the FLASH multiprocessor pro-
tocol can be abstracted and verified using a theorem prover. Qadeer [33] showed that verifying
against SC is undecidable, but can be made tractable for most practical protocols. Chatterjee
et al. [8] showed how the pipeline combined with a coherence protocol can be automatically
verified against an operational specification of a weak memory model in a model checker.
       Because of the complexity of formally verifying coherence protocols—state space explo-
sion combined with the complexity of parameterization—there have been efforts to design co-
herence protocols in a way that enables straightfoward parameterized verification for an indef-
inite number of processors [37, 38]. Another promising direction is a correct-by-construction
approach to coherence protocols. TRANSIT [36] and verC3 [13] leverage program synthe-
sis technology for auto-completing coherence protocols given a partial implementation. Proto-
Gen [28] proposes a method for automatically producing a complete and concurrent protocol
(with transient states and actions) given an atomic protocol with only stable states and transi-
tions.
       In this chapter, we focused on methods for validating whether or not the microarchitec-
ture specification (e.g., pipelines and coherence protocols) satisfies the architectural consistency
specification. However, a complete validation requires spanning the stack from high-level lan-
guages, (through compilers, ISA, microarchitecture) to RTL. TriCheck [35] validates that the
HLL, compiler, ISA, and microarchitecture satisfy the language-level consistency specification
for a set of litmus tests. RTLCheck [23] validates that the RTL faithfully implements the mi-
croarchitectural consistency specification for a set of litmus tests.
       To conclude, we must stress here that we have but scratched the surface on this topic that
is, despite its long history, continuing to see exciting new results.

11.5 REFERENCES
 [1] Linux Kernel mailing list: Spin unlock optimization. https://lists.gt.net/engine?
     post=105365;list=linux 260
      [2] M. Abadi and L. Lamport. The existence of refinement mappings. Theoretical Computer
          Science, 82(2):253–284, 1991. DOI: 10.1109/lics.1988.5115 263
      [3] Y. Afek, G. M. Brown, and M. Merritt. Lazy caching. ACM Transactions on Programming
          Languages and Systems, 15(1):182–205, 1993. DOI: 10.1145/151646.151651 255, 267
      [4] J. Alglave, L. Maranget, and M. Tautschnig. Herding cats: Modelling, simulation, testing,
          and data mining for weak memory. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and
          Systems, 36(2):7:1–7:74, 2014. DOI: 10.1145/2627752 256
      [5] C. J. Banks, M. Elver, R. Hoffmann, S. Sarkar, P. Jackson, and V. Nagarajan. Verification
          of a lazy cache coherence protocol against a weak memory model. In Formal Methods
          in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD), pages 60–67, Vienna, Austria, October 2–6, 2017.
          DOI: 10.23919/fmcad.2017.8102242 264
      [6] A. Biere, A. Cimatti, E. M. Clarke, and Y. Zhu. Symbolic model checking without BDDs.
          In Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems, 5th International Conference
          (TACAS), Held as Part of the Proc. of the European Joint Conferences on the Theory and Prac-
          tice of Software (ETAPS), pages 193–207, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, March 22–28,
          1999. DOI: 10.21236/ada360973 263
      [7] J. R. Burch, E. M. Clarke, K. L. McMillan, and D. L. Dill. Sequential circuit verifica-
          tion using symbolic model checking. In Proc. of the 27th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
          Conference, pages 46–51, Orlando, FL, June 24–28, 1990. DOI: 10.1109/dac.1990.114827
          263
      [8] P. Chatterjee, H. Sivaraj, and G. Gopalakrishnan. Shared memory consistency protocol
          verification against weak memory models: Refinement via model-checking. In Proc. Com-
          puter Aided Verification, 14th International Conference (CAV), pages 123–136, Copenhagen,
          Denmark, July 27–31, 2002. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-45657-0_10 267
      [9] K. Chen, S. Malik, and P. Patra. Runtime validation of memory ordering using constraint
          graph checking. In 14th International Conference on High-Performance Computer Archi-
          tecture (HPCA-14), pages 415–426, Salt Lake City, UT, February 16–20, 2008. DOI:
          10.1109/hpca.2008.4658657 266
 [10] J. Choi, M. Vijayaraghavan, B. Sherman, A. Chlipala, and Arvind. Kami: A platform
      for high-level parametric hardware specification and its modular verification. PACMPL,
      1(ICFP):24:1–24:30, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3110268 264
 [11] C. Chou, P. K. Mannava, and S. Park. A simple method for parameterized verification
      of cache coherence protocols. In Proc. Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, 5th In-
      ternational Conference (FMCAD), pages 382–398, Austin, TX, November 15–17, 2004.
      DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-30494-4_27 263
[12] D. L. Dill. The Murphi verification system. In Proc. Computer Aided Verification, 8th
     International Conference (CAV), pages 390–393, New Brunswick, NJ, July 31–August 3,
     1996. 262
[13] M. Elver, C. J. Banks, P. Jackson, and V. Nagarajan. Verc3: A library for explicit state
     synthesis of concurrent systems. In Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and
     Exhibition (DATE), pages 1381–1386, Dresden, Germany, March 19–23, 2018. DOI:
     10.23919/date.2018.8342228 267
[14] M. Elver and V. Nagarajan. Mcversi: A test generation framework for fast memory con-
     sistency verification in simulation. In IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
     Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 618–630, Barcelona, Spain, March 12–16, 2016.
     DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2016.7446099 261, 266
[15] S. Hangal, D. Vahia, C. Manovit, J. J. Lu, and S. Narayanan. TSOtool: A program for
     verifying memory systems using the memory consistency model. In 31st International
     Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 114–123, Munich, Germany, June 19–
     23, 2004. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2004.1310768 261, 266
[16] M. Herlihy and J. M. Wing. Linearizability: A correctness condition for concurrent ob-
     jects. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 12(3):463–492, 1990.
     DOI: 10.1145/78969.78972 255, 267
[17] R. Jhala and K. L. McMillan. Microarchitecture verification by compositional model
     checking. In Proc. Computer Aided Verification, 13th International Conference (CAV),
     pages 396–410, Paris, France, July 18–22, 2001. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-44585-4_40 263
[18] L. Lamport. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. Communi-
     cations on ACM, 21(7):558–565, 1978. DOI: 10.1145/359545.359563 262
[19] D. Lee and V. Bertacco. MTraceCheck: Validating non-deterministic behavior of memory
     consistency models in post-silicon validation. In Proc. of the 44th Annual International
     Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 201–213, Toronto, ON, Canada, June
     24–28, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3079856.3080235 266
[20] D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. PipeCheck: Specifying and verifying mi-
     croarchitectural enforcement of memory consistency models. In 47th Annual IEEE/ACM
     International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 635–646, Cambridge, UK,
     December 13–17, 2014. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2014.38 258, 264
[21] D. Lustig, G. Sethi, M. Martonosi, and A. Bhattacharjee. COATCheck: Verifying mem-
     ory ordering at the hardware-OS interface. In Proc. of the 21st International Confer-
     ence on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS),
     pages 233–247, Atlanta, GA, April 2–6, 2016. DOI: 10.1145/2872362.2872399 264
 [22] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Martonosi, and A. Gupta. PipeProof: Automated mem-
      ory consistency proofs for microarchitectural specifications. In 51st Annual IEEE/ACM
      International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 788–801, Fukuoka, Japan,
      October 20–24, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2018.00069 265
 [23] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Martonosi, and M. Pellauer. RTLCheck: Verifying the
      memory consistency of RTL designs. In Proc. of the 50th Annual IEEE/ACM International
      Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 463–476, Cambridge, MA, October 14–
      18, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3123939.3124536 267
 [24] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. CCICheck: Using μhb graphs
      to verify the coherence-consistency interface. In Proc. of the 48th International Symposium
      on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 26–37, Waikiki, HI, December 5–9, 2015. DOI:
      10.1145/2830772.2830782 259, 264
 [25] A. Meixner and D. J. Sorin. Dynamic verification of sequential consistency. In 32st In-
      ternational Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 26–37, Madison, WI, June
      4–8, 2005. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2005.25 266
 [26] A. Meixner and D. J. Sorin. Dynamic verification of memory consistency in cache-
      coherent multithreaded computer architectures. In Proc. International Conference on De-
      pendable Systems and Networks (DSN), pages 73–82, Philadelphia, PA, June 25–28, 2006.
      DOI: 10.1109/dsn.2006.29 262
 [27] R. Milner. An algebraic definition of simulation between programs. In Proc. of the 2nd In-
      ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 481–489, London, UK, Septem-
      ber 1–3, 1971. 263
 [28] N. Oswald, V. Nagarajan, and D. J. Sorin. ProtoGen: Automatically generating directory
      cache coherence protocols from atomic specifications. In 45th ACM/IEEE Annual Inter-
      national Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 247–260, Los Angeles, CA,
      June 1–6, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2018.00030 267
 [29] S. Park and D. L. Dill. Verification of FLASH cache coherence protocol by aggregation of
      distributed transactions. In SPAA, pages 288–296, 1996. DOI: 10.1145/237502.237573
      267
 [30] M. Plakal, D. J. Sorin, A. Condon, and M. D. Hill. Lamport clocks: Verifying a directory
      cache-coherence protocol. In SPAA, pages 67–76, 1998. DOI: 10.1145/277651.277672
      262
 [31] A. Pnueli. The temporal logic of programs. In 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
      Computer Science, pages 46–57, Providence, Rhode Island, October 31–November 1, 1977.
      DOI: 10.1109/sfcs.1977.32 252
[32] F. Pong and M. Dubois. Verification techniques for cache coherence protocols. ACM
     Computing Surveys, 29(1):82–126, 1997. DOI: 10.1145/248621.248624 267
[33] S. Qadeer. Verifying sequential consistency on shared-memory multiprocessors by model
     checking. IEEE Transactions on Parallel Distributions on Systems, 14(8):730–741, 2003.
     DOI: 10.1109/tpds.2003.1225053 267
[34] D. E. Shasha and M. Snir. Efficient and correct execution of parallel programs that share
     memory. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 10(2):282–312, 1988.
     DOI: 10.1145/42190.42277 267
[35] C. Trippel, Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. TriCheck:
     Memory model verification at the trisection of software, hardware, and ISA. In Proc.
     of the 22nd International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
     and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 119–133, Xi’an, China, April 8–12, 2017. DOI:
     10.1145/3037697.3037719 267
[36] A. Udupa, A. Raghavan, J. V. Deshmukh, S. Mador-Haim, M. M. K. Martin, and R. Alur.
     TRANSIT: Specifying protocols with concolic snippets. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on
     Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 287–296, Seattle, WA,
     June 16–19, 2013. DOI: 10.1145/2491956.2462174 267
[37] M. Zhang, J. D. Bingham, J. Erickson, and D. J. Sorin. PVCoherence: Designing flat
     coherence protocols for scalable verification. In 20th IEEE International Symposium on
     High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 392–403, Orlando, FL, February
     15–19, 2014. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2015.48 267
[38] M. Zhang, A. R. Lebeck, and D. J. Sorin. Fractal coherence: Scalably verifiable cache
     coherence. In 43rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MI-
     CRO), pages 471–482, Atlanta, GA, December 4–8, 2010. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2010.11
     267
