
               Authors’ Biographies
VIJAY NAGARAJAN
Vijay Nagarajan (http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/vnagaraj/) is a Reader at the School
of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh. He received a Ph.D. in Computer Science from
University of California, Riverside. His research interests span computer architecture, compil-
ers, and computer systems with a focus on memory consistency models and cache coherence
protocols. He is a recipient of the Intel early career faculty honour award, a PACT best paper
award, and an IEEE Top Picks honorable mention. He has served (or is currently serving) on
multiple program committees including ISCA, MICRO, and HPCA. He was General Chair
of LCTES 2017 and is currently serving as an Associate Editor of IEEE Computer Architecture
Letters (IEEE CAL).

DANIEL J. SORIN
Daniel J. Sorin is Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and of Computer Science
at Duke University. His research interests are in computer architecture, including dependable
architectures, verification-aware processor design, and memory system design. He received a
Ph.D. and M.S. in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Wisconsin, and
he received a BSE in electrical engineering from Duke University. He is the recipient of an NSF
Career Award, and he was a Distinguished Visiting Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering
(UK). He is the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, and he is a Founder and
Chief Architect of Realtime Robotics, Inc. He is the author of a previous Synthesis Lecture,
Fault Tolerant Computer Architecture (2009).

MARK D. HILL
Mark D. Hill (http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~markhill) is John P. Morgridge Professor and
Gene M. Amdahl Professor of Computer Sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
where he also has a courtesy appointment in Electrical and Computer Engineering. His re-
search interests and accomplishments are in parallel-computer system design (e.g., data-race-
free memory consistency), memory system design (3C model: compulsory, capacity, and con-
flict misses), and computer simulation (GEMS and gem5). Hill’s work is highly collaborative
with over 160 co-authors and especially his long-time colleague David A. Wood. He received
the 2019 Eckert-Mauchly Award and 2009 ACM SIGARCH Alan Berenbaum Distinguished
274   AUTHORS’ BIOGRAPHIES
 Service Award. Hill is a fellow of IEEE and the ACM. He served as Chair of the Computer
 Community Consortium from 2018–2020 and as Wisconsin Computer Sciences Department
 Chair from 2014–2017. Hill has a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Califor-
 nia, Berkeley.

 DAVID A. WOOD
 David A. Wood is Professor Emeritus of Computer Sciences at the University of Wiscon-
 sin, Madison, where he was the Sheldon B. Lubar Chair in Computer Sciences, the Amar
 and Balinder Sohi Professor in Computer Science, and held a courtesy appointment in Elec-
 trical and Computer Engineering. Dr. Wood has a Ph.D. in Computer Science (1990) from
 UC Berkeley. Dr. Wood is an ACM Fellow (2006), IEEE Fellow (2004), UW Vilas Asso-
 ciate (2011), UW Romnes Fellow (1999), and NSF PYI (1991). Dr. Wood served as Chair of
 ACM SIGARCH, Area Editor (Computer Systems) of ACM TOMACS, Associate Editor of
 ACM TACO, Program Committee Chairman of ASPLOS-X (2002), and served on numerous
 program committees. Dr. Wood has published over 100 technical papers and is an inventor
 on 19 U.S. patents. Dr. Wood co-led the Wisconsin Wind Tunnel and Wisconsin Multifacet
 projects with his long-time collaborator Mark D. Hill.
