1.1. Requirements and tracking | Page 4

Chapter 1. Introduction
This specification provides normative requirements for building secure RISC-V systems using RISC-V
security building blocks, non-normative examples that select a subset of these normative requirements
appropriate for a use case, and non-normative use case specific guidelines.

It is aimed at developers of RISC-V technical specifications, as well as at designers of secure RISC-V
systems. It is intended to be referenced by other documentation that will define a specific subset of
requirements applicable for a given use case, certification regime, platform or profile.

The non-normative example use cases provided are based on commonly used security deployment models.
These are not intended to be exhaustive but are common enough to represent a wide range of deployments
of secure products. They are accompanied by an appropriate set of use case specific security guidelines
which are intended to help readers implement secure products for their specific use cases.

The set of examples may be extended over time as required.

RISC-V is not intending to create a security certification program. This specification is provided as
guidance for developing secure RISC-V systems which are certifiable within existing third party security
certification programs.

This specification does not define any new RISC-V ISA or non-ISA extensions. Instead it refers to the
existing RISC-V ISA and extensions, as well as commonly used non-RVI architecture agnostic security
features and processes. It aims to show how those can be combined, in commonly used examples, to create
systems which are certifiable within commonly used existing security certification programs.

The examples are not definitions of formal Protection Profiles[1]. Formal protection profiles are typically
provided by third party certification bodies for different ecosystems. The guidelines provided within the
examples in this specification are intended to help readers adopt RISC-V security features to meet security
requirements of commonly used third party protection profiles. Mapping documentation or protection
profiles may also directly reference this document.

This specification does not contain threat modeling or security assessment of the RISC-V ISA
specifications, non-ISA specifications, profile specifications or extensions (RISC-V technical
specifications). RISC-V technical specifications are expected to use the Security Model as a guide to
develop their own specific security analysis, including formal threat modeling where appropriate. For this
purpose, all guidelines in this document are labelled to enable referencing from other specifications.
Specific security analysis in the context of a RISC-V technical specification may require testing and a proof
of concept as per normal RISC-V development processes for RISC-V technical specifications.

Security is an evolving area where new use cases and new threats can emerge at any time. This
specification represents the RISC-V security model and best practice as of the date of publication of this
document.

Terms not explicitly defined in this specification are to be interpreted according to the NIST Computer
Security Resource Center Glossary[2]

New versions of this document may be developed and released as and when required.

1.1. Requirements and tracking
This specification defines normative requirements. However, the specification does not mandate the
adoption of any requirements. These requirements are intended to be referenced by current and future
specifications, both RISC-V and external specifications, where a subset of the normative requirements,

                                                                  1.2. Relationship with external protection profiles | Page 5

specific to the use case, certification regime, platform or profile under consideration will be documented. A
set of in-scope security threats are also defined in this specification. These threats are intended to be
referenced by the threat models of current and future specifications, both RISC-V and external
specifications. This specification expresses trackable requirements and threats using the following format:

ID#                    Requirement
SR_CAT_NNN             The SR_CAT is a "Security Requirement CATegory" prefix that logically groups the
                       requirements (e.g., SR_UPD denotes security requirements related to updates, and SR_ATT
                       denotes security requirements related to attestation) and is followed by 3 digits - NNN -
                       assigning a numeric ID to the requirement.

                       The requirements use the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
                       NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
                       "OPTIONAL" that are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 when, and only when, they
                       appear in all capitals, as shown here. When these words are not capitalized, they have their
                       normal English meanings.
T_CAT_NNN              The T_CAT is a "Threat CATegory" prefix that logically groups the threats considered in scope
                       (e.g. T_LGC denotes threats categorized by logical attacks) and is followed by 3 digits - NNN -
                       assigning a numeric ID to the threat.

A requirement or a group of requirements may be followed by non-normative text providing context or
justification for the requirement. The non-normative text may also be used to reference sources that are
the origin of the requirement.

                All normative requirements are expressed as mandatory and some sections may include
               mutually exclusive requirements. A use case specific requirements document MUST define if a
                requirement is recommended or mandatory, as well as any allowable alternatives.

1.2. Relationship with external protection profiles
To assist with articulating security guidelines relevant to the included examples, this specification
references external protection profiles as appropriate. Such references are not intended to mandate any
specific implementations, but to provide guidelines on how RISC-V security building blocks may be used to
comply with those protection profiles.

Typically, protection profiles cover some or all of:

 ⚫ Security reference architectures and taxonomy
 ⚫ Hardware and software security requirements
 ⚫ Interfaces and programming models
 ⚫ Reference firmware/software
 ⚫ Certification programs
 ⚫ Misc Processes and methodology

The following are examples of some external protection profiles that are referenced by this specification:

1.2. Relationship with external protection profiles | Page 6

Profile                              Description
Global Platforms (GP)                Trusted execution environments (TEE) and trusted firmware for mobile, connected
                                     clients, and IoT.
                                     Secure element (SE) for tamper resistant storage of and operations on cryptographic
                                     secrets.
                                     SESIP certification.
                                     globalplatform.org/
Platform Security                    Platform security requirements for connected devices.
Architecture (PSA)                   PSA Certified.
                                     www.psacertified.org/
Trusted computing group              Trusted platform module (TPM) and Device identifier composition engine (DICE) for
(TCG)                                trusted platforms.
                                     TCG certification.
                                     trustedcomputinggroup.org/
Confidential computing               Common principles and protocols for protecting data in use (confidential computing).
consortium                           confidentialcomputing.io/
NIST                                 Widely used US standards for security processes, protocols and algorithms. Examples
                                     for the purposes of this specification:
                                     NISTIR 8259 - IoT device cybersecurity capability
                                     SP800-207 - Zero Trust Architecture
                                     www.nist.gov/

This is not an exhaustive list, more examples can be found in (Dixon, 2025), (Microsoft, 2026), (RISC-V
Crypto TG, n.d.), (RISC-V Server Platform TG, n.d.), (Inside Secure, Infineon Technologies AG, NXP
Semiconductors, and STMicroelectronics, 2014), (OpenTitan, n.d.), (Michael Bartock NIST, Murugiah
Souppaya NIST, Ryan Savino Intel, Timothy Knoll Intel, Uttam Shetty Intel, Mourad Cherfaoui Intel,
Raghuram Yeluri Intel, Akash Malhotra AMD Product Security and Strategy Group, Don Banks Arm
Advanced Technology Group, Michael Jordan IBM, Dimitrios Pendarakis IBM, J. R. Rao IBM, Peter
Romness Cisco, Karen Scarfone Scarfone Cybersecurity, 2022), (Andrew Regenscheid NIST, 2018),
(Rambus, n.d.), (OpenTitan, n.d.), (Trusted Computing Group, n.d.), (Yasin & Sinanoglu, 2017), (Wahbe et
al., 1993), (Lee et al., 2020), (Gilbert Goodwill et al., 2011), (Nassar et al., 2012), (Bronchain et al., 2021),
(Sokolov et al., 2005), (Choudhary et al., 2021), (Stiévenart et al., 2021), (RISC-V Debug TG, n.d.),
(International Organization for Standardization, 2024), and (Brewster, 2020).

[1] csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/protection_profile
[2] csrc.nist.gov/glossary

