
Chapter 2. RISC-V security model overview
The aim of this chapter is to define common taxonomies and principles for secure RISC-V systems as used
in the rest of this specification as well as other RISC-V specifications. It is divided into the following
sections:

 ⚫ Reference model
   Defines a set of generic hardware and software subsystems used in examples and use cases to describe
   secure systems.
 ⚫ Adversarial model
   Defines common attack types on secure systems, and identifies RISC-V extensions which can aid
   mitigation.
 ⚫ Ecosystem security objectives
   Defines common security features and functional guidelines, used to deploy trustworthy devices in an
   ecosystem.

2.1. Reference model

Figure 1: Generic security reference model

The figure above outlines a generic security reference model and taxonomy. This specification is oriented
around this reference model. The model is not tied to any particular implementation.

Most systems are built with multiple software components each managing assets that need to be protected.
These components are often sourced from multiple different supply chains. The security reference model
uses the generic term domain to identify a logical security boundary containing execution state and
resources that are inaccessible to at least some other domain(s) The figure above shows two examples, one
with a single domain, the other with two domains for illustrative purposes but some use cases can require
more. The two domains are notionally labelled hosting domain and confidential domain but they have
identical properties. Workloads are run in a domain, and are isolated from each other within that domain.
Isolation within a domain may be managed by a runtime environment or a domain security manager.
Switching between domains may be managed by a Root domain security manager. Isolated domains at the
software level are typically reflected in isolated domains at the system hardware level, where hardware
resources and devices can be assigned or restricted to specific software domains. For example, device DMA
transfers can be restricted to memory assigned to a particular domain. Additional platform services may be

required in more complex systems. To illustrate this, Platform QoS is shown in the two domain example.

This specification does not imply or limit the number of domains or the type of use cases a RISC-V system
can support. See Use case examples for more comprehensive and specific examples.

2.1.1. Assets

Examples of assets include:

 ⚫ Cryptographic keys and credentials
 ⚫ User data
 ⚫ Proprietary models
 ⚫ Secret algorithms

In this specification, a hardware provisioned asset is an immutable asset provisioned in hardware by a
security provisioning process, before a device is used in a production environment. For example, hardware
provisioned keys or identities.

2.1.2. Trusted Computing Base (TCB)

The Trusted Computing Base (TCB) of any system function is the set of protection mechanisms within a
computer system, including hardware, firmware, and software that are relied upon to enforce a security
policy.

The following are examples of software components that can be a part of some function’s TCB:

 ⚫ An operating system
 ⚫ A hypervisor and a guest operating system
 ⚫ A TEE security manager
 ⚫ Hosting services such as orchestration and server provisioning software

2.1.3. Root of trust

A root of trust (RoT) is the foundation on which all secure operations of a system depend. A RoT is typically
a combination of a minimal amount of hardware and software that has to be implicitly trusted by all other
non-RoT HW and SW in a system.

A RoT supports fundamental security services, for example:

 ⚫ Boot and attestation
 ⚫ Security life cycle management
 ⚫ Key derivations and sealing (sealing is defined in a later section)
 ⚫ Security provisioning
 ⚫ Debug authorization

Depending on use case and ecosystem requirements, a RISC-V RoT can be:

 ⚫ hart firmware (FW RoT)
 ⚫ A dedicated trusted subsystem (HW RoT) supporting a FW RoT

Using a HW RoT moves critical functions and assets off an application processor hart to a dedicated and
possibly isolated trusted subsystem, which can provide stronger protection against physical and logical
attacks.

If present, the HW RoT acts as a primary root of trust on the system.

                It is common for secure systems to support multiple trust chains with their own RoT. For
                example, a TPM can be a RoT for UEFI boot flows within a runtime environment while a SIM
                can be a RoT for user identity management.

               For the purpose of this document, these should be treated as secondary roots of trust.

                The HW RoT can manage the security life cycle of a secondary RoT (booting etc).

ID#                    Requirement
SR_ROT_001             A system MUST implement a HW RoT
SR_ROT_002             A system MUST implement a FW RoT

                Complex systems such as multiple, out-of-order, cache-coherent harts, require HW RoT.
               Simple systems such as a single, in-order, hart may only require a FW RoT

                In this document, the terms "FW RoT" and "HW RoT" will be used as defined above. The term
               "RoT" on its own can be used where a rule or a rationale applies to either model.

2.1.4. Isolation

Assets can be protected by isolation. Isolation reduces dependencies between components, and reduces the
amount of software that needs to be trusted.

Isolation protects resources:

 ⚫ Memory and memory mapped devices
 ⚫ Execution state, including hart register state

Examples of isolation mechanisms include:

 ⚫ Privilege based isolation
   More privileged software is able to access some assets that can enforce security guarantees for less
   privileged software. For instance access to state used to set up virtual memory system is restricted by
   privilege level.
 ⚫ Physical memory isolation
   More privileged software controls memory access for less privileged software.
 ⚫ Domain isolation
   Software in one domain cannot access or modify resources assigned to a different domain (without
    consent), regardless of privilege level.
    (Higher privileged software in one domain cannot access resources assigned to lower privileged
    software in a different domain)
 ⚫ Virtualization
   Virtualization creates and manages virtual resources - compute, memory, devices - abstracted from
   actual physical hardware. A system, or individual domains, can be virtualized. This abstraction can be

    used to restrict a workload to run with access to a defined set of resources, isolated from other
    workloads.

On complex systems the TCB can grow large and become difficult to certify and attest.

Domain isolation enables confidential workloads to be separated from complex hosting software, including
other workloads. The TCB of a confidential workload can be reduced to a Domain Security Manager in a
confidential domain, and the RoT, while allowing the main runtime environment in a separate hosting
domain to remain in control of resource management.

Examples of confidential workloads include:

 ⚫ Platform security services - for example: secure storage, user identity management, payment clients,
   DRM clients
 ⚫ Hosted confidential third party workloads

RISC-V has a range of isolation mechanisms available and in development.

Technology            Use Case                                Controlling   Memor Granularity         Limitations
                                                              Privilege     y
                                                              level
PMP, ePMP             Boot code isolation, code and data      M             Physical Fine Grained     Reprogramming
                      isolation by privilege level.                                                   and Switching
                      Building block for simple trusted                                               overhead,
                      execution isolation using high                                                  Constrained
                      privilege security monitor                                                      resource[1]

SPMP                  OS managed code and data isolation      S             Physical Fine Grained     Reprogramming
                      by privilege level.                                                             and Switching
                      Building block to allow multiple OS                                             overhead,
                      to manage U-Mode isolation                                                      Constrained
                                                                                                      resource[2]
RISC-V Worlds         Hardware World Identifiers for          M, S          Physical Fine Grained     Static boot
                      System level isolation                                                          configuration

Virtual Memory        S - U, U - U isolation                  S             Virtual   Page Based      Additional Table
MMU                   Guest – Guest isolation (VS–VS)         HS/VS                                   Walk[3]
                      Host – Guest isolation (HS-VS)
IOMMU                 System Level MMU                        S             Virtual   Page Based
                                                              HS/VS
IOPMP                 System Level PMP                        n/a           Physical Page Based
Smmpt, SDID           Supervisor domains and memory           M             Physical Page or larger Third Table Walk
                      protection tables, building block for                                         to implement
                      confidential computing, trusted                                               smmpt
                      execution.
                      S-S isolation
                      ( including hypervisor extension
                      support
                      HS - HS isolation )
IOMPT                 System Level MPT                        M             Physical Page or larger
CHERI                 Full Capability-based access control    MSU           Both      Fine Grained    HW/SW
                      for memory safety and isolation                                                 impact[4]

2.1.5. Device assignment

Isolation policy needs to extend to device assignment:

 ⚫ Physical memory access control for device initiated transactions - to allow only authorized access to a
   memory region assigned to a device
 ⚫ Virtual memory translation for virtualized device transactions - to prevent one domain from accessing
   another’s memory via device or memory translation misconfiguration
 ⚫ Interrupt management across privilege and domain boundaries - to ensure interrupts are delivered
   only to the correct domain

These policies can be enforced by system level hardware, controlled by hart firmware.

2.1.6. Invasive subsystems

Invasive subsystems include any system or hart feature which could break security guarantees, either
directly or indirectly. For example:

 ⚫ External debug - may allow direct access to confidential data or runtime control
 ⚫ Power and timing management - may enable remote fault injection and side channel leakage
 ⚫ RAS (reliability, availability, serviceability) - features such as error correction may mask attacks, out of
   band management may give privileged access for remote diagnostics, error reporting can leak memory
   layout or address, stack traces etc.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_INV_001            Invasive subsystems MUST be controlled, or moderated, by a RoT.
SR_INV_002            Invasive subsystems MUST be enabled separately for M-Mode & non-M-Mode software.
SR_INV_003            Invasive subsystems MUST be enabled separately for individual domains

               Fully disabling invasive subsystems, or limiting access in other ways can be an alternative to
               partitioning by privilege level or domain.
               When an invasive subsystem cannot be disabled for functional reasons, or runs across all
              privilege levels, the design must ensure security guarantees are maintained using appropriate
               techniques such as dedicated management networks, hardware-enforced frequency/voltage
               limits
               Each invasive subsystem may use different means to ensure security guarantees.

2.1.7. Event counters

Performance event counters are commonly used for performance management and resource allocation on
systems.

However, they can pose a security risk. For example, a workload can maliciously attempt to infer another
workload’s secrets by monitoring that other workload’s operation. The victim workload can be at the same,
lower, or higher privilege than the malicious workload.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_PMU_001            Lower privileged software MUST NOT be able to monitor higher privileged software.
SR_PMU_002            Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to monitor software in a different domain,
                      without consent.

                  While it’s always necessary to prevent lower-privilege software from monitoring higher-
                 privilege software, it may also be necessary to prevent software in one domain from monitoring
                  software in a different domain — even if it operates at the same or lower privilege levels.

2.1.8. Platform quality of service

More complex systems, such as server platforms, can provide platform quality of service (QoS) features
beyond the capabilities of basic event counters. Platform QoS features include any hart and system
hardware and firmware aimed at managing access to shared physical resources across workloads while
minimizing contention.

For example:

 ⚫ Memory bandwidth management
 ⚫ Cache allocation policies across workloads, including workload prioritization
 ⚫ Allocation of execution resources among harts in a multithreaded system

These types of features rely on monitoring the resource utilization of workloads, similar to event counters,
and on the optimization of resource allocation policies.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_QOS_001                 Lower privileged software MUST NOT be able to observe QoS events or attributes concerning
                           higher privileged software.
SR_QOS_002                 Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to observe QoS events or attributes concerning a
                           different domain, without consent.

2.1.9. Denial of service

The RISC-V security model is primarily concerned with protection of assets, and not with providing service
guarantees. However, a given use case may require service guarantees that extend to preventing denial of
service (DoS) by a malicious workload. For instance, software in a virtual machine must not have the ability
to bring down the cloud provider’s infrastructure; a power management domain may require the ability to
always respond to thermal events etc. Other use cases may not consider DoS in their threat model - for
instance where all platform software is considered trustworthy, or where denial of service by user provided
software would only achieve denying service to that user.

In use cases where preventing DoS is considered an objective, Higher privileged software must always be
able to enforce its own resource management policy without interference, including scheduling, resource
assignment and revocation policies.

Similarly, a hosting domain owning resource allocation and host management across a system normally
has to be able to enforce its own policies across domains. Other domains should not be able to deny service
to the hosting domain, or to other domains.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_DOS_001                 Lower privileged software MUST NOT be able to deny service to higher privileged software, or
                           other isolated workloads at the same privilege level.
SR_DOS_002                 Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to deny service to software in a different domain,
                           irrespective of privilege level

2.2. Adversarial model
For the purpose of this specification, the main goal of an adversary is to gain unauthorized access to
resources - memory, memory mapped devices, and execution state. For example, to access sensitive assets,
to gain privileges, or to affect the control flow of a victim.

In general, adversaries capable of mounting the following broad classes of attacks should be considered by
system designers:

 ⚫ Logical
   The attacker runs software on the same system as the victim, often as an unprivileged user. These
   attacks exploit logical or architectural vulnerabilities to compromise privileged software or co-resident
   applications.
 ⚫ Physical
   The attacker has physical access to the system hosting the victim process. This enables invasive
   techniques such as probing, glitching, and disassembly, as well as local side-channel attacks like
   electromagnetic or power analysis.
 ⚫ Remote
   The attacker does not have physical or logical access to the victim system and interacts solely over a
   network. Examples include protocol-level attacks on exposed services and remote side-channel attacks
   that exploit timing or resource usage observable through network interactions or shared infrastructure.

At an implementation level there can be further distinctions, for example the degree of proximity required
to execute a remote or a physical attack as defined above. However, this document does not make any finer
grained distinctions other than logical, physical and remote.

Attacks can be direct, indirect or chained:

 ⚫ Direct
   An adversary gains direct access to a resource belonging to the victim. For example: direct access to the
   victim’s memory or execution state, or direct control of the victim’s control flow.
 ⚫ Indirect
   An adversary can use a side channel to access or modify the content of a resource owned by the victim.
   For example: by analyzing timing patterns of an operation by a victim to reveal information about data
   used in that operation, or launching row-hammer style memory attacks to affect the contents of
   memory owned by the victim.
 ⚫ Chained
   An adversary is able to chain together multiple direct and indirect attacks to achieve a goal. For
   example, using a software interface exploit to affect the call stack such that control flow is redirected to
   the adversary’s code.

The threats considered in-scope and the required level of protection will vary depending on use case. For
example, a HW RoT would likely have a large set of threats that are considered applicable. Mitigating these
threats may require protection against complex or advanced physical attacks. A Software based TEE may
limit the threats considered applicable, and therefore the required mitigations.

This specification is primarily concerned with ISA level mitigations against logical attacks.

Physical or remote attacks in general need to be addressed at system, protocol or governance level, and can
require additional non-ISA mitigations. However, some ISA level mitigations can also help provide some
mitigation against physical or remote attacks and this is indicated in the tables below.

Finally, this specification does not attempt to rate attacks by severity, or by adversary skill level. Ratings
tend to depend on use case specific threat models and requirements.

2.2.1. Logical

ID#               Threat           Type     Description         Current RISC-V mitigations Future RISC-V mitigations
T_LGC_001         Unrestrict Direct         Unauthorized        RISC-V privilege levels      Capability based
                  ed access Logical         direct access to    RISC-V isolation (for        architecture, such as CHERI,
                                            resources in        example: PMP/ePMP, SPMP, RISC-V Worlds
                                            normal operation.   MTT, supervisor domains)     Architectural sandboxing,
                                                                RISC-V hardware-enforced such as Hardware Fault
                                                                virtualization (H extension, Isolation (HFI).
                                                                MMU, IOMMU)
T_LGC_002         Transient Chained Attacks on                  Domain-bypass and Cross-      Fence.time, speculation
                  execution Logical speculative                 domain attacks can be         barriers, transient execution
                  attacks           execution                   mitigated at a                barriers or similar future
                                    implementations.            microarchitectural level by   extensions, can mitigate
                                                                isolating predictive          against in-domain attacks
                                                                microarchitectural            (such as Spectre V1 , V4).
                                                                resources. Micro-
                                                                architecture for RISC-V
                                                                systems is implementation
                                                                specific, and must consider
                                                                such vulnerabilities.

                                                                This is an evolving area of
                                                                research.

                                                                For example:
                                                                Spectre and meltdown
                                                                papers
                                                                Intel security guidance
                                                                Arm speculative
                                                                vulnerability
                                                                CBQRI and Ssqosid may
                                                                help isolate cache entries.
                                                                Zicfilp and Zicfiss can
                                                                mitigate against
                                                                ROP/COP/JOP, limiting
                                                                some compound attacks.
T_LGC_003         Interface        Chained Abusing interfaces RISC-V privilege levels         High assurance
                  abuse            Logical across privilege or RISC-V isolation               cryptography can isolate key
                                           isolation                                          material from SW
                                           boundaries, for
                                           example to elevate
                                           privilege or to gain
                                           unauthorized
                                           access to
                                           resources.

ID#         Threat     Type      Description           Current RISC-V mitigations Future RISC-V mitigations
T_LGC_004   Event      Direct    For example,          Data-independent timing
            counting   Logical   timing processes      instructions (Zkt, Zkvt)
                                 across privilege or   Performance counters
                                 isolation             restricted by privilege and
                                 boundaries to         isolation boundaries
                                 derive                (sscofpmf, smcntrpmf)
                                 information about
                                 confidential
                                 assets.
T_LGC_005   Redirect   Chained Unauthorized            Shadow stacks (Zicfiss)        Capability based
            control    Logical manipulation of         Landing pads (Zicfilp)         architecture, such as CHERI,
            flow               call stacks and                                        Memory Tagging
                               jump targets to
                               redirect a control
                               flow to code
                               controlled by an
                               attacker.
T_LGC_006   Memory     Logical   Unauthorized        RISC-V pointer masking           Architectural sandboxing,
            safety               access to resources (Sspm, Supm)                     such as HFI
                                 within an isolated Shadow stacks (Zicfiss)           Capability based
                                 component. For                                       architecture, such as CHERI
                                                     Landing pads (Zicfilp)
                                 example, pointer                                     Memory Tagging
                                 or allocation       Memory safe programming
                                 errors (temporal   + For example:
                                 memory safety), or Memory Safety
                                 buffer overflows
                                 (spatial memory
                                 safety).
T_LGC_007   Architectu Logical   Execution             Smstateen
            ral Covert           environment is        Ssstateen
            Channel              unaware of, or
                                 doesn’t
                                 swap/sanitize
                                 CSRs on context
                                 switch, creating
                                 covert
                                 communication
                                 channel between
                                 user threads or
                                 guest OSs

            The 'Future RISC-V mitigations' column identifies examples of architectural mechanisms that
           are currently under development or under discussion, and may become standard extensions.

            Entropy obtained through a RISC-V Zkr-compliant entropy source can be used to improve the
            effectiveness of several attack mitigations. Examples include address-space randomization,
           timing randomization, data masking, and noise-injection techniques. These mechanisms rely
            on high-quality, unpredictable random values to hinder attacker observation and prediction.

2.2.2. Physical and remote

ID#              Threat            Type                  Description                       RISC-V recommendations
T_PHY_001 Analysis of              Direct or indirect    For example, observing            Implement power analysis
          physical                 Physical or remote    electromagnetic emissions,        mitigations such as
          leakage                                        power consumption patterns,       cryptographic masking,
                                                         or temperature variations.        constant time code, noise
                                                                                           injection, timing
                                                                                           decorrelation/randomization,
                                                                                           constant power logic designs.

                                                                                           Implement Data Independent
                                                                                           Execution Latency (Zkt, Zvkt)
                                                                                           Utilize entropy source in
                                                                                           randomization (Zkr)
T_PHY_002 Physical                 Direct                Using NVDIMMs (susceptible        Implement cryptographic
          memory                   Logical or physical   to remanence attack),             memory protection to provide
          manipulation                                   interposers, or physical          confidentiality and
                                                         probing to read, record, replay   authentication with temporal
                                                         or relocate data in physical      and spatial binding.
                                                         memory.                           Supervisor Domain ID,
                                                                                           privilege level, or MPT
                                                                                           attributes may be used to
                                                                                           derive separate memory
                                                                                           encryption contexts at domain
                                                                                           or workload granularity

                                                                                           Provide physical tamper
                                                                                           resistance, such as an active
                                                                                           mesh over critical logic, or
                                                                                           case-opening sensors.

ID#         Threat        Type                  Description                     RISC-V recommendations
T_PHY_003 Boot attacks    Chained               Glitching to bypass secure boot Implement robust power
                          Logical or physical   Retrieving residual             management, and adopt
                                                confidential memory after a     glitch-safe software
                                                system reset                    techniques.

                                                                                Industry best practice should
                                                                                be followed. For example:
                                                                                ensuring un-initialized
                                                                                variables are not used;
                                                                                implementing integrity
                                                                                checking of critical data and
                                                                                hardware provisioned
                                                                                parameters; implementing
                                                                                redundancy in encoding,
                                                                                verification, branching, and
                                                                                critical logic.

                                                                                Adopt randomization
                                                                                techniques between boot
                                                                                sessions. For example:
                                                                                cryptographic memory
                                                                                protection with at least boot
                                                                                freshness; register
                                                                                randomization.

                                                                                Hardware mitigation such as
                                                                                glitch detection, voltage and
                                                                                clock monitoring
T_PHY_004 Subverting      Remote                Infiltration or collusion to   Deploy appropriate
          supply chains                         subvert security provisioning governance, accreditation, and
                                                chains, software supply chains certification processes for an
                                                and signing processes,         ecosystem.
                                                hardware supply chains,
                                                attestation processes,
                                                development processes (for
                                                example, unfused development
                                                hardware or debug
                                                authorizations)

ID#              Threat              Type                  Description                     RISC-V recommendations
T_PHY_005 Fault Injection            Direct or remote      Rowhammer-type software         Implement robust memory
                                     Logical or physical   attacks to manipulate nearby    error detection, cryptographic
                                                           memory cells.                   memory protection, or
                                                           Fault injection attacks           physical tamper resistance.
                                                           (glitching, laser,
                                                           electromagnetic, etc.) to extract
                                                           hardware-provisioned assets, Provide a level of tamper
                                                           modify the control flow,          resistance, e.g., through RoT
                                                           circumvent countermeasures, attestation, redundancy during
                                                           etc.
                                                                                             execution, etc.

                                                                                           Enforce proper access control
                                                                                           for the DVFS configuration.

                                                                                           Employ lockstep processors for
                                                                                           security-critical devices.

                                                                                           Employ physical sensors to
                                                                                           detect attacks

2.3. Ecosystem security objectives
Ecosystem security objectives identify a set of common features and mechanisms that can be used to
enforce and establish trust in an ecosystem.

These features are defined here at a functional level only. Technical requirements are typically use case
specific and defined by external certification programs.

In some cases RISC-V non-ISA specifications can provide guidance or protocols. This is discussed more in
use case examples later in this specification.

2.3.1. Secure identity

ID#                        Requirement
SR_IDN_001                 A platform MUST be securely identifiable

Identifies the immutable part of the platform - immutable hardware, configurations, and firmware.
Immutable components cannot change after the completion of security provisioning (see also security life
cycle management).

A secure identity is an element capable of generating a cryptographic signature which can be verified by a
remote party. This is usually an asymmetric key pair, but symmetric signing schemes can also be used.
Secure identities are typically used as part of an attestation process.

A secure identity’s scope and uniqueness is use case dependent. For example, a secure identity can be:

 ⚫ Unique to a system
 ⚫ Shared among multiple systems with the same immutable security properties (group based

    anonymization)
 ⚫ Anonymized using an attestation protocol supporting a third party anonymization service

A secure identity can be directly hardware provisioned, or derived from other hardware provisioned assets.

2.3.2. Security life cycle

ID#                    Requirement
SR_LFC_001             A secure system MUST manage a security life cycle.

Figure 2: Generic security life cycle

A security life cycle reflects both the trustworthiness of a system during its lifetime and the life cycle state
of hardware provisioned assets.

It can be extended as indicated below to cover additional security provisioning steps such as device
onboarding, device activation, user management, and RMA (Return Merchandise Authorization) processes.
These are use case or ecosystem specific and out of scope of this specification.

For the purpose of this specification, revealing debug includes any HW or FW debug capability which:

 ⚫ Could break security guarantees or could expose assets
 ⚫ Is not part of an attested trust contract with a relying party

Examples of revealing debug include revealing logging, external debug or boundary scans, dedicated debug
builds of software components, or enabling self-hosted debug for a component.

Depending on use case, an attested software component can include debug capabilities managed through
an ecosystem defined governance process - trusted debug. For example, self-hosted debug or external debug
enabled following an ecosystem specific authorization process. In this case the debug capability, and the
associated governance, is part of the trust contract with a relying party.

For the purpose of this specification, a minimum security life cycle includes at least the following states:

 ⚫ Manufacture - The system may not yet be locked down and has no hardware provisioned assets
 ⚫ Security provisioning - The process of provisioning hardware provisioned assets
   Depending on ecosystem requirement, security provisioning may be performed in multiple stages
   through a supply chain and may require additional sub-states. These types of application specific
   extensions are out of scope of this specification.

 ⚫ Secured - hardware provisioned assets are locked (immutable), only authorized software can be used,
    and revealing debug is not enabled.
    Additional specific provisioning stages can take place in this state - for example network onboarding
    and device activation, App/Device attestation or user identity management. This is out of scope of this
    specification.
 ⚫ Recoverable debug - part of the system is in a revealing debug state.
    At least the RoT is not compromised and hardware provisioned secrets remain protected.
    This state is both attestable and recoverable. For example, revealing debug is enabled for a domain
    without compromising another domain or any RoT services.
 ⚫ Terminated - any system change which could expose hardware provisioned assets

    Typically hardware provisioned assets are made permanently inaccessible and revoked before entering
    this state. This also protects any derived assets such as attestation and sealing keys.

A system may support re-provisioning from a terminated state, for example following repair/RMA. This
can be viewed as equivalent to starting over from the security provisioning state, and creates a new
instance with a new secure identifier.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_LFC_002                 After completion of security provisioning, hardware provisioned assets MUST only be
                           accessible while the system is in secured state, or a recoverable debug state (with the
                           recoverable debug state in attestation evidence).
SR_LFC_003                 Derived assets MUST only be available if a component is in secured state.

For example, returning garbage or some known test and debug value when attempting to read a hardware
provisioned asset, unless the system is in a secured state, or a recoverable debug state. Derived assets would
then also become unavailable in these states, though test and debug versions may be available.

A derived asset in this context is any asset derived from hardware provisioned assets. For example
attestation keys, or sealing keys for a supervisor domain.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_LFC_004                 Revealing debug MUST be reflected in attestation.

Attestable states are ones where the RoT and hardware provisioned assets are not compromised by debug
and a valid attestation can be generated reflecting that state:

 ⚫ Secured
 ⚫ Recoverable debug

In other states the system is not able to generate a valid attestation key. It is still indirectly attestable as any
generated attestation will not be signed correctly and can be rejected by a relying party.

Trusted debug is part of a trust contract with a relying party and is application specific. The presence of
trusted debug can be determined indirectly by a relying party through other attested properties, for
example measurements.

2.3.3. Attestable services

For the purpose of this specification a confidential service can be any isolated component on a system. For
example, a hosted confidential workload, or an isolated application security service.

ID#                    Requirement
SR_ATT_001             A confidential service, and all software and hardware components on which it depends,
                       MUST be attestable.

Attestation allows a remote relying party to determine the trustworthiness of a confidential service before
submitting assets to it. Attestation aims to:

 ⚫ Verify the security state of a confidential service
 ⚫ Verify the security state of all software and hardware a confidential service depends on
 ⚫ Establish an attested secure connection to a confidential service

Attestation can be direct or layered:

 ⚫ Direct
   The whole system can be defined by a single security platform attestation. Eg : vertically integrated
   connected IoT devices and edge devices.
 ⚫ Layered
   Enables parts of the attestation process to be delegated to lower privileged components.

Direct and layered attestation are discussed in more detail in use case examples later in this specification.

ID#                    Requirement
SR_ATT_002             A secure platform attestation MUST be signed by a HW RoT, if present, or else by a FW RoT
SR_ATT_003             A secure platform attestation MUST be signed using a hardware provisioned (directly or
                       derived) secure identity
SR_ATT_004             A layered attestation MAY be signed by lower privileged software, itself attested by a security
                       platform attestation
SR_ATT_005             Layered attestations MUST be cryptographically bound such that a relying party can
                       determine that they:

                        ⚫ Were generated on the same system
                        ⚫ Are fresh.

                Software interfaces should only support either direct attestation or layered attestation
               workflows, never both, to prevent impersonation attacks.

2.3.4. Authorized software

Running unauthorized software can compromise the security state of the system.

ID#                    Requirement
SR_AUT_001             A system in secured or recoverable debug states MUST only load authorized software.
SR_AUT_002             A system in security provisioning state MUST only load authorized software.

Two complementary processes can be used to authorize software:

 ⚫ Measurement
   In the context of this document, a measurement is a record of a present state of the system, which can
   be used by a remote party to verify the security state of the system. It is typically a cryptographic
   fingerprint, such as a running hash of memory combined with security life cycle state and other

    attributes. Although depending on use case other kinds of measurements can be used.
 ⚫ Verification
   Verification is a process of establishing that a measurement is correct (expected).

                   When a system in a security provisioning state doesn’t restrict loading to only authorized
                  software, other protection measures such as physical access protection, or device registration
                   are required.

A boot process is typically layered, allowing software to be measured and verified in stages. Different
measurement and verification policies can be employed at different stages. This is discussed further in use
case examples later in this specification. The properties discussed below still apply to each stage.

                   Measurements can be calculated at boot (boot state), and sometimes also dynamically at
                   runtime (runtime state). Measuring runtime state can be used as a robustness feature to
                  mitigate against unauthorized runtime changes of static code segments. It is out of scope of
                   this specification, though the principles discussed below can still be applied.

Verification can be:

 ⚫ Local
   A measurement is verified locally on the device.
 ⚫ Remote
   A measurement is verified by a remote provisioning service, or a remote relying party.

Verification can be:

 ⚫ Direct
   The measurement is directly compared with an expected measurement from a signed authorization.
 ⚫ Indirect
   The measurement is included in derivations of other assets, for example sealing keys, binding assets to
   a measured state.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_MSM_001                 A secure platform MUST be measured.
SR_MSM_002                 A secure platform MUST be verified, either directly or indirectly, before launching services
                           which depend on the security platform.

Verification ensures the system has loaded authorized software.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_MSM_003                 A system MUST only use authorizations from a trusted authority.

 ⚫ Direct verification requires a signed image authorization from a trusted authority before loading an
    image
    For example, a signed image, or a separately signed authorization message.
 ⚫ Indirect verification requires a signed authorization from a trusted authority for migrating assets
    bound to a previously measured state
    For example, a signed provisioning message.

Either way, only authorizations from trusted authorities should be used. For example, from a list of
hardware provisioned or securely discovered trusted authorities.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_MSM_004            Local verification MUST be rooted in immutable boot code.

For example, ROM or locked flash, or rooted in a HW RoT itself rooted in immutable boot code.

2.3.5. System updates

Over time, any mutable component may need updates to address vulnerabilities or functionality
improvements. A system update can concern software, firmware, microcode, or any other updatable
component on a system.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_UPD_001            All components on a system which are not immutable MUST be updatable.

Immutable components include at least immutable boot code. Some trusted subsystems can also include
immutable software to meet specific security certification requirements.

System updates are typically layered so that updates can target only parts of a system and not only the
whole system. The properties discussed below still apply to any system update.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_UPD_002            A system update MUST be measured and verified before launch.

See Section 2.3.4.

A system update can be:

 ⚫ Deferred
   The update can only be effected after a restart of at least the affected component, and all of its
   dependents.
 ⚫ Live
   The update can be effected without restarting any dependent components.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_UPD_003            Updates affecting a security platform MUST be deferred.
SR_UPD_004            Live update capability MUST ensure suitable governance and be part of an already attested
                      trust contract between a relying party and the system.

               A system may choose to defer updates to maintain an attested security state.

A live update changes the attested security state of the affected component(s), as well as that of all other
components that depend on it. It can affect whether a dependent confidential service is still considered
trustworthy or not, as well as affect any derived assets such as sealing keys.

ID#                   Requirement
SR_UPD_005            System updates MUST be monotonic
SR_UPD_006            System updates MUST be robust against update failures

Earlier versions could be carrying known vulnerabilities, or could be able to affect the safe operation of a
system in other ways.

For example, using derived anti-rollback counters (counter tree) rooted in a hardware monotonic counter.

A system can still support recovery mechanisms, with suitable governance, in the case of update failures.
For example, a fallback process or a dedicated recovery loader.

Success criteria for a system update are typically use case or ecosystem specific and out of scope of this
specification. Examples include local watchdog or checkpoints, and network control through a secure
update protocol, and a dedicated recovery loader.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_UPD_007                 System updates, and authorization messages, MUST only be received from trusted sources.

A system update is itself always verified before being launched. Verifying the source as well can mitigate
against attempts to inject adversary controlled data into a local update process. Including into protected
memory regions.

2.3.6. Isolation

Complex systems include software components from different supply chains, and complex integration
chains with different roles and actors. These supply chains and integration actors often share mutual
distrust:

 ⚫ Developed, certified, deployed and attested independently
 ⚫ Protected from errors in, or abuse from, other components
 ⚫ Protected from debugging of other components
 ⚫ Contain assets which should not be available to other components

Use cases later in this specification provide examples of RISC-V isolation models.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_ISO_001                 Isolated software components MUST be supported

An isolated component has private memory and private execution contexts not accessible to other
components.

ID#                        Requirement
SR_ISO_002                 Devices MUST not access memory belonging to an isolated component without permission

Isolation can also extend to other features, such as interrupts and debug.

2.3.7. Sealing

Sealing is the process of protecting confidential assets on a system, typically using sealing keys derived in
different ways for different use cases as discussed in this section. For example, from a hardware
provisioned root key, from a boot state (measurements, security life cycle state), or provisioned at runtime
by a remote provisioning system.

Sealing can be:

 ⚫ Local
   Local sealing binds assets to a local device (hardware unique sealing) or to a measured boot state.

 ⚫ Remote
   Remote sealing binds assets to credentials provided by a remote provisioning service following
   successful attestation.

ID#                           Requirement
SR_SLG_001                    Sealed assets MUST only be possible to unseal in a secured state

For example, local sealing key derivations should take the security life cycle state of the system into
account. And remote sealing key provisioning should always attest the system before releasing unsealing
credentials or keys.

Local sealing can be:

 ⚫ Direct
   Direct sealing binds assets to sealing keys derived by a RoT.
 ⚫ Layered
   Layered sealing enables delegation of some sealing key derivations to lower privileged software.

ID#                           Requirement
SR_SLG_002                    Locally sealed assets MUST only be possible to unseal on the same physical instance of a
                              system that they were sealed on.

For example, using sealing keys derived from a hardware provisioned hardware unique key (HUK).

ID#                           Requirement
SR_SLG_003                    Locally sealed assets bound to a boot measurement MUST only be possible to unseal if that
                              measurement has not changed, or the system has received an authorized update.

See system updates

Sealing is discussed further in use cases examples later in this document.

[1] On switching domains, the PMP must be reprogrammed by M-Mode FW, and PMP entries may be limited in number.
[2] On switching domains, the SPMP must be reprogrammed by M-Mode FW, and PMP entries may be limited in number.
[3] The additional table walk required to fetch domain permissions may introduce a performance penalty, or require additional cached state.
[4] CHERI requires extensive HW modifications, doubles pointer sizes, requires additional SW as well as recompilation and modification of existing
software. This may be offset by performance gains over alternative mechanisms and saving in other state such as PMP.

