        13.4.2 True Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    305
        13.4.3 False Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   305
   13.5 Advanced Analysis Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    307
        13.5.1 Coz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   307
        13.5.2 eBPF and GAPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       308

Epilog                                                                                 310

Acknowledgments                                                                        312

Glossary                                                                               316

List of the Major CPU Microarchitectures                                               317

References                                                                             319

Appendix A. Reducing Measurement Noise                                                 324

Appendix B. Enable Huge Pages                                                         327
  Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
  Linux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327

Appendix C. Intel Processor Traces                                                     330

Appendix D. Event Tracing for Windows Analysis                                         335

Performance is king: this was true a decade ago, and it certainly is now. According to
[domo.com, 2017], in 2017 the world has been creating 2.5 quintillion1 bytes of data
every day. [statista.com, 2024] predicts that number to reach 400 quintillion bytes
per day in 2024. In our increasingly data-centric world, the growth of information
exchange requires both faster software and faster hardware.

Software programmers have had an “easy ride” for decades, thanks to Moore’s law.
Software vendors could rely on new generations of hardware to speed up their software
products, even if they did not spend human resources on making improvements in
their code. This strategy doesn’t work any longer. By looking at Figure 1.1, we
can see that single-threaded2 performance growth is slowing down. From 1990 to
2000, single-threaded performance on SPECint benchmarks increased by a factor
of approximately 25 to 30, driven largely by higher CPU frequencies and improved
microarchitecture.

Figure 1.1: 50 Years of Microprocessor Trend Data. © Image by K. Rupp via karlrupp.net.
Original data up to the year 2010 was collected and plotted by M. Horowitz, F. Labonte, O.
  Shacham, K. Olukotun, L. Hammond, and C. Batten. New plot and data collected for
                                  2010-2021 by K. Rupp.

Single-threaded CPU performance growth was more modest from 2000 to 2010 (a
factor between four and five). At that time, clock speeds topped out around 4GHz
due to power consumption, heat dissipation challenges, limitations in voltage scaling
(Dennard Scaling3 ), and other fundamental problems. Despite clock speed stagnation,
  1 A quintillion is a thousand raised to the power of six (1018 ).
  2 Single-threaded performance is the performance of a single hardware thread inside a CPU core

when measured in isolation.
  3 Dennard Scaling - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennard_scaling

architectural advancements continued: better branch prediction, deeper pipelines,
larger caches, and more efficient execution units.
From 2010 to 2020, single-threaded performance grew only by a factor between two
and three. During this period, CPU manufacturers began to focus more on multi-core
processors and parallelism rather than solely increasing single-threaded performance.
Transistor counts continue to increase in modern processors. For instance, the number
of transistors in Apple chips grew from 16 billion in M1 to 20 billion in M2, to 25
billion in M3, to 28 billion in M4 in a span of roughly four years. The growth in
transistor count enables manufacturers to add more cores to a processor. As of 2024,
you can buy a high-end server processor that will have more than 100 logical cores
on a single CPU socket. This is very impressive. Unfortunately, it doesn’t always
translate into better performance. Very often, application performance doesn’t scale
with extra CPU cores.
As it’s no longer the case that each hardware generation provides a significant perfor-
mance boost, we must start paying more attention to how fast our code runs. When
seeking ways to improve performance, developers should not rely on hardware. Instead,
they should start optimizing the code of their applications.
      “Software today is massively inefficient; it’s become prime time again
      for software programmers to get really good at optimization.” - Marc
      Andreessen, the US entrepreneur and investor (a16z Podcast)

1.1    Why Is Software Slow?
If all the software in the world utilized all available hardware resources efficiently,
then this book would not exist. We would not need any changes on the software
side and would rely on what existing processors have to offer. But you already know
that the reality is different, right? The reality is that modern software is massively
inefficient. A regular server system in a public cloud typically runs poorly optimized
code, consuming more power than it could have consumed (increasing carbon emissions
and contributing to other environmental issues). If we could make all software run
two times faster, we would potentially reduce the carbon footprint of computing by a
factor of two.
The authors of the paper [Leiserson et al., 2020] provide an excellent example that
illustrates the performance gap between “default” and highly optimized software. Table
1.1 summarizes speedups from performance engineering a program that multiplies two
4096-by-4096 matrices. The end result of applying several optimizations is a program
that runs over 60,000 times faster. The reason for providing this example is not to
pick on Python or Java (which are great languages), but rather to break beliefs that
software has “good enough” performance by default. The majority of programs are
within rows 1–5. The potential for source-code-level improvements is significant.

                                                         1.1    Why Is Software Slow?

Table 1.1: Speedups from performance engineering a program that multiplies two
4096-by-4096 matrices running on a dual-socket Intel Xeon E5-2666 v3 system with a total
                  of 60 GB of memory. From [Leiserson et al., 2020].

                                                       Absolute         Relative
      Version      Implementation                      speedup          speedup
      1            Python                              1               —
      2            Java                                11              10.8
      3            C                                   47              4.4
      4            Parallel loops                      366             7.8
      5            Parallel divide and conquer         6,727           18.4
      6            plus vectorization                  23,224          3.5
      7            plus AVX intrinsics                 62,806          2.7

So, let’s talk about what prevents systems from achieving optimal performance by
default. Here are some of the most important factors:
  1. CPU limitations: It’s so tempting to ask: “Why doesn’t hardware solve all
     our problems?” Modern CPUs execute instructions incredibly quickly, and
     are getting better with every generation. But still, they cannot do much if
     instructions that are used to perform the job are not optimal or even redundant.
     Processors cannot magically transform suboptimal code into something that
     performs better. For example, if we implement a bubble sort, a CPU will not
     make any attempts to recognize it and use better alternatives (e.g. quicksort).
     It will blindly execute whatever it was told to do.
  2. Compiler limitations: “But isn’t that what compilers are supposed to do?
     Why don’t compilers solve all our problems?” Indeed, compilers are amazingly
     smart nowadays, but can still generate suboptimal code. Compilers are great at
     eliminating redundant work, but when it comes to making more complex decisions
     like vectorization, they may not generate the best possible code. Performance
     experts often can come up with clever ways to vectorize loops beyond the
     capabilities of compilers. When compilers have to make a decision whether to
     perform a code transformation or not, they rely on complex cost models and
     heuristics, which may not work for every possible scenario. For example, there
     is no binary “yes” or “no” answer to the question of whether a compiler should
     always inline a function into the place where it’s called. It usually depends on
     many factors which a compiler should take into account. Additionally, compilers
     cannot perform optimizations unless they are absolutely certain it is safe to do
     so. It may be very difficult for a compiler to prove that an optimization is correct
     under all possible circumstances, disallowing some transformations. Finally,
     compilers generally do not attempt “heroic” optimizations, like transforming
     data structures used by a program.
  3. Algorithmic complexity analysis limitations: Some developers are overly
     obsessed with algorithmic complexity analysis, which leads them to choose a
     popular algorithm with the optimal algorithmic complexity, even though it
     may not be the most efficient for a given problem. Considering two sorting
     algorithms, insertion sort and quicksort, the latter clearly wins in terms of Big
     O notation for the average case: insertion sort is O(N2 ) while quickSort is only

      O(N log N). Yet for relatively small sizes of N (up to 50 elements), insertion
      sort outperforms quickSort. Complexity analysis cannot account for all the
      low-level performance effects of various algorithms, so people just encapsulate
      them in an implicit constant C, which sometimes can make a large impact on
      performance. Only counting comparisons and swaps that are used for sorting,
      ignores cache misses and branch mispredictions, which, today, are actually very
      costly. Blindly trusting Big O notation without testing on the target workload
      could lead developers down an incorrect path. So, the best-known algorithm for
      a certain problem is not necessarily the most performant in practice for every
      possible input.
In addition to the limitations described above, there are overheads created by pro-
gramming paradigms. Coding practices that prioritize code clarity, readability, and
maintainability can reduce performance. Highly generalized and reusable code can
introduce unnecessary copies, runtime checks, function calls, memory allocations, etc.
For instance, polymorphism in object-oriented programming is usually implemented
using virtual functions, which introduce a performance overhead.4
All the factors mentioned above assess a “performance tax” on the software. There
are very often substantial opportunities for tuning the performance of our software to
reach its full potential.

1.2     Why Care about Performance?
In addition to the slowing growth of hardware single-threaded performance, there are
a couple of other business reasons to care about performance. During the PC era,5
the costs of slow software were paid by the users, as inefficient software was running
on user computers. Software vendors were not directly incentivized to optimize the
code of their applications. With the advent of SaaS (software as a service) and cloud
computing, the costs of slow software are put back on the software providers, not
their users. If you’re a SaaS company like Meta or Netflix,6 it doesn’t matter if you
run your service on-premise hardware or you use the public cloud, you pay for the
electricity your servers consume. Inefficient software cuts right into your margins and
market valuation. According to Synergy Research Group,7 worldwide spending on
cloud services topped $100 billion in 2020, and according to Gartner,8 it will surpass
$675 billion in 2024.
For many years performance engineering was a nerdy niche, but now it’s becoming
mainstream. Many companies have already realized the importance of performance
engineering and are willing to pay well for this work.
It is fairly easy to reach performance level 4 in Table 1.1. In fact, you don’t need this
   4 I do not dismiss design patterns and clean code principles, but I encourage a more nuanced

approach where performance is also a key consideration in the development process.
   5 The late 1990s and early 2000s, a time when personal computers dominated the market of

computing devices.
   6 In 2024, Meta uses mostly on-premise cloud, while Netflix uses AWS public cloud.
   7 Worldwide spending on cloud services in 2020 - https://www.srgresearch.com/articles/2020-the-

year-that-cloud-service-revenues-finally-dwarfed-enterprise-spending-on-data-centers
   8 Worldwide spending on cloud services in 2024 - https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-

releases/2024-05-20-gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloud-end-user-spending-to-surpass-675-
billion-in-2024

                                                       1.2   Why Care about Performance?

book to get there. Write your program in one of the native programming languages,
distribute work among multiple threads, pick a good optimizing compiler and you’ll
get there. Unfortunately, the performance of your program will be about 200 times
slower than the optimal target.
The methodologies in this book focus on squeezing out the last bit of performance
from your application. Such transformations can be attributed along rows 6 and 7
in Table 1.1. The types of improvements that will be discussed are usually not big
and often do not exceed 10%. However, do not underestimate the importance of a
10% speedup. SQLite is commonplace today not because its developers one day made
it 50% faster, but because they meticulously made hundreds of 0.1% improvements
over the years. The cumulative effect of these small improvements is what makes the
difference.
The impact of small improvements is very relevant for large distributed applications
running in the cloud. According to [Hennessy, 2018], in the year 2018, Google spent
roughly the same amount of money on actual computing servers that run the cloud as
it spent on power and cooling infrastructure. Energy efficiency is a very important
problem, which can be improved by optimizing software.
      “At such [Google] scale, understanding performance characteristics be-
      comes critical—even small improvements in performance or utilization can
      translate into immense cost savings.” [Kanev et al., 2015]
In addition to cloud costs, there is another factor at play: how people perceive
slow software. Google reported that a 500-millisecond delay in search caused a 20%
reduction in traffic.9 For Yahoo! 400 milliseconds faster page load caused 5-9% more
traffic.10 In the game of big numbers, small improvements can make a significant
impact. Such examples prove that the slower a service works, the fewer people will
use it.
Outside cloud services, there are many other performance-critical industries where
performance engineering does not need to be justified, such as Artificial Intelligence
(AI), High-Performance Computing (HPC), High-Frequency Trading (HFT), game
development, etc. Moreover, performance is not only required in highly specialized
areas, it is also relevant for general-purpose applications and services. Many tools
that we use every day simply would not exist if they failed to meet their performance
requirements. For example, Visual C++ IntelliSense11 features that are integrated
into Microsoft Visual Studio IDE have very tight performance constraints. For the
IntelliSense autocomplete feature to work, it must parse the entire source codebase
in milliseconds.12 Nobody will use a source code editor if it takes several seconds to
suggest autocomplete options. Such a feature has to be very responsive and provide
valid continuations as the user types new code.
  9 Google I/O ’08 Keynote by Marissa Mayer - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6x0cAzQ7PVs
 10 Slides by Stoyan Stefanov - https://www.slideshare.net/stoyan/dont-make-me-wait-or-building-

highperformance-web-applications
  11 Visual C++ IntelliSense - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/ide/visual-cpp-

intellisense
  12 In fact, it’s not possible to parse the entire codebase in the order of milliseconds. Instead,

IntelliSense only reconstructs the portions of AST that have been changed. Watch more details
on how the Microsoft team achieves this in the video: https://channel9.msdn.com/Blogs/Seth-
Juarez/Anders-Hejlsberg-on-Modern-Compiler-Construction

      “Not all fast software is world-class, but all world-class software is fast.
      Performance is the killer feature.” —Tobi Lutke, CEO of Shopify.

I hope it goes without saying that people hate using slow software, especially when
their productivity goes down because of it. Table 1.2 shows that most people consider
a delay of 2 seconds or more to be a “long wait,” and would switch to something else
after 10 seconds of waiting (I think much sooner). If you want to keep users’ attention,
your application must react quickly.

Table 1.2: Human-software interaction classes. Source: Microsoft Windows Blogs.13

 Interaction
 Class             Human Perception                                           Response Time
 Fast              Minimally noticeable delay                                 100ms–200ms
 Interactive       Quick, but too slow to be described as Fast                300ms–500ms
 Pause             Not quick but still feels responsive                       500ms–1 sec
 Wait              Not quick due to amount of work for scenario               1 sec–3 sec
 Long Wait         No longer feels responsive                                 2 sec–5 sec
 Captive           Reserved for unavoidably long/complex scenarios            5 sec–10 sec
 Long-running      User will probably switch away during operation            10 sec–30 sec

Application performance can drive your customers to a competitor’s product. By
emphasizing performance, you can give your product a competitive advantage.

Sometimes fast tools find applications for which they were not initially designed. For
example, game engines like Unreal and Unity are used in architecture, 3D visualization,
filmmaking, and other areas. Because game engines are so performant, they are a
natural choice for applications that require 2D and 3D rendering, physics simulation,
collision detection, sound, animation, etc.

      “Fast tools don’t just allow users to accomplish tasks faster; they allow
      users to accomplish entirely new types of tasks, in entirely new ways.” -
      Nelson Elhage wrote in his blog.14

Before starting performance-related work, make sure you have a strong reason to do
so. Optimization just for optimization’s sake is useless if it doesn’t add value to your
product.15 Mindful performance engineering starts with clearly defined performance
goals. Understand clearly what you are trying to achieve, and justify the work.
Establish metrics that you will use to measure success.

Now that we’ve talked about the value of performance engineering, let’s uncover what
it consists of. When you’re trying to improve the performance of a program, you need
to find problems (performance analysis) and then improve them (tuning), a task very
similar to a regular debugging activity. This is what we will discuss next.
 13 Microsoft Windows Blogs - https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2023/05/26/delivering-

delightful-performance-for-more-than-one-billion-users-worldwide/
 14 Reflections on software performance by N. Elhage - https://blog.nelhage.com/post/reflections-

on-performance/
 15 Unless you just want to practice performance optimizations, which is fine too.

                                                1.3   What Is Performance Analysis?

1.3    What Is Performance Analysis?
Have you ever found yourself debating with a coworker about the performance of
a certain piece of code? Then you probably know how hard it is to predict which
code is going to work the best. With so many moving parts inside modern processors,
even small tweaks to code can trigger noticeable performance changes. Relying on
intuition when optimizing an application typically results in random “fixes” without
real performance impact.
Inexperienced developers sometimes make changes in their code and claim it should run
faster. One such example is replacing i++ (post-increment) with ++i (pre-increment)
all over the code base (assuming that the previous value of i is not used). In the
general case, this change will make no difference to the generated code: every decent
optimizing compiler will recognize that the previous value of i is not used and will
eliminate redundant copies anyway. The first piece of advice in this book is: don’t
solely rely on your intuition. Always measure.
Many micro-optimization tricks that circulate around the world were valid in the past,
but current compilers have already learned them. Additionally, some people tend to
overuse legacy bit-twiddling tricks. One such example is the XOR swap idiom.16 In
reality, simple std::swap produces equivalent or faster code. Such accidental changes
likely won’t improve the performance of an application. Finding the right place to
tune should be the result of careful performance analysis, not intuition or guessing.
Performance analysis is a process of collecting information about how a program
executes and interpreting it to find optimization opportunities. Any change that
ends up being made in the source code of a program should be driven by analyzing
and interpreting collected data. We will show you how to use performance analysis
techniques to discover optimization opportunities even in a large and unfamiliar
codebase. There are many performance analysis methodologies. Depending on the
problem, some will be more efficient than others. With experience, you will develop
your own strategies about when to use each approach.

1.4    What Is Performance Tuning?
Locating a performance bottleneck is only half of an engineer’s job. The second half
is to fix it properly. Sometimes changing one line in the source code of a program can
yield a drastic performance boost. Missing such opportunities can be quite wasteful.
Performance analysis and tuning are all about finding and fixing this line.
To take advantage of all the computing power of modern CPUs, you need to understand
how they work. Or as performance engineers like to say, you need to have “mechanical
sympathy”. This term was borrowed from the car racing world. It means that a racing
driver with a good understanding of how the car works has an edge over its competitors
who don’t. The same applies to performance engineering. It is not possible to know
all the details of how a modern CPU operates, but you need to have a good mental
model of it to squeeze the last bit of performance.
This is what I mean by low-level optimizations. This is a type of optimization that
takes into account the details of the underlying hardware capabilities. It is different
 16 XOR-based swap idiom - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XOR_swap_algorithm

from high-level optimizations which are more about application-level logic, algorithms,
and data structures. As you will see in the book, the majority of low-level optimizations
can be applied to a wide variety of modern processors. To successfully implement
low-level optimizations, you need to have a good understanding of the underlying
hardware.
      “During the post-Moore era, it will become ever more important to make
      code run fast and, in particular, to tailor it to the hardware on which it
      runs.” [Leiserson et al., 2020]
In the past, software developers had more mechanical sympathy, as they often had to
deal with nuances of the hardware implementation. During the PC era, developers
usually were programming directly on top of the operating system, with possibly a
few libraries in between. As the world moved to the cloud era, the software stack
grew deeper, broader, and more complex. The top layer of the stack (on which most
developers work) has moved further away from the hardware. The negative side of
such evolution is that developers of modern applications have less affinity for the
actual hardware on which their software is running. This book will help you build a
strong connection with modern processors.
There is a famous quote by Donald Knuth: “Premature optimization is the root of
all evil”.[Knuth, 1974] But the opposite is often true as well. Postponed performance
engineering may be too late and cause as much evil as premature optimization. For
developers working with performance-critical projects, it is crucial to know how
underlying hardware works. In such roles, program development without a hardware
focus is a failure from the beginning.17 Performance characteristics of software must be
a primary objective alongside correctness and security from day one. Poor performance
can kill a product just as easily as security vulnerabilities.
Performance engineering is important and rewarding work, but it may be very time-
consuming. In fact, performance optimization is a game with no end. There will always
be something to optimize. Inevitably, a developer will reach the point of diminishing
returns at which further improvement is not justified by expected engineering costs.
Knowing when to stop optimizing is a critical aspect of performance work.

1.5     What Is Discussed in this Book?
This book is written to help developers better understand the performance of their
applications, learn to find inefficiencies, and eliminate them.
   • Why did my change cause a 2x performance drop?
   • Our customers complain about the slowness of our application. How should I
     investigate it?
   • Why does my handwritten compression algorithm perform slower than the
     conventional one?
   • Have I optimized my program to its full potential?
   • What performance analysis tools are available on my platform?
   • What are techniques to reduce the number of cache misses and branch mispre-
     dictions?
  17 ClickHouse DB is an example of a successful software product that was built around a small but

very efficient core.

                                               1.5   What Is Discussed in this Book?

I hope that by the end of this book, you will be able to answer those questions.

The book is split into two parts. The first part (chapters 2–7) teaches you how to find
performance problems, and the second part (chapters 8–13) teaches you how to fix
them.

  • Chapter 2 discusses fair performance experiments and their analysis. It introduces
    the best practices for performance testing and comparing results.
  • Chapter 3 introduces CPU microarchitecture, with a close look at Intel’s Golden
    Cove microarchitecture.
  • Chapter 4 covers terminology and metrics used in performance analysis. At the
    end of the chapter, we present a case study that features various performance
    metrics collected on four real-world applications.
  • Chapter 5 explores the most popular performance analysis approaches. We
    describe how profiling tools work and what sort of data they can collect.
  • Chapter 6 examines features provided by modern Intel, AMD, and ARM-based
    CPUs to support and enhance performance analysis. It shows how they work
    and what problems they help to solve.
  • Chapter 7 gives an overview of the most popular performance analysis tools
    available on Linux, Windows, and MacOS.
  • Chapter 8 is about optimizing memory accesses, cache-friendly code, data
    structure reorganization, and other techniques.
  • Chapter 9 is about optimizing computations; it explores data dependencies,
    function inlining, loop optimizations, and vectorization.
  • Chapter 10 is about branchless programming, which is used to avoid branch
    misprediction.
  • Chapter 11 is about machine code layout optimizations, such as basic block
    placement, function splitting, and profile-guided optimizations.
  • Chapter 12 contains optimization topics not considered in the previous four chap-
    ters, but still important enough to find their place in this book. In this chapter,
    we discuss CPU-specific optimizations, examine several microarchitecture-related
    performance problems, explore techniques used for optimizing low-latency appli-
    cations, and give you advice on tuning your system for the best performance.
  • Chapter 13 discusses techniques for analyzing multithreaded applications. It
    digs into some of the most important challenges of optimizing multithreaded
    applications. We provide a case study of five real-world multithreaded applica-
    tions, where we explain why their performance doesn’t scale with the number of
    CPU threads. We also discuss cache coherency issues (e.g., “false sharing”) and
    a few tools that are designed to analyze multithreaded applications.

At the end of the book, there is a glossary and a list of microarchitectures for major
CPU vendors. Whenever you see an unfamiliar acronim or you need to refresh your
memory on recent Intel, AMD, and ARM chip families, refer to these resources.

Examples provided in this book are primarily based on open-source software: Linux
as the operating system, the LLVM-based Clang compiler for C and C++ languages,

and various open-source applications and benchmarks18 that you can build and run.
The reason is not only the popularity of these projects but also the fact that their
source code is open, which enables us to better understand the underlying mechanism
of how they work. This is especially useful for learning the concepts presented in this
book. This doesn’t mean that we will never showcase proprietary tools. For example,
we extensively use Intel® VTune™ Profiler.
Sometimes it’s possible to obtain attractive speedups by forcing the compiler to
generate desired machine code through various hints. You will find many such examples
throughout the book. While prior compiler experience helps a lot in performance
work, most of the time you don’t have to be a compiler expert to drive performance
improvements in your application. The majority of optimizations can be done at a
source code level without the need to dig down into compiler sources.

1.6    What Is Not Discussed in this Book?
System performance depends on different components: CPU, DRAM, I/O, and
network devices, etc. Applications may benefit from tuning various components of the
system, depending on where a bottleneck is. In general, engineers should analyze the
performance of the whole system. However, the biggest factor in a system’s performance
is its heart, the CPU. This is why this book primarily focuses on performance analysis
from a CPU perspective. We also discuss the memory subsystem quite extensively,
but we don’t explore I/O and network performance.
Likewise, the software stack includes many layers, e.g., firmware, BIOS, OS, libraries,
and the source code of an application. However, since most of the lower layers are not
under our direct control, the primary focus will be on the source code level.
The scope of the book does not go beyond a single CPU socket, so we will not
discuss optimization techniques for distributed, NUMA, and heterogeneous systems.
Offloading computations to accelerators (GPU, FPGA, etc.) using solutions like
OpenCL and openMP is not discussed in this book.
I tried to make this book to be applicable to most modern CPUs, including Intel,
AMD, Apple, and other ARM-based processors. I’m sorry if it doesn’t cover your
favorite architecture. Nevertheless, many of the principles discussed in this book
apply well to other processors. Similarly, most examples in this book were run on
Linux, but again, most of the time it doesn’t matter since the same techniques benefit
applications that run on Windows and macOS operating systems.
Code snippets in this book are written in C or C++, but to a large degree, ideas from
this book can be applied to other languages that are compiled to native code like Rust,
Go, and even Fortran. Since this book targets user-mode applications that run close
to the hardware, we will not discuss managed environments, e.g., Java.
Finally, I assume that readers have full control over the software that they develop,
including the choice of libraries and compilers they use. Hence, this book is not about
tuning purchased commercial packages, e.g., tuning SQL database queries.
  18 Some people don’t like when their application is called a “benchmark”. They think that a

benchmark is something that is synthesized and contrived, and does a poor job of representing
real-world scenarios. In this book, we use the terms “benchmark”, “workload”, and “application”
interchangeably and don’t mean to offend anyone.

                                                                       1.7   Exercises

1.7    Exercises
As supplemental material for this book, I developed “Performance Ninja”, a free
online course where you can practice low-level performance analysis and tuning. It
is available at the following URL: https://github.com/dendibakh/perf-ninja. It has
a collection of lab assignments that focus on a specific performance problem. Each
lab assignment can take anywhere from 30 minutes up to 4 hours depending on your
background and the complexity of the lab assignment itself.
Following the name of the GitHub repository, we will use perf-ninja to refer to
the online course. In the “Questions and Exercises” section at the end of each
chapter, you may find assignments from perf-ninja. For example, when you see
perf-ninja::warmup, this corresponds to the lab assignment with the name “Warmup”
in the GitHub repository. We encourage you to solve these puzzles to solidify your
knowledge.
You can solve assignments on your local machine or submit your code changes to
GitHub for automated verification and benchmarking. If you choose the latter, follow
the instructions on the “Get Started” page of the repository. We also use examples
from perf-ninja throughout the book. This enables you to reproduce a specific
performance problem on your own machine and experiment with it.

Chapter Summary
  • Single-threaded CPU performance is not increasing as rapidly as it used to a
    few decades ago. When it’s no longer the case that each hardware generation
    provides a significant performance boost, developers should start optimizing the
    code of their software.
  • Modern software is massively inefficient. A regular server system in a public
    cloud, typically runs poorly optimized code, consuming more power than it
    could have consumed, which increases carbon emissions and contributes to other
    environmental issues.
  • Certain limitations exist that prevent applications from reaching their full perfor-
    mance potential. CPUs cannot magically speed up slow algorithms. Compilers
    are far from generating optimal code for every program. Big O notation is
    not always a good indicator of performance as it doesn’t account for hardware
    specifics.
  • For many years performance engineering was a nerdy niche. But now it’s
    becoming mainstream as software vendors realize the impact that their poorly
    optimized software has on their bottom line.
  • People absolutely hate using slow software, especially when their productivity
    goes down because of it. Not all fast software is world-class, but all world-class
    software is fast. Performance is the killer feature.
  • Software tuning is becoming more important than it has been for the last 40 years
    and it will be one of the key drivers for performance gains in the near future. The
    importance of low-level performance tuning should not be underestimated, even
    if it’s just a 1% improvement. The cumulative effect of these small improvements
    is what makes the difference.
  • To squeeze the last bit of performance you need to have a good mental model of
    how modern CPUs work.

• Predicting the performance of a certain piece of code is nearly impossible since
  there are so many factors that affect the performance of modern platforms. When
  implementing software optimizations, developers should not rely on intuition
  but use careful performance analysis instead.

