Part 1. Performance Analysis on a Modern
CPU

2      Measuring Performance

The first step to understanding the performance of an application is to measure it.
Anyone ever concerned with performance evaluations likely knows how hard it is
sometimes to conduct fair performance measurements and draw accurate conclusions
from them. Performance measurements can be very unexpected and counterintuitive.
Changing a seemingly unrelated part of the source code can surprise us with a significant
impact on the performance of the program. For various reasons, measurements may
consistently overestimate or underestimate the true performance, which leads to
distorted results that do not accurately reflect reality. This phenomenon is called
measurement bias.
Performance problems are often harder to reproduce and root cause than most func-
tional issues. Every run of a program is usually functionally the same but somewhat
different from a performance standpoint. For example, when unpacking a zip file, we
get the same result over and over again, which means this operation is reproducible.
However, it’s impossible to reproduce the same CPU cycle-by-cycle performance profile
of this operation.
Conducting fair performance experiments is an essential step towards getting accurate
and meaningful results. You need to ensure you’re looking at the right problem and are
not debugging some unrelated issue. Designing performance tests and configuring the
environment are both important components in the process of evaluating performance.
Because of the measurement bias, performance evaluations often involve statistical
methods, which deserve a whole book just for themselves. There are many corner
cases and a huge amount of research done in this field. We will not dive into statistical
methods for evaluating performance measurements. Instead, we only discuss high-level
ideas and give basic directions to follow. We encourage you to research deeper on your
own.
In this chapter, we:
    • Give a brief introduction to why modern systems yield noisy performance
      measurements and what you can do about it.
    • Explain why it is important to measure performance in production deployments.
    • Provide general guidance on how to properly collect and analyze performance
      measurements.
    • Explore how to automatically detect performance regressions as you implement
      changes in your codebase.
    • Describe software and hardware timers that can be used by developers in time-
      based measurements.

   • Discuss how to write a good microbenchmark and some common pitfalls you
     may encounter while doing it.

2.1     Noise in Modern Systems
There are many features in hardware and software that are designed to increase
performance, but not all of them have deterministic behavior. Consider Dynamic
Frequency Scaling (DFS), a feature that allows a CPU to increase its frequency far
above the base frequency, allowing it to run significantly faster. DFS is also frequently
referred to as turbo mode. Unfortunately, a CPU cannot stay in the turbo mode for
a long time, otherwise it may face the risk of overheating. So after some time, it
decreases its frequency to stay within its thermal limits. DFS usually depends a lot on
the current system load and external factors, such as core temperature, which makes
it hard to predict the impact on performance measurements.
Figure 2.1 shows a typical example where DFS can cause variance in performance. In
our scenario, we started two runs of a benchmark, one right after another on a “cold”
processor.19 During the first second, the first iteration of the benchmark was running
on the maximum turbo frequency of 4.4 GHz but later the CPU had to decrease its
frequency below 4 GHz. The second run did not have the advantage of boosting the
CPU frequency and did not enter the turbo mode. Even though we ran the exact
same version of the benchmark two times, the environment in which they ran was not
the same. As you can see, the first run is 200 milliseconds faster than the second run
due to the fact that it was running with a higher CPU frequency in the beginning.
Such a scenario can frequently happen when you benchmark software on a laptop
since laptops have limited heat dissipation.20

Figure 2.1: Variance in performance caused by dynamic frequency scaling: the first run is
                         200 milliseconds faster than the second.

Frequency Scaling is an example of how a hardware feature can cause variations in our
  19 By cold processor, we mean the CPU that stayed in idle mode for a while, allowing it to cool

down its temperature.
  20 Remember that even running Windows task manager or Linux top programs, can affect mea-

surements since an additional CPU core will be activated and assigned to it. This might affect the
frequency of the core that is running the actual benchmark.

                                                              2.1   Noise in Modern Systems

measurements, however, they could also come from software. Consider benchmarking
a git status command, which accesses many files on the disk. The filesystem plays
a big role in performance in this scenario; in particular, the filesystem cache. On the
first run, the required entries in the filesystem cache are missing. The filesystem cache
is not effective and our git status command runs very slowly. However, the second
time, the filesystem cache will be warmed up, making it much faster than the first run.

You’re probably thinking about including a dry run before taking measurements. That
certainly helps, unfortunately, measurement bias can persist through the runs as
well. [Mytkowicz et al., 2009] paper demonstrates that UNIX environment size (i.e.,
the total number of bytes required to store the environment variables) or the link
order (the order of object files that are given to the linker) can affect performance in
unpredictable ways. There are numerous other ways how memory layout may affect
performance measurements.21

Having consistent performance requires running all iterations of the benchmark with
the same conditions. It is impossible to achieve 100% consistent results on every run of
a benchmark, but perhaps you can get close by carefully controlling the environment.
Eliminating nondeterminism in a system is helpful for well-defined, stable performance
tests, e.g., microbenchmarks.

Consider a situation when you implemented a code change and want to know the
relative speedup ratio by benchmarking the “before” and “after” versions of the
program. This is a scenario in which you can control most of the variability in a
system, including HW configuration, OS settings, background processes, etc. Disabling
features with nondeterministic performance impact will help you get a more consistent
and accurate comparison. You can find examples of such features and how to disable
them in Appendix A. Also, there are tools that can set up the environment to ensure
benchmarking results with a low variance; one such tool is temci22 .

However, it is not possible to replicate the exact same environment and eliminate bias
completely: there could be different temperature conditions, power delivery spikes,
unexpected system interrupts, etc. Chasing all potential sources of noise and variation
in a system can be a never-ending story. Sometimes it cannot be achieved, for example,
when you’re benchmarking a large distributed cloud service.

You should not eliminate system nondeterministic behavior when you want to measure
the real-world performance impact of your change. Yes, these features may contribute
to performance instabilities, but they are designed to improve the overall performance
of the system. Users of your application are likely to have them enabled to provide
better performance. So, when you analyze the performance of a production application,
you should try to replicate the target system configuration, which you are optimizing
for. Introducing any artificial tuning to the system will change results from what users

  21 One approach to enable statistically sound performance analysis was presented in

[Curtsinger & Berger, 2013]. This work showed that it’s possible to eliminate measurement bias
that comes from memory layout by repeatedly randomizing the placement of code, stack, and heap
objects at runtime. Sadly, these ideas didn’t go much further, and right now, this project is almost
abandoned.
  22 Temci - https://github.com/parttimenerd/temci.

of your service will see in practice.23

2.2     Measuring Performance in Production
When an application runs in a shared infrastructure, e.g., in a public cloud, there
usually will be workloads from other customers running on the same servers. With
technologies like virtualization and containers becoming more popular, public cloud
providers try to fully utilize the capacity of their servers. Unfortunately, it creates
additional obstacles for measuring performance in such an environment. When your
application shares resources with neighbor processes, its performance can become very
unpredictable.
Analyzing production workloads by recreating a specific scenario in a lab can be
quite tricky. Sometimes it’s not possible to reproduce exact behavior for “in-house”
performance testing. This is why cloud providers and hyperscalers provide tools to
monitor performance directly on production systems. A code change that performs
well in a lab environment does not necessarily always perform well in production.
Consult with your cloud service provider to see how you can enable performance
monitoring of production instances. We provide an overview of continuous profilers in
Section 7.9.
It’s becoming a trend for large service providers to implement telemetry systems
that monitor performance on user devices. One such example is the Netflix Icarus24
telemetry service, which runs on thousands of different devices spread around the
world. Such a telemetry system helps Netflix understand how users perceive Netflix’s
app performance. It enables Netflix engineers to analyze data collected from many
devices and to find issues that otherwise would be impossible to find. This kind of
data enables making better-informed decisions on where to focus optimization efforts.
One important caveat of monitoring production deployments is measurement overhead.
Because any kind of monitoring affects the performance of a running service, we
recommended using lightweight profiling methods. According to [Ren et al., 2010]:
“To conduct continuous profiling on datacenter machines serving real traffic, extremely
low overhead is paramount”. Usually, acceptable aggregated overhead is considered
below 1%. Performance monitoring overhead can be reduced by limiting the set of
profiled machines as well as capturing data samples less frequently.

2.3     Continuous Benchmarking
We just discussed why you should monitor performance in production. On the other
hand, it is still beneficial to set up continuous “in-house” testing to catch performance
problems early, even though not every performance regression can be caught in a lab.
Software vendors constantly seek ways to accelerate the pace of delivering their
products to the market. Many companies deploy newly written code every couple of
months or weeks. Unfortunately, software products don’t get better performance with
  23 Another downside of disabling nondeterministic performance features is that it makes a benchmark

run longer. This is especially important for Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD)
performance testing when there are time limits for how long it should take to run the whole benchmark
suite.
  24 Presented at CMG 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RG2DUK03_0.

                                                       2.3   Continuous Benchmarking

each new release. Performance defects tend to leak into production software at an
alarming rate [Jin et al., 2012]. A large number of code changes pose a challenge to
thorough analysis of their performance impact.
Performance regressions are defects that make the software run slower compared to
the previous version. Catching performance regressions (or improvements) requires de-
tecting the commit that has changed the performance of the program. From database
systems to search engines to compilers, performance regressions are commonly expe-
rienced by almost all large-scale software systems during their continuous evolution
and deployment life cycle. It may be impossible to entirely avoid performance re-
gressions during software development, but with proper testing and diagnostic tools,
the likelihood of such defects silently leaking into production code can be reduced
significantly.
It is useful to track the performance of your application with charts, like the one shown
in Figure 2.2. Using such a chart you can see historical trends and find moments
where performance improved or degraded. Typically, you will have a separate line for
each performance test you’re tracking. Do not include too many benchmarks on a
single chart as it will become very noisy.

Figure 2.2: Performance graph (higher better) for an application showing a big drop in
                    performance on August 7th and smaller ones later.

Let’s consider some potential solutions for detecting performance regressions. The
first option that comes to mind is: having humans look at the graphs. For the chart in
Figure 2.2, humans will likely catch performance regression that happened on August
7th, but it’s not obvious that they will detect later smaller regressions. People tend to
lose focus quickly and can miss regressions, especially on a busy chart. In addition to
that, it is a time-consuming and boring job that must be performed daily.
There is another interesting performance drop on August 3rd. A developer will also
likely catch it, however, most of us would be tempted to dismiss it since performance
recovered the next day. But are we sure that it was merely a glitch in measurements?
What if this was a real regression that was compensated by an optimization on August
4th? If we could fix the regression and keep the optimization, we would have a
performance score of around 4500. Do not dismiss such cases. One way to proceed
here would be to repeat the measurements for the dates Aug 02–Aug 04 and inspect
code changes during that period.
The second option is to have a threshold, say, 2%. Every code modification that

has performance within that threshold is considered noise and everything above the
threshold is considered a regression. It is somewhat better than the first option but still
has its own drawbacks. Fluctuations in performance tests are inevitable: sometimes,
even a harmless code change can trigger performance variation in a benchmark.25
Choosing the right value for the threshold is extremely hard and does not guarantee a
low rate of false-positive as well as false-negative alarms. Setting the threshold too
low might lead to analyzing a bunch of small regressions that were not caused by the
change in source code but due to some random noise. Setting the threshold too high
might lead to filtering out real performance regressions.
Small regressions can pile up slowly into a bigger regression, which can be left unnoticed.
Going back to Figure 2.2, notice a downward trend that lasted from Aug 11 to Aug
21. The period started with a score of 3000 and ended with 2600. That is roughly a
15% regression over 10 days or 1.5% per day on average. If we set a 2% threshold all
regressions will be filtered out. However, as we can see, the accumulated regression is
much bigger than the threshold.
Nevertheless, this option works reasonably well for many projects, especially if the
level of noise in a benchmark is very low. Also, you can adjust the threshold for each
test. An example of a Continuous Integration (CI) system where each test requires
setting explicit threshold values for alerting a regression is LUCI,26 which is a part of
the Chromium project.
It’s worth mentioning that tracking performance results over time requires that you
maintain the same configuration of the machine(s) that you use to run benchmarks. A
change in the configuration may invalidate all the previous performance results. You
may decide to recollect all historical measurements with a new configuration, but this
is very expensive.
Another option that recently became popular uses a statistical approach to identify
performance regressions. It leverages an algorithm called “Change Point Detection”
(CPD, see [Matteson & James, 2014]), which utilizes historical data and identifies
points in time where performance has changed. Many performance monitoring systems
embraced the CPD algorithm, including several open-source projects. You can search
the web to find the one that better suits your needs.
The notable advantage of CPD is that it does not require setting thresholds. The
algorithm evaluates a large window of recent results, which allows it to ignore outliers
as noise and produce fewer false positives. The downside for CPD is the lack of
immediate feedback. For example, consider a performance test with the following
historical measurements of running time: 5 sec, 6 sec, 5 sec, 5 sec, 7 sec. If the next
benchmark result comes at 11 seconds, then the threshold would likely be exceeded
and an alert would be generated immediately. However, in the case of using the CPD
algorithm, it wouldn’t do anything at this point. If in the next run, performance
is restored to 5 seconds, then it would likely dismiss it as a false positive and not
generate an alert. Conversely, if the next run or two resulted in 10 sec and 12 sec
respectively, only then would the CPD algorithm trigger an alert.
  25 The following article shows that changing the order of the functions or removing dead functions

can cause variations in performance: https://easyperf.net/blog/2018/01/18/Code_alignment_issues
  26 LUCI - https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src.git/+/master/docs/tour_of_luci_ui

.md

                                                      2.3   Continuous Benchmarking

There is no clear answer to which approach is better. If your development flow requires
immediate feedback, e.g., evaluating a pull request before it gets merged, then using
thresholds is a better choice. Also, if you can remove a lot of noise from your system
and achieve stable performance results, then using thresholds is more appropriate. In
a very quiet system, the 11 second measurement mentioned before likely indicates a
real performance regression, thus we need to flag it as early as possible. In contrast, if
you have a lot of noise in your system, e.g., you run distributed macro-benchmarks,
then that 11 second result may just be a false positive. In this case, you may be better
off using Change Point Detection.

A typical CI performance tracking system should automate the following actions:

   1. Set up a system under test.
   2. Run a benchmark suite.
   3. Report the results.
   4. Determine if performance has changed.
   5. Alert on unexpected changes in performance.
   6. Visualize the results for a human to analyze.

Another desirable feature of a CI performance tracking system is to allow developers
to submit performance evaluation jobs for their patches before they commit them
to the codebase. This greatly simplifies the developer’s job and facilitates quicker
turnaround of experiments. The performance impact of a code change is frequently
included in the list of check-in criteria.

If, for some reason, a performance regression has slipped into the codebase, it is very
important to detect it promptly. First, because fewer changes were merged since it
happened. This allows us to have a person responsible for the regression look into the
problem before they move to another task. Also, it is a lot easier for a developer to
approach the regression since all the details are still fresh in their head as opposed to
several weeks after that.

Lastly, the CI system should alert, not just on software performance regressions, but
on unexpected performance improvements, too. For example, someone may check in a
seemingly innocuous commit which improves performance by 10% in the automated
tracking harness. Your initial instinct may be to celebrate this fortuitous performance
boost and proceed with your day. However, while this commit may have passed all
functional tests in your CI pipeline, chances are that this unexpected improvement
uncovered a gap in functional testing which only manifested itself in performance
regression results. For instance, the change caused the application to skip some parts
of work, which was not covered by functional tests. This scenario occurs often enough
that it warrants explicit mention: treat the automated performance regression harness
as part of a holistic software testing framework.

To wrap it up, we highly recommend setting up an automated statistical performance
tracking system. Try using different algorithms and see which works best for your
application. It will certainly take time, but it will be a solid investment in the future
performance health of your project.

2.4    Manual Performance Testing
In the previous section, we discussed how CI systems can help with evaluating the
performance impact of a code change. However, it may not always be possible to
leverage such a system due to reasons such as hardware unavailability, setup being
too complicated for the testing infrastructure, a need to collect additional metrics, etc.
In this section, we provide basic advice for local performance evaluations.
We typically measure the performance impact of our code change by 1) measuring
the baseline performance, 2) measuring the performance of the modified program,
and 3) comparing them with each other. For example, we had a program that
calculates Fibonacci numbers recursively (baseline), and we decided to rewrite it with
a loop (modified). Both versions are functionally correct and yield the same Fibonacci
numbers. Now we need to compare the performance of the two versions of the program.
It is highly recommended to get not just a single measurement but to run the
benchmark multiple times. If you make comparisons based on a single measurement,
you’re increasing the risk of having your numbers skewed by the measurement bias
that we discussed in Section 2.1. So, we collected N performance measurements for the
baseline and N measurements for the modified version of the program. We call a set
of performance measurements a performance distribution. Now we need to aggregate
and compare those two distributions to decide which version of the program is faster.
The most straightforward way to compare two performance distributions is to take the
average of N measurements from both distributions and calculate the ratio. For the
types of code improvements we discuss in this book, this simple method works well
in most cases. However, comparing performance distributions is quite nuanced, and
there are many ways how you can be fooled by measurements and potentially derive
wrong conclusions. We will not get into the details of statistical analysis, instead,
we recommend you read a textbook on the subject. A good reference specifically
for performance engineers is a book by Dror G. Feitelson, “Workload Modeling for
Computer Systems Performance Evaluation”,27 that has more information on modal
distributions, skewness, and other related topics.
Data scientists often present measurements by plotting them. This eliminates biased
conclusions and allows readers to interpret the data for themselves. One of the popular
ways to plot distributions is by using box plots (also known as a box-and-whisker plot).
In Figure 2.3, we visualized performance distributions of two versions of the same
functional program (“before” and “after”). There are 70 performance data points in
each distribution.
Let’s describe the terms indicated on the image:
   • The mean (often referred to as the average) is the sum of all values in a dataset
     divided by the number of values. Indicated with X.
   • The median is the middle value of a dataset when the values are sorted. The
     same as 50th percentile (p50).
   • The 25th percentile (p25) divides the lowest 25% of the data from the highest
     75%.
 27 Book   “Workload Modeling for        Computer   Systems       Performance   Evaluation”   -
https://www.cs.huji.ac.il/~feit/wlmod/

                                                       2.4   Manual Performance Testing

Figure 2.3: Performance measurements (lower is better) of “Before” and “After” versions of
                           a program presented as box plots.

   • The 75th percentile (p75) divides the lowest 75% of the data from the highest
     25%.
   • An outlier is a data point that differs significantly from other samples in the
     dataset. Outliers can be caused by variability in the data or experimental errors.
   • The min and max (whiskers) represent the most extreme data points that are
     not considered outliers.
By looking at the box plot in Figure 2.3, we can sense that our code change has a
positive impact on performance since “after” samples are generally faster than “before”.
However, there are some “before” measurements that are faster than “after”. Box
plots allow comparisons of multiple distributions on the same chart. The benefits of
using box plots for visualizing performance distributions are described in a blog post
by Stefan Marr.28
Performance speedups can be calculated by taking a ratio between the two means.
In some cases, you can use other metrics to calculate speedups, including median,
min, and 95th percentile, depending on which one is more representative of your
distribution.
Standard deviation quantifies how much the values in a dataset deviate from the mean
on average. A low standard deviation indicates that the data points are close to the
mean, while a high standard deviation indicates that they are spread out over a wider
range. Unless distributions have low standard deviation, do not calculate speedups. If
  28 Stefan Marr’s blog post about box plots - https://stefan-marr.de/2024/06/5-reasons-for-box-

plots-as-default/

the standard deviation in the measurements is on the same order of magnitude as the
mean, the average is not a representative metric. Consider taking steps to reduce noise
in your measurements. If that is not possible, present your results as a combination of
the key metrics such as mean, median, standard deviation, percentiles, min, max, etc.
Performance gains are usually represented in two ways: as a speedup factor or
percentage improvement. If a program originally took 10 seconds to run, and you
optimized it down to 1 second, that’s a 10x speedup. We shaved off 9 seconds of
running time from the original program, that’s a 90% reduction in time. The formula
to calculate percentage improvement is shown below. In the book, we will use both
ways of representing speedups.
                                                   New Time
                   Percentage Speedup = (1 −                ) × 100%
                                                   Old Time
One of the most important factors in calculating accurate speedup ratios is collecting
a rich collection of samples, i.e., running a benchmark a large number of times. This
may sound obvious, but it is not always achievable. For example, some of the SPEC
CPU 2017 benchmarks29 run for more than 10 minutes on a modern machine. That
means it would take 1 hour to produce just three samples: 30 minutes for each version
of the program. Imagine that you have not just a single benchmark in your suite, but
hundreds. It would become very expensive to collect statistically sufficient data even
if you distribute the work across multiple machines.
If obtaining new measurements is expensive, don’t rush to collect many samples. Often
you can learn a lot from just three runs. If you see a very low standard deviation
within those three samples, you will probably learn nothing new from collecting more
measurements. This is very typical of programs with underlying consistency (e.g.,
static benchmarks). However, if you see an abnormally high standard deviation, I do
not recommend launching new runs and hoping to have “better statistics”. You should
figure out what is causing performance variance and how to reduce it.
In an automated setting, you can implement an adaptive strategy by dynamically
limiting the number of benchmark iterations based on standard deviation, i.e., you
collect samples until you get a standard deviation that lies in a certain range. The
lower the standard deviation in the distribution, the lower the number of samples you
need. Once you have a standard deviation lower than the threshold, you can stop
collecting measurements. This strategy is explained in more detail in [Akinshin, 2019,
Chapter 4].
An important thing to watch out for is the presence of outliers. It is OK to discard some
samples (for example, cold runs) as outliers, but do not deliberately discard unwanted
samples from the measurement set. Outliers can be one of the most important metrics
for some types of benchmarks. For example, when benchmarking software that has
real-time constraints, the 99 percentile could be very interesting.
I recommend using benchmarking tools as they automate performance measurements.
For example, Hyperfine30 is a popular cross platform command-line benchmarking
tool that automatically determines the number of runs, and can visualize the results
as a table with mean, min, max, or as a box plot.
 29 SPEC CPU 2017 benchmarks - http://spec.org/cpu2017/Docs/overview.html#benchmarks
 30 hyperfine - https://github.com/sharkdp/hyperfine

                                                    2.5   Software and Hardware Timers

In the next two sections, we will discuss how to measure wall clock time (latency),
which is the most common case. However, sometimes we also may want to measure
other things, like the number of requests per second (throughput), heap allocations,
context switches, etc.

2.5    Software and Hardware Timers
To benchmark execution time, engineers usually use two different timers, which all
the modern platforms provide:

  • System-wide high-resolution timer: this is a system timer that is typically
    implemented as a simple count of the number of ticks that have transpired since
    an arbitrary starting date, called the epoch31 . This clock is monotonic; i.e., it
    always goes up. System time can be retrieved from the OS with a system call.
    Accessing the system timer on Linux systems is possible via the clock_gettime
    system call. The system timer has a nanosecond resolution, is consistent between
    all the CPUs, and is independent of the CPU frequency. Even though the system
    timer can return timestamps with a nanosecond accuracy, it is not suitable
    for measuring short-running events because it takes a long time to obtain the
    timestamp via the clock_gettime system call. But it is OK to measure events
    with a duration of more than a microsecond. The standard way of accessing the
    system timer in C++ is using std::chrono as shown in Listing 2.1.

Listing 2.1 Using C++ std::chrono to access system timer
#include <cstdint>
#include <chrono>

// returns elapsed time in nanoseconds
uint64_t timeWithChrono() {
  using namespace std::chrono;
  auto start = steady_clock::now();
  // run something
  auto end = steady_clock::now();
  uint64_t delta = duration_cast<nanoseconds>(end - start).count();
  return delta;
}

  • Time Stamp Counter (TSC): this is a hardware timer that is implemented
    as a hardware register. TSC is monotonic and has a constant rate, i.e., it doesn’t
    account for frequency changes. Every CPU has its own TSC, which is simply the
    number of reference cycles (see Section 4.6) elapsed. It is suitable for measuring
    short events with a duration from nanoseconds up to one minute. On x86 plat-
    forms, the value of TSC can be retrieved by using the compiler’s built-in function
    __rdtsc as shown in Listing 2.2, which uses the RDTSC assembly instruction
    under the hood. More low-level details on benchmarking the code using the
    RDTSC assembly instruction can be found in the white paper [Paoloni, 2010].
    On ARM platforms you can read CNTVCT_EL0, Counter-timer Virtual Count
    Register.
 31 Unix epoch starts on 1 January 1970 00:00:00 UT: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_epoch.

Listing 2.2 Using __rdtsc compiler builtins to access TSC
#include <x86intrin.h>
#include <cstdint>

// returns the number of elapsed reference clocks
uint64_t timeWithTSC() {
    uint64_t start = __rdtsc();
    // run something
    return __rdtsc() - start;
}

Choosing which timer to use is very simple and depends on how long the thing is that
you want to measure. If you measure something over a very short time period, TSC
will give you better accuracy. Conversely, it’s pointless to use the TSC to measure
a program that runs for hours. Unless you need cycle accuracy, the system timer
should be enough for a large proportion of cases. It’s important to keep in mind that
accessing the system timer usually has a higher latency than accessing TSC. Making a
clock_gettime system call can be much slower than executing RDTSC instruction. The
latter takes about 5 ns (20 CPU cycles), while the former takes about 500 ns. This may
become important for minimizing measurement overhead, especially in the production
environment. A performance comparison of different APIs for accessing timers on
various platforms is available on the wiki page of the CppPerformanceBenchmarks
repository.32

2.6    Microbenchmarks
Microbenchmarks are small self-contained programs that people write to quickly test a
hypothesis. Usually, microbenchmarks are used to choose the best implementation of
a certain relatively small algorithm or functionality. Nearly all modern languages have
benchmarking frameworks. In C++, you can use the Google benchmark33 library, C#
has the BenchmarkDotNet34 library, Julia has the BenchmarkTools35 package, Java
has JMH36 (Java Microbenchmark Harness), Rust has the Criterion37 package, etc.
When writing microbenchmarks, it’s very important to ensure that the scenario you
want to test is actually executed by your microbenchmark at runtime. Optimizing
compilers can eliminate important code that could render the experiment useless,
or even worse, drive you to the wrong conclusion. In the example below, modern
compilers are likely to eliminate the whole loop:
// foo DOES NOT benchmark string creation
void foo() {
  for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++)
    std::string s("hi");
}

 32 CppPerformanceBenchmarks wiki - https://gitlab.com/chriscox/CppPerformanceBenchmarks/-

/wikis/ClockTimeAnalysis
 33 Google benchmark library - https://github.com/google/benchmark
 34 BenchmarkDotNet - https://github.com/dotnet/BenchmarkDotNet
 35 Julia BenchmarkTools - https://github.com/JuliaCI/BenchmarkTools.jl
 36 Java Microbenchmark Harness - http://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jmh/etc
 37 Criterion.rs - https://github.com/bheisler/criterion.rs

                                                          2.7   Active Benchmarking

Blunders like that one are nicely captured in the paper “Always Measure One Level
Deeper” [Ousterhout, 2018], where the author advocates for a more scientific approach,
and measuring performance from different angles. Following advice from the paper, we
should inspect the performance profile of the benchmark and make sure the intended
code stands out as the hotspot. Sometimes abnormal timings can be spotted instantly,
so use common sense while analyzing and comparing benchmark runs.
One of the popular ways to keep the compiler from optimizing away important code is
to use DoNotOptimize-like38 helper functions, which do the necessary inline assembly
magic under the hood:
// foo benchmarks string creation
void foo() {
  for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
    std::string s("hi");
    DoNotOptimize(s);
  }
}
If written well, microbenchmarks can be a good source of performance data. They are
often used for comparing the performance of different implementations of a critical
function. A good benchmark tests performance in realistic conditions. In contrast, if
a benchmark uses synthetic input that is different from what will be given in practice,
then the benchmark will likely mislead you and will drive you to the wrong conclusions.
Besides that, when a benchmark runs on a system free from other demanding processes,
it has all resources available to it, including DRAM and cache space. Such a benchmark
will likely champion the faster version of the function even if it consumes more memory
than the other version. However, the outcome can be the opposite if there are neighbor
processes that consume a significant part of DRAM, which causes memory regions
that belong to the benchmark process to be swapped to the disk.
For the same reason, be careful when concluding results obtained from unit-testing a
function. Modern unit-testing frameworks, e.g., GoogleTest, provide the duration of
each test. However, this information cannot substitute a carefully written benchmark
that tests the function in practical conditions using realistic input (see more in
[Fog, 2023b, chapter 16.2]). It is not always possible to replicate the exact input and
environment as it will be in practice, but it is something developers should take into
account when writing a good benchmark.

2.7    Active Benchmarking
As you have seen in the previous sections, measuring performance is a complex task
with many pitfalls along the way. As human beings, we tend to welcome favorable
results and ignore unfavorable ones. This often leads to benchmarking done in a “run
and forget” style, with no additional analysis, and overlooking any potential problems.
Measurements done in this way are likely incomplete, misleading, or even erroneous.
Consider the following two scenarios:
  • Developer A on a team meeting: “If we add the final keyword to the class
    declaration across our entire C++ codebase, it will make our code 5% faster,
    with some tests showing up to 30% speedup.”
 38 For JMH, this is known as the Blackhole.consume().

  • Developer B on the next team meeting: “I looked closely at the performance
    impact of adding the final keyword to the class declarations. First, I performed
    longer tests and haven’t measured speedups larger than 5%. The initially
    observed 30% speedups were outliers caused by test instability. I also noticed
    that the two machines used for measurements have different configurations: while
    the CPUs are identical, one of the machines has faster memory modules. I reran
    the tests on the same machine and observed a performance difference within
    1%. I compared the generated machine code before and after the change and
    found no significant differences. Also, I compared the number of instructions
    executed, cache misses, page faults, context switches, etc., and haven’t found
    any anomalies. At this point, I concluded that the performance impact of the
    final keyword is negligible compared to other optimizations we could make.”

Benchmarking done by developer A was done in a passive way. The results were
presented without any technical explanation, and the performance impact was exagger-
ated. In contrast, developer B performed active benchmarking.39 She ensured proper
machine configuration, ran extensive testing, looked one level deeper, and collected
as many metrics as possible to support her conclusions. Her analysis explains the
underlying technical reason for the performance results she observed.

You should have a good intuition to spot suspicious benchmark results. Whenever
you see publications that present benchmark results that look too good to be true
and without any technical explanation, you should be skeptical. There is nothing
wrong with presenting the results of your measurements, but as John Ousterhout
said, “Performance measurements should be considered guilty until proven innocent.”
[Ousterhout, 2018] The best way to verify the results is through active benchmarking.
Active benchmarking requires much more effort than passive benchmarking, but it is
the only way to get reliable results.

Questions and Exercises
  1. Is it always safe to take a mean of a series of measurements to determine the
     running time of a program? What are the pitfalls?
  2. Suppose you’ve identified a performance bug that you’re now trying to fix in
     your development environment. How would you reduce the noise in the system
     to have more pronounced benchmarking results?
  3. Is it OK to track the overall performance of a program with function-level unit
     tests?
  4. Does your organization have a performance regression system in place? If yes,
     can it be improved? If not, think about the strategy of installing one. Take into
     consideration: what is changing and what isn’t (source code, compiler, hardware
     configuration, etc.), how often a change occurs, what is the measurement variance,
     what is the running time of the benchmark suite, and how many iterations you
     can run.

 39 A term coined by Brendan Gregg - https://www.brendangregg.com/activebenchmarking.html.

                                                                        Summary

Chapter Summary
 • Modern systems have nondeterministic performance. Eliminating nondeter-
   minism in a system is helpful for well-defined, stable performance tests, e.g.,
   microbenchmarks.
 • Measuring performance in production is required to assess how users perceive
   the responsiveness of your services. However, this requires dealing with noisy
   environments and using statistical methods for analyzing results.
 • It is beneficial to employ an automated performance tracking system to prevent
   performance regressions from leaking into production software. Such CI systems
   are supposed to run automated performance tests, visualize results, and alert on
   discovered performance anomalies.
 • Visualizing performance distributions helps compare performance results. It is a
   safe way of presenting performance results to a wide audience.
 • To benchmark execution time, engineers can use two different timers: the system-
   wide high-resolution timer and the Time Stamp Counter. The former is suitable
   for measuring events whose duration is more than a microsecond. The latter
   can be used for measuring short events with high accuracy.
 • Microbenchmarks are good for quick experiments, but you should always verify
   your ideas on a real application in practical conditions. Make sure that you are
   benchmarking the right code by checking performance profiles.
 • Always measure one level deeper, collect as many metrics as possible to support
   your conclusions, and be ready to explain the underlying technical reasons for
   the performance results you observe.

