
This chapter provides a brief summary of the critical CPU microarchitecture features
that have a direct impact on software performance. The goal of this chapter is not to
cover all the details and trade-offs of CPU architectures, which are already covered
extensively in the literature [Hennessy & Patterson, 2017], [Shen & Lipasti, 2013]. I
provide a recap of features that are present in modern processors to prepare the reader
for what comes next in the book.

3.1     Instruction Set Architecture
The instruction set architecture (ISA) is the contract between the software and the
hardware, which defines the rules of communication. Intel x86-64,40 Armv8-A, and
RISC-V are examples of current-day ISAs that are widely deployed. All of these are
64-bit architectures, i.e., all address computations use 64 bits. ISA developers and CPU
architects typically ensure that software or firmware conforming to the specification
will execute on any processor built using the specification. Widely deployed ISAs also
typically ensure backward compatibility such that code written for the GenX version
of a processor will continue to execute on GenX+i.

Most modern architectures can be classified as general-purpose register-based, load-
store architectures, such as RISC-V and ARM where the operands are explicitly
specified, and memory is accessed only using load and store instructions. The X86
ISA is a register-memory architecture, where operations can be performed on registers,
as well as memory operands. In addition to providing the basic functions in an
ISA such as load, store, control, and scalar arithmetic operations using integers and
floating-point, the widely deployed architectures continue to augment their ISAs
to support new computing paradigms. These include enhanced vector processing
instructions (e.g., Intel AVX2, AVX512, ARM SVE, RISC-V “V” vector extension)
and matrix/tensor instructions (Intel AMX, ARM SME). Applications that extensively
use these advanced instructions typically see large performance gains.

Modern CPUs support 32-bit and 64-bit precision for floating-point and integer
arithmetic operations. With the fast-evolving fields of machine learning and AI, the
industry has a renewed interest in alternative numeric formats to drive significant
performance improvements. Research has shown that machine learning models perform
just as well using fewer bits to represent variables, saving on both compute and memory
bandwidth. As a result, the majority of mainstream ISAs have recently added support
for lower precision data types such as 8-bit and 16-bit integer and floating-point types
(int8, fp8, fp16, bf16), in addition to the traditional 32-bit and 64-bit formats for
arithmetic operations.

  40 In the book I often write x86 for shortness, but I assume x86-64, which is a 64-bit version of the

x86 instruction set, first announced in 1999. Also, I use ARM to refer to the ISA, and Arm to refer
to the company.

                                                                       3.2   Pipelining

3.2    Pipelining
Pipelining is a foundational technique used to make CPUs fast, wherein multiple
instructions overlap during their execution. Pipelining in CPUs drew inspiration from
automotive assembly lines. The processing of instructions is divided into stages. The
stages operate in parallel, working on different parts of different instructions. DLX is
a relatively simple architecture designed by John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson
in 1994. As defined in [Hennessy & Patterson, 2017], it has a 5-stage pipeline which
consists of:
  1. Instruction fetch (IF)
  2. Instruction decode (ID)
  3. Execute (EXE)
  4. Memory access (MEM)
  5. Write back (WB)

Figure 3.1: Simple 5-stage pipeline diagram.

Figure 3.1 shows an ideal pipeline view of the 5-stage pipeline CPU. In cycle 1,
instruction x enters the IF stage of the pipeline. In the next cycle, as instruction x
moves to the ID stage, the next instruction in the program enters the IF stage, and
so on. Once the pipeline is full, as in cycle 5 above, all pipeline stages of the CPU
are busy working on different instructions. Without pipelining, the instruction x+1
couldn’t start its execution until after instruction x had finished its work.
Modern high-performance CPUs have multiple pipeline stages, often ranging from 10
to 20 (sometimes more), depending on the architecture and design goals. This involves
a much more complicated design than a simple 5-stage pipeline introduced earlier. For
example, the decode stage may be split into several new stages. We may also add new
stages before the execute stage to buffer decoded instructions and so on.
The throughput of a pipelined CPU is defined as the number of instructions that
complete and exit the pipeline per unit of time. The latency for any given instruction
is the total time through all the stages of the pipeline. Since all the stages of the
pipeline are linked together, each stage must be ready to move to the next instruction
in lockstep. The time required to move an instruction from one stage to the next
defines the basic machine cycle or clock for the CPU. The value chosen for the clock
for a given pipeline is defined by the slowest stage of the pipeline. CPU hardware
designers strive to balance the amount of work that can be done in a stage as this

directly affects the frequency of operation of the CPU.
In real implementations, pipelining introduces several constraints that limit the nicely-
flowing execution illustrated in Figure 3.1. Pipeline hazards prevent the ideal pipeline
behavior, resulting in stalls. The three classes of hazards are structural hazards, data
hazards, and control hazards. Luckily for the programmer, in modern CPUs, all classes
of hazards are handled by the hardware.
  • Structural hazards: are caused by resource conflicts, i.e., when there are two
    instructions competing for the same resource. An example of such a hazard is
    when two 32-bit addition instructions are ready to execute in the same cycle,
    but there is only one execution unit available in that cycle. In this case, we
    need to choose which one of the two instructions to execute and which one will
    be executed in the next cycle. To a large extent, they could be eliminated by
    replicating hardware resources, such as using multiple execution units, instruction
    decoders, multi-ported register files, etc. However, this could potentially become
    quite expensive in terms of silicon area and power.
  • Data hazards: are caused by data dependencies in the program and are
    classified into three types:
     A read-after-write (RAW) hazard requires a dependent read to execute after a
     write. It occurs when instruction x+1 reads a source before previous instruction
     x writes to the source, resulting in the wrong value being read. CPUs implement
     data forwarding from a later stage of the pipeline to an earlier stage (called
     “bypassing”) to mitigate the penalty associated with the RAW hazard. The idea
     is that results from instruction x can be forwarded to instruction x+1 before
     instruction x is fully completed. If we take a look at the example:
     R1 = R0 ADD 1
     R2 = R1 ADD 2

     There is a RAW dependency for register R1. If we take the value directly after
     the addition R0 ADD 1 is done (from the EXE pipeline stage), we don’t need to
     wait until the WB stage finishes (when the value will be written to the register
     file). Bypassing helps to save a few cycles. The longer the pipeline, the more
     effective bypassing becomes.
     A write-after-read (WAR) hazard requires a dependent write to execute after a
     read. It occurs when an instruction writes a register before an earlier instruction
     reads the source, resulting in the wrong new value being read. A WAR hazard
     is not a true dependency and can be eliminated by a technique called register
     renaming. It is a technique that abstracts logical registers from physical registers.
     CPUs support register renaming by keeping a large number of physical registers.
     Logical (architectural) registers, the ones that are defined by the ISA, are just
     aliases over a wider register file. With such decoupling of the architectural state,
     solving WAR hazards is simple: we just need to use a different physical register
     for the write operation. For example:
     ; machine code, WAR hazard                 ; after register renaming
     ; (architectural registers)                ; (physical registers)
     R1 = R0 ADD 1                   =>         R101 = R100 ADD 1
     R0 = R2 ADD 2                              R103 = R102 ADD 2

                                 3.3    Exploiting Instruction Level Parallelism (ILP)

      In the original assembly code, there is a WAR dependency for register R0. For
      the code on the left, we cannot reorder the execution of the instructions, because
      it could leave the wrong value in R1. However, we can leverage our large pool of
      physical registers to overcome this limitation. To do that we need to rename
      all the occurrences of the R0 register starting from the write operation (R0
      = R2 ADD 2) and below to use a free register. After renaming, we give these
      registers new names that correspond to physical registers, say R103. By renaming
      registers, we eliminated a WAR hazard in the initial code, and we can safely
      execute the two operations in any order.

      A write-after-write (WAW) hazard requires a dependent write to execute after
      a write. It occurs when an instruction writes to a register before an earlier
      instruction writes to the same register, resulting in the wrong value being stored.
      WAW hazards are also eliminated by register renaming, allowing both writes
      to execute in any order while preserving the correct final result. Below is an
      example of eliminating WAW hazards.

      ; machine code, WAW hazard                 ; after register renaming
      (architectural registers)                  (physical registers)
      R1 = R0 ADD 1                    =>        R101 = R100 ADD 1
      R2 = R1 SUB R3 ; RAW                       R102 = R101 SUB R103 ; RAW
      R1 = R0 MUL 3   ; WAW and WAR              R104 = R100 MUL 3

      You will see similar code in many production programs. In our example, R1
      keeps the temporary result of the ADD operation. Once the SUB instruction is
      complete, R1 is immediately reused to store the result of the MUL operation. The
      original code on the left features all three types of data hazards. There is a
      RAW dependency over R1 between ADD and SUB, and it must survive register
      renaming. Also, we have WAW and WAR hazards over the same R1 register for
      the MUL operation. Again, we need to rename registers to eliminate those two
      hazards. Notice that after register renaming we have a new destination register
      (R104) for the MUL operation. Now we can safely reorder MUL with the other two
      operations.

  • Control hazards: are caused due to changes in the program flow. They arise
    from pipelining branches and other instructions that change the program flow.
    The branch condition that determines the direction of the branch (taken vs. not
    taken) is resolved in the execute pipeline stage. As a result, the fetch of the next
    instruction cannot be pipelined unless the control hazard is eliminated. Tech-
    niques such as dynamic branch prediction and speculative execution described
    in the next section are used to mitigate control hazards.

3.3    Exploiting Instruction Level Parallelism (ILP)
Most instructions in a program lend themselves to be pipelined and executed in
parallel, as they are independent. Modern CPUs implement numerous additional
hardware features to exploit such instruction-level parallelism (ILP), i.e., parallelism
within a single stream of instructions. Working in concert with advanced compiler
techniques, these hardware features provide significant performance improvements.

3.3.1   Out-Of-Order (OOO) Execution
The pipeline example in Figure 3.1 shows all instructions moving through the different
stages of the pipeline in order, i.e., in the same order as they appear in the program, also
known as program order. Most modern CPUs support out-of-order (OOO) execution,
where sequential instructions can enter the execution stage in any arbitrary order only
limited by their dependencies and resource availability. CPUs with OOO execution
must still give the same result as if all instructions were executed in the program
order.
An instruction is called retired after it is finally executed, and its results are correct
and visible in the architectural state. To ensure correctness, CPUs must retire
all instructions in the program order. OOO execution is primarily used to avoid
underutilization of CPU resources due to stalls caused by dependencies, especially in
superscalar engines, which we will discuss shortly.

Figure 3.2: The concept of out-of-order execution.

Figure 3.2 illustrates the concept of out-of-order execution. Let’s assume that in-
struction x+1 cannot be executed during cycles 4 and 5 due to some conflict. An
in-order CPU would stall all subsequent instructions from entering the EXE pipeline
stage, so instruction x+2 would begin executing only at cycle 7. In a CPU with OOO
execution, an instruction can begin executing as long as it does not have any conflicts
(e.g., its inputs are available, the execution unit is not occupied, etc.). As you can
see on the diagram, instruction x+2 started executing before instruction x+1. The
instruction x+3 cannot enter the EXE stage at cycle 6, because it is already occupied
by instruction x+1. All instructions still retire in order, i.e., the instructions complete
the WB stage in the program order.
OOO execution usually brings large performance improvements over in-order execution.
However, it also introduces additional complexity and power consumption.
The process of reordering instructions is often called instruction scheduling. The goal
of scheduling is to issue instructions in such a way as to minimize pipeline hazards
and maximize the utilization of CPU resources. Instruction scheduling can be done at
compile time (static scheduling), or at runtime (dynamic scheduling). Let’s unpack
both options.

3.3.1.1 Static scheduling The Intel Itanium was an example of static scheduling.
With static scheduling of a superscalar, multi-execution unit machine, the scheduling

                                    3.3   Exploiting Instruction Level Parallelism (ILP)

is moved from the hardware to the compiler using a technique known as VLIW (Very
Long Instruction Word). The rationale is to simplify the hardware by requiring the
compiler to choose the right mix of instructions to keep the machine fully utilized.
Compilers can use techniques such as software pipelining and loop unrolling to look
farther ahead than can be reasonably supported by hardware structures to find the
right ILP.
The Intel Itanium never managed to become a success for a few reasons. One of
them was a lack of compatibility with x86 code. Another was the fact that it was
very difficult for compilers to schedule instructions in such a way as to keep the CPU
busy due to variable load latencies. The 64-bit extension of the x86 ISA (x86-64)
was introduced in the same time window by AMD, was compatible with IA-32 (the
32-bit version of the x86 ISA) and eventually became its real successor. The last Intel
Itanium processors were shipped in 2021.

3.3.1.2 Dynamic scheduling To overcome the problem with static scheduling,
modern processors use dynamic scheduling. The two most important algorithms for
dynamic scheduling are Scoreboarding41 and the Tomasulo algorithm.42
Scoreboarding was first implemented in the CDC6600 processor in the 1960s. Its
main drawback is that it not only preserves true dependencies (RAW), but also false
dependencies (WAW and WAR), and therefore it provides suboptimal ILP. False
dependencies are caused by the small number of architectural registers, which is
typically between 16 and 32 in modern ISAs. That is why all modern processors have
adopted the Tomasulo algorithm for dynamic scheduling. The Tomasulo algorithm
was invented in the 1960s by Robert Tomasulo and first implemented in the IBM360
Model 91.
To eliminate false dependencies, the Tomasulo algorithm makes use of register renaming,
which we discussed in the previous section. Because of that, performance is greatly
improved compared to scoreboarding. However, a sequence of instructions that carry
a RAW dependency, also known as a dependency chain, is still problematic for OOO
execution, because there is no increase in the ILP after register renaming since all the
RAW dependencies are preserved. Dependency chains are often found in loops (loop
carried dependency) where the current loop iteration depends on the results produced
on the previous iteration.
Other two key components for implementing dynamic scheduling are the Reorder
Buffer (ROB) and the Reservation Station (RS). The ROB is a circular buffer that
keeps track of the state of each instruction, and in modern processors, it has several
hundred entries. Typically, the size of the ROB determines how far ahead the hardware
can look for scheduling instructions independently. Instructions are inserted in the
ROB in program order, can execute out of order, and retire in program order. Register
renaming is done when instructions are placed in the ROB.
From the ROB, instructions are inserted in the RS, which has much fewer entries.
Once instructions are in the RS, they wait for their input operands to become available.
When inputs are available, instructions can be issued to the appropriate execution unit.
 41 Scoreboarding - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scoreboarding.
 42 Tomasulo algorithm - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomasulo_algorithm.

So instructions can be executed in any order once their operands become available
and are not tied to the program order any longer. Modern processors are becoming
wider (can execute many instructions in one cycle) and deeper (larger ROB, RS, and
other buffers), which demonstrates that there is a lot of potential to uncover more
ILP in production applications.

3.3.2   Superscalar Engines
Most modern CPUs are superscalar, i.e., they can issue more than one instruction in
any given cycle. Issue width is the maximum number of instructions that can be issued
during the same cycle (see Section 4.5). The typical issue width of a mainstream CPU
in 2024 ranges from 6 to 9. To ensure the right balance, such superscalar engines
also have more than one execution unit and/or pipelined execution units. CPUs
also combine superscalar capability with deep pipelines and out-of-order execution to
extract the maximum ILP for a given piece of software.

Figure 3.3: A pipeline diagram of a code executing in a 2-way superscalar CPU.

Figure 3.3 shows a pipeline diagram of a CPU that supports 2-wide issue. Notice
that two instructions can be processed in each stage of the pipeline every cycle. For
example, both instructions x and x+1 started their execution during cycle 3. This could
be two instructions of the same type (e.g., two additions) or two different instructions
(e.g., an addition and a branch). Superscalar processors replicate execution resources
to keep instructions in the pipeline flowing through without structural conflicts. For
instance, to support the decoding of two instructions simultaneously, we need to have
2 independent decoders.

3.3.3   Speculative Execution
As noted in the previous section, control hazards can cause significant performance
loss in a pipeline if instructions are stalled until the branch condition is resolved.
One technique to avoid this performance loss is hardware branch prediction. Using
this technique, a CPU predicts the likely target of branches and starts executing
instructions from the predicted path (known as speculative execution).
Let’s consider an example in Listing 3.1. For a processor to understand which function
it should execute next, it should know whether the condition a < b is false or true.
Without knowing that, the CPU waits until the result of the branch instruction is
determined, as shown in Figure 3.4a.

                                  3.3    Exploiting Instruction Level Parallelism (ILP)

Listing 3.1 Speculative execution
if (a < b)
  foo();
else
  bar();

                                     (a) No speculation

                (b) Speculative execution. Speculative work is marked with *.

Figure 3.4: The concept of speculative execution.

With speculative execution, the CPU guesses an outcome of the branch and initiates
processing instructions from the chosen path. Suppose a processor predicted that
condition a < b will be evaluated as true. It proceeded without waiting for the
branch outcome and speculatively called function foo (see Figure 3.4b). State changes
to the machine cannot be committed until the condition is resolved to ensure that
the architectural state of the machine is never impacted by speculatively executing
instructions.
In the example above, the branch instruction compares two scalar values, which is
fast. But in reality, a branch instruction can depend on a value loaded from memory,
which can take hundreds of cycles.
If the prediction turns out to be correct, it saves a lot of cycles. However, sometimes
the prediction is incorrect, and the function bar should be called instead. In such a
case, the results from the speculative execution must be squashed and thrown away.
This is called the branch misprediction penalty, which we will discuss in Section 4.8.
An instruction that is executed speculatively is marked as such in the ROB. Once
it is not speculative any longer, it can retire in program order. Here is where the
architectural state is committed, and architectural registers are updated. Because the
results of the speculative instructions are not committed, it is easy to roll back when
a misprediction happens.

3.3.4   Branch Prediction
As we just have seen, correct predictions greatly improve execution as they allow a
CPU to make forward progress without having results of previous instructions available.
However, bad speculation often incurs costly performance penalties. Modern CPUs
employ sophisticated dynamic branch prediction mechanisms that provide very high
accuracy and can adapt to dynamic changes in branch behavior. There are three types
of branches which could be handled in a special way:
  • Unconditional jumps and direct calls: they are the easiest to predict as
    they are always taken and go in the same direction every time.
  • Conditional branches: they have two potential outcomes: taken or not taken.
    Taken branches can go forward or backward. Forward conditional branches are
    usually generated for if-else statements, which have a high chance of not being
    taken, as they frequently represent error-checking code. Backward conditional
    jumps are frequently seen in loops and are used to go to the next iteration of a
    loop; such branches are usually taken.
  • Indirect calls and jumps: they have many targets. An indirect jump or
    indirect call can be generated for a switch statement, a function pointer, or a
    virtual function call. A return from a function deserves attention because it
    has many potential targets as well.
Most prediction algorithms are based on previous outcomes of the branch. The core of
the branch prediction unit (BPU) is a branch target buffer (BTB), which caches the
target addresses for every branch. Prediction algorithms consult the BTB every cycle
to generate the next address from which to fetch instructions. The CPU uses that
new address to fetch the next block of instructions. If no branches are identified in
the current fetch block, the next address to fetch will be the next sequential aligned
fetch block (fall through).
Unconditional branches do not require prediction; we just need to look up the target
address in the BTB. Every cycle the BPU needs to generate the next address from
which to fetch instructions to avoid pipeline stalls. We could have extracted the
address just from the instruction encoding itself, but then we have to wait until the
decode stage is over, which will introduce a bubble in the pipeline and make things
slower. So, the next fetch address has to be determined at the time when the branch
is fetched.
For conditional branches, we first need to predict whether the branch will be taken
or not. If it is not taken, then we fall through and there is no need to look up the
target. Otherwise, we look up the target address in the BTB. Conditional branches
usually account for the biggest portion of total branches and are the main source of
misprediction penalties in production software. For indirect branches, we need to
select one of the possible targets, but the prediction algorithm can be very similar to
conditional branches.
All prediction mechanisms try to exploit two important principles, which are similar
to what we will discuss with caches later:
  • Temporal correlation: the way a branch resolves may be a good predictor
    of the way it will resolve at the next execution. This is also known as local
    correlation.

                                                               3.4   SIMD Multiprocessors

   • Spatial correlation: several adjacent branches may resolve in a highly cor-
     related manner (a preferred path of execution). This is also known as global
     correlation.
The best accuracy is often achieved by leveraging local and global correlations together.
So, not only do we look at the outcome history of the current branch, but also we
correlate it with the outcomes of adjacent branches.
Another common technique used is called hybrid prediction. The idea is that some
branches have biased behavior. For example, if a conditional branch goes in one
direction 99.9% of the time, there is no need to use a complex predictor and pollute
its data structures. A much simpler mechanism can be used instead. Another example
is a loop branch. If a branch has loop behavior, then it can be predicted using a
dedicated loop predictor, which will remember the number of iterations the loop
typically executes.
Today, state-of-the-art prediction is dominated by TAGE-like [Seznec & Michaud, 2006]
predictors. Championship43 branch predictors make less than 3 mispredictions per
1000 instructions. Modern CPUs routinely reach a >95% prediction rate on most
workloads.

3.4    SIMD Multiprocessors
Another technique to facilitate parallel processing is called Single Instruction Multiple
Data (SIMD), which is used in nearly all high-performance processors. As the name
indicates, in a SIMD processor, a single instruction operates on many data elements
in a single cycle using many independent functional units. Operations on vectors and
matrices lend themselves well to SIMD architectures as every element of a vector or
matrix can be processed using the same instruction. A SIMD architecture enables
more efficient processing of a large amount of data and works best for data-parallel
applications that involve vector operations.
Figure 3.5 shows scalar and SIMD execution modes for the code in Listing 3.2. In a
traditional Single Instruction Single Data (SISD) mode, also known as scalar mode, the
addition operation is separately applied to each element of arrays a and b. However, in
SIMD mode, addition is applied to multiple elements at the same time. If we target a
CPU architecture that has execution units capable of performing operations on 256-bit
vectors, we can process four double-precision elements with a single instruction. This
leads to issuing 4x fewer instructions and can potentially gain a 4x speedup over four
scalar computations.

Listing 3.2 SIMD execution
double *a, *b, *c;
for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i) {
  c[i] = a[i] + b[i];
}

For regular integer SISD instructions, processors utilize general-purpose registers.
Similarly, for SIMD instructions, CPUs have a set of SIMD registers to keep the
 43 5th Championship Branch Prediction competition - https://jilp.org/cbp2016.

Figure 3.5: Example of scalar and SIMD operations.

data loaded from memory and store the intermediate results of computations. In
our example, two regions of 256 bits of contiguous data corresponding to arrays a
and b will be loaded from memory and stored in two separate vector registers. Next,
the element-wise addition will be done and the result will be stored in a new 256-bit
vector register. Finally, the result will be written from the vector register to a 256-bit
memory region corresponding to array c. Note, that the data elements can be either
integers or floating-point numbers.
A vector execution unit is logically divided into lanes. In the context of SIMD, a
lane refers to a distinct data pathway within the SIMD execution unit and processes
one element of the vector. In our example, each lane processes 64-bit elements
(double-precision), so there will be 4 lanes in a 256-bit register.
Most of the popular CPU architectures feature vector instructions, including x86,
PowerPC, ARM, and RISC-V. In 1996 Intel released MMX, a SIMD instruction set,
that was designed for multimedia applications. Following MMX, Intel introduced new
instruction sets with added capabilities and increased vector size: SSE, AVX, AVX2,
and AVX-512. ARM has optionally supported the 128-bit NEON instruction set in
various versions of its architecture. In version 8 (aarch64), this support was made
mandatory, and new instructions were added.
As the new instruction sets became available, work began to make them usable
to software engineers. The software changes required to exploit SIMD instructions
are known as code vectorization. Initially, SIMD instructions were programmed in
assembly. Later, special compiler intrinsics, which are small functions providing a
one-to-one mapping to SIMD instructions, were introduced. Today all the major
compilers support autovectorization for the popular processors, i.e., they can generate
SIMD instructions straight from high-level code written in C/C++, Java, Rust, and
other languages.
To enable code to run on systems that support different vector lengths, Arm introduced
the SVE instruction set. Its defining characteristic is the concept of scalable vectors:

                                                3.5   Exploiting Thread-Level Parallelism

their length is unknown at compile time. With SVE, there is no need to port software
to every possible vector length. Users don’t have to recompile the source code of
their applications to leverage wider vectors when they become available in newer CPU
generations. Another example of scalable vectors is the RISC-V V extension (RVV),
which was ratified in late 2021. Some implementations support quite wide (2048-bit)
vectors, and up to eight can be grouped together to yield 16384-bit vectors, which
greatly reduces the number of instructions executed. At each loop iteration, SVE
code typically does ptr += number_of_lanes, where number_of_lanes is not known
at compile time. ARM SVE provides special instructions for such length-dependent
operations, while RVV enables a programmer to query/set the number_of_lanes.
Going back to the example in Listing 3.2, if N equals 5, and we have a 256-bit vector,
we cannot process all the elements in a single iteration. We can process the first four
elements using a single SIMD instruction, but the 5th element needs to be processed
individually. This is known as the loop remainder. Loop remainder is a portion of
a loop that must process fewer elements than the vector width, requiring additional
scalar code to handle the leftover elements. Scalable vector ISA extensions do not
have this problem, as they can process any number of elements in a single instruction.
Another solution to the loop remainder problem is to use masking, which allows
selectively enabling or disabling SIMD lanes based on a condition.
Also, CPUs increasingly accelerate the matrix multiplications often used in machine
learning. Intel’s AMX extension, supported in server processors since 2023, multiplies
8-bit matrices of shape 16x64 and 64x16, accumulating into a 32-bit 16x16 matrix. By
contrast, the unrelated but identically named AMX extension in Apple CPUs, as well
as ARM’s SME extension, compute outer products of a row and column, respectively
stored in special 512-bit registers or scalable vectors.
Initially, SIMD was driven by multimedia applications and scientific computations, but
later found uses in many other domains. Over time, the set of operations supported in
SIMD instruction sets has steadily increased. In addition to straightforward arithmetic
as shown in Figure 3.5, newer use cases of SIMD include:
  • String processing: finding characters, validating UTF-8,44 parsing JSON45 and
    CSV;46
  • Hashing,47 random generation,48 cryptography(AES);
  • Columnar databases (bit packing, filtering, joins);
  • Sorting built-in types (VQSort,49 QuickSelect);
  • Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence (speeding up PyTorch, TensorFlow).

3.5    Exploiting Thread-Level Parallelism
Techniques described previously rely on the available parallelism in a program to speed
up execution. In addition to that, CPUs support techniques to exploit parallelism
across processes and/or threads executing on a CPU. Next, we will discuss three
 44 UTF-8 validation - https://github.com/rusticstuff/simdutf8
 45 Parsing JSON - https://github.com/simdjson/simdjson
 46 Parsing CSV - https://github.com/geofflangdale/simdcsv
 47 SIMD hashing - https://github.com/google/highwayhash
 48 Random generation - abseil library
 49 Sorting - VQSort

techniques to exploit Thread-Level Parallelism (TLP): multicore systems, simultaneous
multithreading, and hybrid architectures. Such techniques make it possible to eke
out the most efficiency from the available hardware resources and to improve the
throughput of the system.

3.5.1   Multicore Systems
As processor architects began to reach the practical limitations of semiconductor
design and fabrication, the GHz race slowed down and designers had to focus on
other innovations to improve CPU performance. One of the key directions was the
multicore design that attempted to increase core counts for each generation. The idea
was to replicate multiple processor cores on a single chip and let them serve different
programs at the same time. For example, one of the cores could run a web browser,
another core could render a video, and yet another could play music, all at the same
time. For a server machine, requests from different clients could be processed on
separate cores, which could greatly increase the throughput of such a system.
The first consumer-focused dual-core processor was the Intel Core 2 Duo, released
in 2005, which was followed by the AMD Athlon X2 architecture released later that
same year. Multicore systems caused many software components to be redesigned and
affected the way we write code. These days nearly all processors in consumer-facing
devices are multicore CPUs. At the time of writing this book, high-end laptops contain
more than ten physical cores and server processors contain more than 100 cores on a
single socket.
It may sound very impressive, but we cannot add cores infinitely. First of all, each
core generates heat when it’s working and safely dissipating that heat from the cores
through the processor package remains a challenge. This means that when more cores
are running, heat can quickly exceed cooling capability. In such a situation, multicore
processors will reduce clock speeds. This is one of the reasons you can see server chips
with a large number of cores having much lower frequencies than processors that go
into laptops and desktops.
Cores in a multicore system are connected to each other and to shared resources, such
as last-level cache and memory controllers. Such a communication channel is called an
interconnect, which frequently has either a ring or a mesh topology. Another challenge
for CPU designers is to keep the machine balanced as the core count grows. When
you replicate cores, some resources remain shared, for example, memory buses and
last-level cache. This results in diminishing returns to performance as cores are added,
unless you also address the throughput of other shared resources, e.g., interconnect
bandwidth, last-level cache size and bandwidth, and memory bandwidth. Shared
resources frequently become the source of performance issues in a multicore system.

3.5.2   Simultaneous Multithreading
A more sophisticated approach to improve multithreaded performance is Simultaneous
Multithreading (SMT). Very frequently people use the term Hyperthreading to describe
the same thing. The goal of the technique is to fully utilize the available width of
the CPU pipeline. SMT allows multiple software threads to run simultaneously on
the same physical core using shared resources. More precisely, instructions from

                                             3.5   Exploiting Thread-Level Parallelism

multiple software threads execute concurrently in the same cycle. Those don’t have
to be threads from the same process; they can be completely different programs that
happened to be scheduled on the same physical core.
An example of execution on a non-SMT and a 2-way SMT (SMT2) processor is shown
in Figure 3.6. In both cases, the width of the processor pipeline is four, and each slot
represents an opportunity to issue a new instruction. 100% machine utilization is when
there are no unused slots, which never happens in real workloads. It’s easy to see that
for the non-SMT case, there are many unused slots, so the available resources are not
utilized well. This may happen for a variety of reasons. For instance, in cycle 3, thread
1 cannot make forward progress because all instructions are waiting for their inputs
to become available. Non-SMT processors would simply stall, while SMT-enabled
processors take this opportunity to schedule useful work from another thread. The
goal here is to occupy unused slots by another thread to improve hardware utilization
and multithreaded performance.

Figure 3.6: Execution on a 4-wide non-SMT and a 4-wide SMT2 processor.

With an SMT2 implementation, each physical core is represented by two logical cores,
which are visible to the operating system as two independent processors available to
take work. Consider a situation when we have 16 software threads ready to run, and
only 8 physical cores. In a non-SMT system, only 8 threads will run at the same time,
while with SMT2 we can execute all 16 threads simultaneously. In another hypothetical
situation, if two programs run on an SMT-enabled core and each consistently utilizes
only two out of four available slots, then there is a high chance they will run as fast as
if they were running alone on that physical core.
Although two programs run on the same processor core, they are completely sepa-
rated from each other. In an SMT-enabled processor, even though instructions are
mixed, they have different contexts which helps preserve the correctness of execution.
To support SMT, a CPU must replicate the architectural state (program counter,
registers) to maintain thread context. Other CPU resources can be shared. In a
typical implementation, cache resources are dynamically shared amongst the hardware

threads. Resources to track OOO and speculative execution can either be replicated
or partitioned.
In an SMT2 core, both logical cores are truly running at the same time. In the
CPU Frontend, they fetch instructions in an alternating order (every cycle or a few
cycles). In the backend, each cycle a processor selects instructions for execution from
all threads. Instruction execution is mixed as the processor dynamically schedules
execution units among both threads.
So, SMT is a very flexible setup that makes it possible to recover unused CPU issue
slots. SMT provides equal single-thread performance, in addition to its benefits for
multiple threads. Modern CPUs that choose to support SMT, usually implement
two-way (SMT2), and sometimes four-way (SMT4) SMT.
SMT has its own disadvantages as well. Since some resources are shared among the
logical cores, they could eventually compete to use those resources. The most likely
SMT penalty is caused by competition for L1 and L2 caches. Since they are shared
between two logical cores, they could lack space in caches and force eviction of the
data that will be used by another thread in the future.
SMT brings a considerable burden on software developers as it makes it harder to
predict and measure the performance of an application that runs on an SMT core.
Imagine you’re running performance-critical code on an SMT core, and suddenly the
OS puts another demanding job on a sibling logical core. Your code nearly maxes
out the resources of the machine, and now you need to share them with someone
else. This problem is especially pronounced in a cloud environment when you cannot
predict whether your application will have noisy neighbors or not.
There is also a security concern with certain simultaneous multithreading implemen-
tations. Researchers showed that some earlier implementations had a vulnerability
through which one application could steal critical information (like cryptographic keys)
from another application that runs on the sibling logical core of the same processor
by monitoring its cache use. We will not dig deeper into this topic since hardware
security is outside the scope of this book.

3.5.3   Hybrid Architectures
Computer architects also developed a hybrid CPU design in which two (or more) types
of cores are put in the same processor. Typically, more powerful cores are coupled with
relatively slower cores to address different goals. In such a system, big cores are used
for latency-sensitive tasks and small cores provide reduced power consumption. But
also, both types of cores can be utilized at the same time to improve multithreaded
performance. All cores have access to the same memory, so workloads can migrate
from big to small cores and back on the fly. The intention is to create a multicore
processor that can adapt better to dynamic computing needs and use less power. For
example, video games have portions of single-threaded bursty execution as well as
portions of work that can be scaled to many cores.
The first mainstream hybrid architecture was Arm’s big.LITTLE, which was introduced
in October 2011. Other vendors followed this approach. Apple introduced its M1
chip in 2020 which has four high-performance “Firestorm” and four energy-efficient

“Icestorm” cores. Intel introduced its Alder Lake hybrid architecture in 2021 with
eight P- and eight E-cores in the top configuration.
Hybrid architectures combine the best sides of both core types, but they come with
their own set of challenges. First of all, it requires cores to be fully ISA-compatible,
i.e., they should be able to execute the same set of instructions. Otherwise, scheduling
becomes restricted. For example, if a big core features some fancy instructions that
are not available on small cores, then you can only assign big cores to run workloads
that use such instructions. That’s why usually vendors use the “greatest common
denominator” approach when choosing the ISA for a hybrid processor.
Even with ISA-compatible cores, scheduling becomes challenging. Different types
of workloads call for a specific scheduling scheme, e.g., bursty execution vs. steady
execution, low IPC vs. high IPC,50 low importance vs. high importance, etc. It
becomes non-trivial very quickly. Here are a few considerations for optimal scheduling:
   • Leverage small cores to conserve power. Do not wake up big cores for background
     work.
   • Recognize candidates (low importance, low IPC) for offloading to smaller cores.
     Similarly, promote high importance, high IPC tasks to big cores.
   • When assigning a new task, use an idle big core first. In the case of SMT, use
     big cores with both logical threads idle. After that, use idle small cores. After
     that, use sibling logical threads of big cores.
From a programmer’s perspective, no code changes are needed to make use of hybrid
systems. This approach became very popular in client-facing devices, especially in
smartphones.

3.6    Memory Hierarchy
To effectively utilize all the hardware resources provisioned in a CPU, the machine
needs to be fed with the right data at the right time. Failing to do so requires fetching
a variable from the main memory, which takes around 100 ns. From a CPU perspective,
it is a very long time. Understanding the memory hierarchy is critically important to
delivering the performance capabilities of a CPU. Most programs exhibit the property
of locality: they don’t access all code or data uniformly. A CPU memory hierarchy is
built on two fundamental properties:
   • Temporal locality: when a given memory location is accessed, the same
     location will likely be accessed again soon. Ideally, we want this information to
     be in the cache next time we need it.
   • Spatial locality: when a given memory location is accessed, nearby locations
     will likely be accessed soon. This refers to placing related data close to each
     other. When a program reads a single byte from memory, typically, a larger
     chunk of memory (a cache line) is fetched because very often, the program will
     require that data soon.
This section provides a summary of the key attributes of memory hierarchy systems
supported on modern CPUs.
 50 IPC - Instructions Per Cycle, see Section 4.3.

3.6.1     Cache Hierarchy
A cache is the first level of the memory hierarchy for any request (for code or data)
issued from the CPU pipeline. Ideally, the pipeline performs best with an infinite cache
with the smallest access latency. In reality, the access time for any cache increases as
a function of the size. Therefore, the cache is organized as a hierarchy of small, fast
storage blocks closest to the execution units, backed up by larger, slower blocks. A
particular level of the cache hierarchy can be used exclusively for code (instruction
cache, I-cache) or for data (data cache, D-cache), or shared between code and data
(unified cache). Furthermore, some levels of the hierarchy can be private to a particular
core, while other levels can be shared among cores.
Caches are organized as blocks with a defined size, also known as cache lines. The
typical cache line size in modern CPUs is 64 bytes. However, the notable exception
here is the L2 cache in Apple processors (such as M1, M2, and later), which operates
on 128B cache lines. Caches closest to the execution pipeline typically range in size
from 32 KB to 128 KB. Mid-level caches tend to have 1MB and above. Last-level
caches in modern CPUs can be tens or even hundreds of megabytes.

3.6.1.1 Placement of Data within the Cache. The address for a request is
used to access the cache. In direct-mapped caches, a given block address can appear
only in one location in the cache and is defined by a mapping function shown below.
Dirrect-mapped caches are relatively easy to build and have fast access time, however,
they have a high miss rate.
                                                       Cache Size
                 Number of Blocks in the Cache =
                                                     Cache Block Size
 Direct mapped location = (block address) mod (Number of Blocks in the Cache )

In a fully associative cache, a given block can be placed in any location in the cache.
This approach involves high hardware complexity and slow access time, thus considered
impractical for most use cases.
An intermediate option between direct mapping and fully associative mapping is a
set-associative mapping. In such a cache, the blocks are organized as sets, typically
each set containing 2, 4, 8, or 16 blocks. A given address is first mapped to a set.
Within a set, the address can be placed anywhere, among the blocks in that set. A
cache with m blocks per set is described as an m-way set-associative cache. The
formulas for a set-associative cache are:
                                           Number of Blocks in the Cache
        Number of Sets in the Cache =
                                        Number of Blocks per Set (associativity)
Set (m-way) associative location = (block address) mod (Number of Sets in the Cache)

Consider an example of an L1 cache, whose size is 32 KB with 64 bytes cache lines,
64 sets, and 8 ways. The total number of cache lines in such a cache is 32 KB / 64
bytes = 512 lines. A new line can only be inserted in its appropriate set (one of
the 64 sets). Once the set is determined, a new line can go to one of the 8 ways in
this set. Similarly, when you later search for this cache line, you determine the set
first, and then you only need to examine up to 8 ways in the set.

Here is another example of the cache organization of the Apple M1 processor. The
L1 data cache inside each performance core can store 128 KB, has 256 sets with 8
ways in each set, and operates on 64-byte lines. Performance cores form a cluster and
share the L2 cache, which can keep 12 MB, is 12-way set-associative, and operates on
128-byte lines. [Apple, 2024]

3.6.1.2 Finding Data in the Cache. Every block in the m-way set-associative
cache has an address tag associated with it. In addition, the tag also contains state bits
such as a bit to indicate whether the data is valid. Tags can also contain additional
bits to indicate access information, sharing information, etc.

Figure 3.7: Address organization for cache lookup.

Figure 3.7 shows how the address generated from the pipeline is used to check the
caches. The lowest order address bits define the offset within a given block; the block
offset bits (5 bits for 32-byte cache lines, 6 bits for 64-byte cache lines). The set is
selected using the index bits based on the formulas described above. Once the set is
selected, the tag bits are used to compare against all the tags in that set. If one of
the tags matches the tag of the incoming request and the valid bit is set, a cache hit
results. The data associated with that block entry (read out of the data array of the
cache in parallel to the tag lookup) is provided to the execution pipeline. A cache
miss occurs in cases where the tag is not a match.

3.6.1.3 Managing Misses. When a cache miss occurs, the cache controller must
select a block in the cache to be replaced to allocate the address that incurred the
miss. For a direct-mapped cache, since the new address can be allocated only in a
single location, the previous entry mapping to that location is deallocated, and the
new entry is installed in its place. In a set-associative cache, since the new cache block
can be placed in any of the blocks of the set, a replacement algorithm is required.
The typical replacement algorithm used is the LRU (least recently used) policy, where
the block that was least recently accessed is evicted to make room for the new data.
Another alternative is to randomly select one of the blocks as the victim block.

3.6.1.4 Managing Writes. Write accesses to caches are less frequent than data
reads. Handling writes in caches is harder, and CPU implementations use various
techniques to handle this complexity. Software developers should pay special attention
to the various write caching flows supported by the hardware to ensure the best
performance of their code.
CPU designs use two basic mechanisms to handle writes that hit in the cache:
   • In a write-through cache, hit data is written to both the block in the cache and
     to the next lower level of the hierarchy.

   • In a write-back cache, hit data is only written to the cache. Subsequently, lower
     levels of the hierarchy contain stale data. The state of the modified line is
     tracked through a dirty bit in the tag. When a modified cache line is eventually
     evicted from the cache, a write-back operation forces the data to be written back
     to the next lower level.
Cache misses on write operations can be handled in two ways:
   • In a write-allocate cache, the data for the missed location is loaded into the cache
     from the lower level of the hierarchy, and the write operation is subsequently
     handled like a write hit.
   • If the cache uses a no-write-allocate policy, the cache miss transaction is sent
     directly to the lower levels of the hierarchy, and the block is not loaded into the
     cache.
Out of these options, most designs typically choose to implement a write-back cache
with a write-allocate policy as both of these techniques try to convert subsequent
write transactions into cache hits, without additional traffic to the lower levels of the
hierarchy. Write-through caches typically use the no-write-allocate policy.

3.6.1.5 Other Cache Optimization Techniques. For a programmer, under-
standing the behavior of the cache hierarchy is critical to extracting performance from
any application. From the perspective of the CPU pipeline, the latency to access any
request is given by the following formula that can be applied recursively to all the
levels of the cache hierarchy up to the main memory:

        Average Access Latency = Hit Time + Miss Rate × Miss Penalty

Hardware designers take on the challenge of reducing the hit time and miss penalty
through many novel micro-architecture techniques. Fundamentally, cache misses stall
the pipeline and hurt performance. The miss rate for any cache is highly dependent
on the cache architecture (block size, associativity) and the software running on the
machine.

3.6.1.6 Hardware and Software Prefetching. One method to avoid cache
misses and subsequent stalls is to prefetch data into caches prior to when the pipeline
demands it. The assumption is the time to handle the miss penalty can be mostly
hidden if the prefetch request is issued sufficiently ahead in the pipeline. Most CPUs
provide implicit hardware-based prefetching that is complemented by explicit software
prefetching that programmers can control.
Hardware prefetchers observe the behavior of a running application and initiate
prefetching on repetitive patterns of cache misses. Hardware prefetching can automat-
ically adapt to the dynamic behavior of an application, such as varying data sets, and
does not require support from an optimizing compiler. Also, the hardware prefetching
works without the overhead of additional address generation and prefetch instructions.
However, hardware prefetching works for a limited set of commonly used data access
patterns.
Software memory prefetching complements prefetching done by hardware. Developers
can specify which memory locations are needed ahead of time via dedicated hardware

instruction (see Section 8.5). Compilers can also automatically add prefetch instruc-
tions into the code to request data before it is required. Prefetch techniques need
to balance between demand and prefetch requests to guard against prefetch traffic
slowing down demand traffic.

3.6.2    Main Memory
Main memory is the next level of the hierarchy, downstream from the caches. Requests
to load and store data are initiated by the Memory Controller Unit (MCU). In the past,
this circuit was located in the northbridge chip on the motherboard. But nowadays,
most processors have this component embedded, so the CPU has a dedicated memory
bus connecting it to the main memory.
Main memory uses DRAM (Dynamic Random Access Memory) technology that
supports large capacities at reasonable cost points. When comparing DRAM modules,
people usually look at memory density and memory speed, along with its price of
course. Memory density defines the capacity of the module measured in GB. Obviously,
the more available memory the better as it is a precious resource used by the OS and
applications.
The performance of the main memory is described by latency and bandwidth. Memory
latency is the time elapsed between the memory access request being issued and when
the data is available to use by the CPU. Memory bandwidth defines how many bytes
can be fetched per some period of time, and is usually measured in gigabytes per
second.

3.6.2.1 DDR (Double Data Rate) is the predominant DRAM technology sup-
ported by most CPUs. Historically, DRAM bandwidths have improved every generation
while the DRAM latencies have stayed the same or increased. Table 3.1 shows the top
data rate, peak bandwidth, and the corresponding reading latency for the last three
generations of DDR technologies. The data rate is measured in millions of transfers
per second (MT/s). The latencies shown in this table correspond to the latency in the
DRAM device itself. Typically, the latencies as seen from the CPU pipeline (cache
miss on a load to use) are higher (in the 50ns-150ns range) due to additional latencies
and queuing delays incurred in the cache controllers, memory controllers, and on-die
interconnects. You can see an example of measuring observed memory latency and
bandwidth in Section 4.10.
Table 3.1: Performance characteristics for the last three generations of DDR technologies.

                                                       Peak
     DDR                       Highest Data          Bandwidth         In-device Read
   Generation       Year       Rate(MT/s)             (GB/s)             Latency(ns)
        DDR3        2007            2133                17.1                 10.3
        DDR4        2014            3200                25.6                 12.5
        DDR5        2020            6400                51.2                  14

It is worth mentioning that DRAM chips require their memory cells to be refreshed
periodically. This is because the bit value is stored as the presence of an electric

charge on a tiny capacitor, so it can lose its charge over time. To prevent this, there
is special circuitry that reads each cell and writes it back, effectively restoring the
capacitor’s charge. While a DRAM chip is in its refresh procedure, it is not serving
memory access requests.

A DRAM module is organized as a set of DRAM chips. Memory rank is a term that
describes how many sets of DRAM chips exist on a module. For example, a single-rank
(1R) memory module contains one set of DRAM chips. A dual-rank (2R) memory
module has two sets of DRAM chips, therefore doubling the capacity of a single-rank
module. Likewise, there are quad-rank (4R) and octa-rank (8R) memory modules
available for purchase.

Each rank consists of multiple DRAM chips. Memory width defines how wide the bus
of each DRAM chip is. And since each rank is 64 bits wide (or 72 bits wide for ECC
RAM), it also defines the number of DRAM chips present within the rank. Memory
width can be one of three values: x4, x8, or x16, and defines how wide is the bus
that goes to each chip. As an example, Figure 3.8 shows the organization of a 2Rx16
dual-rank DRAM DDR4 module, with a total of 2GB capacity. There are four chips
in each rank, with a 16-bit wide bus. Combined, the four chips provide 64-bit output.
The two ranks are selected one at a time through a rank-select signal.

Figure 3.8: Organization of a 2Rx16 dual-rank DRAM DDR4 module with a total capacity
                                        of 2GB.

There is no direct answer as to whether the performance of single-rank or dual-rank is
better as it depends on the type of application. Single-rank modules generally produce
less heat and are less likely to fail. Also, multi-rank modules require a rank select
signal to switch from one rank to another, which needs additional clock cycles and
may increase the access latency. On the other hand, if a rank is not accessed, it can
go through its refresh cycles in parallel while other ranks are busy. As soon as the
previous rank completes data transmission, the next rank can immediately start its
transmission.

Going further, we can install multiple DRAM modules in a system to not only increase
memory capacity but also memory bandwidth. Setups with multiple memory channels
are used to scale up the communication speed between the memory controller and the
DRAM.
A system with a single memory channel has a 64-bit wide data bus between the DRAM
and memory controller. The multi-channel architectures increase the width of the
memory bus, allowing DRAM modules to be accessed simultaneously. For example,
the dual-channel architecture expands the width of the memory data bus from 64
bits to 128 bits, doubling the available bandwidth, see Figure 3.9. Notice, that each
memory module, is still a 64-bit device, but we connect them differently. It is very
typical nowadays for server machines to have four or eight memory channels.

Figure 3.9: Organization of a dual-channel DRAM setup.

Alternatively, you could also encounter setups with duplicated memory controllers.
For example, a processor may have two integrated memory controllers, each of them
capable of supporting several memory channels. The two controllers are independent
and only view their own slice of the total physical memory address space.
We can do a quick calculation to determine the maximum memory bandwidth for a
given memory technology, using the simple formula below:
            Max. Memory Bandwidth = Data Rate × Bytes per cycle

For example, for a single-channel DDR4 configuration with a data rate of 2400 MT/s
and 64 bits (8 bytes) per transfer, the maximum bandwidth equals 2400 * 8 = 19.2
GB/s. Dual-channel or dual memory controller setups double the bandwidth to 38.4
GB/s. Remember though, those numbers are theoretical maximums that assume that
a data transfer will occur at each memory clock cycle, which in fact never happens in
practice. So, when measuring actual memory speed, you will always see a value lower
than the maximum theoretical transfer bandwidth.
To enable multi-channel configuration, you need to have a CPU and motherboard
that support such an architecture and install an even number of identical memory

modules in the correct memory slots on the motherboard. The quickest way to check
the setup on Windows is by running a hardware identification utility like CPU-Z or
HwInfo; on Linux, you can use the dmidecode command. Alternatively, you can run
memory bandwidth benchmarks like Intel MLC or Stream.
To make use of multiple memory channels in a system, there is a technique called
interleaving. It spreads adjacent addresses within a page across multiple memory
devices. An example of a 2-way interleaving for sequential memory accesses is shown
in Figure 3.10. As before, we have a dual-channel memory configuration (channels A
and B) with two independent memory controllers. Modern processors interleave per
four cache lines (256 bytes), i.e., the first four adjacent cache lines go to channel A,
and then the next set of four cache lines go to channel B.

Figure 3.10: 2-way interleaving for sequential memory access.

Without interleaving, consecutive adjacent accesses would be sent to the same memory
controller, not utilizing the second available controller. In contrast, interleaving
enables hardware parallelism to better utilize available memory bandwidth. For most
workloads, performance is maximized when all the channels are populated as it spreads
a single memory region across as many DRAM modules as possible.
While increased memory bandwidth is generally good, it does not always translate
into better system performance and is highly dependent on the application. On the
other hand, it’s important to watch out for available and utilized memory bandwidth,
because once it becomes the primary bottleneck, the application stops scaling, i.e.,
adding more cores doesn’t make it run faster.

3.6.2.2 GDDR and HBM Besides multi-channel DDR, there are other technolo-
gies that target workloads where higher memory bandwidth is required to achieve
greater performance. Technologies such as GDDR (Graphics DDR) and HBM (High
Bandwidth Memory) are the most notable ones. They find their use in high-end
graphics, high-performance computing such as climate modeling, molecular dynamics,
and physics simulation, but also autonomous driving, and of course, AI/ML. They are
a natural fit there because such applications require moving large amounts of data
very quickly.

                                                                  3.7   Virtual Memory

GDDR was primarily designed for graphics and nowadays it is used on virtually every
high-performance graphics card. While GDDR shares some characteristics with DDR,
it is also quite different. While DRAM DDR is designed for lower latencies, GDDR
is built for much higher bandwidth, because it is located in the same package as the
processor chip itself. Similar to DDR, the GDDR interface transfers two 32-bit words
(64 bits in total) per clock cycle. The latest GDDR6X standard can achieve up to 168
GB/s bandwidth, operating at a relatively low 656 MHz frequency.
HBM is a new type of CPU/GPU memory that vertically stacks memory chips, also
called 3D stacking. Similar to GDDR, HBM drastically shortens the distance data
needs to travel to reach a processor. The main difference from DDR and GDDR is
that the HBM memory bus is very wide: 1024 bits for each HBM stack. This enables
HBM to achieve ultra-high bandwidth. The latest HBM3 standard supports up to
665 GB/s bandwidth per package. It also operates at a low frequency of 500 MHz
and has a memory density of up to 48 GB per package.
A system with HBM onboard will be a good choice if you want to maximize data
transfer throughput. However, at the time of writing, this technology is quite expensive.
As GDDR is predominantly used in graphics cards, HBM may be a good option to
accelerate certain workloads that run on a CPU. In fact, the first x86 general-purpose
server chips with integrated HBM are now available.

3.7    Virtual Memory
Virtual memory is the mechanism to share the physical memory attached to a CPU
with all the processes executing on it. Virtual memory provides a protection mechanism
that prevents access to the memory allocated to a given process from other processes.
Virtual memory also provides relocation, which is the ability to load a program
anywhere in physical memory without changing the addresses in the program.
In a CPU that supports virtual memory, programs use virtual addresses for their
accesses. But while user code operates on virtual addresses, retrieving data from
memory requires physical addresses. Also, to effectively manage the scarce physical
memory, it is divided into pages. Thus, applications operate on a set of pages that an
operating system has provided.

Figure 3.11: Virtual-to-physical address translation for 4KB pages.

Virtual-to-physical address translation is required for accessing data as well as code
(instructions). The translation mechanism for a system with a page size of 4KB is
shown in Figure 3.11. The virtual address is split into two parts. The virtual page
number (52 most significant bits) is used to index into the page table to produce a
mapping between the virtual page number and the corresponding physical page. The
12 least significant bits are used to offset within a 4KB page. These bits do not require
translation and are used “as-is” to access the physical memory location.

Figure 3.12: Example of a 2-level page table.

The page table can be either single-level or nested. Figure 3.12 shows one example
of a 2-level page table. Notice how the address gets split into more pieces. The first
thing to mention is that the 16 most significant bits are not used. This can seem like
a waste of bits, but even with the remaining 48 bits we can address 256 TB of total
memory (248 ). Some applications use those unused bits to keep metadata, also known
as pointer tagging.
A nested page table is a radix tree that keeps physical page addresses along with some
metadata. To find a translation within a 2-level page table, we first use bits 32..47 as
an index into the Level-1 page table also known as the page table directory. Every
descriptor in the directory points to one of the 216 blocks of Level-2 tables. Once we
find the appropriate L2 block, we use bits 12..31 to find the physical page address.
Concatenating it with the page offset (bits 0..11) gives us the physical address, which
can be used to retrieve the data from the DRAM.
The exact format of the page table is dictated by the CPU for reasons we will discuss
a few paragraphs later. Thus the variations of page table organization are limited by
what a CPU supports. Modern CPUs support both 4-level page tables with 48-bit
pointers (256 TB of total memory) and 5-level page tables with 57-bit pointers (128
PB of total memory).

                                                                        3.7    Virtual Memory

Breaking the page table into multiple levels doesn’t change the total addressable
memory. However, a nested approach does not require storing the entire page table as
a contiguous array and does not allocate blocks that have no descriptors. This saves
memory space but adds overhead when traversing the page table.
Failure to provide a physical address mapping is called a page fault. It occurs if a
requested page is invalid or is not currently in the main memory. The two most
common reasons are: 1) the operating system committed to allocating a page but
hasn’t yet backed it with a physical page, and 2) an accessed page was swapped out
to disk and is not currently stored in RAM.

3.7.1    Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB)
A search in a hierarchical page table could be expensive, requiring traversing through
the hierarchy potentially making several indirect accesses. Such a traversal is called
a page walk. To reduce the address translation time, CPUs support a hardware
structure called a translation lookaside buffer (TLB) to cache the most recently used
translations. Similar to regular caches, TLBs are often designed as a hierarchy of L1
ITLB (Instructions), and L1 DTLB (Data), followed by a shared (instructions and
data) L2 STLB.
To lower memory access latency, the L1 cache lookup can be partially overlapped with
the DTLB lookup thanks to a constraint on the cache associativity and size that allows
the L1 set selection without the physical address.51 However, higher level caches (L2
and L3) - which are also typically Physically Indexed and Physically Tagged (PIPT)
but cannot benefit from this optimization - therefore require the address translation
before the cache lookup.
The TLB hierarchy keeps translations for a relatively large memory space. Still, misses
in the TLB can be very costly. To speed up the handling of TLB misses, CPUs have
a mechanism called a hardware page walker. Such a unit can perform a page walk
directly in hardware by issuing the required instructions to traverse the page table,
all without interrupting the kernel. This is the reason why the format of the page
table is dictated by the CPU, to which operating systems must comply. High-end
processors have several hardware page walkers that can handle multiple TLB misses
simultaneously. However, even with all the acceleration offered by modern CPUs,
TLB misses still cause performance bottlenecks for many applications.

3.7.2    Huge Pages
Having a small page size makes it possible to manage the available memory more
efficiently and reduce fragmentation. The drawback though is that it requires having
more page table entries to cover the same memory region. Consider two page sizes:
4KB, which is a default on x86, and a 2MB huge page size. For an application that
operates on 10MB of data, we need 2560 entries in the first case, but just 5 entries if
we would map the address space onto huge pages. Those are named Huge Pages on
Linux, Super Pages on FreeBSD, and Large Pages on Windows, but they all mean the
same thing. Throughout the rest of this book, we will refer to them as Huge Pages.
  51 Minimum associativity for a PIPT L1 cache to also be VIPT, accessing a set without translating

the index to physical - https://stackoverflow.com/a/59288185.

An example of an address that points to data within a huge page is shown in Figure
3.13. Just like with a default page size, the exact address format when using huge
pages is dictated by the hardware, but luckily we as programmers usually don’t have
to worry about it.

Figure 3.13: Virtual address that points within a 2MB page.

Using huge pages drastically reduces the pressure on the TLB hierarchy since fewer
TLB entries are required. It greatly increases the chance of a TLB hit. We will discuss
how to use huge pages to reduce the frequency of TLB misses in Section 8.4 and
Section 11.8. The downsides of using huge pages are memory fragmentation and,
in some cases, nondeterministic page allocation latency because it is harder for the
operating system to manage large blocks of memory and to ensure effective utilization
of available memory. To satisfy a 2MB huge page allocation request at runtime, an
OS needs to find a contiguous chunk of 2MB. If this cannot be found, the OS needs to
reorganize the pages, resulting in a longer allocation latency.

3.8     Modern CPU Design
To see how all the concepts we talked about in this chapter are used in practice,
let’s take a look at the implementation of Intel’s 12th-generation core, Golden Cove,
which became available in 2021. This core is used as the P-core inside the Alder
Lake and Sapphire Rapids platforms. Figure 3.14 shows the block diagram of the
Golden Cove core. Notice that this section only describes a single core, not the entire
processor. So, we will skip the discussion about frequencies, core counts, L3 caches,
core interconnects, memory latency, and bandwidth.
The core is split into an in-order frontend that fetches and decodes x86 instructions
into µops52 and a 6-wide superscalar, out-of-order backend. The Golden Cove core
supports 2-way SMT. It has a 32KB first-level instruction cache (L1 I-cache), and a
48KB first-level data cache (L1 D-cache). The L1 caches are backed up by a unified
1.25MB (2MB in server chips) L2 cache. The L1 and L2 caches are private to each
core. At the end of this section, we also take a look at the TLB hierarchy.

3.8.1   CPU Frontend
The CPU Frontend consists of several functional units that fetch and decode instruc-
tions from memory. Its main purpose is to feed prepared instructions to the CPU
Backend, which is responsible for the actual execution of instructions.
Technically, instruction fetch is the first stage to execute an instruction. But once a
program reaches a steady state, the branch predictor unit (BPU) steers the work of
the CPU Frontend. That is indicated by the arrow that goes from the BPU to the
 52 Complex CISC instructions are translated into simple RISC microoperations, see Section 4.4.

Figure 3.14: Block diagram of a CPU core in the Intel Golden Cove Microarchitecture.

instruction cache. The BPU predicts the target of all branch instructions and steers
the next instruction fetch based on this prediction.

The heart of the BPU is a branch target buffer (BTB) with 12K entries containing
information about branches and their targets. This information is used by the
prediction algorithms. Every cycle, the BPU generates the next fetch address and
passes it to the CPU Frontend.

The CPU Frontend fetches 32 bytes per cycle of x86 instructions from the L1 I-cache.
This is shared among the two threads (if SMT is enabled), so each thread gets 32
bytes every other cycle. These are complex, variable-length x86 instructions. First,
the pre-decode stage determines and marks the boundaries of the variable instructions
by inspecting the chunk. In x86, the instruction length can range from 1 to 15 bytes.
This stage also identifies branch instructions. The pre-decode stage moves up to 6

instructions (also referred to as macroinstructions) to the Instruction Queue that is
split between the two threads. The instruction queue also supports a macro-op fusion
unit that detects when two macroinstructions can be fused into a single micro-operation
(µop). This optimization saves bandwidth in the rest of the pipeline.
Later, up to six pre-decoded instructions are sent from the Instruction Queue to the
decoder unit every cycle. The two SMT threads alternate every cycle to access this
interface. The 6-way decoder converts the complex macro-Ops into fixed-length µops.
Decoded µops are queued into the Instruction Decode Queue (IDQ), labeled as “µop
Queue” on the diagram.
A major performance-boosting feature of the Frontend is the µop Cache. Also, you
could often see people call it Decoded Stream Buffer (DSB). The motivation is to cache
the macro-ops to µops conversion in a separate structure that works in parallel with
the L1 I-cache. When the BPU generates a new address to fetch, the µop Cache is
also checked to see if the µops translations are already available. Frequently occurring
macro-ops will hit in the µop Cache, and the pipeline will avoid repeating the expensive
pre-decode and decode operations for the 32-byte bundle. The µop Cache can provide
eight µops per cycle and can hold up to 4K entries.
Some very complicated instructions may require more µops than decoders can handle.
µops for such instruction are served from the Microcode Sequencer (MSROM). Exam-
ples of such instructions include hardware operation support for string manipulation,
encryption, synchronization, and others. Also, MSROM keeps the microcode oper-
ations to handle exceptional situations like branch misprediction (which requires a
pipeline flush), floating-point assist (e.g., when an instruction operates with a denor-
malized floating-point value), and others. MSROM can push up to 4 µops per cycle
into the IDQ.
The Instruction Decode Queue (IDQ) provides the interface between the in-order
frontend and the out-of-order backend. The IDQ queues up the µops in order and can
hold 144 µops per logical processor in single thread mode, or 72 µops per thread when
SMT is active. This is where the in-order CPU Frontend finishes and the out-of-order
CPU Backend starts.

3.8.2    CPU Backend
The CPU Backend employs an OOO engine that executes instructions and stores
results. I repeated a part of the diagram that depicts the Golden Cove OOO engine
in Figure 3.15.
The heart of the OOO engine is the 512-entry ReOrder Buffer (ROB). It serves a few
purposes. First, it provides register renaming.53 There are only 16 general-purpose
integer and 32 floating-point/SIMD architectural registers, however, the number of
physical registers is much higher.54 Physical registers are located in a structure
called the Physical Register File (PRF). There are separate PRFs for integer and
floating-point/SIMD registers. The mappings from architecture-visible registers to the
physical registers are kept in the register alias table (RAT).
 53 Renaming must be done in program order.
  54 There are around 300 physical general-purpose registers (GPRs) and a similar number of vector

registers. The actual number of registers is not disclosed.

Figure 3.15: Block diagram of the CPU Backend of the Intel Golden Cove Microarchitecture.

Second, the ROB allocates execution resources. When an instruction enters the ROB,
a new entry is allocated and resources are assigned to it, mainly an execution unit
and the destination physical register. The ROB can allocate up to 6 µops per cycle.
Third, the ROB tracks speculative execution. When an instruction has finished its
execution, its status gets updated and it stays there until the previous instructions
finish. It’s done that way because instructions must retire in program order. Once
an instruction retires, its ROB entry is deallocated and the results of the instruction
become visible. The retiring stage is wider than the allocation: the ROB can retire 8
instructions per cycle.
There are certain operations that processors handle in a specific manner, often called
idioms, which require no or less costly execution. Processors recognize such cases and
allow them to run faster than regular instructions. Here are some of such cases:
   • Zeroing: to assign zero to a register, compilers often use XOR / PXOR / XORPS
     / XORPD instructions, e.g., XOR EAX, EAX, which are preferred by compilers
     instead of the equivalent MOV EAX, 0x0 instruction as the XOR encoding uses
     fewer encoding bytes. Such zeroing idioms are not executed as any other regular
     instruction and are resolved in the CPU frontend, which saves execution resources.
     The instruction later retires as usual.
   • Move elimination: similar to the previous one, register-to-register mov opera-
     tions, e.g., MOV EAX, EBX, are executed with zero cycle delay.
   • NOP instruction: NOP is often used for padding or alignment purposes. It
     simply gets marked as completed without allocating it to the reservation station.
   • Other bypasses: CPU architects also optimized certain arithmetic operations.
     For example, multiplying any number by one will always yield the same number.
     The same goes for dividing any number by one. Multiplying any number by zero
     always yields zero, etc. Some CPUs can recognize such cases at runtime and
     execute them with shorter latency than regular multiplication or divide.
The “Scheduler / Reservation Station” (RS) is the structure that tracks the availability
of all resources for a given µop and dispatches the µop to an execution port once it is
ready. An execution port is a pathway that connects the scheduler to its execution
units. Each execution port may be connected to multiple execution units. When an
instruction enters the RS, the scheduler starts tracking its data dependencies. Once
all the source operands become available, the RS attempts to dispatch the µop to a
free execution port. The RS has fewer entries55 than the ROB. It can dispatch up to
6 µops per cycle.
  55 People have measured ~200 entries in the RS, however the actual number of entries is not

disclosed.

I repeated a part of the diagram that depicts the Golden Cove execution engine and
Load-Store unit in Figure 3.16. There are 12 execution ports:
  • Ports 0, 1, 5, 6, and 10 provide integer (INT) operations, and some of them
    handle floating-point and vector (FP/VEC) operations.
  • Ports 2, 3, and 11 are used for address generation (AGU) and for load operations.
  • Ports 4 and 9 are used for store operations (STD).
  • Ports 7 and 8 are used for address generation.

Figure 3.16: Block diagram of the execution engine and the Load-Store unit in the Intel
                            Golden Cove Microarchitecture.

Instructions that require memory operations are handled by the Load-Store unit (ports
2, 3, 11, 4, 9, 7, and 8) which we will discuss in the next section. If an operation
does not involve loading or storing data, then it will be dispatched to the execution
engine (ports 0, 1, 5, 6, and 10). Some instructions may require two µops that must
be executed on different execution ports, e.g., load and add.
For example, an Integer Shift operation can go only to either port 0 or 6, while a
Floating-Point Divide operation can only be dispatched to port 0. In a situation
when a scheduler has to dispatch two operations that require the same execution port,
one of them will have to be delayed.
The FP/VEC stack does floating-point scalar and all packed (SIMD) operations.
For instance, ports 0, 1, and 5 can handle ALU operations of the following types:
packed integer, packed floating-point, and scalar floating-point. Integer and Vector/FP
register files are located separately. Operations that move values from the INT stack
to FP/VEC and vice-versa (e.g., convert, extract, or insert) incur additional penalties.

3.8.3   Load-Store Unit
The Load-Store Unit (LSU) is responsible for operations with memory. The Golden
Cove core can issue up to three loads (three 256-bit or two 512-bit) by using ports 2,
3, and 11. AGU stands for Address Generation Unit, which is required to access a

memory location. It can also issue up to two stores (two 256-bit or one 512-bit) per
cycle via ports 4, 9, 7, and 8. STD stands for Store Data.
Notice that the AGU is required for both load and store operations to perform
dynamic address calculation. For example, in the instruction vmovss DWORD PTR
[rsi+0x4],xmm0, the AGU will be responsible for calculating rsi+0x4, which will be
used to store data from xmm0.
Once a load or a store leaves the scheduler, the LSU is responsible for accessing the
data. Load operations save the fetched value in a register. Store operations transfer
value from a register to a location in memory. LSU has a Load Buffer (also known
as Load Queue) and a Store Buffer (also known as Store Queue); their sizes are not
disclosed.56 Both Load Buffer and Store Buffer receive operations at dispatch from
the scheduler.
When a memory load request comes, the LSU queries the L1 cache using a virtual
address and looks up the physical address translation in the TLB. Those two operations
are initiated simultaneously. The size of the L1 D-cache is 48KB. If both operations
result in a hit, the load delivers data to the integer or floating-point register and leaves
the Load Buffer. Similarly, a store would write the data to the data cache and exit
the Store Buffer.
In case of an L1 miss, the hardware initiates a query of the (private) L2 cache tags.
While the L2 cache is being queried, a 64-byte wide fill buffer (FB) entry is allocated,
which will keep the cache line once it arrives. The Golden Cove core has 16 fill buffers.
As a way to lower the latency, a speculative query is sent to the L3 cache in parallel
with the L2 cache lookup. Also, if two loads access the same cache line, they will hit
the same FB. Such two loads will be “glued” together and only one memory request
will be initiated.
In case the L2 miss is confirmed, the load continues to wait for the results of the L3
cache, which incurs much higher latency. From that point, the request leaves the
core and enters the uncore, the term you may sometimes see in profiling tools. The
outstanding misses from the core are tracked in the Super Queue (SQ, not shown on
the diagram), which can track up to 48 uncore requests. In a scenario of L3 miss, the
processor begins to set up a memory access. Further details are beyond the scope of
this chapter.
When a store modifies a memory location, the processor needs to load the full cache
line, change it, and then write it back to memory. If the address to write is not in the
cache, it goes through a very similar mechanism as with loads to bring that data in.
The store cannot be complete until the data is written to the cache hierarchy.
Of course, there are a few optimizations done for store operations as well. First, if
we’re dealing with a store or multiple adjacent stores (also known as streaming stores)
that modify an entire cache line, there is no need to read the data first as all of the
bytes will be clobbered anyway. So, the processor will try to combine writes to fill an
entire cache line. If this succeeds no memory read operation is needed.
Second, write combining enables multiple stores to be assembled and written further
  56 Load Buffer and Store Buffer sizes are not disclosed, but people have measured 192 and 114

entries respectively.

out in the cache hierarchy as a unit. So, if multiple stores modify the same cache
line, only one memory write will be issued to the memory subsystem. All these
optimizations are done inside the Store Buffer. A store instruction copies the data
that will be written from a register into the Store Buffer. From there it may be written
to the L1 cache or it may be combined with other stores to the same cache line. The
Store Buffer capacity is limited, so it can hold requests for partial writing to a cache
line only for some time. However, while the data sits in the Store Buffer waiting to
be written, other load instructions can read the data straight from the store buffers
(store-to-load forwarding). Also, the LSU supports store-to-load forwarding when
there is an older store containing all of the load’s bytes, and the store’s data has been
produced and is available in the store queue.
Finally, there are cases when we can improve cache utilization by using so-called
non-temporal memory accesses. If we execute a partial store (e.g., we overwrite 8 bytes
in a cache line), we need to read the cache line first. This new cache line will displace
another line in the cache. However, if we know that we won’t need this data again,
then it would be better not to allocate space in the cache for that line. Non-temporal
memory accesses are special CPU instructions that do not keep the fetched line in the
cache and drop it immediately after use.
During a typical program execution, there could be dozens of memory accesses in flight.
In most high-performance processors, the order of load and store operations is not
necessarily required to be the same as the program order, which is known as a weakly
ordered memory model. For optimization purposes, the processor can reorder memory
read and write operations. Consider a situation when a load runs into a cache miss
and has to wait until the data comes from memory. The processor allows subsequent
loads to proceed ahead of the load that is waiting for data. This allows later loads
to finish before the earlier load and doesn’t unnecessarily block the execution. Such
load/store reordering enables memory units to process multiple memory accesses in
parallel, which translates directly into higher performance.
The LSU dynamically reorders operations, supporting both loads bypassing older loads
and loads bypassing older non-conflicting stores. However, there are a few exceptions.
Just like with dependencies through regular arithmetic instructions, there are memory
dependencies through loads and stores. In other words, a load can depend on an
earlier store and vice-versa. First of all, stores cannot be reordered with older loads:
Load R1, MEM_LOC_X
Store MEM_LOC_X, 0

If we allow the store to go before the load, then the R1 register may read the wrong
value from the memory location MEM_LOC_X.
Another interesting situation happens when a load consumes data from an earlier
store:
Store MEM_LOC, 0
Load R1, MEM_LOC

If a load consumes data from a store that hasn’t yet finished, we should not allow
the load to proceed. But what if we don’t yet know the address of the store? In
this case, the processor predicts whether there will be any potential data forwarding
between the load and the store and if reordering is safe. This is known as memory

disambiguation. When a load starts executing, it has to be checked against all older
stores for potential store forwarding. There are four possible scenarios:
  • Prediction: Not dependent; Outcome: Not dependent. This is a case of a
    successful memory disambiguation, which yields optimal performance.
  • Prediction: Dependent; Outcome: Not dependent. In this case, the processor
    was overly conservative and did not let the load go ahead of the store. This is a
    missed opportunity for performance optimization.
  • Prediction: Not dependent; Outcome: Dependent. This is a memory order
    violation. Similar to the case of a branch misprediction, the processor has to
    flush the pipeline, roll back the execution, and start over. It is very costly.
  • Prediction: Dependent; Outcome: Dependent. There is a memory dependency
    between the load and the store, and the processor predicted it correctly. No
    missed opportunities.
It’s worth mentioning that forwarding from a store to a load occurs in real code
quite often. In particular, any code that uses read-modify-write accesses to its data
structures is likely to trigger these sorts of problems. Due to the large out-of-order
window, the CPU can easily attempt to process multiple read-modify-write sequences
at once, so the read of one sequence can occur before the write of the previous sequence
is complete. One such example is presented in Section 12.2.

3.8.4   TLB Hierarchy
Recall from Section 3.7.1 that translations from virtual to physical addresses are
cached in the TLB. Golden Cove’s TLB hierarchy is presented in Figure 3.17. Similar
to a regular data cache, it has two levels, where level 1 has separate instances for
instructions (ITLB) and data (DTLB). L1 ITLB has 256 entries for regular 4K pages
and covers 1MB of memory, while L1 DTLB has 96 entries that cover 384 KB.

Figure 3.17: TLB hierarchy of Intel’s Golden Cove microarchitecture.

The second level of the hierarchy (STLB) caches translations for both instructions
and data. It is a larger storage for serving requests that missed in the L1 TLBs. L2
STLB can accommodate 2048 recent data and instruction page address translations,
which covers a total of 8MB of memory space. There are fewer entries available for
2MB huge pages: L1 ITLB has 32 entries, L1 DTLB has 32 entries, and L2 STLB can

only use 1024 entries that are also shared with regular 4KB pages.
In case a translation was not found in the TLB hierarchy, it has to be retrieved from
the DRAM by “walking” the kernel page tables. Recall that the page table is built
as a radix tree of subtables, with each entry of the subtable holding a pointer to the
next level of the tree.
The key element to speed up the page walk procedure is a set of Paging-Structure
Caches57 that cache the hot entries in the page table structure. For the 4-level page
table, we have the least significant twelve bits (11:0) for page offset (not translated),
and bits 47:12 for the page number. While each entry in a TLB is an individual
complete translation, Paging-Structure Caches cover only the upper 3 levels (bits
47:21). The idea is to reduce the number of loads required to execute in case of a
TLB miss. For example, without such caches, we would have to execute 4 loads,
which would add latency to the instruction completion. But with the help of the
Paging-Structure Caches, if we find a translation for levels 1 and 2 of the address (bits
47:30), we only have to do the remaining 2 loads.
The Golden Cove microarchitecture has four dedicated page walkers, which allows it
to process 4 page walks simultaneously. In the event of a TLB miss, these hardware
units will issue the required loads into the memory subsystem and populate the TLB
hierarchy with new entries. The page-table loads generated by the page walkers can hit
in L1, L2, or L3 caches (details are not disclosed). Finally, page walkers can anticipate
a future TLB miss and speculatively do a page walk to update TLB entries before a
miss actually happens.
The Golden Cove specification doesn’t disclose how resources are shared between two
SMT threads. But in general, caches, TLBs, and execution units are fully shared to
improve the dynamic utilization of those resources. On the other hand, buffers for
staging instructions between major pipe stages are either replicated or partitioned.
These buffers include IDQ, ROB, RAT, RS, Load Buffer, and the Store Buffer. PRF
is also replicated.

3.9    Performance Monitoring Unit
Every modern CPU provides facilities to monitor performance, which are combined
into the Performance Monitoring Unit (PMU). This unit incorporates features that
help developers analyze the performance of their applications. An example of a PMU
in a modern Intel CPU is provided in Figure 3.18. Most modern PMUs have a
set of Performance Monitoring Counters (PMC) that can be used to collect various
performance events that happen during the execution of a program. Later in Section 5.3,
we will discuss how PMCs can be used for performance analysis. Also, the PMU has
other features that enhance performance analysis, like LBR, PEBS, and PT, topics to
which Chapter 6 is devoted.
As CPU design evolves with every new generation, so do their PMUs. On Linux,
it is possible to determine the version of the PMU in your CPU using the cpuid
command, as shown in Listing 3.3. Similar information can be extracted from the
kernel message buffer by checking the output of the dmesg command. Characteristics
 57 AMD’s equivalent is called Page Walk Caches.

                                                       3.9    Performance Monitoring Unit

Figure 3.18: Performance Monitoring Unit of a modern Intel CPU.

of each Intel PMU version, as well as changes from the previous version, can be found
in [Intel, 2023, Volume 3B, Chapter 20].

Listing 3.3 Querying your PMU
$ cpuid
...
Architecture Performance Monitoring Features (0xa/eax):
      version ID                               = 0x4 (4)
      number of counters per logical processor = 0x4 (4)
      bit width of counter                     = 0x30 (48)
...
Architecture Performance Monitoring Features (0xa/edx):
      number of fixed counters    = 0x3 (3)
      bit width of fixed counters = 0x30 (48)
...

3.9.1    Performance Monitoring Counters
If we imagine a simplified view of a processor, it may look something like what is
shown in Figure 3.19. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, a modern CPU has
caches, a branch predictor, an execution pipeline, and other units. When connected
to multiple units, a PMC can collect interesting statistics from them. For example, it
can count how many clock cycles have passed, how many instructions were executed,
how many cache misses or branch mispredictions happened during that time, and
other performance events.
Typically, PMCs are 48-bit wide, which enables analysis tools to run for a long time
without interrupting a program’s execution.58 Performance counter is a hardware
register implemented as a Model-Specific Register (MSR). That means the number of
counters and their width can vary from model to model, and you cannot rely on the
same number of counters in your CPU. You should always query that first, using tools
like cpuid, for example. PMCs are accessible via the RDMSR and WRMSR instructions,
  58 When the value of PMCs overflows, the execution of a program must be interrupted. A profiling

tool then should save the fact of an overflow. We will discuss it in more detail in Chapter 5.

Figure 3.19: Simplified view of a CPU with a performance monitoring counter.

which can only be executed from kernel space. Luckily, you only have to care about
this if you’re a developer of a performance analysis tool, like Linux perf or Intel
VTune profiler. Those tools handle all the complexity of programming PMCs.
When engineers analyze their applications, it is very common for them to collect the
number of executed instructions and elapsed cycles. That is the reason why some
PMUs have dedicated PMCs for collecting such events. Fixed counters always measure
the same thing inside the CPU core. With programmable counters, it’s up to the user
to choose what they want to measure.
For example, in the Intel Skylake architecture (PMU version 4, see Listing 3.3), each
physical core has three fixed and eight programmable counters. The three fixed
counters are set to count core clocks, reference clocks, and instructions retired (see
Chapter 4 for more details on these metrics). AMD Zen4 and Arm Neoverse V1 cores
support 6 programmable performance monitoring counters per processor core, with no
fixed counters.
It’s not unusual for the PMU to provide more than one hundred events available for
monitoring. Figure 3.18 shows just a small subset of the performance monitoring
events available for monitoring on a modern Intel CPU. It’s not hard to notice that
the number of available PMCs is much smaller than the number of performance events.
It’s not possible to count all the events at the same time, but analysis tools solve this
problem by multiplexing between groups of performance events during the execution
of a program (see Section 5.3.1).
   • For Intel CPUs, the complete list of performance events can be found in
     [Intel, 2023, Volume 3B, Chapter 20] or at perfmon-events.intel.com.
   • AMD doesn’t publish a list of performance monitoring events for every AMD
     processor. Curious readers may find some information in the Linux perf source
     code59 . Also, you can list performance events available for monitoring using the
     AMD uProf command line tool. General information about AMD performance
     counters can be found in [AMD, 2023, 13.2 Performance Monitoring Counters].
   • For ARM chips, performance events are not so well defined. Vendors implement
  59 Linux source code for AMD cores - https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/e

vents/amd/core.c

                                                          Questions and Exercises

    cores following an ARM architecture, but performance events vary, both in what
    they mean and what events are supported. For the Arm Neoverse V1 core,
    that Arm designs themselves, the list of performance events can be found in
    [Arm, 2022b]. For the Arm Neoverse V2 and V3 microarchitectures, the list of
    performance events can be found on Arm’s website.60

Questions and Exercises
 1. Describe pipelining, out-of-order, and speculative execution.
 2. How does register renaming help to speed up execution?
 3. Describe spatial and temporal locality.
 4. What is the size of the cache line in the majority of modern processors?
 5. Name the components that constitute the CPU frontend and backend.
 6. What is the organization of the 4-level page table? What is a page fault?
 7. What is the default page size in x86 and ARM architectures?
 8. What role does the TLB (Translation Lookaside Buffer) play?

Chapter Summary
 • Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) is a fundamental contract between software
   and hardware. ISA is an abstract model of a computer that defines the set of
   available operations and data types, a set of registers, memory addressing, and
   other things. You can implement a specific ISA in many different ways. For
   example, you can design a “small” core that prioritizes power efficiency or a
   “big” core that targets high performance.
 • The details of the implementation are encapsulated in the term CPU “microar-
   chitecture”. This topic has been researched by thousands of computer scientists
   for a long time. Through the years, many smart ideas were invented and imple-
   mented in mass-market CPUs. The most notable are pipelining, out-of-order
   execution, superscalar engines, speculative execution, and SIMD processors. All
   these techniques help exploit Instruction-Level Parallelism (ILP) and improve
   singe-threaded performance.
 • In parallel with single-threaded performance, hardware designers began pushing
   multi-threaded performance. The vast majority of modern client-facing devices
   have a processor containing multiple cores. Some processors double the number
   of observable CPU cores with the help of Simultaneous Multithreading (SMT).
   SMT enables multiple software threads to run simultaneously on the same
   physical core using shared resources. A more recent technique in this direction
   is called “hybrid” processors which combine different types of cores in a single
   package to better support a diversity of workloads.
 • The memory hierarchy in modern computers includes several levels of cache
   that reflect different tradeoffs in speed of access vs. size. L1 cache tends to be
   closest to a core, fast but small. The L3/LLC cache is slower but also bigger.
   DDR is the predominant DRAM technology used in most platforms. DRAM
   modules vary in the number of ranks and memory width which may have a slight
   impact on system performance. Processors may have multiple memory channels
   to access more than one DRAM module simultaneously.
60 Arm telemetry - https://developer.arm.com/telemetry

• Virtual memory is the mechanism for sharing physical memory with all the
  processes running on the CPU. Programs use virtual addresses in their accesses,
  which get translated into physical addresses. The memory space is split into
  pages. The default page size on x86 is 4KB, and on ARM is 16KB. Only the
  page address gets translated, the offset within the page is used as-is. The OS
  keeps the translation in the page table, which is implemented as a radix tree.
  There are hardware features that improve the performance of address translation:
  mainly the Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) and hardware page walkers.
  Also, developers can utilize Huge Pages to mitigate the cost of address translation
  in some cases (see Section 8.4).
• We looked at the design of Intel’s recent Golden Cove microarchitecture. Logically,
  the core is split into a Frontend and a Backend. The Frontend consists of a
  Branch Predictor Unit (BPU), L1 I-cache, instruction fetch and decode logic, and
  the IDQ, which feeds instructions to the CPU Backend. The Backend consists
  of the OOO engine, execution units, the load-store unit, the L1 D-cache, and
  the TLB hierarchy.
• Modern processors have performance monitoring features that are encapsulated
  into a Performance Monitoring Unit (PMU). This unit is built around a concept
  of Performance Monitoring Counters (PMC) that enables observation of specific
  events that happen while a program is running, for example, cache misses and
  branch mispredictions.

