4      Terminology and Metrics in Performance
       Analysis

Like many engineering disciplines, performance analysis is quite heavy on using peculiar
terms and metrics. For a beginner, it can be a very hard time looking into a profile
generated by an analysis tool like Linux perf or Intel VTune Profiler. Those tools
juggle many complex terms and metrics, however, these metrics are “must-knowns” if
you’re set to do any serious performance engineering work.
Since I have mentioned Linux perf, let me briefly introduce the tool as I have
many examples of using it in this and later chapters. Linux perf is a performance
profiler that you can use to find hotspots in a program, collect various low-level CPU
performance events, analyze call stacks, and many other things. I will use Linux
perf extensively throughout the book as it is one of the most popular performance
analysis tools. Another reason why I prefer showcasing Linux perf is because it is
open-source software, which enables enthusiastic readers to explore the mechanics of
what’s going on inside a modern profiling tool. This is especially useful for learning
concepts presented in this book because GUI-based tools, like Intel® VTune™ Profiler,
tend to hide all the complexity. We will have a more detailed overview of Linux perf
in Chapter 7.
This chapter is a gentle introduction to the basic terminology and metrics used in
performance analysis. We will first define the basic things like retired/executed instruc-
tions, IPC/CPI, µops, core/reference clocks, cache misses, and branch mispredictions.
Then we will see how to measure the memory latency and bandwidth of a system and
introduce some more advanced metrics. In the end, we will benchmark four industry
workloads and look at the collected metrics.

4.1    Retired vs. Executed Instruction
Modern processors typically execute more instructions than the program flow requires.
This happens because some instructions are executed speculatively, as discussed in
Section 3.3.3. For most instructions, the CPU commits results once they are available,
and all preceding instructions have already been retired. But for instructions executed
speculatively, the CPU keeps their results without immediately committing their results.
When the speculation turns out to be correct, the CPU unblocks such instructions
and proceeds as normal. But when the speculation turns out to be wrong, the CPU
throws away all the changes done by speculative instructions and does not retire them.
So, an instruction processed by the CPU can be executed but not necessarily retired.
Taking this into account, we can usually expect the number of executed instructions
to be higher than the number of retired instructions.
There is an exception. Certain instructions are recognized as idioms and are resolved
without actual execution. Some examples of this are NOP, move elimination, and
zeroing, as discussed in Section 3.8.2. Such instructions do not require an execution
unit but are still retired. So, theoretically, there could be a case when the number of
retired instructions is higher than the number of executed instructions.

There is a performance monitoring counter (PMC) in most modern processors that
collects the number of retired instructions. There is no performance event to collect
executed instructions, though there is a way to collect executed and retired µops as
we shall see soon. The number of retired instructions can be easily obtained with
Linux perf by running:
$ perf stat -e instructions -- ./a.exe
  2173414 instructions #      0.80 insn per cycle
# or just simply run:
$ perf stat -- ./a.exe

4.2    CPU Utilization
CPU utilization is the percentage of time the core was busy during a time period.
Technically, a CPU is considered utilized when it is not running the kernel idle thread.

                                   CP U _CLK_U N HALT ED.REF _T SC
           CP U U tilization =                                     ,
                                                 T SC

where CPU_CLK_UNHALTED.REF_TSC counts the number of reference cycles when the
core is not in a halt state. TSC stands for timestamp counter (discussed in Section 2.5),
which is always ticking.
If CPU utilization is low, it usually translates into a poor performance of an application
since a portion of time was wasted by a CPU. However, high CPU utilization is not
always an indication of good performance. It is merely a sign that the system is doing
some work but does not say what it is doing: the CPU might be highly utilized even
though it is stalled waiting on memory accesses. In a multithreaded context, a thread
can also spin while waiting for resources to proceed. Later, in Section 13.1, we will
discuss parallel efficiency metrics, and in particular, take a look at “Effective CPU
utilization” which filters spinning time.
Linux perf automatically calculates CPU utilization across all CPUs on the system:
$ perf stat -- a.exe
  0.634874 task-clock (msec) #       0.773 CPUs utilized

4.3    CPI and IPC
Those are two fundamental metrics that stand for:
   • Instructions Per Cycle (IPC) - how many instructions were retired per cycle on
     average.

                                    IN ST _RET IRED.AN Y
                     IP C =                                 ,
                              CP U _CLK_U N HALT ED.T HREAD

where INST_RETIRED.ANY counts the number of retired instructions, and
CPU_CLK_UNHALTED.THREAD counts the number of core cycles while the thread
is not in a halt state.
   • Cycles Per Instruction (CPI) - how many cycles it took to retire one instruction
     on average.

                                                                      4.3   CPI and IPC

                                                  1
                                      CP I =
                                                 IP C
Using one or another is a matter of preference. I prefer to use IPC as it is easier to
compare. With IPC, we want as many instructions per cycle as possible, so the higher
the IPC, the better. With CPI, it’s the opposite: we want as few cycles per instruction
as possible, so the lower the CPI the better. The comparison that uses “the higher the
better” metric is simpler since you don’t have to do the mental inversion every time.
In the rest of the book, we will mostly use IPC, but again, there is nothing wrong
with using CPI either.
The relationship between IPC and CPU clock frequency is very interesting. In the
broad sense, performance = work / time, where we can express work as the number
of instructions and time as seconds. The number of seconds a program was running
can be calculated as total cycles / frequency:

                             instructions × f requency
          P erf ormance =                              = IP C × f requency
                                       cycles

As we can see, performance is proportional to IPC and frequency. If we increase any
of the two metrics, the performance of a program will grow.
From the perspective of benchmarking, IPC and frequency are two independent metrics.
I’ve seen some engineers mistakenly mixing them up and thinking that if you increase
the frequency, the IPC will also go up. But that’s not true. If you clock a processor
at 1 GHz instead of 5 GHz, for many applications you will still get the same IPC.61 It
may sound very confusing, especially since IPC has everything to do with CPU clocks.
However, frequency only tells us how fast a single clock cycle is, whereas IPC counts
how much work is done every cycle. So, from the benchmarking perspective, IPC
solely depends on the design of the processor regardless of the frequency. Out-of-order
cores typically have a much higher IPC than in-order cores. When you increase the
size of CPU caches or improve branch prediction, the IPC usually goes up.
Now, if you ask a hardware architect, they will certainly tell you there is a dependency
between IPC and frequency. From the CPU design perspective, you can deliberately
downclock the processor, which will make every cycle longer and make it possible
to squeeze more work into each cycle. In the end, you will get a higher IPC but a
lower frequency. Hardware vendors approach this performance equation in different
ways. For example, Intel and AMD chips usually have very high frequencies, with
the recent Intel 13900KS processor providing a 6 GHz turbo frequency out of the box
with no overclocking required. On the other hand, Apple M1/M2 chips have lower
frequency but compensate with a higher IPC. Lower frequency facilitates lower power
consumption. Higher IPC, on the other hand, usually requires a more complicated
design, more transistors, and a larger die size. We will not go into all the design
tradeoffs here, as they are topics for a different book.
IPC is useful for evaluating both hardware and software efficiency. Hardware engineers
use this metric to compare CPU generations and CPUs from different vendors. Since
  61 When you lower CPU frequency, memory speed becomes faster relative to the CPU. This may

hide actual memory bottlenecks and artificially increase IPC.

IPC is the measure of the performance of a CPU microarchitecture, engineers and
media use it to express gains over the previous generation. However, to make a fair
comparison, you need to run both systems at the same frequency.
IPC is also a useful metric for evaluating software. It gives you an intuition for how
quickly instructions in your application progress through the CPU pipeline. Later in
this chapter, you will see several production applications with varying IPCs. Memory-
intensive applications usually have a low IPC (0–1), while computationally intensive
workloads tend to have a high IPC (4–6).
Linux perf users can measure the IPC for their workload by running:
$ perf stat -e cycles,instructions -- a.exe
  2369632 cycles
  1725916 instructions #      0,73 insn per cycle
# or as simple as:
$ perf stat -- ./a.exe

4.4    Micro-operations
Microprocessors with the x86 architecture translate complex CISC instructions into
simple RISC microoperations, abbreviated as µops. A simple register-to-register
addition instruction such as ADD rax, rbx generates only one µop, while a more
complex instruction like ADD rax, [mem] may generate two: one for loading from
the mem memory location into a temporary (unnamed) register, and one for adding it
to the rax register. The instruction ADD [mem], rax generates three µops: one for
loading from memory, one for adding, and one for storing the result back to memory.
The main advantage of splitting instructions into micro-operations is that µops can
be executed:
  • Out of order: consider the PUSH rbx instruction, which decrements the stack
    pointer by 8 bytes and then stores the source operand on the top of the stack.
    Suppose that PUSH rbx is “cracked” into two dependent micro-operations after
    decoding:
      SUB rsp, 8
      STORE [rsp], rbx
      Often, a function prologue saves multiple registers by using multiple PUSH
      instructions. In our case, the next PUSH instruction can start executing after the
      SUB µop of the previous PUSH instruction finishes and doesn’t have to wait for
      the STORE µop, which can now execute asynchronously.
  • In parallel: consider HADDPD xmm1, xmm2 instruction, which will sum up (re-
    duce) two double-precision floating-point values from xmm1 and xmm2 and store
    two results in xmm1 as follows:
      xmm1[63:0] = xmm2[127:64] + xmm2[63:0]
      xmm1[127:64] = xmm1[127:64] + xmm1[63:0]
      One way to microcode this instruction would be to do the following: 1) reduce
      xmm2 and store the result in xmm_tmp1[63:0], 2) reduce xmm1 and store the
      result in xmm_tmp2[63:0], 3) merge xmm_tmp1 and xmm_tmp2 into xmm1. Three
      µops in total. Notice that steps 1) and 2) are independent and thus can be done
      in parallel.

                                                                            4.5   Pipeline Slot

Even though we were just talking about how instructions are split into smaller pieces,
sometimes, µops can also be fused together. There are two types of fusion in modern
x86 CPUs:
   • Microfusion: fuse µops from the same machine instruction. Microfusion can
     only be applied to two types of combinations: memory write operations and
     read-modify operations. For example:
      add    eax, [mem]
      There are two µops in this instruction: 1) read the memory location mem, and 2)
      add it to eax. With microfusion, two µops are fused into one at the decoding
      step.
   • Macrofusion: fuse µops from different machine instructions. The decoders
     can fuse arithmetic or logic instructions with a subsequent conditional jump
     instruction into a single compute-and-branch µop in certain cases. For example:
      .loop:
        dec rdi
        jnz .loop
      With macrofusion, two µops from the DEC and JNZ instructions are fused into
      one. The Zen4 microarchitecture also added support for DIV/IDIV and NOP
      macrofusion [Advanced Micro Devices, 2023, sections 2.9.4 and 2.9.5].
Both micro- and macrofusion save bandwidth in all stages of the pipeline, from
decoding to retirement. The fused operations share a single entry in the reorder buffer
(ROB). The capacity of the ROB is utilized better when a fused µop uses only one
entry. Such a fused ROB entry is later dispatched to two different execution ports
but is retired again as a single unit. Readers can learn more about µop fusion in
[Fog, 2023a].
To collect the number of issued, executed, and retired µops for an application, you
can use Linux perf as follows:
$ perf stat -e uops_issued.any,uops_executed.thread,uops_retired.slots -- ./a.exe
  2856278 uops_issued.any
  2720241 uops_executed.thread
  2557884 uops_retired.slots
The way instructions are split into micro-operations may vary across CPU generations.
Usually, a lower number of µops used for an instruction means that hardware has
better support for it and is likely to have lower latency and higher throughput. For
the latest Intel and AMD CPUs, the vast majority of instructions generate only one
µop. Latency, throughput, port usage, and the number of µops for x86 instructions
on recent microarchitectures can be found at the uops.info62 website.

4.5    Pipeline Slot
Another important metric that some performance tools use is the concept of a pipeline
slot. A pipeline slot represents the hardware resources needed to process one µop.
Figure 4.1 demonstrates the execution pipeline of a CPU that has 4 allocation slots
every cycle. That means that the core can assign execution resources (renamed source
 62 x86 instruction latency and throughput - https://uops.info/table.html

and destination registers, execution port, ROB entries, etc.) to 4 new µops every cycle.
Such a processor is usually called a 4-wide machine. During six consecutive cycles on
the diagram, only half of the available slots were utilized (highlighted in yellow). From
a microarchitecture perspective, the efficiency of executing such code is only 50%.

Figure 4.1: Pipeline diagram of a 4-wide CPU.

Intel’s Skylake and AMD Zen3 cores have a 4-wide allocation. Intel’s Sunny Cove
microarchitecture was a 5-wide design. As of the end of 2023, the most recent Golden
Cove and Zen4 architectures both have a 6-wide allocation. Apple M1 and M2 designs
are 8-wide, and Apple M3 is 9-µop execution bandwidth see [Apple, 2024, Table 4.10].
The width of a machine puts a cap on the IPC. This means that the maximum
achievable IPC of a processor equals its width.63 For example, when your calculations
show more than 6 IPC on a Golden Cove core, you should be suspicious.
Very few applications can achieve the maximum IPC of a machine. For example, Intel
Golden Cove core can theoretically execute four integer additions/subtractions, plus
one load, plus one store (for a total of six instructions) per clock, but an application
is highly unlikely to have the appropriate mix of independent instructions adjacent to
each other to exploit all that potential parallelism.
Pipeline slot utilization is one of the core metrics in Top-down Microarchitecture
Analysis (see Section 6.1). For example, Frontend Bound and Backend Bound metrics
are expressed as a percentage of unutilized pipeline slots due to various bottlenecks.

4.6     Core vs. Reference Cycles
Most CPUs employ a clock signal to pace their sequential operations. The clock signal
is produced by an external generator that provides a consistent number of pulses
each second. The frequency of the clock pulses determines the rate at which a CPU
executes instructions. Consequently, the faster the clock, the more instructions the
CPU will execute each second.
                                                     Clockticks
                                  F requency =
                                                       T ime
The majority of modern CPUs, including Intel and AMD CPUs, don’t have a fixed
frequency at which they operate. Instead, they implement dynamic frequency scaling,
 63 Although there are some exceptions. For instance, macrofused compare-and-branch instructions

only require a single pipeline slot but are counted as two instructions. In some extreme cases, this
may cause IPC to be greater than the machine width.

                                                                               4.7   Cache Miss

which is called Turbo Boost in Intel’s CPUs, and Turbo Core in AMD processors. It
enables the CPU to increase and decrease its frequency dynamically. Decreasing the
frequency reduces power consumption at the expense of performance, and increasing
the frequency improves performance but sacrifices power savings.
The core clock cycles counter is counting clock cycles at the actual frequency that the
CPU core is running at. The reference clock event counts cycles as if the processor
is running at the base frequency. Let’s take a look at an experiment on a Skylake
i7-6000 processor running a single-threaded application, which has a base frequency of
3.4 GHz:
$ perf stat -e cycles,ref-cycles -- ./a.exe
  43340884632 cycles    # 3.97 GHz
  37028245322 ref-cycles # 3.39 GHz
      10,899462364 seconds time elapsed
The ref-cycles event counts cycles as if there were no frequency scaling. The external
clock on the platform has a frequency of 100 MHz, and if we scale it by the clock
multiplier, we will get the base frequency of the processor. The clock multiplier for the
Skylake i7-6000 processor equals 34: it means that for every external pulse, the CPU
executes 34 internal cycles when it’s running on the base frequency (i.e., 3.4 GHz).
The cycles event counts real CPU cycles and takes into account frequency scaling.
Using the formula above we can confirm that the average operating frequency was
43340884632 cycles / 10.899 sec = 3.97 GHz. When you compare the perfor-
mance of two versions of a small piece of code, measuring the time in clock cycles is
better than in nanoseconds, because you avoid the problem of the clock frequency
going up and down.

4.7     Cache Miss
As discussed in Section 3.6, any memory request missing in a particular level of cache
must be serviced by higher-level caches or DRAM. This implies a significant increase
in the latency of such memory access. The typical latency of memory subsystem
components is shown in Table 4.1. Performance greatly suffers when a memory request
misses in the Last Level Cache (LLC) and goes all the way down to the main memory.64

Table 4.1: Typical latency of a memory subsystem in x86-based platforms.

               Memory Hierarchy Component                Latency (cycle/time)
               L1 Cache                                 4 cycles (~1 ns)
               L2 Cache                                 10-25 cycles (5-10 ns)
               L3 Cache                                 ~40 cycles (20 ns)
               Main Memory                              200+ cycles (100 ns)

Both instruction and data fetches can miss in the cache. According to Top-down
Microarchitecture Analysis (see Section 6.1), an instruction cache (I-cache) miss is
characterized as a Frontend stall, while a data cache (D-cache) miss is characterized
  64 There is also an interactive view that visualizes the latency of different operations in modern

systems - https://colin-scott.github.io/personal_website/research/interactive_latency.html

as a Backend stall. Instruction cache misses happen very early in the CPU pipeline
during instruction fetch. Data cache misses happen much later during the instruction
execution phase.
Linux perf users can collect the number of L1 cache misses by running:
$ perf stat -e mem_load_retired.fb_hit,mem_load_retired.l1_miss,
  mem_load_retired.l1_hit,mem_inst_retired.all_loads -- a.exe
   29580 mem_load_retired.fb_hit
   19036 mem_load_retired.l1_miss
  497204 mem_load_retired.l1_hit
  546230 mem_inst_retired.all_loads
Above is the breakdown of all loads for the L1 data cache and fill buffers. A load
might either hit the already allocated fill buffer (fb_hit), hit the L1 cache (l1_hit),
or miss both (l1_miss), thus all_loads = fb_hit + l1_hit + l1_miss.65 We can
see that only 3.5% of all loads miss in the L1 cache, thus the L1 hit rate is 96.5%.
We can further break down L1 data misses and analyze L2 cache behavior by running:
$ perf stat -e mem_load_retired.l1_miss,
  mem_load_retired.l2_hit,mem_load_retired.l2_miss -- a.exe
  19521 mem_load_retired.l1_miss
  12360 mem_load_retired.l2_hit
   7188 mem_load_retired.l2_miss
From this example, we can see that 37% of loads that missed in the L1 D-cache also
missed in the L2 cache, thus the L2 hit rate is 63%. A breakdown for the L3 cache
can be made similarly.

4.8    Mispredicted Branch
Modern CPUs try to predict the outcome of a conditional branch instruction (taken
or not taken). For example, when the processor sees code like this:
dec eax
jz .zero
# eax is not 0
...
zero:
# eax is 0
In the above example, the jz instruction is a conditional branch. To increase perfor-
mance, modern processors will try to guess the outcome every time they see a branch
instruction. This is called Speculative Execution which we discussed in Section 3.3.3.
The processor will speculate that, for example, the branch will not be taken and will
execute the code that corresponds to the situation when eax is not 0. However, if
the guess is wrong, this is called branch misprediction, and the CPU is required to
undo all the speculative work that it has done recently.
A mispredicted branch typically involves a penalty between 10 and 25 clock cycles.
First, all the instructions that were fetched and executed based on the incorrect
prediction need to be flushed from the pipeline. After that, some buffers may require
cleanup to restore the state from where the bad speculation started.
 65 Careful readers may notice a discrepancy in the numbers: fb_hit + l1_hit + l1_miss =

545,820, which doesn’t exactly match all_loads. Most likely it’s due to slight inaccuracy in
hardware event collection, but we did not investigate this since the numbers are very close.

                                                            4.9   Performance Metrics

Linux perf users can check the number of branch mispredictions by running:
$ perf stat -e branches,branch-misses -- a.exe
   358209 branches
    14026 branch-misses #     3,92% of all branches
# or simply do:
$ perf stat -- a.exe

4.9      Performance Metrics
Being able to collect various performance events is very helpful in performance
analysis. However, there is a caveat. Say, you ran a program and collected the
MEM_LOAD_RETIRED.L3_MISS event, which counts the LLC misses, and it shows you
a value of one billion. Sure it sounds like a lot, so you decided to investigate where
these cache misses are coming from. Wrong! Are you sure it is an issue? If a program
only does two billion loads, then yes, it is a problem as half of the loads miss in the
LLC. In contrast, if a program does one trillion loads, then only one in a thousand
loads results in a L3 cache miss.
That’s why in addition to the hardware performance events, performance engineers
frequently use metrics, which are built on top of raw events. Table 4.2 shows a list of
metrics for Intel’s 12th-gen Golden Cove architecture along with descriptions and for-
mulas. The list is not exhaustive, but it shows the most important metrics. A complete
list of metrics for Intel CPUs and their formulas can be found in TMA_metrics.xlsx.66
Section 4.11 shows how performance metrics can be used in practice.

Table 4.2: A list (not exhaustive) of performance metrics along with descriptions and
                     formulas for the Intel Golden Cove architecture.

Metric
Name        Description                                       Formula
L1MPKI      L1 cache true misses per kilo                1000 *
            instruction for retired demand    MEM_LOAD_RETIRED.L1_MISS_PS /
            loads.                                 INST_RETIRED.ANY

L2MPKI      L2 cache true misses per kilo                1000 *
            instruction for retired demand    MEM_LOAD_RETIRED.L2_MISS_PS /
            loads.                                 INST_RETIRED.ANY

L3MPKI      L3 cache true misses per kilo                1000 *
            instruction for retired demand    MEM_LOAD_RETIRED.L3_MISS_PS /
            loads.                                 INST_RETIRED.ANY

Branch      Ratio of all branches which       BR_MISP_RETIRED.ALL_BRANCHES /
Mispr.      mispredict                         BR_INST_RETIRED.ALL_BRANCHES
Ratio

 66 TMA metrics - https://github.com/intel/perfmon/blob/main/TMA_Metrics.xlsx.

Metric
Name      Description                                      Formula
Code      STLB (2nd level TLB) code                         1000 *
STLB      speculative misses per kilo          ITLB_MISSES.WALK_COMPLETED /
MPKI      instruction (misses of any                 INST_RETIRED.ANY
          page size that complete the
          page walk)

Load      STLB data load speculative                    1000 *
STLB      misses per kilo instruction      DTLB_LD_MISSES.WALK_COMPLETED
MPKI                                             / INST_RETIRED.ANY

Store     STLB data store speculative                   1000 *
STLB      misses per kilo instruction      DTLB_ST_MISSES.WALK_COMPLETED
MPKI                                             / INST_RETIRED.ANY

Load      Average latency for L1              L1D_PEND_MISS.PENDING /
Miss      D-cache miss demand load         MEM_LD_COMPLETED.L1_MISS_ANY
Real      operations (in core cycles)
Latency

ILP       Instr. level parallelism per         UOPS_EXECUTED.THREAD /
          core (average number of µops     UOPS_EXECUTED.CORE_CYCLES_GE1,
          executed when there is                divide by 2 if SMT is enabled
          execution)

MLP       Memory level parallelism                L1D_PEND_MISS.PENDING /
          per-thread (average number of        L1D_PEND_MISS.PENDING_CYCLES
          L1 miss demand loads when
          there is at least one such
          miss.)

DRAM      Average external memory               ( 64 * ( UNC_M_CAS_COUNT.RD +
BW Use    bandwidth use for reads and          UNC_M_CAS_COUNT.WR ) / 1GB ) /
GB/sec    writes                                              Time

IpCall    Instructions per near call                INST_RETIRED.ANY /
          (lower number means higher            BR_INST_RETIRED.NEAR_CALL
          occurrence rate)

Ip        Instructions per branch                    INST_RETIRED.ANY /
Branch                                         BR_INST_RETIRED.ALL_BRANCHES

IpLoad    Instructions per load                  INST_RETIRED.ANY /
                                           MEM_INST_RETIRED.ALL_LOADS_PS

IpStore   Instructions per store                 INST_RETIRED.ANY /
                                           MEM_INST_RETIRED.ALL_STORES_PS

IpMisp    Number of instructions per              INST_RETIRED.ANY /
redict    non-speculative branch            BR_MISP_RETIRED.ALL_BRANCHES
          misprediction

                                                           4.9   Performance Metrics

Metric
Name        Description                                      Formula

IpFLOP      Instructions per FP (floating              See TMA_metrics.xlsx
            point) operation

IpArith     Instructions per FP arithmetic             See TMA_metrics.xlsx
            instruction

IpArith     Instructions per FP arith.                 INST_RETIRED.ANY /
Scalar      scalar single-precision               FP_ARITH_INST.SCALAR_SINGLE
SP          instruction

IpArith     Instructions per FP arith.                 INST_RETIRED.ANY /
Scalar      scalar double-precision               FP_ARITH_INST.SCALAR_DOUBLE
DP          instruction

Ip Arith    Instructions per arithmetic             INST_RETIRED.ANY / (
AVX128      AVX/SSE 128-bit instruction       FP_ARITH_INST.128B_PACKED_DOUBLE+
                                              FP_ARITH_INST.128B_PACKED_SINGLE)

Ip Arith    Instructions per arithmetic             INST_RETIRED.ANY / (
AVX256      AVX* 256-bit instruction          FP_ARITH_INST.256B_PACKED_DOUBLE+
                                              FP_ARITH_INST.256B_PACKED_SINGLE)

Ip          Instructions per software                 INST_RETIRED.ANY /
SWPF        prefetch instruction (of any          SW_PREFETCH_ACCESS.T0:u0xF
            type)

A few notes on those metrics. First, the ILP and MLP metrics do not represent
theoretical maximums for an application; rather they measure the actual ILP and
MLP of an application on a given machine. On an ideal machine with infinite resources,
these numbers would be higher. Second, all metrics besides “DRAM BW Use” and
“Load Miss Real Latency” are fractions; we can apply fairly straightforward reasoning
to each of them to tell whether a specific metric is high or low. But to make sense of
“DRAM BW Use” and “Load Miss Real Latency” metrics, we need to put them in
context. For the former, we would like to know if a program saturates the memory
bandwidth or not. The latter gives you an idea of the average cost of a cache miss,
which is useless by itself unless you know the latencies of each component in the cache
hierarchy. We will discuss how to find out cache latencies and peak memory bandwidth
in the next section.

Some tools can report performance metrics automatically. If not, you can always
calculate those metrics manually since you know the formulas and corresponding
performance events that must be collected. Table 4.2 provides formulas for the Intel
Golden Cove architecture, but you can build similar metrics on another platform as
long as underlying performance events are available.

4.10     Memory Latency and Bandwidth
Inefficient memory accesses are often a dominant performance bottleneck in modern
environments. Thus, how quickly a processor can fetch data from the memory
subsystem is a critical factor in determining application performance. There are two
aspects of memory performance: 1) how fast a CPU can fetch a single byte from
memory (latency), and 2) how many bytes it can fetch per second (bandwidth). Both
are important in various scenarios; we will look at a few examples later. In this
section, we will focus on measuring the peak performance of the memory subsystem
components.
One of the tools that can become helpful on x86 platforms is Intel Memory Latency
Checker (MLC),67 which is available for free on Windows and Linux. MLC can
measure cache and memory latency and bandwidth using different access patterns
and under load. On ARM-based systems there is no similar tool, however, users
can download and build memory latency and bandwidth benchmarks from sources.
Examples of such projects are lmbench68 , bandwidth69 and Stream.70
We will only focus on a subset of metrics, namely idle read latency and read bandwidth.
Let’s start with the read latency. Idle means that while we do the measurements,
the system is idle. This will give us the minimum time required to fetch data from
memory system components, but when the system is loaded by other “memory-hungry”
applications, the access latency increases as there may be more queueing for resources
at various points. MLC measures idle latency by doing dependent loads (also known
as pointer chasing). A measuring thread allocates a very large buffer and initializes it
so that each (64-byte) cache line within the buffer contains a pointer to another, but
non-adjacent, cache line within the buffer. By appropriately sizing the buffer, we can
ensure that almost all the loads are hitting a certain level of the cache or in the main
memory.
My system under test is an Intel Alder Lake computer with a Core i7-1260P CPU and
16GB DDR4 @ 2400 MT/s dual-channel memory. The processor has 4P (Performance)
hyperthreaded and 8E (Efficient) cores. Every P-core has 48 KB of L1 data cache and
1.25 MB of L2 cache. Every E-core has 32 KB of L1 data cache, and four E-cores
form a cluster that has access to a shared 2 MB L2 cache. All cores in the system are
backed by an 18 MB L3 cache. If we use a 10 MB buffer, we can be nearly certain that
repeated accesses to that buffer would miss in L2 but hit in L3. Here is the example
mlc command:
$ sudo ./mlc --idle_latency -c0 -L -b10m
Intel(R) Memory Latency Checker - v3.10
Command line parameters: --idle_latency -c0 -L -b10m
Using buffer size of 10.000MiB
Each iteration took 31.1 base frequency clocks ( 12.5     ns)
The option --idle_latency measures read latency without loading the system. Also,
MLC has the --loaded_latency option to measure latency when there is memory
traffic generated by other threads. The option -c0 pins the measurement thread to
  67 Intel MLC tool - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/736633/intel-memory-

latency-checker-intel-mlc.html
  68 lmbench - https://sourceforge.net/projects/lmbench
  69 Memory bandwidth benchmark by Zack Smith - https://zsmith.co/bandwidth.php
  70 Stream - https://github.com/jeffhammond/STREAM

                                                4.10   Memory Latency and Bandwidth

logical CPU 0, which is on a P-core. The option -L enables huge pages to limit TLB
effects in our measurements. The option -b10m tells MLC to use a 10MB buffer, which
will fit in the L3 cache on our system.
Figure 4.2 shows the read latencies of L1, L2, and L3 caches. There are four different
regions on the chart. The first region on the left from 1 KB to 48 KB buffer size
corresponds to the L1 D-cache, which is private to each physical core. We can observe
0.9 ns latency for the E-core and a slightly higher 1.1 ns for the P-core. Also, we can
use this chart to confirm the cache sizes. Notice how E-core latency starts climbing
after a buffer size goes above 32 KB but P-core latency stays constant up to 48 KB.
That confirms that the L1 D-cache size in the E-core is 32 KB, and in the P-core it is
48 KB.

Figure 4.2: L1/L2/L3 cache read latencies (lower better) on Intel Core i7-1260P, measured
                        with the MLC tool, huge pages enabled.

The second region shows the L2 cache latencies, which for E-core is almost two times
higher than for P-core (5.9 ns vs. 3.2 ns). For P-core, the latency increases after we
cross the 1.25 MB buffer size, which is expected. We expect E-core latency to stay the
same until we hit 2 MB, however, according to our measurements, it happens sooner.
The third region from 2 MB up to 14 MB corresponds to L3 cache latency, which
is roughly 12 ns for both types of cores. The total size of the L3 cache that is
shared between all cores in the system is 18 MB. Interestingly, we start seeing some
unexpected dynamics starting from 15 MB, not 18 MB. Most likely it has to do with
some accesses missing in L3 and requiring a fetch from the main memory.
I don’t show the part of the chart that corresponds to memory latency, which begins
after we cross the 18MB boundary. The latency starts climbing very steeply and levels
off at 24 MB for the E-core and 64 MB for the P-core. With a much larger buffer size,
e.g., 500 MB, E-core access latency is 45ns and P-core is 90ns. This measures the
memory latency since almost no loads hit in the L3 cache.
Using a similar technique we can measure the bandwidth of various components of

the memory hierarchy. For measuring bandwidth, MLC executes load requests which
results are not used by any subsequent instructions. This allows MLC to generate
the maximum possible bandwidth. MLC spawns one software thread on each of the
configured logical processors. The addresses that each thread accesses are independent
and there is no sharing of data between threads. As with the latency experiments,
the buffer size used by the threads determines whether MLC is measuring L1/L2/L3
cache bandwidth or memory bandwidth.
$ sudo ./mlc --max_bandwidth -k0-15 -Y -L -u -b18m
Measuring Maximum Memory Bandwidths for the system
Bandwidths are in MB/sec (1 MB/sec = 1,000,000 Bytes/sec)
Using all the threads from each core if Hyper-threading is enabled
Using traffic with the following read-write ratios
ALL Reads        :      349670.42
There are a couple of new options here. The -k option specifies a list of CPU cores
used for measurements. The -Y option tells MLC to use AVX2 loads, i.e., 32 bytes at
a time. The options With the -u flag, each thread shares the same buffer and does
not allocate its own. This option must be used to measure the L3 bandwidth (notice
we used an 18 MB buffer, which equals to the size of the L3 cache).

Figure 4.3: Block diagram of the memory hierarchy of Intel Core i7-1260P and external
                                    DDR4 memory.

Combined latency and bandwidth numbers for our system under test, as measured
with Intel MLC, are shown in Figure 4.3. Cores can draw much higher bandwidth from
lower-level caches like L1 and L2 than from shared L3 cache or main memory. Shared

           4.11   Case Study: Analyzing Performance Metrics of Four Benchmarks

caches such as L3 and E-core L2, scale reasonably well to serve requests from multiple
cores at the same time. For example, a single E-core L2 bandwidth is 100GB/s. With
two E-cores from the same cluster, I measured 140 GB/s, three E-cores - 165 GB/s,
and all four E-cores can draw 175 GB/s from the shared L2. The same goes for the
L3 cache, which allows for 60 GB/s for a single P-core and only 25 GB/s for a single
E-core. But when all the cores are used, the L3 cache can sustain a bandwidth of 300
GB/s. Reading data from memory can be done at 33.7 GB/s, while the theoretical
maximum bandwidth is 38.4 GB/s on my platform.
Knowledge of the primary characteristics of a machine is fundamental to assessing
how well a program utilizes available resources. We will return to this topic in
Section 5.5 when discussing the Roofline performance model. If you constantly analyze
performance on a single platform, it is a good idea to memorize the latencies and
bandwidth of various components of the memory hierarchy or have them handy. It
helps to establish the mental model for a system under test which will aid your further
performance analysis as you will see next.

4.11    Case Study: Analyzing Performance Metrics of Four
        Benchmarks
To put together everything we discussed so far in this chapter, let’s look at some
real-world examples. We ran four benchmarks from different domains and calculated
their performance metrics. First of all, let’s introduce the benchmarks.
  1. Blender 3.4 - an open-source 3D creation and modeling software project. This
     test is of Blender’s Cycles performance with the BMW27 blend file. All hard-
     ware threads are used. URL: https://download.blender.org/release. Com-
     mand line: ./blender -b bmw27_cpu.blend -noaudio --enable-autoexec
     -o output.test -x 1 -F JPEG -f 1.
  2. Stockfish 15 - an advanced open-source chess engine. This test is a stockfish built-
     in benchmark. A single hardware thread is used. URL: https://stockfishchess.org.
     Command line: ./stockfish bench 128 1 24 default depth.
  3. Clang 15 self-build - this test uses Clang 15 to build the Clang 15 compiler from
     sources. All hardware threads are used. URL: https://www.llvm.org. Command
     line: ninja -j16 clang.
  4. CloverLeaf 2018 - a Lagrangian-Eulerian hydrodynamics benchmark. All hard-
     ware threads are used. This test uses the clover_bm.in input file (Problem 5).
     URL: http://uk-mac.github.io/CloverLeaf. Command line: ./clover_leaf.
For this exercise, I ran all four benchmarks on the machine with the following charac-
teristics:
  • 12th Gen Alder Lake Intel® Core™ i7-1260P CPU @ 2.10GHz (4.70GHz Turbo),
    4P+8E cores, 18MB L3-cache
  • 16 GB RAM, DDR4 @ 2400 MT/s
  • 256GB NVMe PCIe M.2 SSD
  • 64-bit Ubuntu 22.04.1 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish)
  • Clang-15 C++ compiler with the following options: -O3 -march=core-avx2
To collect performance metrics, I used the toplev.py script from Andi Kleen’s pmu-

tools:71
$ ~/workspace/pmu-tools/toplev.py -m --global --no-desc -v -- <app with args>
Table 4.3 provides a side-by-side comparison of performance metrics for our four
benchmarks. There is a lot we can learn about the nature of those workloads just by
looking at the metrics.

Table 4.3: Performance Metrics of Four Benchmarks.

                                                                Clang15-
Metric Name          Core Type       Blender        Stockfish   selfbuild   CloverLeaf
Instructions         P-core          6.02E+12       6.59E+11    2.40E+13    1.06E+12
Core Cycles          P-core          4.31E+12       3.65E+11    3.78E+13    5.25E+12
IPC                  P-core          1.40           1.80        0.64        0.20
CPI                  P-core          0.72           0.55        1.57        4.96
Instructions         E-core          4.97E+12       0           1.43E+13    1.11E+12
Core Cycles          E-core          3.73E+12       0           3.19E+13    4.28E+12
IPC                  E-core          1.33           0           0.45        0.26
CPI                  E-core          0.75           0           2.23        3.85
L1MPKI               P-core          3.88           21.38       6.01        13.44
L2MPKI               P-core          0.15           1.67        1.09        3.58
L3MPKI               P-core          0.04           0.14        0.56        3.43
Br. Misp. Ratio      P-core          0.02           0.08        0.03        0.01
Code stlb MPKI       P-core          0              0.01        0.35        0.01
Ld stlb MPKI         P-core          0.08           0.04        0.51        0.03
St stlb MPKI         P-core          0              0.01        0.06        0.1
LdMissLat (Clk)      P-core          12.92          10.37       76.7        253.89
ILP                  P-core          3.67           3.65        2.93        2.53
MLP                  P-core          1.61           2.62        1.57        2.78
Dram Bw (GB/s)       All             1.58           1.42        10.67       24.57
IpCall               All             176.8          153.5       40.9        2,729
IpBranch             All             9.8            10.1        5.1         18.8
IpLoad               All             3.2            3.3         3.6         2.7
IpStore              All             7.2            7.7         5.9         22.0
IpMispredict         All             610.4          214.7       177.7       2,416
IpFLOP               All             1.1            1.82E+06    286,348     1.8
IpArith              All             4.5            7.96E+06    268,637     2.1
IpArith Scal SP      All             22.9           4.07E+09    280,583     2.60E+09
IpArith Scal DP      All             438.2          1.22E+07    4.65E+06    2.2
IpArith AVX128       All             6.9            0.0         1.09E+10    1.62E+09
IpArith AVX256       All             30.3           0.0         0.0         39.6
IpSWPF               All             90.2           2,565       105,933     172,348

Here are the hypotheses we can make about the performance of the benchmarks:
   • Blender. The work is split fairly equally between P-cores and E-cores, with a
     decent IPC on both core types. The number of cache misses per kilo instructions
     is pretty low (see L*MPKI). Branch misprediction presents a minor bottleneck:
     the Br. Misp. Ratio metric is at 2%; we get 1 misprediction for every 610
 71 pmu-tools - https://github.com/andikleen/pmu-tools

           4.11   Case Study: Analyzing Performance Metrics of Four Benchmarks

    instructions (see IpMispredict metric), which is quite good. TLB is not a
    bottleneck as we very rarely miss in STLB. We ignore the Load Miss Latency
    metric since the number of cache misses is very low. The ILP is reasonably high.
    Golden Cove is a 6-wide architecture; an ILP of 3.67 means that the algorithm
    utilizes almost 2/3 of the core resources every cycle. Memory bandwidth demand
    is low (only 1.58 GB/s), far from the theoretical maximum for this machine.
    Looking at the Ip* metrics we can tell that Blender is a floating-point algorithm
    (see IpFLOP metric), a large portion of which is vectorized FP operations (see
    IpArith AVX128). But also, some portions of the algorithm are non-vectorized
    scalar FP single precision instructions (IpArith Scal SP). Also, notice that
    every 90th instruction is an explicit software memory prefetch (IpSWPF); we
    expect to see those hints in Blender’s source code. Preliminary conclusion:
    Blender’s performance is bound by FP compute.
 • Stockfish. We ran it using only one hardware thread, so there is zero work on
   E-cores, as expected. The number of L1 misses is relatively high, but then most
   of them are contained in L2 and L3 caches. The branch misprediction ratio is
   high; we pay the misprediction penalty every 215 instructions. We can estimate
   that we get one mispredict every 215 (instructions) / 1.80 (IPC) = 120
   cycles, which is very frequent. Similar to the Blender reasoning, we can say that
   TLB and DRAM bandwidth is not an issue for Stockfish. Going further, we see
   that there are almost no FP operations in the workload (see IpFLOP metric).
   Preliminary conclusion: Stockfish is an integer compute workload, which is
   heavily affected by branch mispredictions.
 • Clang 15 selfbuild. Compilation of C++ code is one of the tasks that has
   a very flat performance profile, i.e., there are no big hotspots. You will see
   that the running time is attributed to many different functions. The first thing
   we spot is that P-cores are doing 68% more work than E-cores and have 42%
   better IPC. But both P- and E-cores have low IPC. The L*MPKI metrics don’t
   look troubling at first glance; however, in combination with the load miss real
   latency (LdMissLat, in core clocks), we can see that the average cost of a cache
   miss is quite high (~77 cycles). Now, when we look at the *STLB_MPKI metrics,
   we notice substantial differences with any other benchmark we test. This is
   due to another aspect of the Clang compiler (and other compilers as well): the
   size of the binary is relatively big (more than 100 MB). The code constantly
   jumps to distant places causing high pressure on the TLB subsystem. As you
   can see the problem exists both for instructions (see Code stlb MPKI) and data
   (see Ld stlb MPKI). Let’s proceed with our analysis. DRAM bandwidth use
   is higher than for the two previous benchmarks, but still is not reaching even
   half of the maximum memory bandwidth on our platform (which is ~34 GB/s).
   Another concern for us is the very small number of instructions per call (IpCall):
   only ~41 instructions per function call. This is unfortunately the nature of the
   compiler’s codebase: it has thousands of small functions. The compiler needs
   to be more aggressive with inlining all those functions and wrappers.72 Yet, we
   suspect that the performance overhead associated with making a function call
   remains an issue for the Clang compiler. Also, one can spot the high ipBranch
   and IpMispredict metrics. For Clang compilation, every fifth instruction is a
72 Perhaps by using Link Time Optimizations (LTO).

      branch and one of every ~35 branches gets mispredicted. There are almost no
      FP or vector instructions, but this is not surprising. Preliminary conclusion:
      Clang has a large codebase, flat profile, many small functions, and “branchy”
      code; performance is affected by data cache misses and TLB misses, and branch
      mispredictions.
   • CloverLeaf . As before, we start with analyzing instructions and core cycles.
     The amount of work done by P- and E-cores is roughly the same, but it takes
     P-cores more time to do this work, resulting in a lower IPC of one logical thread
     on P-core compared to one physical E-core.73 The L*MPKI metrics are high,
     especially the number of L3 misses per kilo instructions. The load miss latency
     (LdMissLat) is off the charts, suggesting an extremely high price of the average
     cache miss. Next, we take a look at the DRAM BW use metric and see that
     memory bandwidth consumption is near its limits. That’s the problem: all the
     cores in the system share the same memory bus, so they compete for access to
     the main memory, which effectively stalls the execution. CPUs are undersupplied
     with the data that they demand. Going further, we can see that CloverLeaf does
     not suffer from mispredictions or function call overhead. The instruction mix is
     dominated by FP double-precision scalar operations with some parts of the code
     being vectorized. Preliminary conclusion: multi-threaded CloverLeaf is bound
     by memory bandwidth.
As you can see from this study, there is a lot one can learn about the behavior of a
program just by looking at the metrics. It answers the “what?” question, but doesn’t
tell you the “why?”. For that, you will need to collect a performance profile, which
we will introduce in later chapters. In Part 2 of this book, we will discuss how to
mitigate the performance issues we suspect to exist in the four benchmarks that we
have analyzed.
Keep in mind that the summary of performance metrics in Table 4.3 only tells you
about the average behavior of a program. For example, we might be looking at
CloverLeaf’s IPC of 0.2, while in reality, it may never run with such an IPC. Instead,
it may have 2 phases of equal duration, one running with an IPC of 0.1, and the
second with an IPC of 0.3. Performance tools tackle this by reporting statistical
data for each metric along with the average value. Usually, having min, max, 95th
percentile, and variation (stdev/avg) is enough to understand the distribution. Also,
some tools allow plotting the data, so you can see how the value for a certain metric
changed during the program running time. As an example, Figure 4.4 shows the
dynamics of IPC, L*MPKI, DRAM BW, and average frequency for the CloverLeaf
benchmark. The pmu-tools package can automatically build those charts once you
add the --xlsx and --xchart options. The -I 10000 option aggregates collected
samples with 10-second intervals.
$ ~/workspace/pmu-tools/toplev.py -m --global --no-desc -v --xlsx workload.xlsx
     –xchart -I 10000 -- ./clover_leaf

Even though the deviation from the average values reported in the summary is not
very big, we can see that the workload is not stable. After looking at the IPC chart
 73 A possible explanation for that is because CloverLeaf is very memory-bandwidth bound. All P-

and E-cores are equally stalled waiting on memory. Because P-cores have a higher frequency, they
waste more CPU clocks than E-cores.

           4.11   Case Study: Analyzing Performance Metrics of Four Benchmarks

Figure 4.4: Performance metrics charts for the CloverLeaf benchmark with 10 second
                                       intervals.

for P-core we can hypothesize that there are no distinct phases in the workload and
the variation is caused by multiplexing between performance events (discussed in
Section 5.3). Yet, this is only a hypothesis that needs to be confirmed or disproved.
Possible ways to proceed would be to collect more data points by running collection
with higher granularity (in our case it was 10 seconds). The chart that plots L*MPKI
suggests that all three metrics hover around their average numbers without much
deviation. The DRAM bandwidth utilization chart indicates that there are periods
with varying pressure on the main memory. The last chart shows the average frequency
of all CPU cores. As you may observe on this chart, throttling starts after the first 10
seconds. I recommend being careful when drawing conclusions just from looking at
the aggregate numbers since they may not be a good representation of the workload
behavior.

Remember that collecting performance metrics is not a substitute for looking into
the code. Always try to find explanation for the numbers that you see by checking
relevant parts of the code.
In summary, performance metrics help you build the right mental model about what
is and what is not happening in a program. Going further into analysis, these data
will serve you well.

Questions and Exercises
  1. What is the difference between the CPU core clock and the reference clock?
  2. What is the difference between retired and executed instructions?
  3. When you increase the frequency, does IPC go up, down, or stay the same?
  4. Take a look at the DRAM BW Use formula in Table 4.2. Why do you think there
     is a constant 64?
  5. Measure the bandwidth and latency of the cache hierarchy and memory on the
     machine you use for development/benchmarking using Intel MLC, Stream, or
     other tools.
  6. Run the application that you’re working with on a daily basis. Collect perfor-
     mance metrics. Does anything surprise you?
Capacity Planning Exercise: Imagine you are the owner of four applications we
benchmarked in the case study. The management of your company has asked you to
build a small computing farm for each of those applications with the primary goal being
maximum performance (throughput). The spending budget you were given is tight but
enough to buy 1 mid-level server system (Mac Studio, Supermicro/Dell/HPE server
rack, etc.) or 1 high-end desktop (with overclocked CPU, liquid cooling, top GPU,
fast DRAM) to run each workload, so 4 machines in total. Those could be all four
different systems. Also, you can use the money to buy 3-4 low-end systems; the choice
is yours. The management wants to keep it under $10,000 per application, but they
are flexible (10–20%) if you can justify the expense. Assume that Stockfish remains
single-threaded. Look at the performance characteristics for the four applications once
again and write down which computer parts (CPU, memory, discrete GPU if needed)
you would buy for each of those workloads. Which parameters you will prioritize?
Where will you go with the most expensive part? Where you can save money? Try to
describe it in as much detail as possible, and search the web for exact components
and their prices. Account for all the components of the system: motherboard, disk
drive, cooling solution, power delivery unit, rack/case/tower, etc. What additional
performance experiments would you run to guide your decision?

Chapter Summary
  • In this chapter, we introduced the basic metrics in performance analysis such as
    retired/executed instructions, CPU utilization, IPC/CPI, µops, pipeline slots,
    core/reference clocks, cache misses, and branch mispredictions. We showed how
    each of these metrics can be collected with Linux perf.
  • For more advanced performance analysis, there are many derivative metrics
    that you can collect. For instance, cache misses per kilo instructions (MPKI),
    instructions per function call, branch, load, etc. (Ip*), ILP, MLP, and others.

                                                                        Summary

  The case studies in this chapter show how you can get actionable insights from
  analyzing these metrics.
• Be careful about drawing conclusions just by looking at the aggregate numbers.
  Don’t fall into the trap of “Excel performance engineering”, i.e., only collecting
  performance metrics and never looking at the code. Always seek a second source
  of data (e.g., performance profiles, discussed later) to verify your ideas.
• Memory bandwidth and latency are crucial factors in the performance of many
  production software packages nowadays, including AI, HPC, databases, and
  many general-purpose applications. Memory bandwidth depends on the DRAM
  speed (in MT/s) and the number of memory channels. Modern high-end server
  platforms have 8–12 memory channels and can reach up to 500 GB/s for the
  whole system and up to 50 GB/s in single-threaded mode. Memory latency
  nowadays doesn’t change a lot, in fact, it is getting slightly worse with new
  DDR4 and DDR5 generations. The majority of modern client-facing systems
  fall in the range of 70–110 ns latency per memory access. Server platforms may
  have higher memory latencies.

