
In the previous chapter, we explored the features implemented in modern processors to
aid performance analysis. However, if you were to start directly using those features, it
would become very nuanced very quickly as it requires a lot of low-level programming
to make use of them. Luckily, performance analysis tools take care of all the complexity
that is required to effectively use these hardware performance monitoring features.
This makes profiling go smoothly, but it’s still critical to have an intuition of how such
tools obtain and interpret the data. That is why we now discuss analysis tools only
after we have discussed CPU performance monitoring features.
This chapter gives a quick overview of the most popular performance analysis tools
available on major platforms. Some of the tools are cross-platform but the majority
are not, so it is important to know what tools are available to you. Profiling tools are
usually developed and maintained by hardware vendors themselves because they are
the ones who know how to properly use performance monitoring features available on
their processors. So, the choice of a tool for advanced performance engineering work
depends on which operating system and CPU you’re using.
After reading the chapter, take the time to practice using tools that you may eventually
use. Familiarize yourself with the interface and workflow of those tools. Profile the
application that you work with daily. Even if you don’t find any actionable insights,
you will be much better prepared when the actual need arises.

7.1     Intel VTune Profiler
VTune Profiler (formerly VTune Amplifier) is a performance analysis tool for x86-based
machines with a rich graphical interface. It can be run on Linux or Windows operating
systems. We skip discussion about MacOS support for VTune since it doesn’t work
on Apple’s chips (e.g., M1 and M2), and Intel-based Macbooks are quickly becoming
obsolete.
VTune can be used on both Intel and AMD systems. However, advanced hardware-
based sampling requires an Intel-manufactured CPU. For example, you won’t be able
to collect hardware performance counters on an AMD system with Intel VTune.
As of early 2023, VTune is available for free as a stand-alone tool or as part of the
Intel oneAPI Base Toolkit.132

How to configure it
On Linux, VTune can use two data collectors: Linux perf and VTune’s own driver
called SEP. The first type is used for user-mode sampling, but if you want to perform
advanced analysis, you need to build and install the SEP driver, which is not too hard.
# go to the sepdk folder in vtune's installation
$ cd ~/intel/oneapi/vtune/latest/sepdk/src

 132 Intel oneAPI Base Toolkit - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi

/base-toolkit.html

# build the drivers
$ ./build-driver
# add vtune group and add your user to that group
# create a new shell, or reboot the system
$ sudo groupadd vtune
$ sudo usermod -a -G vtune `whoami`
# install sep driver
$ sudo ./insmod-sep -r -g vtune

After you’ve done with the steps above, you should be able to use advanced analysis
types like Microarchitectural Exploration and Memory Access.

Windows does not require any additional configuration after you install VTune. Col-
lecting hardware performance events requires administrator privileges.

What you can do with it:
  • Find hotspots: functions, loops, statements.
  • Monitor various CPU-specific performance events, e.g., branch mispredictions
    and L3 cache misses.
  • Locate lines of code where these events happen.
  • Characterize CPU performance bottlenecks with TMA methodology.
  • Filter data for a specific function, process, time period, or logical core.
  • Observe the workload behavior over time (including CPU frequency, memory
    bandwidth utilization, etc).

VTune can provide very rich information about a running process. It is the right tool
for you if you’re looking to improve the overall performance of an application. VTune
always provides aggregated data over a period of time, so it can be used for finding
optimization opportunities for the “average case”.

What you cannot do with it:
  • Analyze very short execution anomalies.
  • Observe system-wide complicated software dynamics.

Due to the sampling nature of the tool, it will eventually miss events with a very short
duration (e.g., sub-microsecond).

Example
Below is a series of screenshots of VTune’s most interesting features. For this example,
I took POV-Ray, which is a ray tracer used to create 3D graphics. Figure 7.1 shows
the hotpots analysis of the built-in POV-Ray 3.7 benchmark, compiled with clang14
compiler with -O3 -ffast-math -march=native -g options, and run on an Intel
Alder Lake system (Core i7-1260P, 4 P-cores + 8 E-cores) with 4 worker threads.

At the left part of the image, you can see a list of hot functions in the workload along
with the corresponding CPU time percentage and the number of retired instructions.
On the right panel, you can see the most frequent call stack that leads to calling
the function pov::Noise. According to that screenshot, 44.4% of the time function

                                                                    7.1    Intel VTune Profiler

Figure 7.1: VTune’s hotspots view of povray built-in benchmark.

pov::Noise, was called from pov::Evaluate_TPat, which in turn was called from
pov::Compute_Pigment.133
If you double-click on the pov::Noise function, you will see an image that is shown
in Figure 7.2. For the interest of space, only the most important columns are shown.
The left panel shows the source code and CPU time that corresponds to each line
of code. On the right, you can see assembly instructions along with the CPU time
that was attributed to them. Highlighted machine instructions correspond to line
476 in the left panel. The sum of all CPU time percentages (not just the ones that
are visible) in each panel equals to the total CPU time attributed to the pov::Noise
function, which is 26.8%.
When you use VTune to profile applications running on Intel CPUs, it can collect
many different performance events. To illustrate this, I ran a different analysis type,
Microarchitecture Exploration. To access raw event counts, you can switch the view
to Hardware Events as shown in Figure 7.3. To enable switching views, you need to
tick the mark in Options → General → Show all applicable viewpoints. Near the top
of Figure 7.3, you can see that the Platform tab is selected. Two other pages are also
useful. The Summary page gives you the absolute number of raw performance events
as collected from CPU counters. The Event Count page gives you the same data with
a per-function breakdown.
Figure 7.3 is quite busy and requires some explanation. The top panel, indicated
with 1 , is a timeline view that shows the behavior of our four worker threads over
time with respect to L1 cache misses, plus some tiny activity of the main thread
 133 Notice that the call stack doesn’t lead all the way to the main function. This happens because,

with the hardware-based collection, VTune uses LBR to sample call stacks, which provides limited
depth. Most likely we’re dealing with recursive functions here, and to investigate that further users
will have to dig into the code.

Figure 7.2: VTune’s source code view of povray built-in benchmark.

(TID: 3102135), which spawns all the worker threads. The higher the black bar, the
more events (L1 cache misses in this case) happened at any given moment. Notice
occasional spikes in L1 misses for all four worker threads. We can use this view to
observe different or repeatable phases of the workload. Then to figure out which
functions were executed at that time, we can select an interval and click “filter in”
to focus just on that portion of the running time. The region indicated with 2 is
an example of such filtering. To see the updated list of functions, you can go to the
Event Count view. Such filtering and zooming features are available on all VTune
timeline views.

The region indicated with 3 shows performance events that were collected and their
distribution over time. This time it is not a per-thread view, but rather it shows
aggregated data across all the threads. In addition to observing execution phases, you
can also visually extract some interesting information. For example, we can see that
the number of executed branches is high (BR_INST_RETIRED.ALL_BRANCHES), but the
misprediction rate is quite low (BR_MISP_RETIRED.ALL_BRANCHES). This can lead you
to the conclusion that branch misprediction is not a bottleneck for POV-Ray. If you
scroll down, you will see that the number of L3 misses is zero, and L2 cache misses
are very rare as well. This tells us that 99% of memory access requests are served by
L1, and the rest of them are served by L2. By combining these two observations, we
can conclude that the application is likely bound by compute, i.e., the CPU is busy
calculating something, not waiting for memory or recovering from a misprediction.

Finally, the bottom panel 4 shows the CPU frequency chart for four hardware
threads. Hovering over different time slices tells us that the frequency of those cores
fluctuates in the 3.2–3.4GHz region.

                                                                     7.2   AMD uProf

Figure 7.3: VTune’s perf events timeline view of povray built-in benchmark.

7.2    AMD uProf
The uProf profiler is a tool developed by AMD for monitoring the performance of
applications running on AMD processors. While uProf can be used on Intel processors
as well, you will be able to use only CPU-independent features. The profiler is available
for free to download and can be used on Windows, Linux, and FreeBSD. AMD uProf
can be used for profiling on multiple virtual machines (VMs), including Microsoft
Hyper-V, KVM, VMware ESXi, and Citrix Xen, but not all features are available on
all VMs. Also, uProf supports analyzing applications written in various languages,
including C, C++, Java, .NET/CLR.

How to configure it
On Linux, uProf uses Linux perf for data collection. On Windows, uProf uses its own
sampling driver that gets installed when you install uProf, no additional configuration
is required. AMD uProf supports both command-line interface (CLI) and graphical
interface. The CLI interface requires two separate steps—collect and report, similar
to Linux perf.

What you can do with it:
   • Find hotspots: functions, statements, instructions.
   • Monitor various hardware performance events and locate lines of code where
     these events happen.
   • Filter data for a specific function or thread.
   • Observe the workload behavior over time: view various performance events in

     the timeline chart.
   • Analyze hot callpaths: call graph, flame graph, and bottom-up charts.
In addition, uProf can monitor various OS events on Linux: thread state, thread
synchronization, system calls, page faults, and others. You can use it to analyze
OpenMP applications to detect thread imbalance and analyze MPI134 applications
to detect the load imbalance among the nodes of the MPI cluster. More details on
various features of uProf can be found in the User Guide135 .

What you cannot do with it:
Due to the sampling nature of the tool, it will eventually miss events with a very short
duration. The reported samples are statistically estimated numbers, which are most of
the time sufficient to analyze the performance but not the exact count of the events.

Example
To demonstrate the look-and-feel of the AMD uProf tool, we ran the dense LU matrix
factorization component from the Scimark2136 benchmark on an AMD Ryzen 9 7950X,
running Windows 11, with 64 GB RAM.

                        Figure 7.4: uProf’s Function Hotspots view.

Figure 7.4 shows Function Hotpots analysis (selected in the menu list on the left side
of the image). At the top of the image, you can see an event timeline showing the
 134 MPI - Message Passing Interface, a standard for parallel programming on distributed memory

systems.
 135 AMD uProf User Guide - https://www.amd.com/en/developer/uprof.html#documentation
 136 Scimark2 - https://math.nist.gov/scimark2/index.html

                                                          7.3   Apple Xcode Instruments

number of events observed at various times of the application execution. On the right,
you can select which metric to plot; we selected RETIRED_BR_INST_MISP. Notice a
spike in branch mispredictions in the time range from 20s to 40s. You can select this
region to analyze closely what’s going on there. Once you do that, it will update the
bottom panels to show statistics only for that time interval.
Below the timeline graph, you can see a list of hot functions, along with corresponding
sampled performance events and calculated metrics. Event counts can be viewed as
sample count, raw event count, or percentage. There are many interesting numbers to
look at, but we will not dive deep into the analysis. Instead, readers are encouraged
to figure out the performance impact of branch mispredictions and find their source.
Below the functions table, you can see a bottom-up call stack view for the selected
function in the functions table. As we can see, the selected LU_factor function is
called from kernel_measureLU, which in turn is called from main. In the Scimark2
benchmark, this is the only call stack for LU_factor, even though it shows Call
Stacks [5]. This is an artifact of collection that can be ignored. But in other
applications, a hot function can be called from many different places, so you would
want to examine other call stacks as well.
If you double-click on any function, uProf will open the source/assembly view for
that function. We don’t show this view for brevity. On the left panel, there are other
views available, like Metrics, Flame Graph, Call Graph view, and Thread Concurrency.
They are useful for analysis as well, however we decided to skip them. Readers can
experiment and look at those views on their own.

7.3    Apple Xcode Instruments
The most convenient way to do similar performance analysis on MacOS is to use Xcode
Instruments. This is an application performance analyzer and visualizer that comes
for free with Xcode. The Instruments profiler is built on top of the DTrace tracing
framework that was ported to MacOS from Solaris. It has many tools to inspect the
performance of an application and enables us to do most of the basic things that other
profilers like Intel VTune can do. The easiest way to get the profiler is to install Xcode
from the Apple App Store. The tool requires no configuration; once you install it
you’re ready to go.
In Instruments, you use specialized tools, known as instruments, to trace different
aspects of your apps, processes, and devices over time. Instruments has a powerful
visualization mechanism. It collects data as it profiles and presents the results to you
in real time. You can gather different types of data and view them side by side, which
enables you to see patterns in the execution, correlate system events and find very
subtle performance issues.
In this chapter, we will only showcase the “CPU Counters” instrument, which is the
most relevant for this book. Instruments can also visualize GPU, network, and disk
activity, track memory allocations, and releases, capture user events, such as mouse
clicks, provide insights into power efficiency, and more. You can read more about
those use cases in the Instruments documentation.137
137 Instruments documentation - https://help.apple.com/instruments/mac/current

What you can do with it:
  • Access hardware performance counters on Apple processors.
  • Find hotspots in a program along with their call stacks.
  • Inspect generated ARM assembly code side-by-side with the source code.
  • Filter data for a selected interval on the timeline.

What you cannot do with it:
Similar to other sampling-based profilers, Xcode Instruments has the same blind spots
as VTune and uProf.

Example: Profiling Clang Compilation
In this example, I will show how to collect hardware performance counters on an Apple
Mac mini with the M1 processor, macOS 13.5.1 Ventura, and 16 GB RAM. I took one
of the largest files in the LLVM codebase and profiled its compilation using version
15.0 of the Clang C++ compiler.

Figure 7.5: Xcode Instruments: timeline and statistics panels.

Here is the command line that I used:

                                                       7.3   Apple Xcode Instruments

$ clang++ -O3 -DNDEBUG -arch arm64 <other options ...> -c
     llvm/lib/Transforms/Vectorize/LoopVectorize.cpp

Figure 7.5 shows the main timeline view of Xcode Instruments. This screenshot was
taken after the compilation had finished. We will get back to it a bit later, but first,
let us show how to start the profiling session.
To begin, open Instruments and choose the CPU Counters analysis type. The first
step you need to do is configure the collection. Click and hold the red target icon (see
 1 in Figure 7.5), then select Recording Options. . . from the menu. It will display the
dialog window shown in Figure 7.6. This is where you can add hardware performance
monitoring events for collection. Apple has documented its hardware performance
monitoring events in its manual [Apple, 2024, Section 6.2 Performance Monitoring
Events].

Figure 7.6: Xcode Instruments: CPU Counters options.

The second step is to set the profiling target. To do that, click and hold the name of
an application (marked 2 in Figure 7.5) and choose the one you’re interested in. Set
the arguments and environment variables if needed. Now, you’re ready to start the
collection; press the red target icon 1 .
Instruments shows a timeline and constantly updates statistics about the running
application. Once the program finishes, Instruments will display the results like those
shown in Figure 7.5. The compilation took 7.3 seconds and we can see how the volume
of events changed over time. For example, the number of executed branch instructions
and mispredictions increased towards the end of the runtime. You can zoom in to that
interval on the timeline to examine the functions involved.
The bottom panel shows numerical statistics. To inspect the hotspots similar to Intel
VTune’s bottom-up view, select Profile in the menu 3 , then click the Call Tree menu
 4 and check the Invert Call Tree box. This is exactly what we did in Figure 7.5.
Instruments show raw counts along with the percentages of the total, which is useful if
you want to calculate secondary metrics like IPC, MPKI, etc. On the right side, we have

the hottest call stack for the function llvm::FoldingSetBase::FindNodeOrInsertPos.
If you double-click on a function, you can inspect ARM assembly instructions
generated for the source code.
To the best of my knowledge, there are no alternative profiling tools of similar quality
available on MacOS platforms. Power users could use the dtrace framework itself
by writing short (or long) command-line scripts, but a discussion of how to do so is
beyond the scope of this book.

7.4     Linux Perf
Linux Perf is probably the most used performance profiler in the world since it is
available on most Linux distributions, which makes it accessible to a wide range of
users. Perf is natively supported in many popular Linux distributions, including
Ubuntu, Red Hat, and Debian. It is included in the kernel, so you can get OS-level
statistics (page faults, CPU migrations, etc.) on any system that runs Linux. As of
mid-2024, the profiler supports x86, ARM, PowerPC64, UltraSPARC, and a few other
CPU types.138 On such platforms, perf provides access to the hardware performance
monitoring features, for example, performance counters. More information about
Linux perf is available on its wiki page139 .

How to configure it
Installing Linux perf is very simple and can be done with a single command:
$ sudo apt-get install linux-tools-common linux-tools-generic linux-tools-`uname -r`
Also, consider changing the following defaults unless security is a concern:
# Allow kernel profiling and access to CPU events for unprivileged users
$ echo 0 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
$ echo kernel.perf_event_paranoid=0 | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.d/local.conf
# Enable kernel modules symbols resolution for unprivileged users
$ echo 0 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/kptr_restrict
$ echo kernel.kptr_restrict=0 | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.d/local.conf

What you can do with it:
Generally, Linux perf can do most of the same things that other profilers can do.
Hardware vendors prioritize enabling their features in Linux perf so that by the time
a new CPU is available on the market, perf already supports it. There are two main
commands that most people use. The first, perf stat, reports a count of specified
performance events. The second, perf record, profiles an application or system in
sampling mode and is often followed by perf report to generate a report from the
sampling data.
The output of the perf record command is a raw dump of samples. Many tools,
built on top of Linux perf, parse raw dump files and provide new analysis types. Here
are the most notable ones:
   • Flame graphs, discussed in Section 7.5.
 138 RISCV is not supported yet as a part of the official kernel, although custom tools from vendors

exist.
 139 Linux perf wiki - https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page.

                                                                   7.5   Flame Graphs

  • KDAB Hotspot,140 a tool that visualizes Linux perf data with an interface very
    similar to Intel VTune. If you have worked with Intel VTune, KDAB Hotspot
    will seem very familiar to you.
  • Netflix Flamescope.141 This tool displays a heat map of sampled events over
    application runtime. You can observe different phases and patterns in the
    behavior of a workload. Netflix engineers found some very subtle performance
    bugs using this tool. Also, you can select a time range on the heat map and
    generate a flame graph for that time range.

What you cannot do with it:
Linux perf is a command-line tool and lacks a Graphical User Interface (GUI), which
makes it hard to filter data, observe how the workload behavior changes over time,
zoom into a portion of the runtime, etc. There is a limited console output provided
through the perf report command, which is fine for quick analysis, although not as
convenient as other GUI profilers. Luckily, as we just mentioned, there are GUI tools
that can post-process and visualize the raw output of Linux perf.

7.5    Flame Graphs
A flame graph is a popular way of visualizing profiling data and the most frequent
code paths in a program. It enables us to see which function calls take the largest
portion of execution time. Figure 7.7 shows an example of a flame graph for the
x264 video encoding benchmark, generated with open-source scripts142 developed by
Brendan Gregg. Nowadays, nearly all profilers can automatically generate a flame
graph as long as the call stacks are collected during the profiling session.

Figure 7.7: A flame graph for the x264 benchmark.

On the flame graph, each rectangle (horizontal bar) represents a function call, and the
140 KDAB Hotspot - https://github.com/KDAB/hotspot.
141 Netflix Flamescope - https://github.com/Netflix/flamescope.
142 Flame graphs by Brendan Gregg - https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph

width of the rectangle indicates the relative execution time taken by the function itself
and by its callees. The function calls happen from the bottom to the top, so we can
see that the hottest path in the program is x264 → threadpool_thread_internal →
... → x264_8_macroblock_analyse. The function threadpool_thread_internal
and its callees account for 74% of the time spent in the program. But the self-time,
i.e., time spent in the function itself is rather small. Similarly, we can do the same
analysis for x264_8_macroblock_analyse, which accounts for 66% of the runtime.
This visualization gives you a very good intuition on where the most time is spent.
Flame graphs are interactive. You can click on any bar on the image and it will zoom
into that particular code path. You can keep zooming until you find a place that
doesn’t look according to your expectations or you reach a leaf/tail function—now
you have actionable information you can use in your analysis. Another strategy is to
figure out what is the hottest function in the program (not immediately clear from
this flame graph) and go bottom-up through the flame graph, trying to understand
from where this hottest function gets called.
Some tools prefer to use an icicle graph, which is the upside-down version of a flame
graph (see an example in Section 7.9).

7.6    Event Tracing for Windows
Microsoft has developed a system-wide tracing facility named Event Tracing for
Windows (ETW). It was originally intended for helping device driver developers but
later found use in analyzing general-purpose applications as well. ETW is available on
all supported Windows platforms (x86 and ARM) with the corresponding platform-
dependent installation packages. ETW records structured events in user and kernel
code with full call stack trace support, which enables you to observe software dynamics
in a running system and solve many challenging performance issues.

How to configure it
Recording ETW data is possible without any extra download since Windows 10 with
WPR.exe. But to enable system-wide profiling you must be an administrator and have
the SeSystemProfilePrivilege enabled. The Windows Performance Recorder tool
supports a set of built-in recording profiles that are suitable for common performance
issues. You can tailor your recording needs by authoring a custom performance
recorder profile xml file with the .wprp extension.
If you want to not only record but also view the recorded ETW data you need to
install the Windows Performance Toolkit (WPT). You can download it from the
Windows SDK143 or ADK144 download page. The Windows SDK is huge; you don’t
necessarily need all its parts. In our case, we just enabled the checkbox of the Windows
Performance Toolkit. You are allowed to redistribute WPT as a part of your own
application.
 143 Windows SDK Downloads - https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/sdk-

archive/
 144 Windows ADK Downloads - https://learn.microsof t.com/en- us/windows- hardware/get-

started/adk-install#other-adk-downloads

                                                7.7   Specialized and Hybrid Profilers

What you can do with it:
  • Identify hotspots with a configurable CPU sampling rate from 125 microseconds
    up to 10 seconds. The default is 1 millisecond which costs approximately 5–10%
    runtime overhead.
  • Determine what blocks a certain thread and for how long (e.g., late event signals,
    unnecessary thread sleep, etc).
  • Examine how fast a disk serves read/write requests and discover what initiates
    that work.
  • Check file access performance and patterns (including cached read/writes that
    lead to no disk IO).
  • Trace the TCP/IP stack to see how packets flow between network interfaces and
    computers.
All the items listed above are recorded system-wide for all processes with configurable
call stack traces (kernel and user mode call stacks are combined). It’s also possible to
add your own ETW provider to correlate the system-wide traces with your application
behavior. You can extend the amount of data collected by instrumenting your code.
For example, you can inject enter/leave ETW tracing hooks in functions into your
source code to measure how often a certain function was executed.

What you cannot do with it:
ETW traces are not useful for examining CPU microarchitectural bottlenecks. For
that, use vendor-specific tools like Intel VTune, AMD uProf, Apple Instruments, etc.
ETW traces capture the dynamics of all processes at the system level, however, it
may generate a lot of data. For example, capturing thread context switching data
to observe various waits and delays can easily generate 1–2 GB per minute. That’s
why it is not practical to record high-volume events for hours without overwriting
previously stored traces.
If you’d like to learn more about ETW, there is a more detailed discussion in Appendix
D. We explore tools to record and analyze ETW and present a case study of debugging
a slow start of a program.

7.7    Specialized and Hybrid Profilers
Most of the tools explored so far fall under the category of sampling profilers. These
are great when you want to identify hotspots in your code, but in some cases, they
might not provide the required granularity for analysis. Depending on the profiler
sampling frequency and the behavior of your program, most functions could be fast
enough that they don’t show up in a profiler. In some scenarios, you might want to
manually define which parts of your program need to be measured consistently. Video
games, for instance, render frames (the final image shown on screen) on average at 60
frames per second (FPS); some monitors allow up to 144 FPS. At 60 FPS, each frame
has as little as 16 milliseconds to complete the work before moving on to the next one.
Developers pay particular attention to frames that go above this threshold, as this
causes visible stutter in games and can ruin the player experience. This situation is
hard to capture with a sampling profiler.

Developers have created profilers that provide features helpful in specific environments,
usually with a marker API that you can use to manually instrument your code. This
enables you to observe the performance of a particular function or a block of code
(later referred to as a zone). Continuing with the game industry, there are several tools
in this space: some are integrated directly into game engines like Unreal, while others
are provided as external libraries and tools that can be integrated into your project.
Some of the most commonly used profilers are Tracy, RAD Telemetry, Remotery, and
Optick (Windows only). Next, we showcase Tracy,145 as this seems to be one of the
most popular projects; however, these concepts apply to the other profilers as well.

What you can do with Tracy:
   • Debug performance anomalies in a program, e.g., slow frames.
   • Correlate slow events with other events in a system.
   • Find common characteristics among slow events.
   • Inspect source code and assembly.
   • Do a “before/after” comparison after a code change.

What you cannot do with Tracy:
   • Examine CPU microarchitectural issues, e.g., collect various performance coun-
     ters.

Case Study: Analyzing Slow Frames with Tracy
In this example, we will use the ToyPathTracer146 program, a simple path tracer,
which is a simplified ray-tracing technique that shoots thousands of rays per pixel
into the scene to render a realistic image. To process a frame, the implementation
distributes the processing of each row of pixels to a separate thread.

To emulate a typical scenario where Tracy can help to diagnose the root cause of
the problem, we have manually modified the code so that some frames will consume
more time than others. Listing 7.1 shows an outline of the code along with added
Tracy instrumentation. Notice, that we randomly select frames to slow down. Also,
we included Tracy’s header and added the ZoneScoped and FrameMark macros to the
functions that we want to track. The FrameMark macro can be inserted to identify
individual frames in the profiler. The duration of each frame will be visible on the
timeline, which is very useful.

Each frame can contain many zones, designated by the ZoneScoped macro. Similar
to frames, there are many instances of a zone. Every time we enter a zone, Tracy
captures statistics for a new instance of that zone. The ZoneScoped macro creates a
C++ object on the stack that will record the runtime activity of the code within the
scope of the object’s lifetime. Tracy refers to this scope as a zone. At the zone entry,
the current timestamp is captured. Once the function exits, the object’s destructor
will record a new timestamp and store this timing data, along with the function name.
145 Tracy - https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy
146 ToyPathTracer - https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy/tree/master/examples/ToyPathTracer

                                                7.7   Specialized and Hybrid Profilers

Listing 7.1 Tracy Instrumentation
#include "tracy/Tracy.hpp"

void DoExtraWork() {
  ZoneScoped;
  // imitate useful work
}

void TraceRowJob() {
  ZoneScoped;
  if (frameCount == randomlySelected)
    DoExtraWork();
  // ...
}

void RenderFrame() {
  ZoneScoped;
  for (...) {
    TraceRowJob();
  }
  FrameMark;
}

Tracy has two operation modes: it can store all the timing data until the profiler
is connected to the application (the default mode), or it can only start recording
when a profiler is connected. The latter option can be enabled by specifying the
TRACY_ON_DEMAND pre-processor macro when compiling the application. This mode
should be preferred if you want to distribute an application that can be profiled as
needed. With this option, the tracing code can be compiled into the application
and it will cause little to no overhead to the running program unless the profiler is
attached. The profiler is a separate application that connects to a running application
to capture and display the live profiling data, also known as the “flight recorder” mode.
The profiler can be run on a separate machine so that it doesn’t interfere with the
running application. Note, however, that this doesn’t mean that the runtime overhead
caused by the instrumentation code disappears. It is still there, but the overhead of
visualizing the data is avoided in this case.

We used Tracy to debug the program and find the reason why some frames are slower
than others. The data was captured on a Windows 11 machine, equipped with a Ryzen
7 5800X processor. The program was compiled with MSVC 19.36.32532. Tracy’s
graphical interface is quite rich, but unfortunately contains too much detail to fit on a
single screenshot, so we break it down into pieces. At the top, there is a timeline view
as shown in Figure 7.8, cropped to fit onto the page. It shows only a portion of frame
76, which took 44.1 ms to render. On that diagram, we see the Main thread and five
WorkerThreads that were active during that frame. All threads, including the main
thread, are performing work to advance progress in rendering the final image. As we
said earlier, each thread processes a row of pixels inside the TraceRowJob zone. Each
TraceRowJob zone instance contains many smaller zones, that are not visible. Tracy
collapses inner zones and only shows the number of collapsed instances. This is what,
for example, number 4,109 means under the first TraceRowJob in the Main Thread.
Notice the instances of DoExtraWork zones, nested under TraceRowJob zones. This

observation already can lead to a discovery, but in a real application, it may not be so
obvious. Let’s leave this for now.

Figure 7.8: Tracy main timeline view. It shows the main thread and five worker threads
                                while rendering a frame.

Right above the main panel, there is a histogram that displays the times for all the
recorded frames (see Figure 7.9). It makes it easier to spot those frames that took
longer than average to complete. In this example, most frames take around 33 ms
(the yellow bars). However, some frames take longer than this and are marked in red.
As seen in the screenshot, a tooltip showing the details of a given frame is displayed
when you point the mouse at a bar in the histogram. In this example, we are showing
the details for the last frame.

Figure 7.9: Tracy frame timings. You can find frames that take more time to render than
                                     other frames.

Figure 7.10 illustrates the CPU data section of the profiler. This area shows which
core a given thread is executing on and it also displays context switches. This section
will also display other programs that are running on the CPU. As seen in the image,
the details for a given thread are displayed when hovering the mouse on a given
section in the CPU data view. Details include the CPU the thread is running on, the
parent program, the individual thread, and timing information. We can see that the
TestCpu.exe thread was active on CPU 1 only for 4.4 ms during the entire run of the
program.
Next comes the panel that provides information on where our program spends its time
(hotspots). Figure 7.11 is a screenshot of Tracy’s statistics window. We can check the
recorded data, including the total time a given function was active, how many times

                                                 7.7   Specialized and Hybrid Profilers

Figure 7.10: Tracy CPU data view. You can see what each CPU core was doing at any given
                                       moment.

it was invoked, etc. It’s also possible to select a time range in the main view to filter
information corresponding to a time interval.

Figure 7.11: Tracy function statistics. A regular “hotspot” view that provides information
                              where a program spends time.

The last set of panels that we show, enables us to analyze individual zone instances in
more depth. Once you click on any zone instance, say, on the main timeline view or on
the CPU data view, Tracy will open a Zone Info window (see the left panel in Figure
7.12) with the details for this zone instance. It shows how much of the execution
time is consumed by the zone itself or its children. In this example, execution of the
TraceRowJob function took 19.24 ms, but the time consumed by the function itself
without its callees (self time) takes 1.36 ms, which is only 7%. The rest of the time is
consumed by child zones.
It’s easy to spot a call to DoExtraWork that takes the bulk of the time, 16.99 ms out of
19.24 ms (see the left panel in Figure 7.12). Notice that this particular TraceRowJob
instance runs almost 4.4 times as long as the average case (indicated by “437.93%
of the mean time” on the image). Bingo! We found one of the slow instances where
the TraceRowJob function was slowed down because of some extra work. One way to
proceed would be to click on the DoExtraWork row to inspect this zone instance. This
will update the Zone Info view with the details of the DoExtraWork instance so that we
can dig down to understand what caused the performance issue. This view also shows

the source file and line of code where the zone starts. So, another strategy would be
to check the source code to understand why the current TraceRowJob instance takes
more time than usual.

Figure 7.12: Tracy zone detail windows. It shows statistics for a slow instance of the
                                    TraceRowJob zone.

Remember, we saw in Figure 7.9, that there are other slow frames. Let’s see if this is
the common problem among all the slow frames. If we click on the Statistics button,
it will display the Find Zone panel (on the right of Figure 7.12). Here we can see
the time histogram that aggregates all zone instances. This is particularly useful to
determine how much variation there is when executing a function. Looking at the
histogram on the right, we see that the median duration for the TraceRowJob function
is 3.59 ms, with most calls taking between 1 and 7 ms. However, there are a few
instances that take longer than 10 ms, with a peak of 23 ms. Note that the time axis
is logarithmic. The Find Zone window also provides other data points, including the
mean, median, and standard deviation for the inspected zone.
Now we can examine other slow instances to find what is common between them,
which will help us to determine the root cause of the issue. From this view, you can
select one of the slow zones. This will update the Zone Info window with the details
of that zone instance and by clicking the Zoom to zone button, the main window will
focus on this slow zone. From here we can check if the selected TraceRowJob instance
has similar characteristics as the one that we just analyzed.

Other Features of Tracy
Tracy monitors the performance of the whole system, not just the application itself.
It also behaves like a traditional sampling profiler as it reports data for applications
that are running concurrently with the profiled program. The tool monitors thread
migration and idle time by tracing kernel context switches (administrator privileges

are required). Zone statistics (call counts, time, histogram) are exact because Tracy
captures every zone entry/exit, but system-level data and source-code-level data are
sampled.

In the example, we used manual markup of interesting areas in the code. However,
doing this is not a strict requirement to start using Tracy. You can profile an unmodified
application and add instrumentation later when you know where it’s needed. Tracy
provides many other features, too many to cover in this overview. Here are some of
the notable ones:

  • Tracking memory allocations and locks.
  • Session comparison. This is vital to ensure a change provides the expected
    benefits. It’s possible to load two profiling sessions and compare zone data before
    and after the change was made.
  • Source code and assembly view. If debug symbols are available, Tracy can also
    display hotspots in the source code and related assembly just like Intel VTune
    and other profilers.

In comparison with other tools like Intel VTune and AMD uProf, with Tracy, you
cannot get the same level of CPU microarchitectural insights (e.g., various performance
events). This is because Tracy does not leverage the hardware features specific to a
particular platform.

The overhead of profiling with Tracy depends on how many zones you have activated.
The author of Tracy provides some data points that he measured on a program that
does image compression: an overhead of 18% and 34% with two different compression
schemes. A total of 200M zones were profiled, with an average overhead of 2.25 ns per
zone. This test instrumented a very hot function. In other scenarios, the overhead
will be much lower. While it’s possible to keep the overhead small, you need to be
careful about which sections of code you want to instrument, especially if you decide
to use it in production.

7.8    Memory Profiling
So far in this chapter, we have discussed tools that identify places where a program
spends most of its time. In this section, we will focus on a program’s interaction
with memory. This is usually called memory profiling. In particular, we will learn
how to collect memory usage, profile heap allocations and measure memory footprint.
Memory profiling helps you understand how an application uses memory over time
and helps you build an accurate mental model of a program’s interaction with memory.
Here are some questions it can answer:

  • What is a program’s total virtual memory consumption and how does it change
    over time?
  • Where and when does a program make heap allocations?
  • What are the code places with the largest amount of allocated memory?
  • How much memory does a program access every second?
  • What is the total memory footprint of a program?

7.8.1    Memory Usage
Memory usage is frequently described by Virtual Memory Size (VSZ) and Resident
Set Size (RSS). VSZ includes all memory that a process can access, e.g., stack, heap,
the memory used to encode instructions of an executable, and instructions from linked
shared libraries, including the memory that is swapped out to disk/SSD. On the other
hand, RSS measures how much memory allocated to a process resides in RAM. Thus,
RSS does not include memory that is swapped out or was never touched yet by that
process. Also, RSS does not include memory from shared libraries that were not
loaded to memory. Files that are mapped to memory with mmap also contribute to
VSZ and RSS usage.
Consider an example. Process A has 200K of stack and heap allocations of which
100K resides in the main memory; the rest is swapped out or unused. It has a 500K
binary, from which only 400K was touched. Process A is linked against 2500K of
shared libraries and has only loaded 1000K in the main memory.
VSZ: 200K + 500K + 2500K = 3200K
RSS: 100K + 400K + 1000K = 1500K

Developers can observe both RSS and VSZ on Linux with a standard top utility,
however, both metrics can change very rapidly. Luckily, some tools can record and
visualize memory usage over time. Figure 7.13 shows the memory usage of the PSPNet
image segmentation algorithm, which is a part of the AI Benchmark Alpha.147 This
chart was created based on the output of a tool called memory_profiler148 , a Python
library built on top of the cross-platform psutil149 package.

Figure 7.13: RSS and VSZ memory utilization of AI_bench PSPNet image segmentation.

In addition to standard RSS and VSZ metrics, people have developed a few more
sophisticated metrics. Since RSS includes both the memory that is unique to the
process and the memory shared with other processes, it’s not clear how much memory
a process has for itself. The USS (Unique Set Size) is the memory that is unique to
a process and which would be freed if the process was terminated right now. The
PSS (Proportional Set Size) represents unique memory plus the amount of shared
memory, evenly divided between the processes that share it. E.g. if a process has 10
147 AI Benchmark Alpha - https://ai-benchmark.com/alpha.html
 148 Easyper blog: Measuring memory footprint with SDE - https://easyperf.net/blog/2024/02/12

/Memory-Profiling-Part3
 149 psutil - https://github.com/giampaolo/psutil

MB all to itself (USS) and 10 MBs shared with another process, its PSS will be 15
MBs. The psutil library supports measuring these metrics (Linux-only), which can
be visualized by memory_profiler.
On Windows, similar concepts are defined by Committed Memory Size and Working
Set Size. They are not direct equivalents to VSZ and RSS but can be used to effectively
estimate the memory usage of Windows applications. The RAMMap150 tool provides
a rich set of information about memory usage for the system and individual processes.
When developers talk about memory consumption, they implicitly mean heap usage.
Heap is, in fact, the biggest memory consumer in most applications as it accommodates
all dynamically allocated objects. But heap is not the only memory consumer. For
completeness, let’s mention others:
  • Stack: Memory used by stack frames in an application. Each thread inside an
    application gets its own stack memory space. Usually, the stack size is only a
    few MB, and the application will crash if it exceeds the limit. For example, the
    default size of stack memory on Linux is usually 8MB, although it may vary
    depending on the distribution and kernel settings. The default stack size on
    macOS is also 8MB, but on Windows, it’s only 1 MB. The total stack memory
    consumption is proportional to the number of threads running in the system.
  • Code: Memory that is used to store the code (instructions) of an application and
    its libraries. In most cases, it doesn’t contribute much to memory consumption,
    but there are exceptions. For example, the Clang 17 C++ compiler has a 33
    MB code section, while the latest Windows Chrome browser has 187MB of its
    219MB chrome.dll dedicated to code. However, not all parts of the code are
    frequently exercised while a program is running. We show how to measure code
    footprint in Section 11.9.
Since the heap is usually the largest consumer of memory resources, it makes sense for
developers to focus on this part of memory when they analyze the memory utilization
of their applications. In the following section, we will examine heap consumption and
memory allocations in a popular real-world application.

7.8.2   Case Study: Analyzing Stockfish’s Heap Allocations
In this case study, I use heaptrack151 , an open-sourced heap memory profiler for
Linux developed by KDE. Ubuntu users can install it very easily with apt install
heaptrack heaptrack-gui. Heaptrack can find places in the code where the largest
and most frequent allocations happen among many other things. On Windows, you
can use Mtuner152 which has similar capabilities to Heaptrack.
I analyzed Stockfish’s153 chess engine built-in benchmark, which we have already
looked at in Section 4.11. As before, I compiled it using the Clang 15 compiler with
-O3 -mavx2 options. I collected the Heaptrack memory profile of a single-threaded
Stockfish built-in benchmark on an Intel Alder Lake i7-1260P processor using the
following command:
150 RAMMap - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/rammap
151 Heaptrack - https://github.com/KDE/heaptrack
152 MTuner - https://github.com/milostosic/MTuner
153 Stockfish - https://github.com/official-stockfish/Stockfish

$ heaptrack ./stockfish bench 128 1 24 default depth
Figure 7.14 shows us a summary view of the Stockfish memory profile. Here are some
interesting facts we can learn from it:
  • The total number of allocations is 10614.
  • Almost half of the allocations are temporary, i.e., allocations that are directly
    followed by their deallocation.
  • Peak heap memory consumption is 204 MB.
  • Stockfish::std_aligned_alloc is responsible for the largest portion of the
    allocated heap space (182 MB). But it is not among the most frequent allocation
    spots (middle table), so it is likely allocated once and stays alive until the end
    of the program.
  • Almost half of all the allocation calls come from operator new, which are all
    temporary allocations. Can we get rid of temporary allocations? You will find
    out later.
  • Leaked memory is not a concern for this case study.

Figure 7.14: Stockfish memory profile with Heaptrack, summary view.

Notice, that there are many tabs on the top of the image; we will explore some of
them. Figure 7.15 shows the memory usage of the Stockfish built-in benchmark. The
memory usage stays constant at 200 MB throughout the entire run of the program.
Total consumed memory is broken into slices, e.g., regions 1 and 2 on the image.
Each slice corresponds to a particular allocation. Interestingly, it was not a single
big 182 MB allocation that was done through Stockfish::std_aligned_alloc as
we thought earlier. Instead, there are two: slice 1 134.2 MB and slice 2 48.4 MB.
Both allocations stay alive until the very end of the benchmark.
Does it mean that there are no memory allocations after the startup phase? Let’s
find out. Figure 7.16 shows the accumulated number of allocations over time. Similar
to the consumed memory chart (Figure 7.15), allocations are sliced according to the
accumulated number of memory allocations attributed to each function. As we can
see, new allocations keep coming from not just a single place, but many. The most
frequent allocations are done through operator new that corresponds to region 1
on the image.
Notice there are new allocations at a steady pace throughout the life of the program.

Figure 7.15: Stockfish memory profile with Heaptrack, memory usage over time stays
                                        constant.

However, as we just saw, memory consumption doesn’t change; how is that possible?
Well, it can be possible if we deallocate previously allocated buffers and allocate new
ones of the same size (also known as temporary allocations).

Figure 7.16: Stockfish memory profile with Heaptrack, the number of allocations is growing.

Since the number of allocations is growing but the total consumed memory doesn’t
change, we are dealing with temporary allocations. Let’s find out where in the code
they are coming from. It is easy to do with the help of a flame graph shown in Figure
7.17. There are 4800 temporary allocations in total with 90.8% of those coming from
operator new. Thanks to the flame graph we know the entire call stack that leads to
4360 temporary allocations. Interestingly, those temporary allocations are initiated
by std::stable_sort which allocates a temporary buffer to do the sorting. One way
to get rid of those temporary allocations would be to use an in-place stable sorting
algorithm. However, by doing so I observed an 8% drop in performance, so I discarded
this change.

Similar to temporary allocations, you can also find the paths that lead to the largest
allocations in a program. In the dropdown menu at the top of Figure 7.17, you would
need to select the “Consumed” flame graph.

Figure 7.17: Stockfish memory profile with Heaptrack, temporary allocations flamegraph.

7.8.3    Memory Intensity and Footprint
In this section, I will show how to measure the memory intensity and memory footprint
of a program. Memory intensity refers to the size of data being accessed by a program
during an interval, measured, for example, in MB per second. A program with high
memory intensity makes heavy use of the memory system, often accessing large amounts
of data. On the other hand, a program with low memory intensity makes relatively
fewer memory accesses and may be more compute-bound, meaning it spends more
time performing calculations rather than waiting for data from memory. Measuring
memory intensity during short time intervals enables us to observe how it changes
over time.
Memory footprint measures the total number of bytes accessed by an application.
While calculating memory footprint, we only consider unique memory locations. That
is, if a memory location was accessed twice during the lifetime of a program, we count
the touched memory only once.
Figure 7.18 shows the memory intensity and footprint of four workloads: Blender
ray tracing, Stockfish chess engine, Clang++ compilation, and AI_bench PSPNet
segmentation. We collect data for the chart with the Intel SDE (Software Development
Emulator) tool using the method described on the Easyperf blog154 with intervals of
one billion instructions.
The solid line (Intensity) tracks the number of bytes accessed during each interval of
1B instructions. Here, we don’t count how many times a certain memory location was
accessed. If a memory location was loaded twice during an interval I, we count the
touched memory only once. However, if this memory location is accessed the third
time in the subsequent interval I+1, it contributes to the memory intensity of the
interval I+1. Because of this, we cannot aggregate time intervals. For example, we
can see that, on average, the Blender benchmark touches roughly 20MB every interval.
We cannot aggregate its 150 consecutive intervals and say that the memory footprint
of Blender was 150 * 20MB = 3GB. It would be true only if a program never repeats
memory accesses across intervals.
 154 Easyper blog: Measuring memory footprint with SDE - https://easyperf.net/blog/2024/02/12

/Memory-Profiling-Part3

Figure 7.18: Memory intensity and footprint of four workloads. Intensity: total memory
accessed during 1B instructions interval. Footprint: accessed memory that has not been seen
                                           before.

The dashed line (Footprint) tracks the size of the new data accessed every interval
since the start of the program. Here, we count the number of bytes accessed during
each 1B instruction interval that have never been touched before by the program.
Aggregating all the intervals (cross-hatched area under that dashed line) gives us
the total memory footprint for a program. Here are the memory footprint numbers
for our benchmarks: Clang C++ compilation (487MB); Stockfish (188MB); PSPNet
(1888MB); and Blender (149MB). Keep in mind, that these unique memory locations
can be accessed many times, so the overall pressure on the memory subsystem may be
high even if the footprint is relatively small.
As you can see our workloads have very different behavior. Clang compilation has high
memory intensity at the beginning, sometimes spiking to 100MB per 1B instructions,
but after that, it decreases to about 15MB per 1B instructions. Any of the spikes on
the chart may be concerning to a Clang developer: are they expected? Could they
be related to some memory-hungry optimization pass? Can the accessed memory
locations be compacted?
The Blender benchmark is very stable; we can see the start and the end of each
rendered frame. This enables us to focus on just a single frame, without looking at
the entire workload of 1000+ frames. The Stockfish benchmark is a lot more chaotic,
probably because the chess engine crunches different positions which require different
amounts of resources. Finally, the PSPNet segmentation memory intensity is very
interesting as we can spot repetitive patterns. After the initial startup, there are
five or six sine waves from 40B to 95B, then three regions that end with a sharp
spike to 200MB, and then again three mostly flat regions hovering around 25MB
per 1B instructions. This is actionable information that can be used to optimize an
application.

Such charts help us estimate memory intensity and measure the memory footprint of an
application. By looking at the chart, you can observe phases and correlate them with
the underlying algorithm. Ask yourself: “Does it look according to your expectations,
or the workload is doing something sneaky?” You may encounter unexpected spikes in
memory intensity. On many occasions, memory profiling helped identify a problem or
served as an additional data point to support the conclusions that were made during
regular profiling.
In some scenarios, memory footprint helps us estimate the pressure on the memory
subsystem. For instance, if the memory footprint is small (several megabytes), we
might suspect that the pressure on the memory subsystem is low since the data will
likely reside in the L3 cache; remember that available memory bandwidth in modern
processors ranges from tens to hundreds of GB/s and is getting close to 1 TB/s. On
the other hand, when we’re dealing with an application that accesses 10 GB/s and
the memory footprint is much bigger than the size of the L3 cache, then the workload
might put significant pressure on the memory subsystem.
While memory profiling techniques discussed in this chapter certainly help better
understand the behavior of a workload, this is not enough to fully assess the temporal
and spatial locality of memory accesses. We still have no visibility into how many
times a certain memory location was accessed, what is the time interval between
two consecutive accesses to the same memory location, and whether the memory is
accessed sequentially, with strides, or completely random. The topic of data locality of
applications has been researched for a long time. Unfortunately, as of early 2024, there
are no production-quality tools available that would give us such information. Further
details are beyond the scope of this book, however, curious readers are welcome to
read the related article155 on the Easyperf blog.

7.9    Continuous Profiling
In Chapter 5, we covered the various approaches available for conducting performance
analysis, including but not limited to instrumentation, tracing, and sampling. Among
these three approaches, sampling imposes relatively minor runtime overhead and
requires the least amount of upfront work while still offering valuable insight into
application hotspots. However, this insight is limited to the specific point in time when
the samples are gathered. What if we could add a time dimension to this sampling?
Instead of knowing that FunctionA consumes 30% of CPU cycles at one particular
point in time, what if we could track changes in FunctionA’s CPU usage over days,
weeks, or months? Or detect changes in its stack trace over that same timespan, all in
production? Continuous Profiling has emerged to turn these goals into reality.
Continuous Profiling (CP) is a systemwide, sample-based profiler that is always on,
albeit at a low sample rate to minimize runtime impact. Continuously collecting data
from all processes facilitates analysis of why the execution of code was different at
different times and also aids debugging of incidents even after they have happened. CP
tools provide valuable insights into which code uses the most resources, and this helps
engineers reduce resource usage in their production environments and thus save money.
Unlike typical profilers like Linux perf or Intel VTune, CP can pinpoint a performance
 155 Easyperf blog: Data Locality and Reuse Distances - https://easyperf.net/blog/2024/02/12/Mem

ory-Profiling-Part5

                                                            7.9   Continuous Profiling

issue from the application stack down to the kernel stack from any given date and
time and supports call stack comparisons between any two arbitrary dates/times to
highlight performance differences.

Figure 7.19: Screenshot of the Parca Continuous Profiler Web UI.

To showcase the look-and-feel of a typical CP tool, let’s look at the Web UI of Parca,156
one of the open-source CP tools, depicted in Figure 7.19. The top panel displays a
time series graph of the number of CPU samples gathered from various processes on
the machine during the period selected from the time window dropdown list, which in
this case is “Last 15 minutes”. However, to make it fit on the page, the image was cut
to show only the last 10 minutes.

By default, Parca collects 19 samples per second. For each sample, it collects stack
traces from all the processes that run on the host system. The more samples are
attributed to a certain process, the more CPU activity it had during a period of time.
In our example, you can see the hottest process (top line) had a bursty behavior with
spikes and dips in CPU activity. If you were the lead developer behind this application
you would probably be curious why this happens. When you roll out a new version of
your application and suddenly see an unexpected spike in the CPU samples attributed
to the process, that is an indication that something is going wrong.

Continuous profiling tools make it easier not only to spot the point in time when
performance change occurred but also to determine the root cause of the issue. Once
you click on any point of interest on the chart, the tool displays an icicle graph
associated with that period in the bottom panel. An icicle graph is the upside-down
156 Parca - https://github.com/parca-dev/parca

version of a flame graph. Using it, you can compare call stacks before and after to
help you find what is causing performance problems.
Imagine, you merged a code change into production and after it has been running
for a while, you receive reports of intermittent response time spikes. These may or
may not correlate with user traffic or with any particular time of day. This is an area
where CP shines. You can pull up the CP Web UI and do a search for stack traces at
the dates and times of those response time spikes, and then compare them to stack
traces of other dates and times to identify anomalous executions at the application
and/or kernel stack level. This type of “visual diff” is supported directly in the UI,
like a graphical “perf diff” or a differential flamegraph.157
Google introduced the CP concept in the 2010 paper “Google-Wide Profiling”
[Ren et al., 2010], which championed the value of always-on profiling in production
environments. However, it took nearly a decade before it gained traction in the
industry:
   1. In March 2019, Google Cloud released its Continuous Profiler.
   2. In July 2020, AWS released CodeGuru Profiler.
   3. In August 2020, Datadog released its Continuous Profiler.
   4. In December 2020, New Relic acquired the Pixie Continuous Profiler.
   5. In Jan 2021, Pyroscope released its open-source Continuous Profiler.
   6. In October 2021, Elastic acquired Optimyze and its Continuous Profiler (Prod-
      filer); Polar Signals released its Parca Continuous Profiler. It was open-source
      in April 2024.
   7. In December 2021, Splunk released its AlwaysOn Profiler.
   8. In March 2022, Intel acquired Granulate and its Continuous Profiler (gProfiler).
      It was made open-source in March 2024.
New entrants into this space continue to pop up in both open-source and commercial
varieties. Some of these offerings require more hand-holding than others. For example,
some require source code or configuration file changes to begin profiling. Others
require different agents for different language runtimes (e.g., Ruby, Python, Golang,
C/C++/Rust). The best of them have crafted a secret sauce around eBPF so that
nothing other than simply installing the runtime agent is necessary.
They also differ in the number of language runtimes supported, the work required for
obtaining debug symbols for readable stack traces, and the type of system resources that
can be profiled aside from the CPU (e.g., memory, I/O, or locking). While Continuous
Profilers differ in the aforementioned aspects, they all share the common function of
providing low-overhead, sample-based profiling for various language runtimes, along
with remote stack trace storage for web-based search and query capability.
Where is Continuous Profiling headed? Thomas Dullien, co-founder of Optimyze
which developed the innovative Continuous Profiler Prodfiler, delivered the Keynote at
QCon London 2023 in which he expressed his wish for a cluster-wide tool that could
answer the questions, “Why is this request slow?” or “Why is this request expensive?”
In a multithreaded application, one particular function may show up on a profile as
the highest CPU and memory consumer, yet its duties might be completely outside an
 157 Differential flamegraph - https://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2014-11-09/differential-flame-

graphs.html

                                                             Questions and Exercises

application’s critical path, e.g., a housekeeping thread. Meanwhile, another function
with such insignificant CPU execution time that it barely registers in a profile may
exhibit an outsized effect on overall application latency and/or throughput. Typical
profilers fail to address this shortcoming. And since CP tools are basically profilers
that run at all times, they inherit this same blind spot.
Thankfully, a new generation of CP tools has emerged that employ AI with Large
Language Model-inspired architectures to process profile samples, analyze the rela-
tionships between functions, and finally pinpoint with high accuracy the functions
and libraries that directly impact overall throughput and latency. One such company
that offers this today is Raven.io. As competition intensifies in this space, innovative
capabilities will continue to grow so that CP tooling becomes as powerful and robust
as that of typical profilers.

Questions and Exercises
  1. Recall all the tools we used in this chapter. Which ones would you use in the
     following scenarios?
  • Scenario 1: the client support team reports a customer issue: after upgrading to
    a new version of the application, the performance of a certain operation drops
    by 10%.
  • Scenario 2: the client support team reports a customer issue: some transactions
    take 2x longer time to finish than usual with no particular pattern.
  • Scenario 3: you’re evaluating three different compression algorithms and you
    want to know what are the performance bottlenecks in each of them.
  • Scenario 4: there is a new shiny library that claims to be faster than the one
    you currently have integrated into your project; you’ve decided to compare their
    performance.
  2. Run the application that you’re working with daily. What is the most appropriate
     tool for performance analysis of your application according to the improvements
     you want to make? Practice using this tool.
  3. Suppose you run multiple copies of the same program with different inputs on a
     single machine. Is it enough to profile one of the copies or do you need to profile
     the whole system?

Chapter Summary
  • We gave a quick overview of the most popular tools available on three major
    platforms: Linux, Windows, and MacOS. Depending on the CPU vendor, the
    choice of a profiling tool will vary. For systems with an Intel processor we
    recommend using VTune; for systems with an AMD processor use uProf; on
    Apple platforms use Xcode Instruments.
  • Linux perf is probably the most frequently used profiling tool on Linux. It has
    support for processors from all major CPU vendors. It doesn’t have a graphical
    interface. However, there are tools that can visualize perf’s profiling data.
  • We also discussed Windows Event Tracing (ETW), which is designed to ob-
    serve software dynamics in a running system. Linux has a similar tool called

    KUtrace,158 which is covered in the book [Sites, 2022].
  • There are hybrid profilers that combine techniques like code instrumentation,
    sampling, and tracing. This takes the best of these approaches and allows users
    to get very detailed information on a specific piece of code. In this chapter, we
    looked at Tracy, which is quite popular among game developers.
  • Memory profilers provide information about memory usage, heap allocations,
    memory footprint, and other metrics. Memory profiling helps you understand
    how an application uses memory over time.
  • Continuous profiling tools have already become an essential part of monitoring
    performance in production environments. They collect system-wide performance
    metrics with call stacks for days, weeks, or even months. Such tools make it easier
    to spot the point in time when a performance change started and determine the
    root cause of an issue.

158 KUtrace - https://github.com/dicksites/KUtrace

