
depends on characteristics of the memory hierarchy in a system, especially L2 and
L3 cache sizes. So, an algorithm tuned for a CPU with particular sizes of L2 and L3
caches might not work well for CPUs with smaller caches. It is important to test the
change on the platforms your application will be running on.
The next four chapters are organized according to the TMA classification (see Sec-
tion 6.1):
  • Chapter 8. Optimizing Memory Accesses—the TMA:MemoryBound category.
  • Chapter 9. Optimizing Computations—the TMA:CoreBound category.
  • Chapter 10. Optimizing Branch Prediction—the TMA:BadSpeculation category.
  • Chapter 11. Machine Code Layout Optimizations—the TMA:FrontendBound
    category.
The idea behind this classification is to offer a checklist for developers when they are
using TMA methodology in their performance engineering work. Whenever TMA
attributes a performance bottleneck to one of the categories mentioned above, feel
free to consult one of the corresponding chapters to learn about your options.
Chapter 12 covers optimization topics not specifically related to any of the categories
covered in the previous four chapters. In this chapter, we will discuss CPU-specific
optimizations, examine several microarchitecture-related performance problems, ex-
plore techniques used for optimizing low-latency applications, and give you advice on
tuning your system for the best performance.
Chapter 13 addresses some common problems in optimizing multithreaded applications.
It provides a case study of five real-world multithreaded applications, where we explain
why their performance doesn’t scale with the increasing number of CPU threads. We
also discuss cache coherency issues, such as “False Sharing” and a few tools that are
designed to analyze multithreaded applications.

Modern computers are still being built based on the classical Von Neumann architecture
which decouples CPU, memory, and input/output units. Nowadays, operations with
memory (loads and stores) account for the largest portion of performance bottlenecks
and power consumption. It is no surprise that we start with this category.
The statement that memory hierarchy performance is critical can be illustrated by
Figure 8.1. It shows the growth of the gap in performance between memory and
processors. The vertical axis is on a logarithmic scale and shows the growth of the
CPU-DRAM performance gap. The memory baseline is the latency of memory access
of 64 KB DRAM chips from 1980. Typical DRAM performance improvement is 7%
per year, while CPUs enjoy 20-50% improvement per year. According to this picture,
processor performance has plateaued, but even then, the gap in performance remains.
[Hennessy & Patterson, 2017]

Figure 8.1: The gap in performance between memory and processors. © Source:
                             [Hennessy & Patterson, 2017].

A variable can be fetched from the smallest L1 cache in just a few clock cycles, but
it can take more than three hundred clock cycles to fetch a variable from DRAM if
it is not in the CPU cache. From a CPU perspective, a last-level cache miss feels
like a very long time, especially if the processor is not doing any useful work during
that time. Execution threads may also be starved when the system is highly loaded
with threads accessing memory at a very high rate and there is no available memory
bandwidth to satisfy all loads and stores promptly.
When an application executes a large number of memory accesses and spends significant
time waiting for them to finish, such an application is characterized as being bounded
by memory. It means that to further improve its performance, we likely need to
improve how we access memory, reduce the number of such accesses, or upgrade the
memory subsystem itself.
In the TMA methodology, the Memory Bound metric estimates a fraction of slots where

a CPU pipeline is likely stalled due to demand for load or store instructions. The
first step to solving such a performance problem is to locate the memory accesses that
contribute to the high Memory Bound metric (see Section 6.1.1). Once a troublesome
memory access issue is identified, several optimization strategies might be applied. In
this chapter, we will discuss techniques to improve memory access patterns.

8.1     Cache-Friendly Data Structures
Writing cache-friendly algorithms and data structures is one of the key items in the
recipe for a well-performing application. The key pillars of cache-friendly code are the
principles of temporal and spatial locality that we introduced in Section 3.6. The goal
here is to have a predictable memory access pattern and store data efficiently.
The cache line is the smallest unit of data that can be transferred between the cache
and the main memory. When designing cache-friendly code, it’s helpful to think not
only of individual variables and their locations in memory but also of cache lines.
Next, we will discuss several techniques to make data structures more cache-friendly.

8.1.1   Access Data Sequentially
The best way to exploit the spatial locality of the caches is to make sequential
memory accesses. By doing so, we enable the hardware prefetching mechanism (see
Section 3.6.1.6) to recognize the memory access pattern and bring in the next chunk
of data ahead of time. An example of Row-major versus Column-Major traversal is
shown in Listing 8.1. Notice, that there is only one tiny change in the code (swapped
col and row subscripts), but it has a large impact on performance.
The code on the left is not cache-friendly because it skips the NCOLS elements on every
iteration of the inner loop. This results in a very inefficient use of caches: we aren’t
making full use of the entire prefetched cache line before it gets evicted. In contrast,
the code on the right accesses elements of the matrix in the order in which they are
laid out in memory. This guarantees that the cache line will be fully used before it
gets evicted. Row-major traversal exploits spatial locality and is cache-friendly. Figure
8.2 illustrates the difference between the two traversal patterns.

Listing 8.1 Cache-friendly memory accesses.
// Column-major order                               // Row-major order
for (row = 0; row < NROWS; row++)                   for (row = 0; row < NROWS; row++)
  for (col = 0; col < NCOLS; col++)                   for (col = 0; col < NCOLS; col++)
    matrix[col][row] = row + col;          =>           matrix[row][col] = row + col;

Figure 8.2: Column-major versus Row-major traversal.

                                                8.1   Cache-Friendly Data Structures

The example presented above is classical, but usually, real-world applications are much
more complicated than this. Sometimes you need to go an additional mile to write
cache-friendly code. If the data is not laid out in memory in a way that is optimal for
the algorithm, it may require to rearrange the data first.
Consider a standard implementation of binary search in a large sorted array, where
on each iteration, you access the middle element, compare it with the value you’re
searching for, and go either left or right. This algorithm does not exploit spatial
locality since it tests elements in different locations that are far away from each other
and do not share the same cache line. The most famous way of solving this problem
is storing elements of the array using the Eytzinger layout [Khuong & Morin, 2015].
The idea is to maintain an implicit binary search tree packed into an array using the
BFS-like layout, usually seen with binary heaps. If the code performs a large number
of binary searches in the array, it may be beneficial to convert it to the Eytzinger
layout.

8.1.2   Use Appropriate Containers.
There is a wide variety of ready-to-use containers in almost any language. But it’s
important to know their underlying storage and performance implications. Keep in
mind how the data will be accessed and manipulated. You should consider not only the
time and space complexity of operations with a data structure but also the hardware
effects associated with them.
By default, stay away from data structures that rely on pointers, e.g. linked lists or
trees. When traversing elements, they require additional memory accesses to follow
the pointers. If the maximum number of elements is relatively small and known at
compile time, C++ std::array might be a better option than std::vector. If you
need an associative container but don’t need to store the elements in sorted order,
std::unordered_map should be faster than std::map. A good step-by-step guide for
choosing appropriate C++ containers can be found in [Fog, 2023b, Section 9.7 Data
structures, and container classes].
Sometimes, it’s more efficient to store pointers to contained objects, instead of objects
themselves. Consider a situation when you need to store many objects in an array
while the size of each object is big. In addition, the objects are frequently shuffled,
removed, and inserted. Storing objects in an array will require moving large chunks of
memory every time the order of objects is changed, which is expensive. In this case,
it’s better to store pointers to objects in the array. This way, only the pointers are
moved, which is much cheaper. However, this approach has its drawbacks. It requires
additional memory for the pointers and introduces an additional level of indirection.

8.1.3   Packing the Data
The utilization of data caches can be also improved by making data more compact.
There are many ways to pack data. One of the classic examples is to use bitfields. An
example of code when packing data might be profitable is shown in Listing 8.2. If we
know that a, b, and c represent enum values that take a certain number of bits to
encode, we can reduce the storage of the struct S.
Notice the three times less space required to store an object of the packed version of

Listing 8.2 Data Packing
// S is 3 bytes                               // S is 1 byte
struct S {                                    struct S {
   unsigned char a;                              unsigned char a:4;
   unsigned char b;                    =>        unsigned char b:2;
   unsigned char c;                              unsigned char c:2;
};                                            };

S. This greatly reduces the amount of memory transferred back and forth and saves
cache space. However, using bitfields comes with additional costs.160 Since the bits of
a, b, and c are packed into a single byte, the compiler needs to perform additional bit
manipulation operations to extract and insert them. For example, to load b, you need
to shift the byte value right (>>) by 2 and do logical AND (&) with 0x3. Similarly,
shift left (<<) and logical OR (|) operations are needed to store the updated value
back into the packed format. Data packing is beneficial in places where additional
computation is cheaper than the delay caused by inefficient memory transfers.
Also, a programmer can reduce memory usage by rearranging fields in a struct or
class when it avoids padding added by a compiler. Inserting unused bytes of memory
(pads) enables efficient storing and fetching of individual members of a struct. In the
example in Listing 8.3, the size of S can be reduced if its members are declared in the
order of decreasing size. Figure 8.3 illustrates the effect of rearranging the fields in
struct S.

Listing 8.3 Avoid compiler padding.
// S is `sizeof(int) * 3` bytes                // S is `sizeof(int) * 2` bytes
struct S {                                     struct S {
   bool b;                                        int i;
   int i;                             =>          short s;
   short s;                                       bool b;
};                                             };

Figure 8.3: Avoid compiler padding by rearranging the fields. Blank cells represent compiler
                                        padding.

8.1.4    Field Reordering
Reordering fields in a data structure can also be beneficial for another reason. Consider
an example in Listing 8.4. Suppose that the Soldier structure is used to track each
one of the thousands of units on the battlefield in a game. The game has three phases:
battle, movement, and trade. During the battle phase, the attack, defense, and
health fields are used. During the movement phase, the coords, and speed fields are
used. During the trade phase, only the money field is used.
160 Also, you cannot take the address of a bitfield.

                                                     8.1   Cache-Friendly Data Structures

The problem with the organization of the Soldier struct in the code on the left is
that the fields are not grouped according to the phases of the game. For example,
during the battle phase, the program needs to access two different cache lines to fetch
the required fields. The fields attack and defense are very likely to reside on the
same cache line, but the health field is always pushed to the next cache line. The
same applies to the movement phase (speed and coords fields).
We can make the Soldier struct more cache-friendly by reordering the fields as shown
in Listing 8.4 on the right. With that change, the fields that are accessed together are
grouped together.

Listing 8.4 Field Reordering.
struct Soldier {                                      struct Soldier {
  2DCoords coords;    /* 8 bytes */                     unsigned attack; // 1. battle
   unsigned attack;                                     unsigned defense; // 1. battle
   unsigned defense;                        =>          unsigned health; // 1. battle
   /* other fields */ /* 64 bytes */                    2DCoords coords; // 2. move
   unsigned speed;                                      unsigned speed;   // 2. move
   unsigned money;                                      // other fields
   unsigned health;                                     unsigned money;   // 3. trade
};                                                     };

Since Linux kernel 6.8, there is a new functionality in the perf tool that allows you
to find data structure reordering opportunities. The perf mem record command
can now be used to profile data structure access patterns. The perf annotate
--data-type command will show you the data structure layout along with profiling
samples attributed to each field of the data structure. Using this information you can
identify fields that are accessed together.161
Data-type profiling is very effective at finding opportunities to improve cache utiliza-
tion. Recent Linux kernel history contains many examples of commits that reorder
structures,162 pad fields,163 , or pack164 them to improve performance.

8.1.5   Other Data Structure Reorganization Techniques
To close the topic of cache-friendly data structures, we will briefly mention two other
techniques that can be used to improve cache utilization: structure splitting and
pointer inlining.
Structure splitting. Splitting a large structure into smaller ones can improve cache
utilization. For example, if you have a structure that contains a large number of fields,
but only a few of them are accessed together, you can split the structure into two or
more smaller ones. This way, you can avoid loading unnecessary data into the cache.
An example of structure splitting is shown in Listing 8.5. By splitting the Point
structure into PointCoords and PointInfo, we can avoid loading the PointInfo data
into caches when we only need PointCoords. This way, we can fit more points on a
single cache line.
161 Linux perf data-type profiling - https://lwn.net/Articles/955709/
162 Linux commit 54ff8ad69c6e93c0767451ae170b41c000e565dd
163 Linux commit aee79d4e5271cee4ffa89ed830189929a6272eb8
164 Linux commit e5598d6ae62626d261b046a2f19347c38681ff51

Listing 8.5 Structure Splitting.
struct Point {                                  struct PointCoords {
   int X;                                          int X;
   int Y;                                          int Y;
   int Z;                                          int Z;
   /*many other fields*/            =>          };
};                                              struct PointInfo {
std::vector<Point> points;                         /*many other fields*/
                                                };
                                                std::vector<PointCoords> pointCoords;
                                                std::vector<PointInfo> pointInfos;

Pointer inlining. Inlining a pointer into a structure can improve cache utilization.
For example, if you have a structure that contains a pointer to another structure, you
can inline the pointer into the first structure. This way, you can avoid additional
memory access to fetch the second structure. An example of pointer inlining is shown
in Listing 8.6. The weight parameter is used in many graph algorithms, and thus,
it is frequently accessed. However, in the original version on the left, retrieving the
edge weight requires additional memory access, which can result in a cache miss. By
moving the weight parameter into the GraphEdge structure, we avoid such issues.

Listing 8.6 Moving the weight parameter into the parent structure.
struct GraphEdge {                              struct GraphEdge {
   unsigned int from;                              unsigned int from;
   unsigned int to;                                unsigned int to;
  GraphEdgeProperties* prop;                       float weight;
};                                  =>             GraphEdgeProperties* prop;
struct GraphEdgeProperties {                    };
   float weight;                                struct GraphEdgeProperties {
  std::string label;                              std::string label;
   // ...                                          // ...
};                                              };

8.2    Dynamic Memory Allocation
Developers should realize that dynamic memory allocation has many associated costs.
Allocating an object on the stack is done instantly, regardless of the size of the object:
you just need to move the stack pointer. However, dynamic memory allocation is a
more complex operation. It involves calling a standard library function like malloc,
which potentially may delegate the allocation to the operating system. Avoiding
unnecessary dynamic memory allocation is the first step to avoiding these costs. The
easy target in this process is temporary allocations, i.e., allocations that are directly
followed by their deallocation. In Section 7.8.2 we showed how you can use heaptrack
to find sources of dynamic memory allocations.
You can amortize the cost of many small allocations by allocating one large block.
This is the core idea behind arena allocators165 and memory pools. It gives more
flexibility for manual memory management. You can take a memory region allocated
 165 Region-based memory management - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Region-based_memory_m

anagement

                                       8.3   Workaround Memory Bandwidth Limitations

by the OS and design your own allocation strategy on top of that region. One simple
strategy could be to divide that region into two parts: one for hot data and one for
cold data. And provide two allocation methods that will tap into their own arenas.
Keeping hot data together creates opportunities for better cache utilization. It is also
likely to improve TLB utilization since hot data will be more compact and will occupy
fewer memory pages.
Another cost of dynamic memory allocation appears when an application is using
multiple threads. When two threads are trying to allocate memory at the same time,
the OS has to synchronize them. In a highly concurrent application, threads may
spend a significant amount of time waiting for a common lock to allocate memory.
The same applies to memory deallocation. Again, custom allocators can help to avoid
this problem, for example, by employing a separate arena for each thread.
There are many drop-in replacements for the standard dynamic memory allocation
routines (malloc and free) that are faster, more scalable, and address fragmentation
problems better. Some of the most popular memory allocation libraries are jemalloc166
and tcmalloc167 . Some projects adopted jemalloc and tcmalloc as their default
memory allocator, and they have seen significant performance improvements.
Finally, some costs of dynamic memory allocation are hidden168 and cannot be easily
measured. In all major operating systems, the pointer returned by malloc is just a
promise – the OS commits that when pages are touched it will provide the required
memory, but the actual physical pages are not allocated until the virtual addresses
are accessed. This is called demand paging, which incurs a cost of a minor page fault
for every newly allocated page. We discuss how to mitigate this cost in Section 12.3.1.
Also, for security reasons, all modern operating systems erase the contents (write zeros)
of a page before giving it to the next process. The OS maintains a pool of zeroed pages
to have them ready for allocation. But when this pool runs out of available zeroed
pages, the OS has to zero a page on demand. This process isn’t super expensive, but
it isn’t free either and may increase the latency of a memory allocation call.

8.3    Workaround Memory Bandwidth Limitations
As discussed in Section 3.6.2, a processor gets the data from memory through a
memory bus. With the latest DDR5 memory technology, the maximum theoretical
memory bandwidth is 51.2 GB/s per channel. Modern systems have multiple memory
channels; for example, a typical laptop usually has two memory channels, while server
systems can have from 4 to 12 channels. It may seem that even a laptop can move a
lot of data back and forth each second, but in reality, memory bandwidth becomes a
limitation in many applications.
We should keep in mind that memory channels are shared between all the cores in a
system. Once many cores engage in a memory-intensive activity, the traffic flowing
through the memory bus can become congested. This may lead to increased wait times
for memory requests to return. Modern systems are designed to accommodate multiple
166 jemalloc - http://jemalloc.net/.
167 tcmalloc - https://github.com/google/tcmalloc
 168 Bruce Dawson: Hidden Costs of Memory Allocation - https://randomascii.wordpress.com/2014/1

2/10/hidden-costs-of-memory-allocation/.

memory-demanding threads working at the same time, so usually you need multiple
threads to saturate the memory bandwidth. Emerging AI workloads are known to
be extremely “memory hungry” and highly parallelized, so memory bandwidth is the
number one bottleneck for them.
The first step in addressing memory bandwidth limitations is to determine the maxi-
mum theoretical and expected memory bandwidth. The theoretical maximum memory
bandwidth can be calculated from the memory technology specifications as we have
shown in Section 5.5. The expected memory bandwidth can be measured using tools
like Intel Memory Latency Checker or lmbench, which we discussed in Section 4.10.
Intel VTune can automatically measure memory bandwidth before the analyzed
application starts.
The second step is to measure the memory bandwidth utilization while your application
is running. If the amount of memory traffic is close to the maximum measured
bandwidth, then the performance of your application is likely to be bound by memory
bandwidth. It is a good idea to plot the memory bandwidth utilization over time to
see if there are different phases where memory intensity spikes or takes a dip. Intel
VTune can provide such a chart if you tick the “Evaluate max DRAM bandwidth”
checkbox in the analysis configuration.
If you have determined that your application is memory bandwidth bound, the first
suggestion is to see if you can decrease the memory intensity of your application. It is
not always possible, but you can consider disabling some memory-hungry features of
your application, recomputing data on the fly instead of caching results, or compressing
your data. In the AI space, most Large Language Models (LLMs) are supplied in fp32
precision, which means that each parameter takes 4 bytes. The biggest performance
gain can be achieved with quantization techniques, which reduce the precision of
the parameters to fp16 or int8. This will reduce the memory traffic by 2x or 4x,
respectively. Sometimes, 4-bit and even 5-bit quantization is used, to reduce memory
traffic and strike the right balance between inference performance and quality.
It is important to mention that for workloads that saturate available memory band-
width, code optimizations don’t play a big role as they do for compute-bound workloads.
For compute-bound applications, code optimizations like vectorization usually translate
into large performance gains. However, for memory-bound workloads, vectorization
may not have a similar effect since a processor can’t make forward progress, simply
because it lacks data to work with. We cannot make the memory bus run faster, this
is why memory bandwidth is often a hard limitation to overcome.
Finally, if all the options have been exhausted, and the memory bandwidth is still a
limitation, the only way to improve the situation is to buy better hardware. You can
invest money in a server with more memory channels, or DRAM modules with faster
transfer speed. This could be an expensive but still, a viable option to speed up your
application.

8.4    Reducing DTLB Misses
As discussed in Section 3.7.1, TLB is a fast but finite per-core cache for virtual-to-
physical address translations of memory addresses. Without it, every memory access
by an application would require a time-consuming page walk of the kernel page table

                                                        8.4   Reducing DTLB Misses

to calculate the correct physical address for each referenced virtual address. In a
system with a 5-level page table, it will require accessing at least 5 different memory
locations to obtain an address translation. In section Section 11.8 we will discuss how
huge pages can be used for code. Here we will see how they can be used for data.
Any algorithm that does random accesses into a large memory region will likely suffer
from DTLB misses. Examples of such applications are binary search in a big array,
accessing a large hash table, and traversing a graph. The usage of huge pages has the
potential to speed up such applications.
On x86 platforms, the default page size is 4KB. Consider an application that frequently
references memory space of 20 MBs. With 4KB pages, the OS needs to allocate many
small pages. Also, the process will be touching many 4KB-sized pages, each of which
will contend for a limited number of TLB entries. In contrast, using huge 2MB pages,
20MB of memory can be mapped with just ten pages, whereas with 4KB pages, you
would need 5120 pages. This means fewer TLB entries are needed when using huge
pages, which in turn reduces the number of TLB misses. It will not be a proportional
reduction by a factor of 512 since the number of 2MB entries is much less. For example,
in Intel’s Skylake core families, L1 DTLB has 64 entries for 4KB pages and only 32
entries for 2MB pages. Besides 2MB huge pages, x86-based chips from AMD and Intel
also support 1GB gigantic pages for data, but not for instructions. Using 1GB pages
instead of 2MB pages reduces TLB pressure even more.
Utilizing huge pages typically leads to fewer page walks, and the penalty for walking
the kernel page table in the event of a TLB miss is reduced since the table itself is
more compact. Performance gains from utilizing huge pages can sometimes go as
high as 30%, depending on how much TLB pressure an application is experiencing.
Expecting 2x speedups would be asking too much, as it is quite rare that TLB misses
are the primary bottleneck. The paper [Luo et al., 2015] presents the evaluation of
using huge pages on the SPEC2006 benchmark suite. Results can be summarized
as follows. Out of 29 benchmarks in the suite, 15 have a speedup within 1%, which
can be discarded as noise. Six benchmarks have speedups in the range of 1%-4%.
Four benchmarks have speedups in the range from 4% to 8%. Two benchmarks have
speedups of 10%, and the two benchmarks that gain the most enjoyed 22% and 27%
speedups respectively.
Many real-world applications already take advantage of huge pages, for example,
KVM, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Java’s JVM, and others. Usually, those software packages
provide an option to enable that feature. Whenever you’re using a similar application,
check its documentation to see if you can enable huge pages.
Both Windows and Linux allow applications to establish huge-page memory regions.
Instructions on how to enable huge pages for Windows and Linux can be found in
Appendix B. On Linux, there are two ways of using huge pages in an application:
Explicit and Transparent Huge Pages. Windows support is not as rich as Linux and
will be discussed later.

8.4.1   Explicit Huge Pages
Explicit Huge Pages (EHP) are available as part of the system memory, and are
exposed as a huge page file system hugetlbfs. EHPs should be reserved either at

system boot time or before an application starts. See Appendix B for instructions on
how to do that. Reserving EHPs at boot time increases the possibility of successful
allocation because the memory has not yet been significantly fragmented. Explicitly
preallocated pages reside in a reserved chunk of physical memory and cannot be
swapped out under memory pressure. Also, this memory space cannot be used for
other purposes, so users should be careful and reserve only the number of pages they
require.
The simplest method of using EHP in a Linux application is to call mmap with
MAP_HUGETLB as shown in Listing 8.7. In this code, the pointer ptr will point to a
2MB region of memory that was explicitly reserved for EHPs. Notice, that allocation
may fail if the EHPs were not reserved in advance. Other less popular ways to use
EHPs in user code are provided in Appendix B. Also, developers can write their own
arena-based allocators that tap into EHPs.

Listing 8.7 Mapping a memory region from an explicitly allocated huge page.
void ptr = mmap(nullptr, size, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
                MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_HUGETLB, -1, 0);
if (ptr == MAP_FAILED)
  throw std::bad_alloc{};
...
munmap(ptr, size);

In the past, there was an option to use the libhugetlbfs169 library, which overrode
malloc calls used in existing dynamically linked executables, to allocate memory in
EHPs. Unfortunately, this project is no longer maintained. It didn’t require users to
modify the code or to relink the binary. They could simply prepend the command line
with LD_PRELOAD=libhugetlbfs.so HUGETLB_MORECORE=yes <your app command
line> to make use of it. But luckily, other libraries enable the use of huge pages (not
EHPs) with malloc, which we will discuss next.

8.4.2   Transparent Huge Pages
Linux also offers Transparent Huge Page Support (THP), which has two modes of
operation: system-wide and per-process. When THP is enabled system-wide, the
kernel manages huge pages automatically and it is transparent for applications. The
OS kernel tries to assign huge pages to any process when large blocks of memory are
needed and it is possible to allocate such, so huge pages do not need to be reserved
manually. If THP is enabled per process, the kernel only assigns huge pages to
individual processes’ memory areas attributed to the madvise system call. You can
check if THP is enabled in the system with:
$ cat /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled
always [madvise] never
The value shown in brackets is the current setting. If this value is always (system-wide)
or madvise (per-process), then THP is available for your application. A detailed
specification for every option can be found in the Linux kernel documentation170
regarding THP.
169 libhugetlbfs - https://github.com/libhugetlbfs/libhugetlbfs.
170 Linux kernel THP documentation - https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/transhuge.

txt

                                                        8.4   Reducing DTLB Misses

When THP is enabled system-wide, huge pages are used automatically for normal mem-
ory allocations, without an explicit request from applications. To observe the effect of
huge pages on their application, a user just needs to enable system-wide THPs with
echo "always" | sudo tee /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled.
It will automatically launch a daemon process named khugepaged which starts
scanning the application’s memory space to promote regular pages to huge pages.
Sometimes the kernel may fail to combine multiple regular pages into a huge page in
case it cannot find a contiguous 2MB chunk of memory.

System-wide THPs mode is good for quick experiments to check if huge pages can
improve performance. It works automatically, even for applications that are not aware
of THPs, so developers don’t have to change the code to see the benefit of huge pages
for their application. When huge pages are enabled system-wide, applications may
end up allocating more memory resources than needed. This is why the system-wide
mode is disabled by default. Don’t forget to disable system-wide THPs after you’ve
finished your experiments as it may hurt overall system performance.

With the madvise (per-process) option, THP is enabled only inside memory regions
attributed via the madvise system call with the MADV_HUGEPAGE flag. As shown in
Listing 8.8, the pointer ptr will point to a 2MB region of the anonymous (transparent)
memory region, which the kernel allocates dynamically. The mmap call will fail if the
kernel cannot find a contiguous 2MB chunk of memory.

Listing 8.8 Mapping a memory region to a transparent huge page.
void ptr = mmap(nullptr, size, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE | PROT_EXEC,
                MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1 , 0);
if (ptr == MAP_FAILED)
  throw std::bad_alloc{};
madvise(ptr, size, MADV_HUGEPAGE);
// use the memory region `ptr`
munmap(ptr, size);

Developers can build custom THP allocators based on the code in Listing 8.8. But
also, it’s possible to use THPs inside malloc calls that their application is making.
Many memory allocation libraries provide that feature by overriding the libc’s
implementation of malloc. Here is an example of using jemalloc, which is one of the
most popular options. If you have access to the source code of the application, you
can relink the binary with an additional -ljemalloc option. This will dynamically
link your application against the jemalloc library, which will handle all the malloc
calls. Then use the following option to enable THPs for heap allocations:
$ MALLOC_CONF="thp:always" <your app command line>

If you don’t have access to the source code, you can still make use of jemalloc by
preloading the dynamic library:
$ LD_PRELOAD=/usr/local/libjemalloc.so.2 MALLOC_CONF="thp:always" <your app command
     line>

Windows only offers using huge pages in a way similar to the Linux THP per-process
mode via the VirtualAlloc system call. See details in Appendix B.

8.4.3   Explicit vs. Transparent Huge Pages
Linux users can use huge pages in three different modes:
  • Explicit Huge Pages
  • System-wide Transparent Huge Pages
  • Per-process Transparent Huge Pages
Let’s compare those options. First, EHPs are reserved in virtual memory upfront,
THPs are not. That makes it harder to ship software packages that use EHPs, as
they rely on specific configuration settings made by an administrator of a machine.
Moreover, EHPs statically sit in memory, consuming precious DRAM, even when they
are not used.
System-wide Transparent Huge Pages are great for quick experiments. No changes in
the user code are required to test the benefit of using huge pages in your application.
However, it will not be wise to ship a software package to the customers and ask them
to enable system-wide THPs, as it may negatively affect other running programs on
that system. Usually, developers identify allocations in the code that could benefit
from huge pages and use madvise hints in these places (per-process mode).
Per-process THPs don’t have either of the downsides mentioned above, but they have
another one. Previously we discussed that THP allocation by the kernel happens
transparently to the user. The allocation process can potentially involve several kernel
processes responsible for making space in virtual memory, which may include swapping
memory to disk, fragmentation, or promoting pages. Background maintenance of
transparent huge pages incurs non-deterministic latency overhead from the kernel as
it manages the inevitable fragmentation and swapping issues. EHPs are not subject
to memory fragmentation and cannot be swapped to disk, so they incur much less
latency overhead.
All in all, THPs are easier to use, but incur bigger allocation latency overhead.
That is the reason why THPs are not popular in High-Frequency Trading and other
ultra-low-latency industries; they prefer to use EHPs instead. On the other hand,
virtual machine providers and databases tend to use per-process THPs since requiring
additional system configuration can become a burden for their users.

8.5     Explicit Memory Prefetching
By now, you should know that memory accesses not resolved from caches are often
very expensive. Modern CPUs try very hard to lower the penalty of cache misses by
predicting which memory locations a program will access in the future and prefetch
them ahead of time. If the requested memory location is not in the cache at the time
a program demands it, then we will suffer the cache miss penalty as we have to go to
the DRAM and fetch the data anyway. But if the CPU manages to bring that memory
location into caches in time or if the request was predicted and data is underway, then
the penalty of a cache miss will be much lower.
Modern CPUs have two automatic mechanisms for solving that problem: hardware
prefetching and OOO execution. Hardware prefetchers help to hide the memory access
latency by initiating prefetching requests on repetitive memory access patterns. An

                                                    8.5   Explicit Memory Prefetching

OOO engine looks N instructions into the future and issues loads early to enable the
smooth execution of future instructions that will demand this data.
Hardware prefetchers fail when data access patterns are too complicated to predict.
And there is nothing software developers can do about it as we cannot control the
behavior of this unit. On the other hand, an OOO engine does not try to predict
memory locations that will be needed in the future as hardware prefetching does. So,
the only measure of success for it is how much latency it was able to hide by scheduling
the load in advance.
Consider a small snippet of code in Listing 8.9, where arr is an array of one million
integers. The index idx, which is assigned to a random value, is immediately used to
access a location in arr, which almost certainly misses in caches as it is random. A
hardware prefetcher can’t predict it since every time the load goes to a completely new
place in memory. The interval from the time the address of a memory location is known
(returned from the function random_distribution) until the value of that memory
location is demanded (call to doSomeExtensiveComputation) is called prefetching
window. In this example, the OOO engine doesn’t have the opportunity to issue the
load early since the prefetching window is very small. This leads to the latency of
the memory access arr[idx] to stand on a critical path while executing the loop as
shown in Figure 8.4. The program waits for the value to come back (the hatched fill
rectangle in the diagram) without making forward progress.
You’re probably thinking: “But the next iteration of the loop should start executing
speculatively in parallel”. That’s true, and indeed, it is reflected in Figure 8.4. The
doSomeExtensiveComputation function requires a lot of work, and when execution
gets closer to the finish of the first iteration, a CPU speculatively starts executing
instructions from the next iteration. It creates a positive overlap in the execution
between iterations. In fact, we presented an optimistic scenario where a processor
was able to generate the next random number and issue a load in parallel with the
previous iteration of the loop. However, a CPU wasn’t able to fully hide the latency
of the load, because it cannot look that far ahead of the current iteration to issue the
load early enough. Maybe future processors will have more powerful OOO engines,
but for now, there are cases where a programmer’s intervention is needed.

Listing 8.9 A random number is an index for a subsequent load.
for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i) {
  size_t idx = random_distribution(generator);
  int x = arr[idx]; // cache miss
  doSomeExtensiveComputation(x);
}

Luckily, it’s not a dead end as there is a way to speed up this code by fully overlapping
the load with the execution of doSomeExtensiveComputation, which will hide the
latency of a cache miss. We can achieve this with techniques called software pipelining
and explicit memory prefetching. Implementation of this idea is shown in Listing 8.10.
We pipeline generation of random numbers and start prefetching memory location for
the next iteration in parallel with doSomeExtensiveComputation.
A graphical illustration of this transformation is shown in Figure 8.5. We utilized
software pipelining to generate random numbers for the next iteration. In other words,

Figure 8.4: Execution timeline that shows the load latency standing on a critical path.

Listing 8.10 Utilizing Explicit Software Memory Prefetching hints.
size_t idx = random_distribution(generator);
for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i) {
  int x = arr[idx];
  idx = random_distribution(generator);
  // prefetch the element for the next iteration
  __builtin_prefetch(&arr[idx]);
  doSomeExtensiveComputation(x);
}

on iteration M, we produce a random number that will be consumed on iteration M+1.
This enables us to issue the memory request early since we already know the next
index in the array. This transformation makes our prefetching window much larger
and fully hides the latency of a cache miss. On the iteration M+1, the actual load has
a very high chance to hit caches, because it was prefetched on iteration M.

Figure 8.5: Hiding the cache miss latency by overlapping it with other execution.

Notice the usage of __builtin_prefetch,171 a special hint that developers can use to
explicitly request a CPU to prefetch a certain memory location. Another option is to
use compiler intrinsics. On x86 platforms there is _mm_prefetch intrinsic, on ARM
platforms there is __pld intrinsic. Compilers will generate the PREFETCH instruction
for x86 and the pld instruction for ARM.
171 GCC builtins - https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Other-Builtins.html.

                                                           8.5   Explicit Memory Prefetching

There are situations when software memory prefetching is not possible. For example,
when traversing a linked list, the prefetching window is tiny and it is not possible to
hide the latency of pointer chasing.
In Listing 8.10 we saw an example of prefetching for the next iteration, but also you
may frequently encounter a need to prefetch for 2, 4, 8, and sometimes even more
iterations. The code in Listing 8.11 is one of those cases when it could be beneficial. It
presents a typical code for populating a graph with edges. If the graph is very sparse
and has a lot of vertices, it is very likely that accesses to this->out_neighbors and
this->in_neighbors vectors will frequently miss in caches. This happens because
every edge is likely to connect new vertices that are not currently in caches.
This code is different from the previous example as there are no extensive computations
on every iteration, so the penalty of cache misses likely dominates the latency of each
iteration. But we can leverage the fact that we know all the elements that will be
accessed in the future. The elements of vector edges are accessed sequentially and
thus are likely to be timely brought to the L1 cache by the hardware prefetcher. Our
goal here is to overlap the latency of a cache miss with executing enough iterations to
completely hide it.
As a general rule, for a prefetch hint to be effective, it must be inserted well ahead
of time so that by the time the loaded value is used in other calculations, it will be
already in the cache. However, it also shouldn’t be inserted too early since it may
pollute the cache with data that is not used for a long time. Notice, in Listing 8.11,
lookAhead is a template parameter, which enables a programmer to try different
values and see which gives the best performance. More advanced users can try to
estimate the prefetching window using the method described in Section 6.2.7; an
example of using this method can be found on the Easyperf blog.172

Listing 8.11 Example of a software prefetching for the next 8 iterations.
template <int lookAhead = 8>
void Graph::update(const std::vector<Edge>& edges) {
  for(int i = 0; i + lookAhead < edges.size(); i++) {
    VertexID v = edges[i].from;
    VertexID u = edges[i].to;
    this->out_neighbors[u].push_back(v);
    this->in_neighbors[v].push_back(u);

      // prefetch elements for future iterations
      VertexID v_next = edges[i + lookAhead].from;
      VertexID u_next = edges[i + lookAhead].to;
      __builtin_prefetch(this->out_neighbors.data() + v_next);
      __builtin_prefetch(this->in_neighbors.data() + u_next);
    }
    // process the remainder of the vector `edges` ...
}

Explicit memory prefetching is most frequently used in loops, but also you can insert
those hints into a parent function; again, it all depends on the available prefetching
window.
 172 “Precise timing of machine code with Linux perf” - https://easyperf.net/blog/2019/04/03/Precise-

timing-of-machine-code-with-Linux-perf#application-estimating-prefetch-window.

This technique is a powerful weapon, however, it should be used with extreme care as
it is not easy to get it right. First of all, explicit memory prefetching is not portable,
meaning that if it gives performance gains on one platform, it doesn’t guarantee similar
speedups on another platform. It is very implementation-specific and platforms are
not required to honor those hints. In such a case it will likely degrade performance.
My recommendation would be to verify that the impact is positive with all available
tools. Not only check the performance numbers but also make sure that the number
of cache misses (L3 in particular) went down. Once the change is committed into the
code base, monitor performance on all the platforms that you run your application on,
as it could be very sensitive to changes in the surrounding code. Consider dropping
the idea if the benefits do not outweigh the potential maintenance burden.
For some complicated scenarios, make sure that the code prefetches the right memory
locations. It can get tricky when a current iteration of a loop depends on the previous
iteration, e.g., there is a continue statement or changing the next element to be
processed is guarded by an if condition. In this case, my recommendation is to
instrument the code to test the accuracy of your prefetching hints. Because when used
badly, it can degrade the performance of caches by evicting other useful data.
Finally, explicit prefetching increases code size and adds pressure on the CPU Frontend.
A prefetch hint is just a fake load that goes into the memory subsystem but does not
have a destination register. And just like any other instruction, it consumes CPU
resources. Apply it with extreme care, because when used wrong, it can pessimize the
performance of a program.

Questions and Exercises
   1. Solve the perf-ninja::data_packing lab assignment, in which you need to
      make a data structure more compact.
   2. Solve the perf-ninja::huge_pages_1 lab assignment using methods we dis-
      cussed in Section 8.4. Observe any changes in performance, huge page allocation
      in /proc/meminfo, and CPU performance counters that measure DTLB loads
      and misses.
   3. Solve the perf-ninja::swmem_prefetch_1 lab assignment by implementing
      explicit memory prefetching for future loop iterations.
   4. Describe in general terms what it takes for a piece of code to be cache-friendly.
   5. Run the application that you’re working with daily. Measure its memory
      utilization and analyze heap allocations using memory profilers that we discussed
      in Section 7.8. Identify hot memory accesses using Linux perf, Intel VTune, or
      other profiler. Is there a way to improve those accesses?

Chapter Summary
   • Most real-world applications experience memory-related performance bottlenecks.
     Emerging application domains, such as machine learning and big data, are
     particularly demanding in terms of memory bandwidth and latency.
   • The performance of the memory subsystem is not growing as fast as the CPU
     performance. Yet, memory accesses are a frequent source of performance prob-
     lems in many applications. Speeding up such programs requires revising the way

                                                                       Summary

  they access memory.
• In Chapter 8, we discussed frequently used recipes for developing cache-friendly
  data structures, explored data reorganization techniques, learned how to utilize
  huge memory pages to improve DTLB performance, and how to use explicit
  memory prefetching to reduce the number of cache misses.

