
In this chapter, we will take a look at some of the optimization topics not specifically
related to any of the categories covered in the previous three chapters, but still
important enough to find their place in this book.

We will start by discussing how to introduce CPU-specific optimizations in your code.
Then we will cover some of the corner case situations that can have a measurable
impact on the performance of your application. Next, we move on to exploring
low-latency tuning techniques, which are essential for applications that require fast
response times. Finally, we will provide advice for tuning the system settings.

12.1     CPU-Specific Optimizations
Optimizing software for a specific CPU microarchitecture involves tailoring your code
to leverage the strengths and mitigate the weaknesses of that microarchitecture. It
is easier to do when you know the exact target CPU for your application. However,
most applications run on a wide range of CPUs. Optimizing the performance of
a cross-platform application with very high-speed requirements can be challenging
since platforms from different vendors have different designs and implementations.
Nevertheless, it is possible to write code that performs reasonably well on CPUs from
different vendors, while providing a fine-tuned version for a specific microarchitecture.

The major differences between x86 (considered as CISC) and RISC ISAs, such as
ARM and RISC-V, are summarized below:

   • x86 instructions are variable-length, while ARM and RISC-V instructions are
     fixed-length. This makes decoding x86 instructions more complex.
   • x86 ISA has many addressing modes, while ARM and RISC-V have few addressing
     modes. Operands in ARM and RISC-V instructions are either registers or
     immediate values, while x86 instruction inputs can also come from memory. This
     bloats the number of x86 instructions but also allows for more powerful single
     instructions. For instance, ARM requires loading a memory location first, then
     performing the operation; x86 can do both in one instruction.

In addition to this, there are a few other differences that you should consider when
optimizing for a specific microarchitecture. As of 2024, the most recent x86-64 ISA has
16 architectural general-purpose registers, while the latest ARMv8 and RV64 require
a CPU to provide 32 general-purpose registers. Extra architectural registers reduce
register spilling and hence reduce the number of loads/stores. Intel has announced a
new extension called APX226 that will increase the number of registers to 32.

There is also a difference in the memory page size between x86 and ARM. The default
page size for x86 platforms is 4 KB, while most ARM systems (for example, Apple
MacBooks) use a 16 KB page size, although both platforms support larger page sizes
226 Intel APX - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/advanced-

performance-extensions-apx.html

(see Section 3.7.2, and Section 8.4). All these differences can affect the performance of
your application when they become a bottleneck.
Although ISA differences may have a tangible impact on the performance of a specific
application, numerous studies show that on average, differences between the two most
popular ISAs, namely x86 and ARM, don’t have a measurable performance impact.
Throughout this book, I carefully avoided advertisements of any products (e.g., Intel
vs. AMD vs. Apple) and any religious ISA debates (x86 vs. ARM vs. RISC-V).227
Below are some references that I hope will close the debate:
   • Performance or energy consumption differences are not generated by ISA differ-
     ences, but rather by microarchitecture implementation. [Blem et al., 2013]
   • ISA doesn’t have a large effect on the number and type of executed instructions.
     [Weaver & McIntosh-Smith, 2023] [Blem et al., 2013]
   • CISC code is not denser than RISC code. [Geelnard, 2022]
   • ISA overheads can be effectively mitigated by microarchitecture implementa-
     tion. For example, µop cache minimizes decoding overheads; instruction cache
     minimizes code density impact. [Blem et al., 2013] [ChipsAndCheese, 2024]
Nevertheless, this doesn’t remove the value of architecture-specific optimizations.
In this section, we will discuss how to optimize for a particular platform. We will
cover ISA extensions, the CPU dispatch technique, and discuss how to reason about
instruction latencies and throughput.

12.1.1    ISA Extensions
ISA evolution has been continuous. It has focused on accelerating specialized workloads,
such as cryptography, AI, multimedia, and others. Utilizing ISA extensions often
results in substantial performance improvements. Developers keep finding smart ways
to leverage these extensions in general-purpose applications. So, even if you’re outside
of one of these highly specialized domains, you might still benefit from using ISA
extensions.
It’s not possible to learn about all specific instructions. But I suggest you familiarize
yourself with major ISA extensions available on your target platform. For example, if
you are developing an AI application that uses fp16 (16-bit half-precision floating-
point) data types, and you target one of the modern ARM processors, make sure that
your program’s machine code contains corresponding fp16 ISA extensions. If you’re
developing encryption/decryption software, check if it utilizes crypto extensions of
your target ISA. And so on.
Here is a list of some notable x86 ISA extensions:
   • SSE/AVX/AVX2: provide SIMD instructions for floating-point and integer
     operations.
   • AVX512: extends AVX2 with 512-bit registers and many new instructions.
   • AVX512_FP16/AVX512_BF16: add support for 16-bit half-precision and
     Bfloat16 floating-point values.
227 The debate also isn’t interesting because after µops conversion, x86 becomes a RISC-style

micro-architecture. Complex instructions get broken down into simpler instructions.

                                                  12.1   CPU-Specific Optimizations

  • AES/SHA: provide instructions for AES encryption, decryption, and SHA
    hashing.
  • BMI/BMI2: provide instructions for bit manipulation.
  • AVX_VNNI/AVX512_VNNI: Vector Neural Network Instructions for accelerat-
    ing deep learning workloads.
  • AMX: Advanced Matrix Extensions for accelerating matrix multiplication.
Here is a list of some notable ARM ISA extensions:
  • Advanced SIMD: also known as NEON, provides arithmetic SIMD instructions.
  • Cryptographic Instructions: provide instructions for encryption, hashing, and
    checksumming.
  • FP16/BF16: provide 16-bit half-precision and Bfloat16 floating-point instruc-
    tions.
  • UDOT/SDOT: support for dot product instructions for accelerating machine
    learning workloads.
  • SVE: enables scalable vector length instructions.
  • SME: Scalable Matrix Extension for accelerating matrix multiplication.
When compiling your applications, make sure to enable the necessary compiler flags to
activate required ISA extensions. On GCC and Clang compilers use the -march option.
For example, -march=native will activate ISA features of your host system, i.e., on
which you run the compilation. Or you can include a specific version of ISA, e.g.,
-march=armv8.6-a. On the MSVC compiler, use the /arch option, e.g., /arch:AVX2.
I do not recommend using -march=native for production builds, because code gener-
ation will depend on which machine you’re building your code. Many CI/CD systems
have old machines. Building software on one of these machines with -march=native
may lead to suboptimal performance when the application is run on a newer machine.
Instead, use -march with a specific microarchitecture that you want to target.

12.1.2   CPU Dispatch
When you want to provide a fast path for a specific microarchitecture while keeping
a generic implementation for other platforms, you can use CPU dispatching. It is a
technique that allows your program to detect which features your processor has, and
based on that decide which version of the code to execute. It enables you to introduce
platform-specific optimizations in a single codebase. As a rule of thumb, it is better
to start with a generic implementation and then introduce microarchitecture-specific
optimizations progressively, ensuring there is a fallback for architectures that do not
have the required features. For example:
if (__builtin_cpu_supports ("avx512f")) {
  avx512_impl();
} else {
  generic_impl();
}
This demonstrates the use of built-in functions that are available in GCC and Clang
compilers. Besides detecting supported ISA extensions, there is a __builtin_cpu_is
function to detect an exact processor model. A compiler-agnostic way of writing CPU
dispatch is to use the CPUID instruction (x86-only), getauxval(AT_HWCAP) Linux
system call, or sysctlbyname on macOS.

You would typically see CPU dispatching constructs used to optimize only specific
parts of the code, e.g., hot function or loop. Very often, these platform-specific
implementations are written with compiler intrinsics (see Section 9.5) to generate
desired instructions.
Even though CPU dispatching is a runtime check, its overhead is not high. You
can identify hardware capabilities at startup once and save it in some variable, so at
runtime, it becomes just a single branch, which is well-predicted. Perhaps a bigger
concern about CPU dispatching is the maintenance cost. Every new specialized branch
requires fine-tuning and validation.

12.1.3     Instruction Latencies and Throughput
Besides ISA extensions, it’s worth learning about the number and type of execution
units in your processor (e.g., the number of loads, stores, divisions, and multiplications
a processor can issue every cycle). For most processors, this information is published
by CPU vendors in corresponding technical manuals. However, information about
latencies and throughput of specific instructions is not usually disclosed. Nevertheless,
people have benchmarked individual instructions, which can be accessed online. For
the latest Intel and AMD CPUs, latency, throughput, port usage, and the number
of µops for an instruction can be found at the uops.info228 website. For Apple
processors, similar data is accessible in [Apple, 2024, Appendix A].229 Along with
instruction latencies and throughput, developers have reverse-engineered other aspects
of a microarchitecture such as the size of branch prediction history buffers, reorder
buffer capacity, size of load/store buffers, and others.
Be very careful about making conclusions just on the instruction latency and through-
put numbers. In many cases, instruction latencies are hidden by the out-of-order
execution engine, and it may not matter if an instruction has a latency of 4 or 8
cycles. If it doesn’t block forward progress, such instruction will be handled “in the
background” without harming performance. However, the latency of an instruction
becomes important when it stands on a critical dependency chain because it delays
the execution of dependent operations.
In contrast, if you have a loop that performs a lot of independent operations, you
should focus on instruction throughput rather than latency. When operations are
independent, they can be processed in parallel. In such a scenario, the critical factor
is how many operations of a certain type can be executed per cycle, or execution
throughput. There are also “in-between” scenarios, where both instruction latency and
throughput may affect performance.
When you analyze machine code for one of your hot loops, you may find that multiple
instructions are assigned to the same execution port. This situation is known as
execution port contention. So the challenge is to find ways of substituting some of
these instructions with the ones that are not assigned to the critical port. For example
on Intel processors, if you’re heavily bottlenecked on port5, then you may find that
two instructions on port0 are better than one instruction on port5. Often it is not
228 x86 instruction latency and throughput - https://uops.info/table.html
 229 Also, there are instruction throughput and latency data collected via reverse-engineering experi-

ments, such as in https://dougallj.github.io/applecpu/firestorm-simd.html. Since this is an unofficial
source of data, you should take it with a grain of salt.

                                                     12.1   CPU-Specific Optimizations

  an easy task and it requires deep ISA and microarchitecture knowledge. When in
  doubt, seek help on specialized forums. Also, keep in mind that some of these things
  may change in future CPU generations, so consider using CPU dispatch to isolate the
  effect of your code changes.

  Case Study: When FMA Instructions Hurt Performance
  In Section 5.6.1, we looked at one example, of when the throughput of FMA instructions
  becomes critical. Now let’s take a look at another example, involving FMA latency.
  In Listing 12.1 on the left, we have the sqSum function which computes a sum of every
  element squared. On the right, we present the corresponding machine code generated
  by Clang-18 when compiled with -O3 -march=core-avx2. Notice, that we didn’t use
  -ffast-math, perhaps because we want to maintain bit-exact results over multiple
  platforms. That’s why the code was not autovectorized by the compiler.

Listing 12.1 FMA latency
1 float sqSum(float *a, int N) {           .loop:
2   float sum = 0;                          vmovss xmm1, dword ptr [rcx + 4*rdx]
3   for (int i = 0; i < N; i++ )            vfmadd231ss xmm0, xmm1, xmm1
4     sum += a[i] * a[i];                   inc rdx
5   return sum;                             cmp rax, rdx
6 }                                         jne .loop

  On each iteration of the loop, we have two operations: calculate the squared value
  of a[i] and accumulate the product in the sum variable. If you look closer, you may
  notice that multiplications are independent of each other, so they can be executed in
  parallel. The generated machine code (on the right) uses fused multiply-add (FMA)
  to perform both operations with a single instruction. The problem here is that by
  using FMAs, the compiler has included multiplication into the critical dependency
  chain of the loop.
  The vfmadd231ss instruction computes the squared value of a[i] (in xmm1) and then
  accumulates the result in xmm0. There is a data dependency over xmm0: a processor
  cannot issue a new vfmadd231ss instruction until the previous one has finished since
  xmm0 is both an input and an output of vfmadd231ss. Even though multiplication
  parts of FMA do not depend on each other, these instructions need to wait until all
  inputs become available. The performance of this loop is bound by FMA latency,
  which in Intel’s Alder Lake is 4 cycles.
  In this case, fusing multiplication and addition hurts performance. We would be better
  off with two separate instructions. The nanobench experiment below proves that:
  # ran on Intel Core i7-1260P (Alder Lake)
  $ sudo ./kernel-nanoBench.sh -f -basic    $ sudo ./kernel-nanoBench.sh -f -basic
   -loop 100 -unroll 1000                    -loop 100 -unroll 1000
   -warm_up_count 10 -asm "                  -warm_up_count 10 -asm "
  vmovss xmm1, dword ptr [R14];             vmovss xmm1, dword ptr [R14];
  vfmadd231ss xmm0, xmm1, xmm1;"            vmulss xmm1, xmm1, xmm1;
  -asm_init "<not shown>"                   vaddss xmm0, xmm0, xmm1;"
                                            -asm_init "<not shown>"
  Instructions retired: 2.00
  Core cycles: 4.00                         Instructions retired: 3.00
                                            Core cycles: 2.00

The version on the left runs in four cycles per iteration, which corresponds to the
FMA latency. However, on the right-hand side, vmulss instructions do not depend on
each other, so they can be run in parallel. Still, there is a loop carry dependency over
xmm0 in the vaddss instruction (FADD). But the latency of FADD is only two cycles,
this is why the version on the right runs in just two cycles per iteration. The latency
and throughput characteristics for other processors may vary.230
From this experiment, we know that if the compiler would not have decided to fuse
multiplication and addition into a single instruction, it would result in two times
better performance for this loop. This only became clear once we examined the loop
dependencies and compared the latencies of FMA and FADD instructions. Since
Clang 18, you can prevent generating FMA instructions within a scope by using
#pragma clang fp contract(off).231

12.2      Microarchitecture-Specific Performance Issues
In this section, we will discuss some common microarchitecture-specific issues that
affect the majority of modern processors. I call them microarchitecture-specific because
they are caused by the way a particular microarchitecture feature is implemented.
These issues are very specific and do not frequently appear as a major performance
bottleneck. Typically, they are diluted among other more significant performance
problems. Thus, these microarchitecture-specific performance issues are considered
corner cases and are less known than the other issues that we already discussed in the
book. Nevertheless, they can cause very undesirable performance penalties. Note that
the impact of a particular problem can be more/less pronounced on one platform than
another. Also, keep in mind that the list of microarchitecture-specific issues covered
below is not exhaustive.

12.2.1     Memory Order Violations
I introduced the concept of memory ordering in Section 3.8.3. Memory reordering
is a crucial aspect of modern CPUs, as it enables them to execute memory requests
in parallel and out-of-order. The key element in load/store reordering is memory
disambiguation, which predicts if it is safe to let loads go ahead of earlier stores. Since
memory disambiguation is speculative, it can lead to performance issues if not handled
properly.
Consider an example in Listing 12.2, on the left. This code snippet calculates a
histogram of an 8-bit grayscale image, i.e., how many times a certain color appears in
the image. Besides countless other places, this code can be found in Otsu’s thresholding
algorithm232 which is used to convert a grayscale image to a binary image. Since the
input image is 8-bit grayscale, there are only 256 different colors.
For each pixel on an image, you need to read the current histogram count of the
color of the pixel, increment it, and store it back. This is a classic read-modify-
write dependency through the memory. Imagine we have the following consecutive
 230 The two versions will produce slightly different results due to the different rounding of floating-

point values.
 231 LLVM extensions to specify floating-point flags - https://clang.llvm.org/docs/LanguageExtensio

ns.html#extensions-to-specify-floating-point-flags
 232 Otsu’s thresholding method - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otsu%27s_method

pixels in the image: pixels = [0xFF,0xFF,0x00,0xFF,...] and so on. The loaded
value of the histogram count for pixels[1] comes from the result of the previous
iteration (pixels[0]). The histogram count for pixels[2] comes from memory; it is
independent and can be reordered. But then again, the histogram count for pixels[3]
is dependent on the result of processing pixels[1], and so on. Iterations 0, 1, and 3
are dependent and cannot be reordered.

Listing 12.2 Memory Order Violation Example.
std::array<uint32_t, 256> hist;            std::array<uint32_t, 256> hist1;
hist.fill(0);                              std::array<uint32_t, 256> hist2;
int N = width * height;                    hist1.fill(0);
for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i)        =>      hist2.fill(0);
  hist[image[i]]++;                        int N = width * height;
                                           int i = 0;
                                           for (; i + 1 < N; i += 2) {
                                             hist1[image[i+0]]++;
                                             hist2[image[i+1]]++;
                                           }
                                           // remainder
                                           for (; i < N; ++i)
                                             hist1[image[i]]++;
                                           // combine partial histograms
                                           for (int i = 0; i < hist1.size(); ++i)
                                             hist1[i] += hist2[i];

Recall from Section 3.8.3 that the processor doesn’t necessarily know about a potential
store-to-load forwarding, so it has to make a prediction. If it correctly predicts a
memory order violation between two updates of color 0xFF, then these accesses will
be serialized. The performance will not be great, but it is the best we could hope
for with the initial code. On the contrary, if the processor predicts that there is no
memory order violation, it will speculatively let the two updates run in parallel. Later
it will recognize the mistake, flush the pipeline, and re-execute the youngest of the
two updates. This is very hurtful for performance.

Performance will greatly depend on the color patterns of the input image. Images
with long sequences of pixels with the same color will have worse performance than
images where colors don’t repeat often. The performance of the initial version will
be good as long as the distance between two pixels of the same color is long enough.
The phrase “long enough” in this context is determined by the size of the out-of-order
instruction window. Repeating read-modify-writes of the same color may trigger
ordering violations if they occur within a few loop iterations of each other, but not if
they occur more than a hundred loop iterations apart.

A cure for the memory order violation problem is shown in Listing 12.2, on the right.
As you can see, I duplicated the histogram, and now the processing of pixels alternates
between two partial histograms. In the end, we combine the two partial histograms
to get a final result. This new version with two partial histograms is still prone to
potentially problematic patterns, such as 0xFF 0x00 0xFF 0x00 0xFF ... However,
with this change, the original worst-case scenario (e.g., 0xFF 0xFF 0xFF ...) will run
twice as fast as before. It may be beneficial to create four or eight partial histograms
depending on the color pattern of input images. This exact code is featured in the

mem_order_violation_1233 lab assignment of the Performance Ninja course, so feel
free to experiment.
On a small set of input images, I observed from 10% to 50% speedup on various
platforms. It is worth mentioning that the version on the right consumes 1 KB of
additional memory, which may not be huge in this case but is something to watch out
for.

12.2.2    Misaligned Memory Accesses
A variable is accessed most efficiently if it is stored at a memory address that is
divisible by the size of the variable. For example, an int requires a 4-byte alignment,
meaning its address should be a multiple of 4. In C++, it is called natural alignment,
which occurs by default for fundamental data types, such as integer, float, or double.
When you declare variables of these types, the compiler ensures that they are stored
in memory at addresses that are multiples of their size. In contrast, arrays, structs,
and classes may require special alignment as you’ll learn in this section.
A typical case where data alignment is important is SIMD code, where loads and
stores access large chunks of data with a single operation. In most processors, the L1
cache is designed to be able to read/write data at any alignment. Generally, even if a
load/store is misaligned but does not cross the cache line boundary, it won’t have any
performance penalty.
However, when a load or store crosses the cache line boundary, such access requires
two cache line reads (split load/store). It requires using a split register, which keeps
the two parts and once both parts are fetched, they are combined into a single register.
The number of split registers is limited. When executed sporadically, split accesses
complete without any observable performance impact on overall execution. However,
if that happens frequently, misaligned memory accesses will suffer delays.
A memory address is said to be aligned if it is a multiple of a specific size. For example,
when a 16-byte object is aligned on the 64-byte boundary, the low 6 bits of its address
are zero. Otherwise, when a 16-byte object crosses the 64-byte boundary, it is said
to be misaligned. In the literature, you can also encounter the term split load/store
to describe such a situation. Split loads/stores may incur performance penalties if
many of them in a row consume all available split registers. Intel’s TMA methodology
tracks this with the Memory_Bound → L1_Bound → Split Loads metric.
For instance, AVX2 memory operations can access up to 32 bytes. If an array starts
at offset 0x30 (48 bytes), the first AVX2 load will fetch data from 0x30 to 0x4F, the
second load will fetch data from 0x50 to 0x6F, and so on. The first load crosses
the cache line boundary (0x40). In fact, every second load will cross the cache line
boundary which may slow down the execution. Figure 12.1 illustrates this. Pushing
the data forward by 16 bytes would align the array to the cache line boundary and
eliminate split loads. Listing 12.3 shows how to fix this example using the C++11
alignas keyword.
When it comes to dynamic allocations, C++17 made it much easier. Operator new
 233 Performance Ninja lab assignment: Memory Order Violation - https://github.com/dendibakh/p

erf-ninja/tree/main/labs/memory_bound/mem_order_violation_1

Figure 12.1: AVX2 loads in a misaligned array. Every second load crosses the cache line
                                       boundary.

Listing 12.3 Aligning data using the “alignas” keyword.
// Array of 16-bit integers aligned at a 64-byte boundary
#define CACHELINE_ALIGN alignas(64)
CACHELINE_ALIGN int16_t a[N];

now takes an additional argument, which you can use to control the alignment of
dynamically allocated memory. When using standard containers, such as std::vector,
you can define a custom allocator. Listing 12.4 shows a minimal example of a custom
allocator that aligns the memory buffer at the cache line boundary.

Listing 12.4 Defining std::vector aligned at the cache line boundary.
// Returns aligned pointers when allocations are requested.
template <typename T>
class CacheLineAlignedAllocator {
public:
   using value_type = T;
   static std::align_val_t constexpr ALIGNMENT{64};
  [[nodiscard]] T* allocate(std::size_t N) {
     return reinterpret_cast<T*>(::operator new[](N * sizeof(T), ALIGNMENT));
  }
   void deallocate(T* allocPtr, [[maybe_unused]] std::size_t N) {
     ::operator delete[](allocPtr, ALIGNMENT);
  }
};
template<typename T>
using AlignedVector = std::vector<T, CacheLineAlignedAllocator<T> >;

To demonstrate the effect of misaligned memory accesses, I created the
mem_alignment_1234 lab assignment in the Performance Ninja online course.
It features a very simple matrix multiplication example, where the initial version
doesn’t take any care of the alignment of the matrices. The assignment asks to align
the matrices to the cache line boundary and measure the performance difference. Feel
free to experiment with the code and measure the effect on your platform.
The first step to mitigate split loads/stores in this assignment is to align the starting
offset of a matrix. The operating system might allocate memory for the matrix such
that it is already aligned to the cache line boundary. However, you should not rely on
this behavior, as it is not guaranteed. A simple way to fix this is to use AlignedVector
from Listing 12.4 to allocate memory for the matrices.
 234 Performance Ninja lab assignment: Memory Alignment - https://github.com/dendibakh/perf-

ninja/tree/main/labs/memory_bound/mem_alignment_1

However, it’s not enough to only align the starting offset of a matrix. Consider an
example of a 9x9 matrix of float values shown in Figure 12.2. If a cache line is 64
bytes, it can store 16 float values. When using AVX2 instructions, the program will
load/store 8 elements (256 bits) at a time. In each row, the first eight elements will be
processed in a SIMD way, while the last element will be processed in a scalar way by
the loop remainder. The second vector load/store (elements 10-17) crosses the cache
line boundary as many other subsequent vector loads/stores. The problem highlighted
in Figure 12.2 affects any matrix with the number of columns that is not a multiple of
8 (for AVX2 vectorization). The SSE and ARM Neon vectorization requires 16-byte
alignment; AVX-512 requires 64-byte alignment.

Figure 12.2: Split loads/stores inside a 9x9 matrix when using AVX2 vectorization. The split
                           memory access is highlighted in yellow.

So, in addition to aligning the starting offset, each row of the matrix should be aligned
as well. For example in Figure 12.2, it can be achieved by inserting seven dummy
columns into the matrix, effectively making it a 9x16 matrix. This will align the
second row (elements 10-18) at the offset 0x40. Similarly, all the other rows will be
aligned as well. The dummy columns will not be processed by the algorithm, but they
will ensure that the actual data is aligned at the cache line boundary. In my testing,
the performance impact of this change was up to 30%, depending on the matrix size
and platform configuration.
Alignment and padding cause holes with unused bytes, which potentially decreases
memory bandwidth utilization. For small matrices, like our 9x9 matrix, padding
will cause almost half of each row to be unused. However, for large matrices, like
1025x1025 the impact of padding is not that big. Nevertheless, for some algorithms,
e.g., in AI, memory bandwidth can be a bigger concern. Use these techniques with
care and always measure to see if the performance gain from alignment is worth the
cost of unused bytes.
Accesses that cross a 4 KB boundary introduce more complications because virtual to
physical address translations are usually handled in 4 KB pages. Handling such access
would require accessing two TLB entries as well. Unless a TLB supports multiple
lookups per cycle, such loads can cause a significant slowdown.

12.2.3    Cache Aliasing
There are specific data access patterns that may cause unpleasant performance issues.
These corner cases are tightly connected with cache organization, e.g., the number of
sets and ways in the cache. We discussed cache organization in Section 3.6.1, in case
you want to revisit it. The placement of a memory location in the cache is determined

by its address. Based on the address bits, the cache controller does set selection, i.e.,
it determines the set to which a cache line with the fetched memory location will go.
If two memory locations map to the same set, they will compete for the limited
number of available slots (ways) in a set. When a program repeatedly accesses memory
locations that map to the same set, they will be constantly evicting each other. This
may cause saturation of one set in the cache and underutilization of other sets. This is
known as cache aliasing, though you may find people use the terms cache contention,
cache conflicts, or cache trashing to describe this effect.
A simple example of cache aliasing can be observed in matrix transposition as explained
in detail in [Fog, 2023b, section 9.10 Cache contentions in large data structures]. I
encourage readers to study this manual to learn more about why it happens. I
repeated the experiment on a few modern processors and confirmed that it remains a
relevant issue. Figure 12.3 shows the performance of transposing matrices of 32-bit
floating-point values on Intel’s 12th-gen core i7-1260P processor.

Figure 12.3: Cache aliasing effects observed in matrix transposition ran on Intel’s 12th-gen
  processor. Matrix sizes that are powers of two or multiples of 128 cause more than 10x
                                     performance drop.

There are several spikes in the chart, which correspond to the matrix sizes that cause
cache aliasing. Performance drops significantly when the matrix size is a power of
two (e.g., 256, 512) or is a multiple of 128 (e.g., 384, 640, 768, 896).235 This happens
because memory locations that belong to the same column are mapped to the same set
in the L1D and L2 caches. These memory locations compete for the limited number
of ways in the set which causes the same cache line to be reloaded many times before
every element on this line is processed.
On Intel’s processors, this issue can be diagnosed with the help of the L1D.REPLACEMENT
performance event, which counts L1 cache line replacements. For instance, there are
17 times more cache line replacements for the matrix size 256x256 than for the size
 235 Also, there are a few spikes at the sizes 341, 683, and 819. Supposedly, these sizes suffer from the

same cache aliasing effect, but I haven’t investigated them further.

255x255. I tested all sizes from 64x64 up to 10,000x10,000 and found that the
pattern repeats very consistently. I also ran the same experiment on an Intel Skylake-
based processor as well as an Apple M1 chip and confirmed that these chips are prone
to cache aliasing effects.
To mitigate cache aliasing, you can use cache blocking as we discussed in Section 9.3.2.
The idea is to process the matrix in smaller blocks that fit into the cache. That
way you will avoid cache line eviction since there will be enough space in the cache.
Another way to solve this is to pad the matrix with extra columns, e.g., instead of a
256x256 matrix, you would allocate a 256x264 matrix; in a similar way we did in the
previous section. But be careful not to run into misaligned memory access issues.

12.2.4   Slow Floating-Point Arithmetic
Some applications that do extensive computations with floating-point (FP) values
are prone to one very subtle issue that can cause performance slowdown. This issue
arises when an application hits a subnormal FP value, which we will discuss in this
section. You can also find a term denormal FP value, which refers to the same thing.
According to the IEEE Standard 754,236 a subnormal is a non-zero number with an
exponent smaller than the smallest normal number.237 Listing 12.5 shows a very
simple instantiation of a subnormal value.
In real-world applications, a subnormal value usually represents a signal so small
that it is indistinguishable from zero. In audio, it can mean a signal so quiet that
it is out of the human hearing range. In image processing, it can mean any of the
RGB color components of a pixel to be very close to zero, and so on. Interestingly,
subnormal values are present in many production software packages, including weather
forecasting, ray tracing, physics simulations, and others.

Listing 12.5 Instantiating a normal and subnormal FP value
unsigned usub = 0x80200000; // -2.93873587706e-39 (subnormal)
unsigned unorm = 0x411a428e; // 9.641248703 (normal)
float sub = *((float*)&usub);
float norm = *((float*)&unorm);
assert(std::fpclassify(sub) == FP_SUBNORMAL);
assert(std::fpclassify(norm) != FP_SUBNORMAL);

Without subnormal values, the subtraction of two FP values a - b can underflow and
produce zero even though the values are not equal. Subnormal values allow calculations
to gradually lose precision without rounding the result to zero. Although, it can come
with a cost as we shall see later. Subnormal values also may occur in production
software when a value keeps decreasing in a loop with subtraction or division.
From the hardware perspective, handling subnormals is more difficult than handling
normal FP values as it requires special treatment and generally, is considered as an
exceptional situation. The application will not crash, but it will get a performance
penalty. Calculations that produce or consume subnormal numbers are slower than
similar calculations on normal numbers and can run 10 times slower or more. For
236 IEEE Standard 754 - https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8766229
237 Subnormal number - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subnormal_number

instance, Intel processors currently handle operations on subnormals with a microcode
assist. When a processor recognizes a subnormal FP value, a Microcode Sequencer
(MSROM) will provide the necessary microoperations (µops) to compute the result.
In many cases, subnormal values are generated naturally by the algorithm and thus
are unavoidable. Most processors give the option to flush subnormal values to zero
and not generate subnormals in the first place. Developers of performance-critical
applications perhaps would prefer to have slightly less accurate results than slowing
down the code.
Suppose your application doesn’t need subnormal values, how do you detect and
mitigate associated costs? While you can use runtime checks as shown in Listing 12.5,
inserting them all over the codebase is not practical. There is a better way to detect if
your application is producing subnormal values using PMU (Performance Monitoring
Unit). On Intel CPUs, you can collect the FP_ASSIST.ANY performance event, which
gets incremented every time a subnormal value is used or produced. The TMA
methodology classifies such bottlenecks under the Retiring category, and yes, this is
another situation when a high Retiring doesn’t mean a good thing.
Once you confirm subnormal values are there, you can enable the FTZ and DAZ
modes:
   • DAZ (Denormals Are Zero). Any denormal inputs are replaced by zero before
     use.
   • FTZ (Flush To Zero). Any outputs that would be denormal are replaced by
     zero.
When they are enabled, there is no need for costly handling of subnormal values in
a CPU floating-point arithmetic. In x86-based platforms, there are two separate bit
fields in the MXCSR, global control and status register. In ARM Aarch64, two modes
are controlled with FZ and AH bits of the FPCR control register. If you compile your
application with -ffast-math, you have nothing to worry about, the compiler will
automatically insert the required code to enable both flags at the start of the program.
The -ffast-math compiler option is a little overloaded, so GCC developers created
a separate -mdaz-ftz option that only controls the behavior of subnormal values.
If you’d rather control it from the source code, Listing 12.6 shows an example that
you can use. If you choose this option, avoid frequent changes to the MXCSR register
because the operation is relatively expensive. A read of the MXCSR register has a
fairly long latency, and a write to the register is a serializing instruction.

Listing 12.6 Enabling FTZ and DAZ modes manually
unsigned FTZ = 0x8000;
unsigned DAZ = 0x0040;
unsigned MXCSR = _mm_getcsr();
_mm_setcsr(MXCSR | FTZ | DAZ);

Keep in mind, that both FTZ and DAZ modes are incompatible with the IEEE Standard
754. They are implemented in hardware to improve performance for applications where
underflow is common and generating a denormalized result is unnecessary. I have
observed a 3%-5% performance penalty on some production floating-point applications
that were using subnormal values.

12.3     Low Latency Tuning Techniques
So far we have discussed a variety of software optimizations that aim at improving
the overall performance of an application. In this section, we will discuss additional
tuning techniques used in low-latency systems, such as real-time processing and high-
frequency trading (HFT). In such an environment, the primary optimization goal is to
make a certain portion of a program run as fast as possible. When you work in the
HFT industry, every microsecond and nanosecond counts as it has a direct impact on
profits. Usually, the low-latency portion implements a critical loop of a real-time or
an HFT system, such as moving a robotic arm or sending an order to the exchange.
Optimizing the latency of a critical path is sometimes done at the expense of other
portions of a program. And some techniques even sacrifice the overall throughput of a
system.
When developers optimize for latency, they avoid any unnecessary costs they need to
pay on a hot path. That usually involves system calls, memory allocation, I/O, and
anything else that has non-deterministic latency. To reach the lowest possible latency,
the hot path needs to have all the resources ready and available immediately.
One relatively simple technique is to precompute some of the operations you would
do on the hot path. That comes with a cost of using more memory which will be
unavailable to other processes in the system but it may save you some precious cycles
on a critical path. However, keep in mind that sometimes it is faster to compute the
thing than to fetch the result from memory.
Since this is a book about low-level CPU performance, we will skip talking about
higher-level techniques similar to the one we just mentioned. Instead, we will discuss
how to avoid page faults, cache misses, TLB shootdowns, and core throttling on a
critical path.

12.3.1   Avoid Minor Page Faults
While the term contains the word “minor”, there’s nothing minor about the impact
of minor page faults on runtime latency. Recall that when a user code allocates
memory, OS only commits to provide a page, but it doesn’t immediately execute on
the commitment by giving us a zeroed physical page. Instead, it will wait until the
first time the user code will access it, and only then the operating system fulfills its
duties. The very first write to a newly allocated page triggers a minor page fault, a
hardware interrupt that is handled by the OS. The latency impact of minor faults can
range from just under a microsecond up to several microseconds, especially if you’re
using a Linux kernel with 5-level page tables instead of 4-level page tables.
How do you detect runtime minor page faults in your application? One simple way is
by using the top utility (add the -H option for a thread-level view). Add the vMn field
to the default selection of display columns to view the number of minor page faults
occurring per display refresh interval. Listing 12.7 shows a dump of the top command
with the top-10 processes while compiling a large C++ project. The additional vMn
column shows the number of minor page faults that occurred during the last 3 seconds.
Another way of detecting runtime minor page faults involves attaching to the running
process with perf stat -e page-faults.

                                                    12.3     Low Latency Tuning Techniques

Listing 12.7 A dump of Linux top command with additional vMn field while compiling
a large C++ project.
   PID USER       PR   NI     VIRT    RES     SHR S   %CPU    %MEM     TIME+ COMMAND   vMn
341763 dendiba+   20    0   303332 165396   83200 R   99.3     1.0   0:05.09 c++       13k
341705 dendiba+   20    0   285768 153872   87808 R   99.0     1.0   0:07.18 c++        5k
341719 dendiba+   20    0   313476 176236   83328 R   94.7     1.1   0:06.49 c++        8k
341709 dendiba+   20    0   301088 162800   82944 R   93.4     1.0   0:06.46 c++        2k
341779 dendiba+   20    0   286468 152376   87424 R   92.4     1.0   0:03.08 c++       26k
341769 dendiba+   20    0   293260 155068   83072 R   91.7     1.0   0:03.90 c++       22k
341749 dendiba+   20    0   360664 214328   75904 R   88.1     1.3   0:05.14 c++       18k
341765 dendiba+   20    0   351036 205268   76288 R   87.1     1.3   0:04.75 c++       18k
341771 dendiba+   20    0   341148 194668   75776 R   86.4     1.2   0:03.43 c++       20k
341776 dendiba+   20    0   286496 147460   82432 R   76.2     0.9   0:02.64 c++       25k

In the HFT world, anything more than 0 is a problem. But for low latency applications
in other business domains, a constant occurrence in the range of 100-1000 faults per
second should prompt further investigation. Investigating the root cause of runtime
minor page faults can be as simple as firing up perf record -e page-faults and
then perf report to locate offending source code lines.
To avoid page fault penalties during runtime, you should pre-fault all the memory for
the application at startup time. A toy example might look something like this:
char *mem = malloc(size);
int pageSize = sysconf(_SC_PAGESIZE)
for (int i = 0; i < size; i += pageSize)
  mem[i] = 0;

First, this sample code allocates a size amount of memory on the heap as usual.
However, immediately after that, it steps by and writes to the first byte of each page
of newly allocated memory to ensure each one is brought into RAM. This method
helps to avoid runtime delays caused by minor page faults during future accesses.
Take a look at Listing 12.8 with a more comprehensive approach to tuning the glibc
allocator in conjunction with mlock/mlockall syscalls (taken from the “Real-time
Linux Wiki” 238 ).
The code in Listing 12.8 tunes three glibc malloc settings:                      M_MMAP_MAX,
M_TRIM_THRESHOLD, and M_ARENA_MAX.
   • Setting M_MMAP_MAX to 0 disables underlying mmap syscall usage for large alloca-
     tions – this is necessary because the mlockall can be undone by library usage of
     munmap when it attempts to release mmap-ed segments back to the OS, defeating
     the purpose of our efforts.
   • Setting M_TRIM_THRESHOLD to -1 prevents glibc from returning memory to the
     OS after calls to free. As indicated before, this option has no effect on mmap-ed
     segments.
   • Finally, setting M_ARENA_MAX to 1 prevents glibc from allocating multiple arenas
     via mmap to accommodate multiple cores. Keep in mind, that the latter hinders
     the glibc allocator’s multithreaded scalability feature.
 238 The Linux Foundation Wiki: Memory for Real-time Applications - https://wiki.linuxfoundation

.org/realtime/documentation/howto/applications/memory

Listing 12.8 Tuning the glibc allocator to lock pages in RAM and prevent releasing
them to the OS.
#include <malloc.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>

mallopt(M_MMAP_MAX, 0);
mallopt(M_TRIM_THRESHOLD, -1);
mallopt(M_ARENA_MAX, 1);

mlockall(MCL_CURRENT | MCL_FUTURE);

char *mem = malloc(size);
for (int i = 0; i < size; i += sysconf(_SC_PAGESIZE))
    mem[i] = 0;
//...
free(mem);

Combined, these settings force glibc into heap allocations which will not release
memory back to the OS until the application ends. As a result, the heap will remain
the same size after the final call to free(mem) in the code above. Any subsequent
runtime calls to malloc or new simply will reuse space in this pre-allocated/pre-faulted
heap area if it is sufficiently sized at initialization.
More importantly, all that heap memory that was pre-faulted in the for-loop will
persist in RAM due to the previous mlockall call – the option MCL_CURRENT locks all
pages that are currently mapped, while MCL_FUTURE locks all pages that will become
mapped in the future. An added benefit of using mlockall this way is that any thread
spawned by this process will have its stack pre-faulted and locked, as well. For the
finer control of page locking, developers should use mlock system call which gives you
the option to choose which pages should persist in RAM. A downside of this technique
is that it reduces the amount of memory available to other processes running on the
system.
Developers of applications for Windows should look into the following APIs: lock
pages with VirtualLock, avoid immediate release of memory with VirtualFree with
MEM_DECOMMIT, but not the MEM_RELEASE flag.
These are just two example methods for preventing runtime minor faults. Some or all
of these techniques may be already integrated into memory allocation libraries such
as jemalloc, tcmalloc, or mimalloc. Check the documentation of your library to see
what is available.

12.3.2   Cache Warming
In some applications, the portions of code that are most latency-sensitive are the
least frequently executed. An example of such an application might be an HFT
application that continuously reads market data signals from the stock exchange and,
once a favorable market signal is detected, sends an order to the exchange. In the
aforementioned workload, the code paths involved with reading the market data are
most commonly executed, while the code paths for executing an order are rarely
executed.

                                                12.3   Low Latency Tuning Techniques

Since other players in the market are likely to catch the same market signal, the
success of the strategy largely relies on how fast we can react, in other words, how fast
we send the order to the exchange. When we want our order to reach the exchange as
fast as possible and to take advantage of the favorable signal detected in the market
data, the last thing we want is to meet roadblocks right at the moment we decide to
take off.
When a certain code path is not exercised for a while, its instructions and associated
data are likely to be evicted from the I-cache and D-cache. Then, just when we need
that critical piece of rarely executed code to run, we take I-cache and D-cache miss
penalties, which may cause us to lose the race. This is where the technique of cache
warming is helpful.
Cache warming involves periodically exercising the latency-sensitive code to keep it in
the cache while ensuring it does not follow all the way through with any unwanted
actions. Exercising the latency-sensitive code also “warms up” the D-cache by bringing
latency-sensitive data into it. This technique is routinely employed for HFT applica-
tions. While I will not provide an example implementation, you can get a taste of it
in a CppCon 2018 lightning talk239 .

12.3.3   Avoid TLB Shootdowns
We learned from earlier chapters that the TLB is a fast but finite per-core cache
for virtual-to-physical memory address translations that reduces the need for time-
consuming kernel page table walks. Unlike the case with MESI-based protocols and
per-core CPU caches (i.e., L1, L2, and LLC), the hardware itself is not maintaining
core-to-core TLB coherency. Therefore, this task must be performed in software by
the operating system.
In a multithreaded application, process threads share the virtual address space.
Therefore, the kernel must communicate specific types of updates to that shared
address space among the TLBs of the cores on which any of the participating threads
execute. For example, commonly used syscalls such as munmap (which can be disabled
from glibc allocator usage, see Section 12.3.1), mprotect, and madvise may invalidate
TLB entries. These updates must be communicated among the constituent threads
of a process. The kernel performs this job using a specific type of Inter Processor
Interrupts (IPI), called TLB shootdowns, which on x86 platforms are implemented via
the INVLPG assembly instruction. TLB shootdowns are one of the most overlooked
pitfalls to achieving low latency with multithreaded applications.
Though a developer may avoid explicitly using these syscalls in his/her code, TLB
shootdowns may still erupt from external sources – e.g., memory allocation shared
libraries or OS facilities. Not only will this type of IPI disrupt runtime application
performance, but the magnitude of its impact grows with the number of threads
involved since the interrupts are delivered in software.
How do you detect TLB shootdowns in your multithreaded application? One simple
way is to check the TLB row in /proc/interrupts. A useful method of detecting
continuous TLB interrupts during runtime is to use the watch command while viewing
239 Cache Warming technique - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XzRxikGgaHI

this file. For example, you might run watch -n5 -d 'grep TLB /proc/interrupts',
where the -n 5 option refreshes the view every 5 seconds while -d highlights the delta
between each refresh output.
Listing 12.9 shows a dump of /proc/interrupts with a large number of TLB shoot-
downs on the CPU2 processor that ran the latency-critical thread. Notice the order
of magnitude difference between other cores. In that scenario, the culprit of such
behavior was a Linux kernel feature called Automatic NUMA Balancing, which can
be easily disarmed with sysctl -w numa_balancing=0.

Listing 12.9 A dump of /proc/interrupts that shows a large number of TLB shoot-
downs on CPU2
           CPU0       CPU1        CPU2       CPU3
...
NMI:          0          0           0          0   Non-maskable interrupts
LOC:     552219    1010298     2272333    3179890   Local timer interrupts
SPU:          0          0           0          0   Spurious interrupts
...
IWI:          0          0           0          0   IRQ work interrupts
RTR:          7          0           0          0   APIC ICR read retries
RES:      18708       9550         771        528   Rescheduling interrupts
CAL:        711        934        1312       1261   Function call interrupts
TLB:       4493       6108       73789       5014   TLB shootdowns

But that’s not the only source of TLB shootdowns. Others include Transparent Huge
Pages, memory compaction, page migration, and page cache writeback. Garbage
collectors also can initiate TLB shootdowns. These features either relocate pages
and/or alter permissions on pages in the process of fulfilling their duties, which require
page table updates and, thus, TLB shootdowns.
Preventing TLB shootdowns requires limiting the number of updates made to the
shared process address space. On the source code level, you should avoid runtime exe-
cution of the aforementioned list of syscalls, namely munmap, mprotect, and madvise.
On the OS level, disable kernel features that induce TLB shootdowns as a consequence
of its function, such as Transparent Huge Pages and Automatic NUMA Balancing.
For a more nuanced discussion on TLB shootdowns, along with their detection and
prevention, read a related article240 on the JabPerf blog.

12.3.4   Prevent Unintentional Core Throttling
C/C++ compilers are a wonderful feat of engineering. However, they sometimes
generate surprising results that may lead you on a wild goose chase. A real-life
example is an instance where the compiler optimizer emits heavy AVX512 instructions
that you never intended. While less of an issue on more modern chips, many older
generations of CPUs (which remain in active usage on-premises and in the cloud)
exhibit heavy core throttling/downclocking when executing heavy AVX512 instructions.
If your compiler produces these instructions without your explicit knowledge or consent,
you may experience unexplained latency anomalies during application runtime.
 240 JabPerf blog: TLB Shootdowns - https://www.jabperf.com/how- to-deter- or- disarm-tlb-

shootdowns/

                                                                          12.4    System Tuning

For this specific case, if heavy AVX512 instruction usage is not desired, include
-mprefer-vector-width=### to your compilation flags to pin the highest width
instruction set to either 128 or 256. Again, if your entire server fleet runs on the
latest chips then this is much less of a concern since the throttling impact of AVX
instruction sets is negligible nowadays.

12.4      System Tuning
After completing all the hard work of tuning an application to exploit all the intricate
facilities of the CPU microarchitecture, the last thing we want is for the system
firmware, the OS, or the kernel to destroy all our efforts. The most highly tuned
application will mean very little if it is intermittently disrupted by a system interrupt
that halts the entire system. Such interrupt might run for up to tens to hundreds of
milliseconds at a time.
Developers usually have little to no control over the environment in which the appli-
cation is executed. When we ship the product, it’s unrealistic to tune every setup a
customer might have. Usually, large enough organizations have separate Operations
Teams (Ops), which handle such sort of issues. It is in our interest to provide them
with recommendations on how to set up the system to get the best performance out
of our application.
There are many things to tune in a modern system, and avoiding system-based
interference is not an easy task. An example of a performance tuning manual of
x86-based server deployments is Red Hat guidelines241 . There, you will find tips for
eliminating or significantly minimizing cache-disrupting interrupts from sources like
the system BIOS, the Linux kernel, and from device drivers, among many other sources
of application interference. These guidelines should serve as a baseline image for all
new server builds before any application is deployed into a production environment.
Most out-of-the-box platforms are configured for optimal throughput while saving
power when possible. But there are industries with real-time requirements, which
care more about having lower latency than everything else. An example of such an
industry can be robots operating in automotive assembly lines. Actions performed by
such robots are triggered by external events and usually have a predetermined time
budget to finish because the next interrupt will come shortly (it is usually called a
“control loop”). Meeting real-time goals for such a platform may require sacrificing
the overall throughput of the machine or allowing it to consume more energy. One of
the popular techniques in that area is to disable processor sleeping states242 to keep it
ready to react immediately. Another interesting technique is called Cache Locking,243
where portions of the CPU cache are reserved for a particular set of data. It helps to
streamline the memory latencies within an application.
 241 Red Hat low latency tuning guidelines - https://access.redhat.com/sites/default/files/attachmen

ts/201501-perf-brief-low-latency-tuning-rhel7-v2.1.pdf
 242 Power Management States: P-States, C-States - https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en

/develop/articles/power-management-states-p-states-c-states-and-package-c-states.html
 243 Cache Locking. Survey of cache locking techniques [Mittal, 2016]. An example of pseudo-locking

a portion of the cache, which is then exposed as a character device in the Linux file system and made
available for mmaping: https://events19.linuxfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Introducin
g-Cache-Pseudo-Locking-to-Reduce-Memory-Access-Latency-Reinette-Chatre-Intel.pdf

A more extreme shot at boosting performance is to overclock the CPU. Overclocking is
a process of running the CPU at a higher frequency than it was designed for. It is a risky
operation, as it can void the warranty and potentially damage the CPU. Overclocking
is not suited for production environments and is usually done by enthusiasts who are
willing to take the risk for the sake of performance. To overclock a CPU, you need to
have the right parts, mainly a motherboard that supports overclocking, a CPU that
has unlocked clock frequency, and a cooling system that can handle the increased heat
output. At the beginning of 2024, overclocking experts crossed the 9 GHz barrier on a
widely available CPU.244

It is helpful to understand performance bottlenecks in your application to tune the right
settings. Scalability studies can help you to determine the sensitivity of your application
to various system settings. For example, you may find out that your application doesn’t
scale with the number of cores (see Section 13.2.1), or that it is limited by the memory
latency. Using this information, you can make educated decisions about tuning the
system settings or perhaps buying new hardware components for your computing
systems. In the next case study, we will show how you can determine whether an
application is sensitive to the size of the last-level cache (LLC).

12.5     Case Study: Sensitivity to Last Level Cache Size
In this case study, we run the same set of applications multiple times with varying
LLC sizes. Modern server processors let users control the allocation of LLC space to
processor threads. In this way, a user can limit each thread to only use its allocated
amount of shared resources. Such facilities are often called Quality of Service (QoS)
extensions. They can be used to prioritize performance-critical applications and to
reduce interference with other threads in the same system. Besides LLC allocation,
QoS extensions support limiting memory read bandwidth.

Our analysis will help us identify applications whose performance drops significantly
when decreasing the size of the LLC. We say that such applications are sensitive to
the size of the LLC. Also, we identified applications that are not sensitive, i.e., LLC
size doesn’t have an impact on performance. This result can be applied to properly
size the processor LLC, especially considering the wide range available on the market.
For example, we can determine that an application benefits from a larger LLC. Then
perhaps an investment in new hardware is justified. Conversely, if the performance of
an application doesn’t improve from having a large LLC, then we can probably buy a
cheaper processor.

For this case study, we use an AMD Milan processor, but other server processors
such as Intel Xeon [Herdrich et al., 2016], and Arm ThunderX [Wang et al., 2017],
also include hardware support for users to control the allocation of both LLC space
and memory read bandwidth to processor threads. Based on our tests, the method
described in this section works equally well on AMD Zen4-based desktop processors,
such as 7950X and 7950X3D.

 244 CPU overclocking records - https://press.asus.com/news/press-releases/rog-maximus-z790-apex-

encore-sets-3-overclocking-world-records/

                                 12.5    Case Study: Sensitivity to Last Level Cache Size

Target machine: AMD EPYC 7313P
We have used a server system with a 16-core AMD EPYC 7313P processor, code-named
Milan, which AMD launched in 2021. The main characteristics of this system are
specified in table 12.1.

Table 12.1: Main features of the server used in the experiments.

 Feature                       Value
 Processor                     AMD EPYC 7313P
 Cores x threads               16 × 2
 Configuration                 4 CCX × 4 cores/CCX
 Frequency                     3.0/3.7 GHz, base/max
 L1 cache (I, D)               8-ways, 32 KiB (per core), 64-byte lines
 L2 cache                      8-ways, 512 KiB (per core), 64-byte lines
 LLC                           16-ways, 32 MB, non-inclusive (per CCX), 64-byte lines
 Main Memory                   512 GiB DDR4, 8 channels, nominal peak BW: 204.8 GB/s
 TurboBoost                    Disabled
 Hyperthreading                Disabled (1 thread/core)
 OS                            Ubuntu 22.04, kernel 5.15.0-76

Figure 12.4 shows the clustered memory hierarchy of an AMD Milan 7313P processor.
It consists of four Core Complex Dies (CCDs) connected to each other and to off-chip
memory via an I/O chiplet. Each CCD integrates a Core CompleX (CCX) and an
I/O connection. In turn, each CCX has four Zen3 cores that share a 32 MB victim
LLC.245

Figure 12.4: The clustered memory hierarchy of the AMD Milan 7313P processor.

Although there is a total of 128 MB of LLC (32 MB/CCX x 4 CCX), the four cores of
a CCX cannot store cache lines in an LLC other than their own 32 MB LLC. Since
we will be running single-threaded benchmarks, we can focus on a single CCX. The
LLC size in our experiments will vary from 0 to 32 MB with steps of 2 MB. This is
245 “Victim” means that the LLC is filled with the cache lines evicted from the four L2 caches of a

CCX.

directly related to having a 16-way LLC: by disabling one of 16 ways, we reduce the
LLC size by 2 MB.

Workload: SPEC CPU2017
We use a subset of applications from the SPEC CPU2017 suite246 . SPEC CPU2017
contains a collection of industry-standardized workloads that benchmark the perfor-
mance of the processor, memory subsystem, and compiler. It is widely used to compare
the performance of high-performance systems and in computer architecture research.
Specifically, we selected 15 memory-intensive benchmarks from SPEC CPU2017 (6 INT
and 9 FP) as suggested in [Navarro-Torres et al., 2019]. These applications have been
compiled with GCC 6.3.1 and the following compiler options: -O3 -march=native
-fno-unsafe-math-optimizations.

Controlling and Monitoring LLC allocation
To monitor and enforce limits on LLC allocation and memory read band-
width, we will use AMD64 Technology Platform Quality of Service Extensions
[Advanced Micro Devices, 2022]. Users can manage this QoS extension through the
banks of model-specific registers (MSRs). First, a thread or a group of threads must
be assigned a resource management identifier (RMID), and a class of service (COS)
by writing to the PQR_ASSOC register (MSR 0xC8F). Here is a sample command for
the hardware thread 1:
# write PQR_ASSOC (MSR 0xC8F): RMID=1, COS=2 -> (COS << 32) + RMID
$ wrmsr -p 1 0xC8F 0x200000001
where -p 1 refers to the hardware thread 1. All rdmsr and wrmsr commands that we
show require root access.
LLC space management is performed by writing to a 16-bit per-thread binary mask.
Each bit of the mask allows a thread to use a given sixteenth fraction of the LLC
(1/16 = 2 MB in the case of the AMD Milan 7313P). Multiple threads can use the
same fraction(s), implying a competitive shared use of the same subset of LLC.
To set limits on the LLC usage by thread 1, we need to write to the L3_MASK_n register,
where n is the COS, the cache partitions that can be used by the corresponding COS.
For example, to limit thread 1 to use only half of the available space in the LLC, run
the following command:
# write L3_MASK_2 (MSR 0xC92): 0x00FF (half of the LLC space)
$ wrmsr -p 1 0xC92 0x00FF
Similarly, the memory read bandwidth allocated to a thread can be limited. This
is achieved by writing an unsigned integer to a specific MSR register, which sets a
maximum read bandwidth in 1/8 GB/s increments. Interested readers are welcome to
read [Advanced Micro Devices, 2022] for more details.

Metrics
The ultimate metric for quantifying the performance of an application is execution
time. To analyze the impact of the memory hierarchy on system performance, we will
246 SPEC CPU® 2017 - https://www.spec.org/cpu2017/.

                                12.5   Case Study: Sensitivity to Last Level Cache Size

also use the following three metrics: 1) CPI, cycles per instruction, 2) DMPKI, demand
misses in the LLC per thousand instructions, and 3) MPKI, total misses (demand +
prefetch) in the LLC per thousand instructions. While CPI has a direct correlation
with the performance of an application, DMPKI and MPKI do not necessarily impact
performance. Table 12.2 shows the formulas used to calculate each metric from specific
hardware counters. Detailed descriptions for each of the counters are available in
AMD’s Processor Programming Reference [Advanced Micro Devices, 2021].

Table 12.2: Formulas for calculating metrics used in the case study.

 Metric                                            Formula
 CPI             Cycles not in Halt (PMCx076) / Retired Instructions (PMCx0C0)
 DMPKI       Demand Data Cache Fills247 (PMCx043) / (Retired Instr (PMCx0C0) / 1000)
 MPKI          L3 Misses248 (L3PMCx04) / (Retired Instructions (PMCx0C0) / 1000)

The methodology used in this case study is described in more detail in
[Navarro-Torres et al., 2023]. It also explains how we configured and read hardware
counters. The code and the information necessary to reproduce the experiments can
be found in the following public repository: https://github.com/agusnt/BALANCER.

Results
We run a set of SPEC CPU2017 benchmarks alone in the system using only one
instance and a single hardware thread. We repeat those runs while changing the
available LLC size from 0 to 32 MB in 2 MB steps.
Figure 12.5 shows in graphs, from left to right, CPI, DMPKI, and MPKI for each
assigned LLC size. We only show three workloads, namely 503.bwaves (blue),
520.omnetpp (green), and 554.roms (red). They cover the three main trends observed
in all other applications. Thus, we do not show the rest of the benchmarks.
For the CPI chart, a lower value on the Y-axis means better performance. Also, since
the frequency on the system is fixed, the CPI chart is reflective of absolute scores. For
example, 520.omnetpp (green line) with 32 MB LLC is 2.5 times faster than with 0
MB LLC. For the DMPKI and MPKI charts, the lower the value on the Y-axis, the
better.
Two different behaviors can be observed in the CPI and DMPKI graphs. On one
hand, 520.omnetpp takes advantage of its available space in the LLC: both CPI and
DMPKI decrease significantly as the space allocated in the LLC increases. We can
say that the behavior of 520.omnetpp is sensitive to the size available in the LLC.
Increasing the allocated LLC space improves performance because it avoids evicting
cache lines that will be used in the future.
In contrast, 503.bwaves and 554.roms don’t make use of all available LLC space.
For both benchmarks, CPI and DMPKI remain roughly constant as the allocation
limit in the LLC grows. We can say that the performance of these two applications is
 247 We used subevents MemIoRemote and MemIoLocal, that count demand data cache fills from DRAM

or IO connected in remote/local NUMA node.
 248 We used a mask to count only L3 Misses, specifically, L3Event[0x0300C00000400104].

Figure 12.5: CPI, DMPKI, and MPKI for increasing LLC allocation limits (2 MB steps).

insensitive to their available space in the LLC.249 If your application shows similar
behavior, you can buy a cheaper processor with a smaller LLC size without sacrificing
performance.
Let’s now analyze the MPKI graph, that combines both LLC demand misses and
prefetch requests. First of all, we can see that the MPKI values are always much
higher than the DMPKI values. That is, most of the blocks are loaded from memory
into the on-chip hierarchy by the prefetcher. This behavior is due to the fact that the
prefetcher is efficient in preloading the private caches with the data to be used, thus
eliminating most of the demand misses.
For 503.bwaves, we observe that MPKI remains roughly at the same level, similar to
CPI and DMPKI charts. There is likely not much data reuse in the benchmark and/or
the memory traffic is very low. The 520.omnetpp workload behaves as we identified
earlier: MPKI decreases as the available space increases.
However, for 554.roms, the MPKI chart shows a large drop in total misses as the
available space increases while CPI and DMPKI remain unchanged. In this case,
there is data reuse in the benchmark, but it is not consequential to the performance.
The prefetcher can bring required data ahead of time, eliminating demand misses,
regardless of the available space in the LLC. However, as the available space decreases,
the probability that the prefetcher will not find the blocks in the LLC and will have to
load them from memory increases. So, giving more LLC capacity to 554.roms does
not directly benefit its performance, but it does benefit the system since it reduces
memory traffic. So, it is better not to limit available LLC space for 554.roms as it
may negatively affect the performance of other applications running on the system.
[Navarro-Torres et al., 2023]

Questions and Exercises
   1. Solve the following lab assignments from the Performance Ninja online course:
   • perf-ninja::mem_order_violation_1
 249 However, for 554.roms, we can observe sensitivity to the available space in the LLC in the range

0-4 MB. Once the LLC size is 4 MB and above, the performance remains constant. That means that
554.roms doesn’t require more than 4 MB of LLC space to perform well.

                                                                           Summary

 • perf-ninja::mem_alignment_1
 • perf-ninja::io_opt1
 2. Study the ISA extensions supported by the processor you’re working with. Check
    if the application that you’re working on uses these extensions. If not, can it
    benefit from them?
 3. Run the application that you’re working with daily. Find the hotspot. Check if
    they suffer from any of the microarchitecture-specific issues that we discussed in
    this chapter.
 4. Describe how you can avoid page faults on a critical path in your application.

Chapter Summary
 • Processors from different vendors are not created equal. They differ in terms
   of instruction set architecture (ISA) that they support and microarchitecture
   implementation. Reaching peak performance often requires leveraging the latest
   ISA extensions and tuning the application for a specific CPU microarchitecture.
 • CPU dispatching is a technique that enables you to introduce platform-specific
   optimizations. Using it, you can provide a fast path for a specific microarchitec-
   ture while keeping a generic implementation for other platforms.
 • We explored several performance corner cases that are caused by the interaction
   of the application with the CPU microarchitecture. These include memory
   ordering violations, misaligned memory accesses, cache aliasing, and denormal
   floating-point numbers.
 • We also discussed a few low-latency tuning techniques that are essential for
   applications that require fast response times. We showed how to avoid page
   faults, cache misses, TLB shootdowns, and core throttling on a critical path.
 • System tuning is the last piece of the puzzle. Some knobs and settings may
   affect the performance of your application. It is crucial to ensure that the system
   firmware, the OS, or the kernel does not destroy all the efforts put into tuning
   the application.

