
Modern CPUs are getting more and more cores each year. As of 2024, you can buy
a server processor which will have more than 200 cores! And even a laptop with 16
execution threads is a pretty usual setup nowadays. Since there is so much processing
power in every CPU, effective utilization of all the hardware threads becomes more
challenging. Preparing software to scale well with a growing amount of CPU cores is
very important for the future success of your application.
There is a difference in how server and client products exploit parallelism. Most
server platforms are designed to process requests from a large number of customers.
Those requests are usually independent of each other, so the server can process them
in parallel. If there is enough load on the system, applications themselves could be
single-threaded, and still platform utilization will be high. However, when you use
your server platform for HPC or AI computations; then you need all the computing
power you have. On the other hand, client platforms, such as laptops and desktops,
have all the resources to serve a single user. In this case, an application has to make
use of all the available cores to provide the best user experience. In this chapter, we
will focus on applications that can scale to a large number of cores.
From the software perspective, there are two primary ways to achieve parallelism:
multiprocessing and multithreading. In a multiprocess application, multiple inde-
pendent processes run concurrently. Each process has its own memory space and
communicates with other processes through inter-process communication mechanisms
such as pipes, sockets, or shared memory. In a multithreaded application, a single
process contains multiple threads, which share the same memory space and resources
of the process. Threads within the same process can communicate and share data
more easily because they have direct access to the same memory space. However,
synchronization between threads is usually more complex and is prone to issues like
race conditions and deadlocks. In this chapter we will mostly focus on multithreaded
applications, however, some techniques can be applied to multiprocess applications as
well. We will show examples of both types of applications in this chapter.
When talking about throughput-oriented applications, we can distinguish the following
two types of applications:
  • Massively parallel applications. Such applications usually scale well with the
    number of cores. They are designed to process a large number of independent
    tasks. Massively parallel programs often use the divide-and-conquer technique
    to split the work into smaller tasks (also called worker threads) and process them
    in parallel. Examples of such applications are scientific computations, video
    rendering, data analytics, AI, and many others. The main obstacle for such
    applications is the saturation of a shared resource, such as memory bandwidth,
    that can effectively stall all the worker threads in the process.
  • Applications that require synchronization. Such applications have workers
    share resources to complete their tasks. Worker threads depend on each other,
    which creates periods when some threads are stalled. Examples of such appli-
    cations are databases, web servers, and other server applications. The main

                                                            13.1    Parallel Efficiency Metrics

       challenge for such applications is to minimize required synchronization and to
       avoid contention on shared resources.
In this chapter, we will explore how to analyze the performance of both types of
applications. Since this is a book about low-level performance, we will not discuss
algorithm-level optimizations such as lock-free data structures, which are well covered
in other books.

13.1      Parallel Efficiency Metrics
Let’s start by introducing a few metrics that are important for analyzing the perfor-
mance of multithreaded applications. When dealing with multithreaded applications,
engineers should be careful in analyzing basic metrics, for example, CPU utilization.
One of the threads might show high CPU utilization, but it could turn out that the
thread was just spinning in a busy-wait loop while waiting for a lock. That’s why,
when evaluating the parallel efficiency of an application, it’s recommended to use
Effective CPU Utilization, which is based only on the Effective time.

Effective CPU Utilization
This metric represents how efficiently an application utilizes the available CPUs. It
shows the percent of average CPU utilization by all logical CPUs on the system. It
is based only on the Effective time and does not include the overhead introduced by
the parallel runtime system250 and Spin time. An Effective CPU utilization of 100%
means that your application keeps all the logical CPU cores busy for the entire time
that it runs.
For a specified time interval T, Effective CPU Utilization can be calculated as
                                       PThreadCount
                                                    Effective CPU Time(T,i)
        Effective CPU Utilization = i=1
                                               T × ThreadCount

        Effective CPU Time = CPU Time − (Overhead Time + Spin Time)

Measuring overhead and spin time can be challenging, and I recommend using a
performance analysis tool like Intel VTune Profiler, which can provide these metrics.

Thread Count
Most parallel applications have a configurable number of threads, which allows them to
run efficiently on platforms with a different number of cores. Running an application
using a lower number of threads than is available on the system underutilizes its
resources. On the other hand, running an excessive number of threads can cause
oversubscription; some threads will be waiting for their turn to run.
Besides actual worker threads, multithreaded applications usually have other house-
keeping threads: main thread, input/output threads, etc. If those threads consume
significant time, they will take execution time away from worker threads, as they too
 250 Threading libraries such as pthread, OpenMP, and Intel TBB incur additional overhead for creating

and managing threads.

require CPU cores to run. This is why it is important to know the total thread count
and configure the number of worker threads properly.
To avoid a penalty for thread creation and destruction, engineers usually allocate a pool
of threads251 with multiple threads waiting for tasks to be allocated for concurrent
execution by the supervising program. This is especially beneficial for executing
short-lived tasks.

Wait Time
Wait Time occurs when software threads are waiting due to APIs that block or cause
a context switch. Wait Time is per thread; therefore, the total Wait Time can exceed
the application elapsed time.
A thread can be switched off from execution by the OS scheduler due to either
synchronization or preemption. So, Wait Time can be further divided into Sync Wait
Time and Preemption Wait Time. A large amount of Sync Wait Time likely indicates
that the application has highly contended synchronization objects. We will explore how
to find them in the following sections. Significant Preemption Wait Time can signal
a thread oversubscription problem either because of a large number of application
threads or a conflict with OS threads or other applications on the system. In this case,
the developer should consider reducing the total number of threads or increasing task
granularity for every worker thread.

Spin Time
Spin time is Wait Time, during which the CPU is busy. This often occurs when a
synchronization API causes the CPU to poll while the software thread is waiting. In
reality, the implementation of kernel synchronization primitives spins on a lock for
some time instead of immediately yielding to another thread. Too much Spin Time,
however, can reflect the lost opportunity for productive work.
A list of other parallel efficiency metrics can be found on Intel’s VTune page.252

13.2     Performance Scaling in Multithreaded Programs
When dealing with a single-threaded application, optimizing one portion of a program
usually yields positive results on performance. However, this is not necessarily the
case for multithreaded applications. There could be an application in which thread A
executes a long-running operation, while thread B finishes its task early and just waits
for thread A to finish. No matter how much we improve thread B, application latency
will not be reduced since it will be limited by a longer-running thread A.
This effect is widely known as Amdahl’s law,253 which constitutes that the speedup of
a parallel program is limited by its serial part. Figure 13.1a illustrates the theoretical
speedup of the latency of the execution of a program as a function of the number of
processors executing it. For a program, 75% of which is parallel, the speedup factor
converges to 4.
251 Thread pool - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_pool
252 CPU metrics reference - https://software.intel.com/en-us/vtune-help-cpu-metrics-reference
253 Amdahl’s law - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amdahl’s_law.

         (a) The theoretical speedup limit as a         (b) Linear speedup, Amdahl’s law, and
          function of the number of processors,                Universal Scalability Law.
               according to Amdahl’s law.

Figure 13.1: Amdahl’s Law and Universal Scalability Law.

In reality, further adding computing nodes to the system may yield retrograde speed
up. We will see examples of it in the next section. This effect is explained by Neil
Gunther as the Universal Scalability Law254 (USL), which is an extension of Amdahl’s
law. USL describes communication between computing nodes (threads) as yet another
factor gating performance. As the system is scaled up, overheads start to neutralize
the gains. Beyond a critical point, the capability of the system starts to decrease
(see Figure 13.1b). USL is widely used for modeling the capacity and scalability of
systems.
The slowdowns described by USL are driven by several factors. First, as the number
of computing nodes increases, they start to compete for resources (contention). This
results in additional time being spent on synchronizing those accesses. Another
issue occurs with resources that are shared between many workers. We need to
maintain a consistent state of the shared resources between many workers (coherence).
For example, when multiple workers frequently change a globally visible object,
those changes need to be broadcast to all nodes that use that object. Suddenly,
usual operations start taking more time to finish due to the additional need to
maintain coherence. Optimizing multithreaded applications not only involves all the
techniques described in this book so far but also involves detecting and mitigating the
aforementioned effects of contention and coherence.

13.2.1     Thread Count Scaling Case Study
Thread count scaling is perhaps the most valuable analysis you can perform on a
multithreaded application. It shows how well the application can utilize modern
multicore systems. As you will see, there is a ton of information you can learn along
the way. Without further introduction, let’s get started. In this case study, we will
analyze the thread count scaling of the following benchmarks, some of which should
be already familiar to you from the previous chapters:
   1. Blender 3.4 - an open-source 3D creation and modeling software project.
254 USL law - http://www.perfdynamics.com/Manifesto/USLscalability.html#tth_sEc1.

     This test is of Blender’s Cycles performance with the BMW27 blend file.
     URL: https://download.blender.org/release. Command line: ./blender
     -b bmw27_cpu.blend -noaudio --enable-autoexec -o output.test -x
     1 -F JPEG -f 1 -t N, where N is the number of threads.
  2. Clang 17 build - this test uses Clang 15 to build the Clang 17 compiler from
     sources. URL: https://www.llvm.org. Command line: ninja -jN clang, where
     N is the number of threads.
  3. Zstandard v1.5.5, a fast lossless compression algorithm. URL: https://github.c
     om/facebook/zstd. A dataset used for compression: http://wanos.co/assets/si
     lesia.tar. Command line: ./zstd -TN -3 -f -- silesia.tar, where N is the
     number of compression worker threads.
  4. CloverLeaf 2018 - a Lagrangian-Eulerian hydrodynamics benchmark. All hard-
     ware threads are used. This test uses the input file clover_bm.in (Problem
     5). URL: http://uk-mac.github.io/CloverLeaf. Command line: export
     OMP_NUM_THREADS=N; ./clover_leaf, where N is the number of threads.
  5. CPython 3.12, a reference implementation of the Python programming language.
     URL: https://github.com/python/cpython. I ran a simple multithreaded
     binary search script written in Python, which searches 10,000 random numbers
     (needles) in a sorted list of 1,000,000 elements (haystack). Command line:
     ./python3 binary_search.py N, where N is the number of threads. Needles
     are divided equally between threads.
The benchmarks were executed on a machine with the configuration shown below:
  • 12th Gen Alder Lake Intel® Core™ i7-1260P CPU @ 2.10GHz (4.70GHz Turbo),
    4P+8E cores, 18MB L3-cache.
  • 16 GB RAM, DDR4 @ 2400 MT/s.
  • Clang 15 compiler with the following options: -O3 -march=core-avx2.
  • 256GB NVMe PCIe M.2 SSD.
  • 64-bit Ubuntu 22.04.1 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish, Linux kernel 6.5).
This is clearly not the top-of-the-line hardware setup, but rather a mainstream
computer, not necessarily designed to handle media, developer, or HPC workloads.
However, it is an excellent platform for our case study as it demonstrates various
effects of thread count scaling. Because of the limited resources, applications start to
hit performance roadblocks even with a small number of threads. Keep in mind, that
on better hardware, the scaling results will be different.
My processor has four P-cores and eight E-cores. P-cores are SMT-enabled, which
means the total number of threads on this platform is sixteen. By default, the Linux
scheduler will first try to use idle physical P-cores. The first four threads will utilize
four threads on four idle P-cores. When they are fully utilized, it will start to schedule
threads on E-cores. So, the next eight threads will be scheduled on eight E-cores.
Finally, the remaining four threads will be scheduled on the 4 sibling SMT threads of
P-cores.
I ran the benchmarks while affinitizing threads using the aforementioned scheme,
except Zstd and CPython. Running without affinity does a better job of representing
real-world scenarios, however, thread affinity makes thread count scaling analysis
cleaner. Since performance numbers were very similar, in this case study I present the
results when thread affinity is used.

The benchmarks do a fixed amount of work. The number of retired instructions is
almost identical regardless of the thread count. In all of them, the largest portion of
an algorithm is implemented using a divide-and-conquer paradigm, where work is split
into equal parts, and each part can be processed independently. In theory, this allows
applications to scale well with the number of cores. However, in practice, the scaling
is often far from optimal.
Figure 13.2 shows the thread count scalability of the selected benchmarks. The
x-axis represents the number of threads, and the y-axis shows the speedup relative
to the single-threaded execution. The speedup is calculated as the execution time of
the single-threaded execution divided by the execution time of the multi-threaded
execution. The higher the speedup, the better the application scales with the number
of threads.

Figure 13.2: Thread Count Scalability chart for five selected benchmarks.

As you can see, most of them are very far from the linear scaling, which is quite
disappointing. The benchmark with the best scaling in this case study, Blender,
achieves only 6x speedup while using 16x threads. CPython, for example, enjoys no
thread count scaling at all. The performance of Clang and Zstd degrades when the
number of threads goes beyond 10. To understand why that happens, let’s dive into
the details of each benchmark.

Blender
Blender is the only benchmark in our suite that continues to scale up to all 16 threads
in the system. The reason for this is that the workload is highly parallelizable. The
rendering process is divided into small tiles, and each tile can be rendered independently.
However, even with this high level of parallelism, the scaling is only 6.1x speedup
/ 16 threads = 38%. What are the reasons for this suboptimal scaling?
From Section 4.11, we know that Blender’s performance is bounded by floating-point
computations. It has a relatively high percentage of SIMD instructions as well. P-cores
are much better at handling such instructions than E-cores. This is why we see the
slope of the speedup curve decrease after 4 threads as E-cores start getting used.

Performance scaling continues at the same pace up until 12 threads, where it starts to
degrade again. This is the effect of using SMT sibling threads. Two active sibling SMT
threads compete for the limited number of FP/SIMD execution units. To measure
SMT scaling, we need to divide the performance of two SMT threads (2T1C - two
threads one core) by the performance of a single P-core (1T1C).255 For Blender, SMT
scaling is around 1.3x.
There is another aspect of scaling degradation that also applies to Blender that we
will talk about while discussing Clang’s thread count scaling.

Clang
While Blender uses multithreading to exploit parallelism, concurrency in C++ com-
pilation is usually achieved with multiprocessing. Clang 17 has more than 2,500
translation units, and to compile each of them, a new process is spawned. Similar to
Blender, we classify Clang compilation as massively parallel, yet they scale differently.
We recommend you revisit Section 4.11 for an overview of Clang compiler performance
bottlenecks. In short, it has a large codebase, flat profile, many small functions, and
“branchy” code. Its performance is affected by D-Cache, I-Cache, and TLB misses, and
branch mispredictions. Clang’s thread count scaling is affected by the same scaling
issue as Blender: P-cores are more effective than E-cores, and P-core SMT scaling is
about 1.1x. However, there is more. Notice that scaling stops at around 10 threads,
and starts to degrade. Let’s understand why that happens.
The problem is related to the frequency throttling. When multiple cores are utilized
simultaneously, the processor generates more heat due to the increased workload on
each core. To prevent overheating and maintain stability, CPUs often throttle down
their clock speeds depending on how many cores are in use. Additionally, boosting all
cores to their maximum turbo frequency simultaneously would require significantly
more power, which might exceed the power delivery capabilities of the CPU. My system
doesn’t have an advanced liquid cooling solution and only has a single processor fan.
That’s why it cannot sustain high frequencies when many cores are utilized.
Figure 13.3 shows the performance scaling of the Clang workload overlaid with the
CPU frequency on our platform while running with different thread counts. Notice
that sustained frequency drops when we start using just two P-cores simultaneously.
By the time you start using all 16 threads, the frequency of P-cores is throttled down
to 3.2GHz, while E-cores operate at 2.6GHz. I used Intel VTune’s platform view to
capture CPU frequencies as shown in Section 7.1.
The tipping point of performance scaling for the Clang workload is around 10 threads.
This is the point where the frequency throttling starts to have a significant impact on
performance, and the benefit of adding additional threads is smaller than the penalty
of running at a lower frequency.
Keep in mind that this frequency chart cannot be automatically applied to all other
workloads. Applications that heavily use SIMD instructions typically operate on lower
frequencies, so Blender, for example, may see slightly more frequency throttling than
Clang. However, such a chart can give you a good intuition about the frequency
throttling issues that occur on your platform.
255 Also, you can measure SMT scaling as 4T2C/2T2C, 6T3C/3T3C, and so on.

Figure 13.3: Frequency throttling while running Clang compilation on Intel® Core™
        i7-1260P. E-cores become active only after using four threads on P-cores.

To confirm that frequency throttling is one of the main reasons for performance
degradation, I temporarily disabled Turbo Boost on my platform and repeated the
scaling study for Blender and Clang. When Turbo Boost is disabled, all cores operate
on their base frequencies, which are 2.1 Ghz for P-cores and 1.5 Ghz for E-cores.
The results are shown in Figure 13.4. As you can see, thread count scaling almost
doubles when all 16 threads are used and TurboBoost is disabled, for both Blender
(38% → 69%) and Clang (21% → 41%). It gives us an intuition of what the thread count
scaling would look like if frequency throttling had not happened. In fact, frequency
throttling accounts for a large portion of unrealized performance scaling in modern
systems.

Figure 13.4: Thread Count Scalability chart for Blender and Clang with disabled Turbo
 Boost. Frequency throttling is a major roadblock to achieving good thread count scaling.

Zstandard
Next on our list is the Zstandard compression algorithm, or Zstd for short. When
compressing data, Zstd divides the input into blocks, and each block can be compressed
independently. This means that multiple threads can work on compressing different
blocks simultaneously. Although it seems that Zstd should scale well with the number
of threads, it doesn’t. Performance scaling stops at around 5 threads, sooner than in
the previous two benchmarks. As you will see, the dynamic interaction between Zstd
worker threads is quite complicated.
First of all, the performance of Zstd depends on the compression level. The higher
the compression level, the more compact the result. Lower compression levels provide
faster compression, while higher levels yield better compression ratios. In the case
study, I used compression level 3 (which is also the default level) since it provides a
good trade-off between speed and compression ratio.
Here is the high-level algorithm of Zstd compression:
  • The input file is divided into blocks, whose size depends on the compression level.
    Each job is responsible for compressing a block of data. When Zstd receives
    some data to compress, the main thread copies a small chunk into one of its
    internal buffers and posts a new compression job, which is picked up by one of
    the worker threads. In a similar manner, the main thread fills all input buffers
    for all its workers and sends them to work in order. Worker threads share a
    common queue from which they concurrently pick up jobs.
  • Jobs are always started in order, but they can be finished in any order. Compres-
    sion speed can be variable and depends on the data to compress. Some blocks
    are easier to compress than others.
  • After a worker finishes compressing a block, it signals to the main thread that
    the compressed data is ready to be flushed to the output file. The main thread
    is responsible for flushing the compressed data to the output file. Note that
    flushing must be done in order, which means that the second job is allowed to be
    flushed only after the first one is entirely flushed. The main thread can “partially
    flush” an ongoing job, i.e., it doesn’t have to wait for a job to be completely
    finished to start flushing it.
To visualize the work of the Zstd algorithm on a timeline, I instrumented the Zstd
source code with VTune’s Instrumentation and Tracing Technology (ITT) markers.256
They enable us to visualize the duration of instrumented code regions and events on
the timeline and control the collection of trace data during execution.
The timeline of compressing the Silesia corpus using 8 threads is shown in Figure
13.5. Using 8 worker threads is enough to observe thread interaction in Zstd while
keeping the image less noisy than when all 16 threads are active. The second half of
the timeline was cut to make the image fit on the page.
On the image, we have the main thread at the bottom (TID 913273), and eight worker
threads at the top. The worker threads are created at the beginning of the compression
process and are reused for multiple compressing jobs.
 256 VTune ITT instrumentation - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/vtune-

profiler/user-guide/2023-1/instrumenting-your-application.html

Figure 13.5: Timeline view of compressing Silesia corpus with Zstandard using 8 threads.

On the worker thread timeline (top 8 rows) we have the following markers:
  • job0–job25 bars indicate the start and end of a job.
  • ww (short for “worker wait”, green bars) bars indicate a period when a worker
    thread is waiting for a new job.
  • Notches below job periods indicate that a thread has just finished compressing
    a portion of the input block and is signaling to the main thread that there is
    data available to be flushed (partial flushing).
On the main thread timeline (the bottom row, TID 913273) we have the following
markers:
  • p0–p25 boxes indicate periods of preparing a new job. It starts when the main
    thread starts filling up the input buffer until it is full (but this new job is not
    necessarily posted on the worker queue immediately).
  • fw (short for “flush wait”, blue bars) markers indicate a period when the main
    thread waits for the produced data to start flushing it. This happens when the
    main thread has prepared the next job and has nothing else to do. During this
    time, the main thread is blocked.
With a quick glance at the image, we can tell that there are many ww periods when
worker threads are waiting. This negatively affects the performance of Zstandard
compression. Let’s progress through the timeline and try to understand what’s going
on.
  1. First, when worker threads are created, there is no work to do, so they are
     waiting for the main thread to post a new job.

  2. Then the main thread starts to fill up the input buffers for the worker threads.
     It has prepared jobs 0 to 7 (see bars p0–p7), which were picked up by worker
     threads immediately. Notice, that the main thread also prepared job8 (p8), but
     it hasn’t posted it in the worker queue yet. This is because all workers are still
     busy.
  3. After the main thread has finished p8, it flushed the data already produced
     by job0. Notice, that by this time, job0 has already delivered five portions of
     compressed data (first five notches below the job0 bar). Now, the main thread
     enters its first fw period and starts to wait for more data from job0.
  4. At the timestamp 45ms, one more chunk of compressed data is produced by
     job0, and the main thread briefly wakes up to flush it, see 1 . After that, it
     goes to sleep (fw) again.
  5. Job3 is the first to finish, but there is a couple of milliseconds delay before
     TID 913309 picks up the new job, see 2 . This happens because job8 was not
     posted in the queue by the main thread. At this time, the main thread is waiting
     for a new chunk of compressed data from job0. When it arrives a couple of
     milliseconds later, the main thread wakes up, flushes the data, and notices that
     there is an idle worker thread (TID 913309, the one that has just finished job3).
     So, the main thread posts job8 to the worker queue and starts preparing the
     next job (p9).
  6. The same thing happens with TID 913313 (see 3 ) and TID 913314 (see 4 ).
     But this time the delay is bigger. Interestingly, job10 could have been picked
     up by either TID 913314 or TID 913312 since they were both idle at the time
     job10 was pushed to the job queue.
  7. We should have expected that the main thread would start preparing job11
     immediately after job10 was posted in the queue as it did before. But it didn’t.
     This happens because there are no available input buffers. We will discuss it in
     more detail shortly.
  8. Only when job0 finishes, the main thread was able to acquire a new input buffer
     and start preparing job11 (see 5 ).
As we just said, the reason for the 20–40ms delays between jobs (e.g., between job4
and job11) is the lack of input buffers, which are required to start preparing a new
job. Zstd maintains a single memory pool, which allocates space for both input and
output buffers. This memory pool is prone to fragmentation issues, as it has to provide
contiguous blocks of memory. When a worker finishes a job, the output buffer is
waiting to be flushed, but it still occupies memory. To start working on another job,
it will require another pair of buffers (one input and one output buffer).
Limiting the capacity of the memory pool is a design decision to reduce memory
consumption. In the worst case, there could be many “run-away” buffers, left by
workers that have completed their jobs very fast, and moved on to process the next
job; meanwhile, the flush queue is still blocked by one slow job and the buffers cannot
be released. In such a scenario, the memory consumption would be high, which is
undesirable. However, the downside of the current implementation is increased wait
time between the jobs.
The Zstd compression algorithm is a good example of a complex interaction between
threads. Visualizing worker threads on a timeline is extremely helpful in understanding
how threads communicate and synchronize, and can be useful for identifying bottlenecks.

It is also a good reminder that even if you have a parallelizable workload, the
performance of your application can be limited by the synchronization between
threads and resource availability.

CloverLeaf
CloverLeaf is a hydrodynamics workload. We will not dig deeply into the details of
the underlying algorithm as it is not relevant to this case study. CloverLeaf uses
OpenMP to parallelize the workload. HPC workloads usually scale well, so we expect
CloverLeaf to scale well too. However, on my platform performance stops growing
after using 3 threads. What’s going on?
To determine the root cause of poor scaling, I collected TMA metrics (see Section 6.1)
in four data points: running CloverLeaf with one, two, three, and four threads. Once
we compare the performance characteristics of these profiles, one thing becomes
clear immediately: CloverLeaf’s performance is bound by memory bandwidth. Table
13.1 shows the relevant metrics from these profiles that highlight increasing memory
bandwidth demand when using multiple threads.

Table 13.1: Performance metrics for CloverLeaf workload.

                                                       1          2          3            4
Metric                                            thread    threads    threads      threads
TMA::Memory Bound (% of pipeline slots)             34.6       53.7         59.0      65.4
TMA::DRAM Memory Bandwidth (% of cycles)            71.7       83.9         87.0      91.3
Memory Bandwidth Utilization (range, GB/s)         20-22      25-28        27-30     27-30

As you can see from those numbers, the pressure on the memory subsystem keeps
increasing as we add more threads. An increase in the TMA::Memory Bound metric
indicates that threads increasingly spend more time waiting for data and do less useful
work. An increase in the DRAM Memory Bandwidth metric further highlights that
performance is hurt due to approaching bandwidth limits. The Memory Bandwidth
Utilization metric indicates the range of total memory bandwidth utilization while
CloverLeaf was running. I captured these numbers by looking at the memory bandwidth
utilization chart in VTune’s platform view as shown in Figure 13.6.

Figure 13.6: VTune’s platform view of running CloverLeaf with 3 threads.

Let’s put those numbers into perspective. The maximum theoretical memory band-
width of my platform is 38.4 GB/s. However, as I measured in Section 4.10, the

maximum memory bandwidth that can be achieved in practice is 35 GB/s. With just
a single thread, the memory bandwidth utilization reaches 2/3 of the practical limit.
CloverLeaf fully saturates the memory bandwidth with three threads. Even when
all 16 threads are active, Memory Bandwidth Utilization doesn’t go above 30 GB/s,
which is 86% of the practical limit.
To confirm my hypothesis, I swapped two 8 GB DDR4 2400 MT/s memory modules
with two DDR4 modules of the same capacity, but faster speed: 3200 MT/s. This
brings the theoretical memory bandwidth of the system to 51.2 GB/s and the practical
maximum to 45 GB/s. The resulting performance boost grows with an increasing
number of threads used and is in the range of 10% to 33%. When running CloverLeaf
with 16 threads, faster memory modules provide the expected 33% performance as
a ratio of the memory bandwidth increase (3200 / 2400 = 1.33). But even with a
single thread, there is a 10% performance improvement. This means that there were
moments when CloverLeaf fully saturated the memory bandwidth with a single thread
in the original configuration.
Interestingly, for CloverLeaf, TurboBoost doesn’t provide any performance benefit
when all 16 threads are used, i.e., performance is the same regardless of whether you
enable Turbo or let the cores run on their base frequency. How is that possible? The
answer is: that having 16 active threads is enough to saturate two memory controllers
even if CPU cores run at half the frequency. Since most of the time threads are just
waiting for data, when you disable Turbo, they simply start to wait “slower”.

CPython
The final benchmark in the case study is CPython. I wrote a simple multithreaded
Python script that uses binary search to find numbers (needles) in a sorted list
(haystack). Needles are divided equally between worker threads. The script that I
wrote doesn’t scale at all. Can you guess why?
To solve this puzzle, I built CPython 3.12 from sources with debug information and
ran Intel VTune’s Threading Analysis collection while using two threads. Figure 13.7
visualizes a small portion of the timeline of the Python script execution. As you can
see, the CPU time alternates between two threads. They work for 5 ms, then yield to
another thread. In fact, if you were to scroll left or right, you would see that they
never run simultaneously.

Figure 13.7: VTune’s timeline view when running our Python script with two worker threads
                              (other threads are filtered out).

Let’s try to understand why two worker threads take turns instead of running together.
Once a thread finishes its turn, the Linux kernel scheduler switches to another thread
as highlighted in Figure 13.7. It also gives the reason for a context switch. If we take

a look at the pthread_cond_wait.c source code257 at line 652, we would land on the
function ___pthread_cond_timedwait64, which waits for a condition variable to be
signaled. Many other inactive wait periods wait for the same reason.

On the Bottom-up page (see the left panel of Figure 13.8), VTune reports that the
___pthread_cond_timedwait64 function is responsible for the majority of Inactive
Sync Wait Time. On the right panel, you can see the corresponding call stack. Using
this call stack we can tell what is the most frequently used code path that led to the
___pthread_cond_timedwait64 function and subsequent context switch.

Figure 13.8: VTune’s timeline view when running our Python script with two threads (other
                                 threads are filtered out).

This call stack leads us to the take_gil function, which is responsible for acquiring the
Global Interpreter Lock (GIL). The GIL is preventing our attempts at running worker
threads in parallel by allowing only one thread to run at any given time, effectively
turning our multithreaded program into a single-threaded one. If you take a look at
the implementation of the take_gil function, you will find out that it uses a version
of wait on a conditional variable with a timeout of 5 ms. Once the timeout is reached,
the waiting thread asks the GIL-holding thread to drop it. Once another thread
complies with the request, the waiting thread acquires the GIL and starts running.
They keep switching roles until the very end of the execution.

Experienced Python programmers would immediately understand the problem, but in
this example, I demonstrated how to find contested locks even without an extensive
knowledge of CPython internals. CPython is the default and by far the most widely
used Python interpreter. Unfortunately, it comes with GIL, which destroys the
performance of compute-bound multithreaded Python programs.

Nevertheless, there are ways to bypass GIL, for example, by using GIL-immune libraries
such as NumPy, writing performance-critical parts of the code as a C extension module,
or using alternative runtime environments, such as nogil.258 Also, in Python 3.13
there is experimental support for running with the global interpreter lock disabled.259

Summary
In the case study, we have analyzed several throughput-oriented applications with
varying thread count scaling characteristics. Here is a quick summary of our findings:
257 Glibc source code - https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=tree
258 Nogil - https://github.com/colesbury/nogil
259 Python 3.13 release notes - https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.13.html

  • Frequency throttling is a major roadblock to achieving good thread count
    scaling. Any application that makes use of multiple hardware threads suffers
    from frequency drop due to thermal limits. Platforms that have processors with
    higher TDP (Thermal Design Power) and advanced liquid cooling solutions are
    less prone to frequency throttling.
  • Thread count scaling on hybrid processors (with performant and energy-efficient
    cores) is penalized because E-cores are less performant than P-cores. Once
    E-cores start being used, performance scaling is slowing down. Sibling SMT
    threads also don’t provide good performance scaling.
  • Worker threads in a throughput-oriented workload share a common set of
    resources, which may become a bottleneck. As we saw in the CloverLeaf example,
    performance doesn’t scale because of the memory bandwidth limitation. This
    is a common problem for many HPC and AI workloads. Once you hit that
    limitation, everything else becomes less important, including code optimizations
    and even CPU frequency. The L3 cache and I/O are other examples of shared
    resources that often become a bottleneck.
  • Finally, the performance of a concurrent application may be limited by the
    synchronization between threads as we saw in Zstd and CPython examples.
    Some programs have very complex interactions between threads, so it is very
    useful to visualize worker threads on a timeline. Also, you should know how to
    find contested locks using performance profiling tools.
To confirm that suboptimal scaling is a common case, rather than an exception, let’s
look at the SPEC CPU 2017 suite of benchmarks. In the rate part of the suite, each
hardware thread runs its own single-threaded workload, so there are no slowdowns
caused by thread synchronization. According to [Marr, 2023], benchmarks that have
integer code (regular general-purpose programs) have a thread count scaling in the
range of 40% - 70%, while benchmarks that have floating-point code (scientific, media,
and engineering programs) have a scaling in the range of 20% - 65%. Those numbers
represent inefficiencies caused just by the hardware platform. Inefficiencies caused
by thread synchronization in multithreaded programs further degrade performance
scaling.
In a latency-oriented application, you typically have a few performance-critical threads
and the rest do background work that doesn’t necessarily have to be fast. Many issues
that we’ve discussed apply to latency-oriented applications as well. We covered some
low-latency tuning techniques in Section 12.3.

13.3    Task Scheduling
With the emergence of hybrid processors, task scheduling becomes very challenging.
For example, recent Intel’s Meteor Lake chips have three types of cores; all with
different performance characteristics. As you will see in this section, it is very easy
to pessimize the performance of a multithreaded application by scheduling tasks
suboptimally. Implementing a generic task scheduling policy is tricky because it
greatly depends on the nature of the running tasks. Here are some examples:
  • Compute-intensive lightly-threaded workloads (e.g., data compression) must be
    served only on P-cores.
  • Background tasks (e.g., video calls) could be run on E-cores to save power.

                                                                  13.3   Task Scheduling

   • For bursty applications that demand high responsiveness (e.g., productivity
     software), a system should only use P-cores.
   • Multithreaded programs with sustained performance demand (e.g., video render-
     ing) should utilize both P- and E-cores.
For the most part, task schedulers in modern operating systems take care of these
and many other corner cases. For example, Intel’s Thread Director helps monitor and
analyze performance data in real-time to seamlessly place the right application thread
on the right core. My general recommendation here is to let the operating system do
its job and not restrict it too much. The operating system knows how to schedule tasks
to minimize contention, maximize reuse of data in caches, and ultimately maximize
performance. This will play a big role if you are developing cross-platform software
that is intended to run on different hardware configurations.
Below I show a few typical pitfalls of task scheduling in asymmetric systems. I took
the same system I used in the previous case study: 12th Gen Alder Lake Intel® Core™
i7-1260P CPU, which has four P-cores and eight E-cores. For simplicity, I only enabled
two P-cores and two E-cores; the rest of the cores were temporarily disabled. I also
disabled SMT sibling threads on the two active P-cores. I wrote a simple OpenMP
application, where each worker thread runs several bit manipulation operations on
every 32-bit integer element of a large array. After a worker thread has finished
processing, it hits a barrier and is forced to wait for other threads to finish their parts.
After that, the main thread cleans up the array and the processing repeats. The
program was compiled with GCC 13.2 and -O3 -march=core-avx2, which enables
vectorization.
Figure 13.9 shows three strategies, which highlight common problems that I regularly
see in practice. These screenshots were captured with Intel VTune. The bars on
the timeline indicate CPU time, i.e., periods when a thread was running. For each
software thread, there is one or two corresponding CPU cores. Using this view, we
can see on which core each thread was running at any given moment.
Our first example uses static partitioning, which divides the processing of our large
array into four equal chunks (since I have four cores enabled). For each chunk, the
OpenMP runtime spawns a new thread. Also, I used OMP_PROC_BIND=true, which
instructs OpenMP runtime to pin spawned threads to the CPU cores. Figure 13.9a
demonstrates the effect: P-cores are much better at handling SIMD instructions than
E-cores and they finish their jobs two times faster (see Thread 1 and Thread 2 ).
However, thread affinity does not allow Thread 3 and Thread 4 to migrate to P-cores,
which are waiting at the barrier. That results in a high latency, which is limited by
the speed of E-cores.
My recommendation is to avoid pinning threads to cores. With unbalanced work,
pinning might restrict the work stealing, leaving the long execution tail for E-cores.
On macOS, it is not possible to pin threads to cores since the operating system does
not provide an API for that.
In the second example, I don’t pin threads anymore, but the partitioning scheme
remains the same (four equal chunks). Figure 13.9b illustrates the effect of this change.
As in the previous scenario, Thread 1 and Thread 4 finished their jobs early, because
they were using P-cores. Thread 2 and Thread 3 started running on E-cores, but once

               (a) Static partitioning with pinning threads to the cores:
            #pragma omp for schedule(static) with OMP_PROC_BIND=true.

                      (b) Static partitioning, no thread affinity:
                        #pragma omp for schedule(static).

                      (c) Dynamic partitioning with 16 chunks:
                    #pragma omp for schedule(dynamic, N/16).

Figure 13.9: Typical task scheduling pitfalls: core affinity blocks thread migration,
    partitioning jobs with large granularity fails to maximize CPU utilization.

                                                                 13.4   Cache Coherence

P-cores became available, they migrated. It solved the problem we had before, but
now E-cores remain idle until the end of the processing.
My second piece of advice is to avoid static partitioning on systems with asymmetric
cores. Equal-sized chunks will likely be processed faster on P-cores than on E-cores
which will introduce dynamic load imbalance.
In the final example, I switch to using dynamic partitioning. With dynamic partitioning,
chunks are distributed to threads dynamically. Each thread processes a chunk of
elements, then requests another chunk, until no chunks remain to be distributed.
Figure 13.9c shows the result of using dynamic partitioning by dividing the array
into 16 chunks. With this scheme, each task becomes more granular, which enables
OpenMP runtime to balance the work even when P-cores run two times faster than
E-cores. However, notice that there is still some idle time on E-cores.
Performance can be slightly improved if we partition the work into 128 chunks instead of
16. But don’t make the jobs too small, otherwise it will result in increased management
overhead. The result summary of my experiments is shown in Table 13.2. Partitioning
the work into 128 chunks turns out to be the sweet spot for our example. Even
though this example is very simple, lessons from it can be applied to production-grade
multithreaded software.

Table 13.2: Results of the task scheduling experiments.

                                               Dynamic, Dynamic, Dynamic, Dynamic,
                                                  4       16       128      1024
                         Affinity   Static     chunks   chunks   chunks    chunks
Avg latency of 10          864      567            570     541          517       560
runs, ms

13.4     Cache Coherence
Multiprocessor systems incorporate means to ensure data coherence during shared
usage of memory by each core containing its own, separate cache entity. Without such
a protocol, if both CPU A and B read memory location L into their individual caches,
and CPU B subsequently modifies its cached value for L, then the CPUs would have
incoherent values of the same memory location L. Cache Coherency Protocols ensure
that any updates to cached entries are dutifully updated or invalidated in any other
cached entry of the same location.

13.4.1   Cache Coherency Protocols
One of the most well-known cache coherency protocols is MESI (Modified Exclusive
Shared Invalid), which is used to support writeback caches like those used in modern
CPUs. Its acronym denotes the four states with which a cache line can be marked
(see Figure 13.10):
   • Modified: a cache line is present only in the current cache and has been modified
     from its value in RAM

   • Exclusive: a cache line is present only in the current cache and matches its
     value in RAM
   • Shared: a cache line is present here and in other cache lines and matches its
     value in RAM
   • Invalid: a cache line is unused (i.e., does not contain any RAM location)

Figure 13.10: MESI States Diagram. © Source: University of Washington via
                               courses.cs.washington.edu.

When fetched from memory, each cache line has one of the states encoded into its tag.
Then the cache line state keeps transiting from one state to another.260 In reality, CPU
vendors usually implement slightly improved variants of MESI. For example, Intel
uses MESIF,261 which adds a Forwarding (F) state, while AMD employs MOESI,262
which adds the Owning (O) state. However, these protocols still maintain the essence
of the base MESI protocol.
Lack of cache coherency can cause sequentially inconsistent programs. This problem
can be mitigated by having snoop caches watch all memory transactions and cooperate
with each other to maintain memory consistency. Unfortunately, it comes with a cost
since modification done by one core invalidates the corresponding cache line in another
core’s cache. This causes memory stalls and wastes system bandwidth. In contrast to
serialization and locking issues, which can only put a ceiling on the performance of
the application, coherency issues can cause retrograde effects as attributed by USL in
Section 13.2. Two widely known types of coherency problems are true sharing and
 260 There is an animated demonstration of the MESI protocol - https://www.scss.tcd.ie/Jeremy.Jon

es/vivio/caches/MESI.htm.
 261 MESIF - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MESIF_protocol
 262 MOESI - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MOESI_protocol

                                                                      13.4   Cache Coherence

false sharing, which we will explore next.

13.4.2    True Sharing
True sharing occurs when two different cores access the same variable (see Listing 13.1).

Listing 13.1 True Sharing Example.
unsigned int sum; // shared between all threads
{ // code executed by thread A        { // code executed by thread B
  for (int i = 0; i < N; i++)           for (int i = 0; i < N; i++)
    sum += a[i];                          sum += b[i];
}                                     }

First of all, we have a bigger problem here besides true sharing. We actually have a data
race, which sometimes can be quite tricky to detect. Notice, that we don’t have a proper
synchronization mechanism in place, which can lead to unpredictable or incorrect
program behavior, because the operations on the shared data might interfere with
one another. Fortunately, there are tools that can help identify such issues. Thread
sanitizer263 from Clang and helgrind264 are among such tools. To prevent the data
race in Listing 13.1, you should declare the sum variable as std::atomic<unsigned
int> sum.
Using C++ atomics can help to solve data races when true sharing happens. However,
it effectively serializes accesses to the atomic variable, which may hurt performance.
A better way of solving our true sharing issue is by using Thread Local Storage
(TLS). TLS is the method by which each thread in a given multithreaded process can
allocate memory to store thread-specific data. By doing so, threads modify their local
copies instead of contending for a globally available memory location. The example in
Listing 13.1 can be fixed by declaring sum with a TLS class specifier: thread_local
unsigned int sum (since C++11). The main thread should then incorporate results
from all the local copies of each worker thread.

13.4.3    False Sharing
If not careful, you may attempt to solve the true sharing issue as shown in Listing 13.2.
This solution introduces another problem: false sharing. It occurs when two different
cores modify different variables that happen to reside on the same cache line. In the
code sample shown in Listing 13.2, even though threads A and B update different fields
of struct S, they are very likely to reside on the same cache line, which will trigger a
false sharing issue. Figure 13.11 illustrates this problem.
False sharing is a frequent source of performance issues for multithreaded applications.
Because of that, modern analysis tools have built-in support for detecting such cases.
For applications that experience true/false sharing, TMA will likely show a high
Memory Bound → L3 Bound → Contested Accesses metric.265
When using Intel VTune Profiler, I recommend running two types of analysis to find
and eliminate false sharing issues. First, run a Microarchitecture Exploration analysis
263 Clang’s thread sanitizer tool: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThreadSanitizer.html.
264 Helgrind, a thread error detector tool: https://www.valgrind.org/docs/manual/hg-manual.html.
265 See the Intel VTune user guide for a description of the Contested Accesses metric.

Listing 13.2 False Sharing Example.
struct S {
   int sumA; // sumA and sumB are likely to
   int sumB; // reside in the same cache line
};
S s;

{ // code executed by thread A                 { // code executed by thread B
  for (int i = 0; i < N; i++)                    for (int i = 0; i < N; i++)
    s.sumA += a[i];                                s.sumB += b[i];
}                                              }

Figure 13.11: False Sharing: two threads access the same cache line.

that implements TMA methodology to detect the presence of false sharing in an
application. As noted before, the high value for the Contested Accesses metric prompts
us to dig deeper and run the Memory Access analysis with the Analyze dynamic
memory objects checkbox enabled. This analysis helps in finding out memory accesses
to the data structure that caused contention issues. Typically, such memory accesses
have high latency, which will be revealed by the analysis. See an example of using
Intel VTune Profiler for fixing false sharing issues in Intel Developer Zone.266
Linux perf has support for finding false sharing as well. As with the Intel VTune
profiler, run TMA first (see Section 6.1.1) to find out if the program experiences
false/true sharing issues. If that’s the case, use the perf c2c tool to detect memory
accesses with high cache coherency costs. perf c2c matches store/load addresses for
different threads and checks if the hit in a modified cache line occurred. Readers can
find a detailed explanation of the process and how to use the tool in a dedicated blog
post.267
It is possible to eliminate false sharing with the help of aligning/padding memory
objects. Example in Section 13.4.2 can be fixed by ensuring sumA and sumB do not
share the same cache line as shown in Listing 13.3.268
266 VTune cookbook: false-sharing - https://software.intel.com/en-us/vtune-cookbook-false-sharing.
267 An article on perf   c2c - https://joemario.github.io/blog/2016/09/01/c2c-blog/.
268 Do not take the size of a cache line as a constant value. For example, in Apple processors such

as M1, M2, and later, the L2 cache operates on 128B cache lines.

                                                           13.5   Advanced Analysis Tools

Listing 13.3 Data padding to avoid false sharing.
                                constexpr int CacheLineAlign = 64;
struct S {                      struct S {
   int sumA;        =>             int sumA;
   int sumB;                      alignas(CacheLineAlign) int sumB;
};                              };

False sharing can not only be observed in native languages, like C and C++, but
also in managed ones, like Java and C#. From a general performance perspective,
the most important thing to consider is the cost of the possible state transitions. Of
all cache states, the only ones that do not involve a costly cross-cache subsystem
communication and data transfer during CPU read/write operations are the Modified
(M) and Exclusive (E) states. Thus, the longer the cache line maintains the M or
E states (i.e., the less sharing of data across caches), the lower the coherence cost
incurred by a multithreaded application. An example demonstrating how this property
has been employed can be found in Nitsan Wakart’s blog post “Diving Deeper into
Cache Coherency”.269

13.5     Advanced Analysis Tools
Many tools have been developed to address specific use cases where traditional profilers
don’t provide enough visibility. In this section, we will introduce Coz and eBPF tools.
We encourage you to do further research on these and other tools.

13.5.1    Coz
In Section 13.2, we defined the challenge of identifying parts of code that affect the
overall performance of a multithreaded program. Due to various reasons, optimizing
one part of a multithreaded program might not always give visible results. Traditional
sampling-based profilers only show code places where most of the time is spent.
However, it does not necessarily correspond to where programmers should focus their
optimization efforts.

Coz270 is a profiler that addresses this problem. It uses a novel technique called causal
profiling, whereby experiments are conducted during the runtime of an application
by virtually speeding up segments of code to predict the overall effect of certain
optimizations. It accomplishes these “virtual speedups” by inserting pauses that slow
down all other concurrently running code. Also, Coz quantifies the potential impact
of an optimization. [Curtsinger & Berger, 2018]

An example of applying the Coz profiler to the C-Ray271 benchmark is shown in
Figure 13.12. According to the chart, if we improve the performance of line 540 in
c-ray-mt.c by 20%, Coz expects a corresponding increase in application performance
of the C-Ray benchmark overall of about 17%. Once we reach ~45% improvement on
 269 Blog post “Diving Deeper into Cache Coherency” - http://psy-lob-saw.blogspot.com/2013/09/d

iving-deeper-into-cache-coherency.html
 270 COZ source code - https://github.com/plasma-umass/coz.
 271 C-Ray benchmark - https://github.com/jtsiomb/c-ray.

that line, the impact on the application begins to level off by Coz’s estimation. For
more details on this example, see the article272 on the Easyperf blog.

Figure 13.12: Coz profile for the C-Ray benchmark.

13.5.2    eBPF and GAPP
Linux supports a variety of thread synchronization primitives: mutexes, semaphores,
condition variables, etc. The kernel supports these thread primitives via the futex
system call. Therefore, by tracing the execution of the futex system call in the kernel
while gathering useful metadata from the threads involved, contention bottlenecks can
be more readily identified. Linux provides kernel tracing and profiling tools that make
this possible, none more powerful than Extended Berkeley Packet Filter273 (eBPF).
eBPF is based around a sandboxed virtual machine running in the kernel that allows
the execution of user-defined programs safely and efficiently inside the kernel. The
user-defined programs can be written in C and compiled into BPF bytecode by the
BCC compiler274 in preparation for loading into the kernel virtual machine. These
BPF programs can be written to launch upon the execution of certain kernel events
and communicate raw or processed data back to userspace via a variety of means.
The open-source community has provided many eBPF programs for general use. One
such tool is the Generic Automatic Parallel Profiler (GAPP),275 which helps to track
multithreaded contention issues. GAPP uses eBPF to track the contention overhead
of a multithreaded application by ranking the criticality of identified serialization
bottlenecks and it collects stack traces of threads that were blocked and the one
that caused the blocking. The best thing about GAPP is that it does not require
code changes, expensive instrumentation, or recompilation. Creators of the GAPP
profiler were able to confirm known bottlenecks and also expose new, previously
unreported ones in Parsec 3.0 Benchmark Suite276 and some large open-source projects.
[Nair & Field, 2020]
As a closing thought, I would like to reemphasize the importance of optimizing
multithreaded applications. From everything we have discussed in this book, advice
from this chapter may bring the most significant performance improvements. In
 272 Blog article “COZ vs Sampling Profilers” - https://easyperf .net/blog/2020/02/26/coz-vs-

sampling-profilers.
 273 eBPF docs - https://prototype-kernel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bpf/
 274 BCC compiler - https://github.com/iovisor/bcc
 275 GAPP - https://github.com/RN-dev-repo/GAPP/
 276 Parsec 3.0 Benchmark Suite - https://parsec.cs.princeton.edu/index.htm

                                                             Questions and Exercises

multithreaded applications, the devil is in the details. A subtle synchronization issue
or a small inefficiency in data sharing can lead to significant performance degradation.
As we look to the future, the trend toward many-core processors and parallel workloads
will only accelerate. The complexity of multithreaded optimization will grow, but so
will the opportunities for those who master it.

Questions and Exercises
  1. Solve the perf-ninja::false_sharing lab assignment.
  2. What are the benefits of multithreaded vs. multiprocessed applications?
  3. What is the essence of Amdahl’s Law and Universal Scalability Law?
  4. Run the application that you’re working with daily. Is it multithreaded? If
     not, pick one of the popular multithreaded benchmarks. Run the thread count
     scaling study and analyze the results. Generate a diagram that visualizes worker
     threads on a timeline. Can you identify any scheduling issues? Identify hot locks
     and which code paths lead to those locks. Can you improve locking?

Chapter Summary
  • Applications that do not take advantage of modern multicore CPUs are lagging
    behind their competitors. Preparing software to scale well with a growing amount
    of CPU cores is very important for the future success of your application.
  • When dealing with a single-threaded application, optimizing one portion of the
    program usually yields positive results on performance. However, this is not
    necessarily the case for multithreaded applications. This effect is widely known
    as Amdahl’s law, which constitutes that the speedup of a parallel program is
    limited by its serial part.
  • Thread communication can yield retrograde speedup as explained by Universal
    Scalability Law. This poses additional challenges for tuning multithreaded
    programs.
  • As we saw in our thread count case study, frequency throttling, memory band-
    width saturation, and other issues can lead to poor performance scaling.
  • Task scheduling on hybrid processors is challenging. Watch out for suboptimal
    job scheduling and do not restrict the OS scheduler when it is not necessary.
  • Optimizing the performance of multithreaded applications also involves detecting
    and mitigating the effects of cache coherence, such as true sharing and false
    sharing.
  • During the past years, new tools emerged that cover gaps in analyzing perfor-
    mance of multithreaded applications, that traditional profilers cannot cover. We
    introduced Coz and GAPP which have a unique set of features.

                                                                                Epilog

Epilog

Thanks for reading through the whole book. I hope you enjoyed it and found it useful.
I would be even happier if the book would help you solve a real-world problem. In
such a case, I would consider it a success and proof that my efforts were not wasted.
Before you continue with your endeavors, let me briefly highlight the essential points
of the book and give you final recommendations:

  • Modern software is massively inefficient. There are significant optimization
    opportunities to reduce carbon emissions and make a better user experience.
    People hate using slow software, especially when their productivity goes down
    because of it. Not all fast software is world-class, but all world-class software is
    fast. Performance is the killer feature.
  • Single-threaded CPU performance is not increasing as rapidly as it used to a
    few decades ago. When it’s no longer the case that each hardware generation
    provides a significant performance boost, developers should start optimizing the
    code of their software.
  • For many years performance engineering was a nerdy niche. But now it is
    mainstream as software vendors have realized the impact that their poorly
    optimized software has on their bottom line. Performance tuning is more critical
    than it has been for the last 40 years. It will be one of the key drivers for
    performance gains in the near future.
  • The importance of low-level performance tuning should not be underestimated,
    even if it’s just a 1% improvement. The cumulative effect of these small improve-
    ments is what makes a difference.
  • There is a famous quote by Donald Knuth: “Premature optimization is the
    root of all evil”.[Knuth, 1974] The opposite is often true as well. Postponed
    performance engineering work may be too late and cause as much evil as
    premature optimization. Do not neglect performance aspects when designing
    your future products. Save your project by integrating automated performance
    benchmarking into your CI/CD pipeline. Measure early, measure often.
  • Knowledge of the CPU microarchitecture is required to reach peak performance.
    However, your mental model can never be as accurate as the actual microarchi-
    tecture design of a CPU. So don’t solely rely on your intuition when you make a
    specific change in your code. Predicting the performance of a particular piece of
    code is nearly impossible. Always measure!
  • When measuring performance, understand the underlying technical reasons for
    the performance results you observe. Always measure one level deeper and
    collect as many metrics as possible to support your conclusions.
  • Performance engineering is hard because there are no predetermined steps
    you should follow, no algorithm. Engineers need to tackle problems from
    different angles. Know performance analysis methods and tools (both hardware
    and software) available to you. I strongly suggest embracing the Top-down
    Microarchitecture Analysis (TMA) methodology. It will help you steer your
    work in the right direction.
  • When you identify the performance-limiting factor of your application, you are

                                                                              Epilog

    more than halfway through. Based on my experience, the fix is often easier
    than finding the root cause of the problem. In Part 2 we covered some essential
    optimizations for every type of CPU performance bottleneck: how to optimize
    memory accesses and computations, how to get rid of branch mispredictions,
    how to improve machine code layout, and several others. Use chapters from Part
    2 as a reference to see what options are available when your application has one
    of these problems.
  • Processors from different vendors are not created equal. They differ in terms of
    instruction set architecture (ISA) supported and microarchitectural implementa-
    tion. Reaching peak performance on a given platform requires utilizing the latest
    ISA extensions, avoiding common microarchitecture-specific issues, and tuning
    your code according to the strengths of a particular CPU microarchitecture.
  • Multithreaded programs add one more dimension of complexity to performance
    tuning. They introduce new types of bottlenecks and require additional tools
    and methods to analyze and optimize. Examining how an application scales with
    the number of threads is an effective way to identify bottlenecks in multithreaded
    programs.
I hope you now have a better understanding of low-level performance optimizations.
Of course, this book doesn’t cover every possible scenario you may encounter in your
daily job. My goal was to give you a starting point and to show you potential options
and strategies for dealing with performance analysis and tuning on modern CPUs. I
wish you experience the joy of discovering performance bottlenecks in your application
and the satisfaction of fixing them.
Happy performance tuning!
I will post errata and other information about the book on my blog at the following
URL: https://easyperf.net/blog/2024/11/11/Book-Updates-Errata.
If you haven’t solved the perf-ninja exercises yet, I encourage you to take the time
to do so. They will help you to solidify your knowledge and prepare you for real-world
performance engineering challenges.
P.S. If you enjoyed reading this book, make sure to pass it on to your friends and
colleagues. I would appreciate your help in spreading the word about the book by
endorsing it on social media platforms.

                                                                     Acknowledgments

Acknowledgments

I write this section with profound gratitude to all the people mentioned below. I feel
very humble to deliver to you all the knowledge these people have.

Mark E. Dawson, Jr. authored Section 12.3 “Low Latency Tuning
Techniques” and Section 7.9 “Continuous Profiling”. He has also con-
tributed a lot to the first edition of the book. Mark is a recognized
expert in the High-Frequency Trading industry, currently working
at WH Trading. Mark also has a blog (https://www.jabperf.com)
where he writes about low latency and other performance optimiza-
tions.

Agustín Navarro-Torres, Jesús Alastruey-Benedé, Pablo Ibáñez-
Marín, Víctor Viñals-Yúfera from the University of Zaragoza au-
thored Section 12.5 “Case Study: Sensitivity to Last Level Cache
Size”. They are researchers in the field of computer science and
have published multiple papers on topics related to performance
engineering.

Jan Wassenberg authored Section 9.5.1 “Wrapper Libraries for In-
trinsics” and also proposed many improvements to Section 9.4 “Vec-
torization” and Section 3.4 “SIMD Multiprocessors”. Jan is a soft-
ware engineer at Google DeepMind, where he leads the development
of Gemma.cpp.277 He also has authored multiple research papers.
His personal webpage is https://wassenberg.dreamhosters.com.

Swarup Sahoo helped me with writing about AMD PMU features in
Chapter 6, and authored Section 7.1 about AMD uProf. Swarup is a
senior developer at AMD, where he works on the uProf performance
analysis tool for HPC (OpenMP, MPI) applications. Swarup’s
LinkedIn page can be found at https://www.linkedin.com/in/sw
arupsahoo.

Alois Kraus authored Section 7.6 “Event Tracing for Windows”,
and Appendix D. He developed ETWAnalyzer, a command-line tool
for analyzing ETW files with simple queries. He is employed by
Siemens Healthineers where he studies the performance of large
software systems. Alois’ personal webpage and blog: https://aloi
skraus.wordpress.com.
277 Gemma.cpp, LLM inference on CPU - https://github.com/google/gemma.cpp

                                                                     Acknowledgments

Marco Castorina authored Section 7.7 “Specialized and Hybrid
Profilers” which showcases performance profiling with Tracy. Marco
currently works on the games graphics performance team at AMD,
focusing on DX12. Also, he is the co-author of a book titled
“Mastering Graphics Programming with Vulkan”. Marco’s personal
web page is https://marcocastorina.com.

Lally Singh has authored Section 5.3.2 about Marker APIs. Lally is
currently at Tesla, his prior work includes Datadog’s performance
team, Google’s Search performance team, low-latency trading sys-
tems, and embedded real-time control systems. Lally has a PhD in
CS from Virginia Tech, focusing on scalability in distributed VR.

Richard L. Sites provided a technical review of the book. He is a
veteran of the semiconductor industry and has spent most of his
career at the boundary between hardware and software, particularly
in CPU/software performance interactions. Richard invented the
performance counters found in most modern processors. He had
worked at DEC, Adobe, Google, and Tesla. His personal page is
https://sites.google.com/site/dicksites.

Matt Godbolt provided a technical review of the book. Matt is
a creator of Compiler Explorer, an extremely popular tool among
software developers. He is a C++ developer passionate about
high-performance code. Matt has over twenty years of professional
experience in computer game programming, systems design, real-
time embedded systems, and high-frequency trading. He is also
a speaker, a blogger, and a podcaster. His personal blog is https:
//xania.org.

Also, I would like to thank the following people. Jumana Mundichipparakkal from
Arm, for helping me write about Arm PMU features in Chapter 6. Yann Collet,
the author of Zstandard, for providing me with the information about the internal
workings of Zstd for Section 13.2.1. Ciaran McHale, for finding tons of grammar
mistakes in my initial draft. Nick Black for proofreading and editing the final version
of the book. Peter Veentjer, Amir Aupov, and Charles-Francois Natali for various
edits and suggestions.

I’m also thankful to the whole performance community for countless blog articles and
papers. I was able to learn a lot from reading blogs by Travis Downs, Daniel Lemire,
Andi Kleen, Agner Fog, Bruce Dawson, Brendan Gregg, and many others. I stand on
the shoulders of giants, and the success of this book should not be attributed only to
myself. This book is my way to thank and give back to the whole community.

                                                                    Acknowledgments

A special “thank you” goes to my family, who were patient enough to tolerate me
missing weekend trips and evening walks. Without their support, I wouldn’t have
finished this book.
Images were created with excalidraw.com. Cover design by Darya Antonova. The
fonts used on the cover of this book are Bebas Neue and Raleway, both provided under
the Open Font License. Bebas Neue was designed by Ryoichi Tsunekawa. Raleway
was designed by Matt McInerney, Pablo Impallari, and Rodrigo Fuenzalida.
I should also mention contributors to the first edition of this book. Below I only list
names and section titles. More detailed acknowledgments are available in the first
edition.
  • Mark E. Dawson, Jr. wrote sections Section 8.4 “Optimizing For DTLB”, Sec-
    tion 11.8 “Optimizing for ITLB”, Section 12.3.2 “Cache Warming”, Section 12.4
    “System Tuning”, and a few other.
  • Sridhar Lakshmanamurthy, authored a large part of Chapter 3 about CPU
    microarchitecture.
  • Nadav Rotem helped write Section 9.4 about vectorization.
  • Clément Grégoire authored Section 9.4.2.5 about ISPC compiler.
  • Reviewers: Dick Sites, Wojciech Muła, Thomas Dullien, Matt Fleming, Daniel
    Lemire, Ahmad Yasin, Michele Adduci, Clément Grégoire, Arun S. Kumar, Surya
    Narayanan, Alex Blewitt, Nadav Rotem, Alexander Yermolovich, Suchakrapani
    Datt Sharma, Renat Idrisov, Sean Heelan, Jumana Mundichipparakkal, Todd
    Lipcon, Rajiv Chauhan, Shay Morag, and others.

