                                                                      preface
I encountered the concept of multithreaded code while working at my first job after I
left college. We were writing a data processing application that had to populate a data-
base with incoming data records. There was a lot of data, but each record was inde-
pendent and required a reasonable amount of processing before it could be inserted
into the database. To take full advantage of the power of our 10-CPU UltraSPARC, we
ran the code in multiple threads, each thread processing its own set of incoming
records. We wrote the code in C++, using POSIX threads, and made a fair number of
mistakes—multithreading was new to all of us—but we got there in the end. It was also
while working on this project that I first became aware of the C++ Standards Commit-
tee and the freshly published C++ Standard.
    I have had a keen interest in multithreading and concurrency ever since. Where
others saw it as difficult, complex, and a source of problems, I saw it as a powerful tool
that could enable your code to take advantage of the available hardware to run faster.
Later on, I would learn how it could be used to improve the responsiveness and per-
formance of applications even on single-core hardware, by using multiple threads to
hide the latency of time-consuming operations such as I/O. I also learned how it
worked at the OS level and how Intel CPUs handled task switching.
    Meanwhile, my interest in C++ brought me in contact with the ACCU and then the
C++ Standards panel at BSI, as well as Boost. I followed the initial development of the
Boost Thread Library with interest, and when it was abandoned by the original devel-
oper, I jumped at the chance to get involved. I was the primary developer and main-
tainer of the Boost Thread Library for a number of years, though I have since handed
that responsibility on.

                                       xiii

xiv                                       PREFACE

          As the work of the C++ Standards Committee shifted from fixing defects in the
      existing standard to writing proposals for the C++11 standard (named C++0x in the
      hope that it would be finished by 2009, and then officially C++11, because it was finally
      published in 2011), I got more involved with BSI and started drafting proposals of my
      own. Once it became clear that multithreading was on the agenda, I jumped in with
      both feet and authored or co-authored many of the multithreading and concurrency-
      related proposals that shaped this part of the standard. I have continued to be
      involved with the concurrency group as we worked on the changes for C++17, the
      Concurrency TS, and proposals for the future. I feel privileged to have had the oppor-
      tunity to combine two of my major computer-related interests—C++ and multithread-
      ing—in this way.
          This book draws on all my experience with both C++ and multithreading and aims
      to teach other C++ developers how to use the C++17 Thread Library and Concurrency
      TS safely and efficiently. I also hope to impart some of my enthusiasm for the subject
      along the way.

                                         acknowledgments
I will start by saying a big “Thank you” to my wife, Kim, for all the love and support she
has given me while writing this book. The first edition occupied a significant part of
my spare time for the four years before publication, and the second edition has again
required a significant investment of time, and without her patience, support, and
understanding, I couldn’t have managed it.
    Second, I would like to thank the team at Manning who have made this book possi-
ble: Marjan Bace, publisher; Michael Stephens, associate publisher; Cynthia Kane, my
development editor; Aleksandar Dragosavljević, review editor; Safis Editing and Heidi
Ward, my copyeditors; and Melody Dolab, my proofreader. Without their efforts you
would not be reading this book right now.
    I would also like to thank the other members of the C++ Standards Committee
who wrote committee papers on the multithreading facilities: Andrei Alexandrescu,
Pete Becker, Bob Blainer, Hans Boehm, Beman Dawes, Lawrence Crowl, Peter Dimov,
Jeff Garland, Kevlin Henney, Howard Hinnant, Ben Hutchings, Jan Kristofferson,
Doug Lea, Paul McKenney, Nick McLaren, Clark Nelson, Bill Pugh, Raul Silvera, Herb
Sutter, Detlef Vollmann, and Michael Wong, plus all those who commented on the
papers, discussed them at the committee meetings, and otherwise helped shaped the
multithreading and concurrency support in C++11, C++14, C++17, and the Concur-
rency TS.
    Finally, I would like to thank the following people, whose suggestions have greatly
improved this book: Dr. Jamie Allsop, Peter Dimov, Howard Hinnant, Rick Molloy,
Jonathan Wakely, and Dr. Russel Winder, with special thanks to Russel for his detailed

                                        xv

xvi                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

      reviews and to Frédéric Flayol, who, as technical proofreader, painstakingly checked
      all the content for outright errors in the final manuscript during production. (Any
      remaining mistakes are, of course, all mine.) In addition, I’d like to thank my panel
      of reviewers for the second edition: Al Norman, Andrei de Araújo Formiga, Chad
      Brewbaker, Dwight Wilkins, Hugo Filipe Lopes, Vieira Durana, Jura Shikin, Kent R.
      Spillner, Maria Gemini, Mateusz Malenta, Maurizio Tomasi, Nat Luengnaruemitchai,
      Robert C. Green II, Robert Trausmuth, Sanchir Kartiev, and Steven Parr. Also, thanks
      to the readers of the MEAP edition who took the time to point out errors or highlight
      areas that needed clarifying.

                                               about this book
This book is an in-depth guide to the concurrency and multithreading facilities from
the new C++ Standard, from the basic usage of std::thread, std::mutex, and std::
async, to the complexities of atomic operations and the memory model.

Roadmap
The first four chapters introduce the various library facilities provided by the library
and show how they can be used.
    Chapter 5 covers the low-level nitty-gritty of the memory model and atomic opera-
tions, including how atomic operations can be used to impose ordering constraints on
other code, and marks the end of the introductory chapters.
    Chapters 6 and 7 start the coverage of higher-level topics, with some examples of
how to use the basic facilities to build more complex data structures—lock-based data
structures in chapter 6, and lock-free data structures in chapter 7.
    Chapter 8 continues the higher-level topics, with guidelines for designing multi-
threaded code, coverage of the issues that affect performance, and example imple-
mentations of various parallel algorithms.
    Chapter 9 covers thread management—thread pools, work queues, and interrupt-
ing operations.
    Chapter 10 covers the new parallelism support from C++17, which comes in the
form of additional overloads for many of the Standard Library algorithms.
    Chapter 11 covers testing and debugging—types of bugs, techniques for locating
them, how to test for them, and so forth.

                                      xvii

xviii                                  ABOUT THIS BOOK

            The appendixes include a brief description of some of the new language facilities
        introduced with the new standard that are relevant to multithreading, the implemen-
        tation details of the message-passing library mentioned in chapter 4, and a complete
        reference to the C++17 Thread Library.

        Who should read this book
        If you're writing multithreaded code in C++, you should read this book. If you're using
        the new multithreading facilities from the C++ Standard Library, this book is an essen-
        tial guide. If you’re using alternative thread libraries, the guidelines and techniques
        from the later chapters should still prove useful.
            A good working knowledge of C++ is assumed, though familiarity with the new lan-
        guage features is not—these are covered in appendix A. Prior knowledge or experi-
        ence of multithreaded programming is not assumed, though it may be useful.

        How to use this book
        If you’ve never written multithreaded code before, I suggest reading this book sequen-
        tially from beginning to end, though possibly skipping the more detailed parts of
        chapter 5. Chapter 7 relies heavily on the material in chapter 5, so if you skipped
        chapter 5, you should save chapter 7 until you’ve read it.
             If you haven’t used the new C++11 language facilities before, it might be worth
        skimming appendix A before you start to ensure that you’re up to speed with the
        examples in the book. The uses of the new language facilities are highlighted in the
        text, though, and you can always flip to the appendix if you encounter something you
        haven’t seen before.
            If you have extensive experience with writing multithreaded code in other environ-
        ments, the beginning chapters are probably still worth skimming so you can see how
        the facilities you know map onto the new standard C++ ones. If you’re going to be
        doing any low-level work with atomic variables, chapter 5 is a must. Chapter 8 is worth
        reviewing to ensure that you’re familiar with things like exception safety in multi-
        threaded C++. If you have a particular task in mind, the index and table of contents
        should help you find a relevant section quickly.
            Once you’re up to speed on the use of the C++ Thread Library, appendix D should
        continue to be useful, such as for looking up the exact details of each class and func-
        tion call. You may also like to dip back into the main chapters from time to time to
        refresh your memory on a particular construct or to look at the sample code.

        Code conventions and downloads
        All source code in listings or in text is in a fixed-width font like this to separate it
        from ordinary text. Code annotations accompany many of the listings, highlighting
        important concepts. In some cases, numbered bullets link to explanations that follow
        the listing.

                                            ABOUT THIS BOOK                                           xix

             Source code for all working examples in this book is available for download from
          the publisher’s website at www.manning.com/books/c-plus-plus-concurrency-in-action-
          second-edition. You may also download the source code from github at https://github
          .com/anthonywilliams/ccia_code_samples.

          Software requirements
          To use the code from this book unchanged, you’ll need a recent C++ compiler that
          supports the C++17 language features used in the examples (see appendix A), and
          you’ll need a copy of the C++ Standard Thread Library.
              At the time of writing, the latest versions of g++, clang++, and Microsoft Visual Stu-
          dio all ship with implementations of the C++17 Standard Thread Library. They also
          support most of the language features from the appendix, and those features that
          aren't supported are coming soon.
              My company, Just Software Solutions Ltd, sells a complete implementation of the
          C++11 Standard Thread Library for several older compilers, along with an implemen-
          tation of the Concurrency TS for newer versions of clang, gcc, and Microsoft Visual
          Studio.1 This implementation has been used for testing the examples in this book.
              The Boost Thread Library2 provides an API that’s based on the C++11 Standard
          Thread Library proposals and is portable to many platforms. Most of the examples
          from the book can be modified to work with the Boost Thread Library by judicious
          replacement of std:: with boost:: and use of the appropriate #include directives.
          There are a few facilities that are either not supported (such as std::async) or have
          different names (such as boost::unique_future) in the Boost Thread Library.

          Book forum
          Purchase of C++ Concurrency in Action, Second Edition includes free access to a pri-
          vate web forum run by Manning Publications where you can make comments about
          the book, ask technical questions, and receive help from the author and from other
          users. To access the forum, go to www.manning.com/books/c-plus-plus-concurrency-
          in-action-second-edition. You can also learn more about Manning’s forums and the
          rules of conduct at https://forums.manning.com/forums/about.
              Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue where a meaningful
          dialogue between individual readers and between readers and the author can take
          place. It’s not a commitment to any specific amount of participation on the part of the
          author, whose contribution to the book’s forum remains voluntary (and unpaid). We
          suggest you try asking the author some challenging questions, lest his interest stray!
              The forum and the archives of previous discussions will be accessible from the pub-
          lisher’s website as long as the book is in print.

    The just::thread implementation of the C++ Standard Thread Library, http://www.stdthread.co.uk.
2
    The Boost C++ library collection, http://www.boost.org.

                     about the author
Anthony Williams is a UK-based developer, consultant, and
trainer with over 20 years of experience in C++. He has been an
active member of the BSI C++ Standards Panel since 2001, and
is the author or coauthor of many of the C++ Standards Com-
mittee papers that led up to the inclusion of the thread library
in the C++11 Standard. He continues to work on new facilities
to enhance the C++ concurrency toolkit, both with standards
proposals, and implementations of those facilities for the
just::thread Pro extensions to the C++ thread library from Just
Software Solutions Ltd. Anthony lives in the far west of Corn-
wall, England.

                xx

              about the cover illustration
The illustration on the cover of C++ Concurrency in Action is captioned “Habit of a Lady
of Japan.” The image is taken from the four-volume Collection of the Dress of Different
Nations by Thomas Jefferys, published in London between 1757 and 1772. The collec-
tion includes beautiful hand-colored copperplate engravings of costumes from
around the world and has influenced theatrical costume design since its publication.
The diversity of the drawings in the compendium speaks vividly of the richness of the
costumes presented on the London stage over 200 years ago. The costumes, both his-
torical and contemporaneous, offered a glimpse into the dress customs of people
living in different times and in different countries, making them come alive for
London theater audiences.
    Dress codes have changed in the last century, and the diversity by region, so rich in
the past, has faded away. It’s now often hard to tell the inhabitant of one continent
from another. Perhaps, trying to view it optimistically, we’ve traded a cultural and
visual diversity for a more varied personal life—or a more varied and interesting intel-
lectual and technical life.
    We at Manning celebrate the inventiveness, the initiative, and the fun of the com-
puter business with book covers based on the rich diversity of the regional and theatri-
cal life of two centuries ago, brought back to life by the pictures from this collection.

                                       xxi

