Front Matter                                                           0-1

                              Chapter 0
                             Front Matter

$Revision: 2.2 $
$Date: 1999/06/09 00:48:48 $
Dedication
To Tonia and Sarah, my women folk.
Introduction
Linkers and loaders have been part of the software toolkit almost as long
as there have been computers, since they are the critical tools that permit
programs to be built from modules rather than as one big monolith.
As early as 1947, programmers started to use primitive loaders that could
take program routines stored on separate tapes and combine and relocate
them into one program. By the early 1960s, these loaders had evolved into
full-fledged linkage editors. Since program memory remained expensive
and limited and computers were (by modern standards) slow, these linkers
contained complex features for creating complex memory overlay struc-
tures to cram large programs into small memory, and for re-editing previ-
ously linked programs to save the time needed to rebuild a program from
scratch.
During the 1970s and 1980s there was little progress in linking technolo-
gy. Linkers tended to become even simpler, as virtual memory moved
much of the job of storage management away from applications and over-
lays, into the operating system, and as computers became faster and disks
larger, it became easier to recreate a linked program from scratch to re-
place a few modules rather than to re-link just the changes. In the 1990s
linkers have again become more complex, adding support for modern fea-
tures including dynamically linked shared libraries and the unusual de-
mands of C++. Radical new processor architectures with wide instruction
words and compiler-scheduled memory accesses, such as the Intel IA64,
will also put new demands on linkers to ensure that the complex require-
ments of the code are met in linked prograsm.
0-2                                                            Front Matter

Who is this book for?
This book is intended for several overlapping audiences.
•      Students: Courses in compiler construction and operating systems
       have generally given scant treatment to linking and loading, often
       because the linking process seemed trivial or obvious. Although
       this was arguably true when the languages of interest were Fortran,
       Pascal, and C, and operating systems didn’t use memory mapping
       or shared libraries, it’s much less true now. C++, Java, and other
       object-oriented languages require a much more sophisticated link-
       ing environment. Memory mapped executable program, shared li-
       braries, and dynamic linking affect many parts of an operating sys-
       tem, and an operating system designer disregards linking issues at
       his or her peril.
•      Practicing programmers also need to be aware of what linkers do,
       again particularly for modern languages. C++ places unique de-
       mands on a linker, and large C++ programs are prone to develop
       hard-to-diagnose bugs due to unexpected things that happen at link
       time. (The best known are static constructors that run in an an or-
       der the programmer wasn’t expecting.) Linker features such as
       shared libraries and dynamic linking offer great flexibility and
       power, when used appropriately,
•      Language designers and developers need to be aware of what link-
       ers do and can do as they build languages and compilers. Program-
       ming tasks had been handled hand for 30 years are automated in
       C++, depending on the linker to handle the details. (Consider what
       a programmer has to do to get the equivalent of C++ templates in
       C, or ensuring that the initialization routines in each of a hundred
       C source files are called before the body of the program starts.)
       Future languages will automate even more program-wide book-
       keeping tasks, with more powerful linkers doing the work. Linkers
       will also be more involved in global program optimization, since
       the linker is the only stage of the compiler process that handles the
       entire program’s code together and can do transformations that af-
       fect the entire program as a unit.
Front Matter                                                             0-3

(The people who write linkers also all need this book, of course. But all
the linker writers in the world could probably fit in one room and half of
them already have copies because they reviewed the manuscript.)
Chapter summaries
Chapter 1, Linking and Loading, provides a short historical overview of
the linking process, and discusses the stages of the linking process. It ends
with a short but complete example of a linker run, from input object files
to runnable ‘‘Hello, world’’ program.
Chapter 2, Architectural Issues, reviews of computer architecture from the
point of view of linker design. It examines the SPARC, a representative
reduced instruction set architecture, the IBM 360/370, an old but still very
viable register-memory architecture. and the Intel x86, which is in a cate-
gory of its own. Important architectural aspects include memory architec-
ture, program addressing architecture, and the layout of address fields in
individual instructions.
Chapter 3, Object Files, examines the internal structure of object and ex-
ecutable files. It starts with the very simplest files, MS-DOS .COM files,
and goes on to examine progressively more complex files including, DOS
EXE, Windows COFF and PE (EXE and DLL), Unix a.out and ELF, and
Intel/Microsoft OMF.
Chapter 4, Storage allocation, covers the first stage of linking, allocating
storage to the segments of the linked program, with examples from real
linkers.
Chapter 5, Symbol management, covers symbol binding and resolution,
the process in which a symbolic reference in one file to a name in a second
file is resolved to a machine address.
Chapter 6, Libraries, covers object code libraries, creation and use, with
issues of library structure and performance.
Chapter 7, Relocation, covers address relocation, the process of adjusting
the object code in a program to reflect the actual addresses at which it
runs. It also covers position independent code (PIC), code created in a
way that avoids the need for relocation, and the costs and benefits of doing
0-4                                                            Front Matter

so.
Chapter 8, Loading and overlays, covers the loading process, getting a
program from a file into the computer’s memory to run. It also covers
tree-structured overlays, a venerable but still effective technique to con-
serve address space.
Chapter 9, Shared libraries, looks at what’s required to share a single copy
of a library’s code among many different programs. This chapter concen-
trates on static linked shared libraries.
Chapter 10, Dynamic Linking and Loading, continues the discussion of
Chapter 9 to dynamically linked shared libraries. It treats two examples in
detail, Windows32 dynamic link libraries (DLLs), and Unix/Linux ELF
shared libraries.
Chapter 11, Advanced techniques, looks at a variety of things that sophisti-
cated modern linkers do. It covers new features that C++ requires, includ-
ing ‘‘name mangling’’, global constructors and destructors, template ex-
pansion, and duplicate code elimination. Other techniques include incre-
mental linking, link-time garbage collection, link time code generation and
optimization, load time code generation, and profiling and instrumenta-
tion. It concludes with an overview of the Java linking model, which is
considerably more semantically complex than any of the other linkers cov-
ered.
Chapter 12, References, is an annotated bibliography.
The project
Chapters 3 through 11 have a continuing project to develop a small but
functional linker in perl. Although perl is an unlikely implementation lan-
guage for a production linker, it’s an excellent choice for a term project.
Perl handles many of the low-level programming chores that bog down
programming in languages like C or C++, letting the student concentrate
on the algorithms and data structures of the project at hand. Perl is avail-
able at no charge on most current computers, including Windows 95/98
and NT, Unix, and Linux, and many excellent books are available to teach
perl to new users. (See the bibliography in Chapter 12 for some sugges-
tions.)
Front Matter                                                                0-5

The initial project in Chapter 3 builds a linker skeleton that can read and
write files in a simple but complete object format, and subsequent chapters
add functions to the linker until the final result is a full-fledged linker that
supports shared libraries and produces dynamically linkable objects.
Perl is quite able to handle arbitrary binary files and data structures, and
the project linker could if desired be adapted to handle native object for-
mats.
Acknowledgements
Many, many, people generously contributed their time to read and review
the manuscript of this book, both the publisher’s reviewers and the readers
of the comp.compilers usenet newsgroup who read and commented on an
on-line version of the manuscript. They include, in alphabetical order,
Mike Albaugh, Rod Bates, Gunnar Blomberg, Robert Bowdidge, Keith
Breinholt, Brad Brisco, Andreas Buschmann, David S. Cargo, John Carr,
David Chase, Ben Combee, Ralph Corderoy, Paul Curtis, Lars Duening,
Phil Edwards, Oisin Feeley, Mary Fernandez, Michael Lee Finney, Peter
H. Froehlich, Robert Goldberg, James Grosbach, Rohit Grover, Quinn
Tyler Jackson, Colin Jensen, Glenn Kasten, Louis Krupp, Terry Lambert,
Doug Landauer, Jim Larus, Len Lattanzi, Greg Lindahl, Peter Ludemann,
Steven D. Majewski, John McEnerney, Larry Meadows, Jason Merrill,
Carl Montgomery, Cyril Muerillon, Sameer Nanajkar, Jacob Navia, Simon
Peyton-Jones, Allan Porterfield, Charles Randall, Thomas David Rivers,
Ken Rose, Alex Rosenberg, Raymond Roth, Timur Safin, Kenneth G
Salter, Donn Seeley, Aaron F. Stanton, Harlan Stenn, Mark Stone, Robert
Strandh, Bjorn De Sutter, Ian Taylor, Michael Trofimov, Hans Walheim,
and Roger Wong.
These people are responsible for most of the true statements in the book.
The false ones remain the author’s responsiblity. (If you find any of the
latter, please contact me at the address below so they can be fixed in subse-
quent printings.)
I particularly thank my editors at Morgan-Kaufmann Tim Cox and Sarah
Luger, for putting up with my interminable delays during the writing pro-
cess, and pulling all the pieces of this book together.
0-6                                                         Front Matter

Contact us
This book has a supporting web site at http://linker.iecc.com.
It includes example chapters from the book, samples of perl code and ob-
ject files for the project, and updates and errata.
You can send e-mail to the author at linker@iecc.com. The author
reads all the mail, but because of the volume received may not be able to
answer all questions promptly.
