1. Introduction
Over the last decade, Git has risen to become the dominant version control and collaboration
tool both for open source software, and within private companies. It ushered in a move away
from centralised version control towards a decentralised model, in which every developer
has a complete self-contained repository on their local workstation. This radically changed
the process of software development, making many common operations faster and enabling
completely new workflows for managing change across software teams.

Git has always had a reputation for being hard to learn and use. This is partly because of
this paradigm change, but also because its user interface is confusing. It provides many ways
of doing the same thing, and has unclear separation of responsibilities between different
commands. The ad-hoc nature of its design process means it’s accumulated more than its fair
share of rabbit holes for new users to fall down. In some cases the user interface is strictly more
complicated than the functionality it sits on top of. It is a long-running complaint that in order
to use Git effectively, you have to know what it’s doing behind the scenes.

Unfortunately, determining what it’s really doing can be a daunting task. We can get a certain
amount of visibility by examining what it’s doing with the files on disk, but for some things
there’s no substitute for reading the source code. At the time of writing, the current version
of Git is v2.15.0, and its codebase is approaching 200,000 lines of C code. Due to the large
number of options some commands have, a lot of this code is very complicated and it can be
hard to see the essential functionality among all the different code paths.

In this book, we’ll be building our own version of Git, from scratch, to learn how it works. To
make this more manageable than reading the original, we’ll take two simplifying steps. First, we
won’t be implementing anywhere near the complete command interface from Git, only those
parts that are essential to making a usable replica that demonstrates the core concepts. Second,
we’ll be using a high-level language with a rich standard library, so we’ll need much less code
than if we were rewriting in C. To the extent possible, this implementation will be informed
by direct observation of Git itself, either by observing its effects on files, by logging its system
calls, or by study of the original source code.

To keep ourselves honest, we won’t rely on the original Git implementation in our
codebase — instead, all the commits we add to our project will be generated by our own
software. That means we won’t be able to commit anything until we have enough code to
generate a valid Git commit, but as it turns out, we won’t need to write much code to get the
project off the ground. This process of self-hosting1 provides excellent motivation for adding
new features, as we’ll quickly notice where the lack of a feature is limiting the tool’s utility.
As we add features, our implementation will become more and more capable, and each new
command will unlock opportunities for further improvements.

We’ll focus on covering the essential components as quickly as possible, rather than fully
implementing each command and all its options. The ultimate aim is to have a program that can
store and accurately retrieve its own Git history, and push itself to a remote repository hosted
on GitHub2.
1
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-hosting
2
 https://github.com/

                                          Introduction

Within a tool like Git, numerous programming concepts come into play and studying it is a
great way to broaden your knowledge. As we work on our implementation, we’ll explore the
theory behind each component and why it works the way it does. So, as well as gaining a better
understanding of Git, you’ll learn a great many programming concepts along the way that you
can apply to other problems.

You’ll learn Unix system concepts like how to work with files, how processes work and
how they communicate, and how to present output in a terminal. You’ll learn about the data
structures that Git uses to keep the commit history compact and efficient to search, both on
disk and when it sends content over the network. You’ll learn the algorithms behind diffing
and merging files, and how to find data shared between files so they can be compressed. And,
you’ll learn how Git implements a form of distributed database, how it supports concurrent
editing, why merge conflicts occur and how it prevents race conditions when users share their
changes to a project.

1.1. Prerequisites
I have tried to target this text at an audience that has some experience of programming already,
without assuming they know any particular language or topic in detail. Our Git implementation
will use Ruby, a dynamic object-oriented language, but this choice is somewhat arbitrary and
the code should be approachable if you have experience in a similar language such as Python,
JavaScript, or C#.

If you don’t already know Ruby, or need to brush up, you can find everything you need to
know about it for this book in Appendix A, Programming in Ruby. This includes installation
instructions, an explanation of the core language and its built-in libraries.

One of the aims of this book is to teach Unix programming concepts, and as such I recommend
following the code on a Unix-like system such as macOS or Linux. Some of the code will not
be compatible with Windows — essentially, anything that interacts directly with the filesystem,
starts child processes, or performs I/O would need further work to run on that platform.
However, if you are a Windows user, this knowledge is still likely to be useful to you, and there
is plenty about this project that is platform-agnostic.

1.2. How the book is structured
This book charts the development of our own version of Git. Many of the features we’ll develop
in the course of the project rely on tools developed in earlier chapters, and so it will make most
sense if you approach the book in the order it is presented. Although each chapter functions
as a useful reference for an element of Git’s behaviour, the implementations will rely on code
studied earlier in the text.

The content has been grouped into three parts, covering broad conceptual chunks of the problem
of distributed version control. Part I, “Storing changes” focuses on the initial challenge of
storing the history of a project as a sequence of commits, and helping the author see the current
state of their project. Part II, “Branching and merging” introduces the idea of concurrent editing
via branches, and examines how commits on separate branches are merged together. This
includes a discussion of how the operation of merging can be applied to a wide variety of

                                          Introduction

operations to alter the project history. Part III, “Distribution” discusses how Git sends content
over the network between repositories, how it stores data efficiently, and how it prevents data
loss in shared repositories.

1.3. Typographic conventions
All code listings in this book are in Ruby, unless otherwise indicated. Code listings that form
part of the codebase are shown with their filename at the top, for example:
     # lib/command/diff.rb

     module Command
       class Diff < Base

         include PrintDiff

         def define_options
           @options[:patch] = true
           define_print_diff_options

           @parser.on "--cached", "--staged" do
             @options[:cached] = true
           end
         end

         # ...

       end
     end

The line # ... indicates that part of a method or class has been elided, either because it is
unchanged from a previous version, or because it will appear in a later code listing.

When a code listing includes lines beginning >>, these are examples typed into Ruby’s
interactive shell, IRB. Lines beginning with => show the result of the previous statement, for
example:
     >> 1 + 1
     => 2

Listings in which lines begin with $ are commands entered into a Bash terminal. Lines not
beginning with $ in such listings are output from the last command.
     $ cat .git/HEAD
     ref: refs/heads/master

When discussing numbers in various bases, numerals are presented with a subscript indicating
which base they are in. For example, 12310 is a decimal number, one hundred and twenty-three.
The same number may be presented as the hexadecimal numeral 7B16, or the binary numeral
11110112. In Ruby, numeric literals beginning with 0x are hexadecimal, those starting with 0b
are binary, and those with a leading 0 are octal (base-8). Unless otherwise indicated, you should
assume numerals are in base-10.

                                          Introduction

1.4. The Jit codebase
Over the course of this book we’ll build an alternative implementation of Git, which I’ve named
Jit. You should have received a copy of the Jit repository along with this book. This should
contain a working copy of the Jit codebase along with its history in the .git directory.
     $ cd Jit

     $ ls
     LICENSE.txt Rakefile      bin          lib           test

     $ tree .git
     .git
     ├── HEAD
     ├── config
     ├── index
     ├── objects
     │   └── pack
     │        ├── pack-32295bd84e83a270b366bd809565fe250082f4bb.idx
     │        └── pack-32295bd84e83a270b366bd809565fe250082f4bb.pack
     └── refs
         └── heads
              └── master

All the content in the .git directory was generated using Jit itself, not the canonical Git
software. The files in .git/objects/pack contain all the code that generated them!

You can run Jit from this directory via the file bin/jit, if you have Ruby installed. For example,
running this command should show you the complete history of the project:
     $ ./bin/jit log --patch

If you want to run jit from other locations on your computer, add its bin directory to your PATH:
     $ export PATH="$PWD/bin:$PATH"

Jit has also been published as a gem, which is Ruby’s system for sharing packages. You can
install it using gem:
     $ gem install jit

The text of the book tracks the commit history of Jit, and you can follow along with the changes
described in the book by using the log command to view all the commits and their diffs. To
retrieve an old version of the codebase you can run ./bin/jit checkout, but do bear in mind
that since this will change the code that’s in the workspace, you will not be able to get back
to the master commit if you check out a commit before the checkout command was added!
But, since the repository is a valid Git repository, you can also use the usual git commands
to navigate it.

