34. …and everything else
Over the course of this book, we’ve developed a perfectly capable Git implementation. It is
by no means complete, but it contains all the essential building blocks to be useful for version
control, and to interoperate with the canonical Git software. It can store commits, create and
merge branches, and distribute content over the network. We could fill several more books
attempting to replicate all of Git’s functionality. But the tools we have developed cover most
of the core concepts in Git’s internals, and it should be straightforward to implement further
features on top of them, should you want to explore further.

For example, some Git commands are sugar over commands we already have. clone can
be implemented using init, remote, fetch, branch and reset. pull is the same as running
fetch followed by either merge or rebase, and rebase itself can be simulated using reset and
cherry-pick.

Some commands have options that translate into lower-level workflows. For example, commit
--all is equivalent to calling add or rm with all modified or deleted files before running commit.
checkout -b is the same as creating a new branch and then immediately checking it out. If
checkout is called with a remote-tracking branch like origin/master, then it creates a new
local branch with the remote as its upstream, as in branch --track master origin/master, and
then checks this new branch out. If checkout is given a path, it behaves like reset, only instead
of setting the index equal to HEAD for the given path, it affects the index and the workspace file.
In fact checkout and reset have a lot of overlapping functionality related to equating entries
in the workspace, index and HEAD, and this can make them confusing to learn.

There are some commands and options that we could build on top of our existing internal tools.
For example, add --patch lets you add only some of the changes in a file to the index, and
this can be implemented by using Diff.diff_hunks to find the changes between the index and
the workspace, asking the user to approve each one, and applying the selected edits to a copy
of the workspace file before storing it as a blob. The blame command1 annotates each line of
a file with the last commit that changed it, and this can be built by using RevList to find all
the commits that change a file, then using Diff on consecutive versions to find out which lines
each commit introduced. The bisect tool2 is used to find which commit introduced a bug — if
you know commit G was good and commit B is bad, then RevList can calculate the range G..B
and pick a point halfway between them to test. If the selected commit contains the bug, then
it replaces B in the range, and if it does not then it’s added to the set of G commits that are
excluded from the search. This process just requires storing the lists of good and bad commits
on disk while pausing to let the user run tests.

Many commands have options that tweak the core behaviour that we’ve implemented here.
diff (and commands that use diff internally, such as merge) have options for determining
whether lines are equal, for example by ignoring changes to whitespace. diff can also use
one of several algorithms — we’ve discussed the Myers algorithm here, but there are others
with different characteristics, and they can be used to improve merge results if the default
algorithm doesn’t produce a good diff. The log command has numerous options for filtering
1
 https://git-scm.com/docs/git-blame
2
 https://git-scm.com/docs/git-bisect

                                                      …and everything else

and displaying commits, including a --graph option to show the commit graph, and there are
many more features in the revision notation that we’ve not looked at here.

A few commands require infrastructure we’ve not looked at. tag creates tag objects, which
are essentially objects that point to commits and give them a memorable name — often used
to record released versions of the software. reflog lets you search the history of the commits
that files in refs have pointed at, and to support that the Refs class needs to be updated so that
whenever it changes the content of a .git/refs file, it appends the change to a corresponding
file in .git/logs. This helps you find commits that have become unreachable, and it also helps
the rebase command find the point where a branch started, if the commits it’s based on have
been discarded by cherry-picking3.

Finally, there are some Git features that, like the compression functionality we have
implemented, are optimisations rather than new user-facing behaviour. For example, the index
supports an extension that caches the IDs of trees when commit is run, so that it doesn’t need to
recompute trees that have not changed on each commit. The pack protocol supports a capability
called thin packs, which means a pack can include deltas that are based on objects that aren’t
in the pack, but which the sender knows the receiver has. This allows a pack to be compressed
even further, although the receiver has to append any delta bases that are not included in order
to make the pack self-contained before storing it.

All in all, there is plenty of scope to expand Jit and learn more about how Git works on your own.
Read the documentation for a command you use every day and see if you can implement some
of its options. Think of a command you find confusing and try to improve its user interface.
With the copy of Jit included with this book, you can start committing right away and take it
in whatever direction you want.

3
 https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase#git-rebase---fork-point

