Preface

This book emerged from the course Superscalar Processor Design, which has been
taught at Carnegie Mellon University since 1995. Superscalar Processor Design is a
mezzanine course targeting seniors and first-year graduate students. Quite a few of
the more aggressive juniors have taken the course in the spring semester of their jun¬
ior year. The prerequisite to this course is the Introduction to Computer Architecture
course. The objectives for the Superscalar Processor Design course include: (1) to
teach modern processor design skills at the microarchitecture level of abstraction;
(2) to cover current microarchitecture techniques for achieving high performance via
the exploitation of instruction-level parallelism (ILP); and (3) to impart insights and
hands-on experience for the effective design of contemporary high-performance
microprocessors for mobile, desktop, and server markets. In addition to covering the
contents of this book, the course contains a project component that involves the
microarchitectural design of a future-generation superscalar microprocessor.
     During the decade of the 1990s many microarchitectural techniques for increas¬
ing clock frequency and harvesting more ILP to achieve better processor perfor¬
mance have been proposed and implemented in real machines. This book is an
attempt to codify this large body of knowledge in a systematic way. These techniques
include deep pipelining, aggressive branch prediction, dynamic register renaming,
multiple instruction dispatching and issuing, out-of-order execution, and speculative
load/store processing. Hundreds of research papers have been published since the
early 1990s, and many of the research ideas have become reality in commercial
superscalar microprocessors. In this book, the numerous techniques are organized
and presented within a clear framework that facilitates ease of comprehension. The
foundational principles that underlie the plethora of techniques are highlighted.
     While the contents of this book would generally be viewed as graduate-level
material, the book is intentionally written in a way that would be very accessible to
undergraduate students. Significant effort has been spent in making seemingly
complex techniques to appear as quite straightforward through appropriate abstrac¬
tion and hiding of details. The priority is to convey clearly the key concepts and
fundamental principles, giving just enough details to ensure understanding of im¬
plementation issues without massive dumping of information and quantitative data.
The hope is that this body of knowledge can become widely possessed by not just
microarchitects and processor designers but by most B.S. and M.S. students with
interests in computer systems and microprocessor design.
     Here is a brief summary of the chapters.

Chapter 1: Processor Design
This chapter introduces the art of processor design, the instruction set architecture
(ISA) as the specification of the processor, and the microarchitecture as the imple¬
mentation of the processor. The dynamic/static interface that separates compile-time
                                                                                            PREFACE Xi

software and run-time hardware is defined and discussed. The goal of this chapter
is not to revisit in depth the traditional issues regarding ISA design, but to erect the
proper framework for understanding modern processor design.

Chapter 2: Pipelined Processors
This chapter focuses on the concept of pipelining, discusses instruction pipeline
design, and presents the performance benefits of pipelining. Pipelining is usually in¬
troduced in the first computer architecture course. Pipelining provides the foundation
for modem superscalar techniques and is presented in this chapter in a fresh and
unique way. We intentionally avoid the massive dumping of bar charts and graphs;
instead, we focus on distilling the foundational principles of instmction pipelining.

Chapter 3: Memory and I/O Systems
This chapter provides a larger context for the remainder of the book by including a
thorough grounding in the principles and mechanisms of modern memory and I/O
systems. Topics covered include memory hierarchies, caching, main memory de¬
sign, virtual memory architecture, common input/output devices, processor-I/O in¬
teraction, and bus design and organization.

Chapter 4: Superscalar Organization
This chapter introduces the main concepts and the overall organization of superscalar
processors. It provides a “big picture” view for the reader that leads smoothly into the
detailed discussions in the next chapters on specific superscalar techniques for achiev¬
ing performance. This chapter highlights only the key features of superscalar processor
organizations. Chapter 7 provides a detailed survey of features found in real machines.

Chapter 5: Superscalar Techniques
This chapter is the heart of this book and presents all the major microarchitecture tech¬
niques for designing contemporary superscalar processors for achieving high perfor¬
mance. It classifies and presents specific techniques for enhancing instruction flow,
register data flow, and memory data flow. This chapter attempts to organize a plethora
of techniques into a systematic framework that facilitates ease of comprehension.

Chapter 6: The PowerPC 620
This chapter presents a detailed analysis of the PowerPC 620 microarchitecture and
uses it as a case study to examine many of the issues and design tradeoffs intro¬
duced in the previous chapters. This chapter contains extensive performance data
of an aggressive out-of-order design.

Chapter 7: Intel's P6 Microarchitecture
This is a case study chapter on probably the most commercially successful contempo¬
rary superscalar microarchitecture. It is written by the Intel P6 design team led by Bob
Colwell and presents in depth the P6 microarchitecture that facilitated the implemen¬
tation of the Pentium Pro, Pentium II, and Pentium III microprocessors. This chapter
offers the readers an opportunity to peek into the mindset of a top-notch design team.

               Chapter 8: Survey of Superscalar Processors
               This chapter, compiled by Prof. Mark Smotherman of Clemson University, pro¬
               vides a historical chronicle on the development of superscalar machines and a
               survey of existing superscalar microprocessors. The chapter was first completed in
               1998 and has been continuously revised and updated since then. It contains fasci¬
               nating information that can’t be found elsewhere.

               Chapter 9: Advanced Instruction Flow Techniques
               This chapter provides a thorough overview of issues related to high-performance
               instruction fetching. The topics covered include historical, currently used, and pro¬
               posed advanced future techniques for branch prediction, as well as high-bandwidth
               and high-frequency fetch architectures like trace caches. Though not all such tech¬
               niques have yet been adopted in real machines, future designs are likely to incorpo¬
               rate at least some form of them.

               Chapter 10: Advanced Register Data Flow Techniques
               This chapter highlights emerging microarchitectural techniques for increasing per¬
               formance by exploiting the program characteristic of value locality. This program
               characteristic was discovered recently, and techniques ranging from software
               memoization, instruction reuse, and various forms of value prediction are described
               in this chapter. Though such techniques have not yet been adopted in real machines,
               future designs are likely to incorporate at least some form of them.
               Chapter 11: Executing Multiple Threads
               This chapter provides an introduction to thread-level parallelism (TLP), and pro¬
               vides a basic introduction to multiprocessing, cache coherence, and high-perfor¬
               mance implementations that guarantee either sequential or relaxed memory
               ordering across multiple processors. It discusses single-chip techniques like multi¬
               threading and on-chip multiprocessing that also exploit thread-level parallelism.
               Finally, it visits two emerging technologies—implicit multithreading and
               preexecution—that attempt to extract thread-level parallelism automatically from
               single-threaded programs.
                    In summary, Chapters 1 through 5 cover fundamental concepts and foundation¬
               al techniques. Chapters 6 through 8 present case studies and an extensive survey of
               actual commercial superscalar processors. Chapter 9 provides a thorough overview
               of advanced instruction flow techniques, including recent developments in ad¬
               vanced branch predictors. Chapters 10 and 11 should be viewed as advanced topics
               chapters that highlight some emerging techniques and provide an introduction to
               multiprocessor systems.
                    This is the first edition of the book. An earlier beta edition was published in 2002
               with the intent of collecting feedback to help shape and hone the contents and presen¬
               tation of this first edition. Through the course of the development of the book, a large
               set of homework and exam problems have been created. A subset of these problems
               are included at the end of each chapter. Several problems suggest the use of the
                                                                                           PREFACE Xiii

Simplescalar simulation suite available from the Simplescalar website at http://www
.simplescalar.com. A companion website for the book contains additional support mate¬
rial for the instructor, including a complete set of lecture slides (www.mhhe.com/shen).

Acknowledgments
Many people have generously contributed their time, energy, and support toward
the completion of this book. In particular, we are grateful to Bob Colwell, who is
the lead author of Chapter 7, Intel’s P6 Microarchitecture. We also acknowledge
his coauthors, Dave Papworth, Glenn Hinton, Mike Fetterman, and Andy Glew,
who were all key members of the historic P6 team. This chapter helps ground this
textbook in practical, real-world considerations. We are also grateful to Professor
Mark Smotherman of Clemson University, who meticulously compiled and au¬
thored Chapter 8, Survey of Superscalar Processors. This chapter documents the rich
and varied history of superscalar processor design over the last 40 years. The guest
authors of these two chapters added a certain radiance to this textbook that we could
not possibly have produced on our own. The PowerPC 620 case study in Chapter 6
is based on Trung Diep’s Ph.D. thesis at Carnegie Mellon University. Finally, the
thorough survey of advanced instruction flow techniques in Chapter 9 was authored
by Gabriel Loh, largely based on his Ph.D. thesis at Yale University.
     In addition, we want to thank the following professors for their detailed, in¬
sightful, and thorough review of the original manuscript. The inputs from these
reviews have significantly improved the first edition of this book.

   David Andrews, University of Arkansas              • Walid Najjar, University of California
   Angelos Bilas, University of Toronto                  Riverside
   Fred H. Carlin, University of California at        • Vojin G. Oklabdzija, University of California
   Santa Barbara                                         at Davis
   Yinong Chen, Arizona State University              • Soner Onder, Michigan Technological
   Lynn Choi, University of California at Irvine          University
   Dan Connors, University of Colorado                • Parimal Patel, University of Texas at San
   Karel Driesen, McGill University                      Antonio
   Alan D. George, University of Florida              • Jih-Kwon Peir, University of Florida
   Arthur Glaser, New Jersey Institute of             • Gregory D. Peterson, University of
   Technology                                             Tennessee
   Rajiv Gupta, University of Arizona                 • Amir Roth, University of Pennsylvania
   Vincent Hayward, McGill University                 • Kevin Skadron, University of Virginia
   James Hoe, Carnegie Mellon University              • Mark Smotherman, Clemson University
   Lizy Kurian John, University of Texas at Austin    • Miroslav N. Velev, Georgia Institute of
   Peter M. Kogge, University of Notre Dame               Technology
   Angkul Kongmunvattana, University of               • Bin Wei, Rutgers University
   Nevada at Reno                                     • Anthony S. Wojcik, Michigan State University
   Israel Koren, University of Massachusetts at       • Ali Zaringhalam, Stevens Institute of
   Amherst                                               Technology
   Ben Lee, Oregon State University                   • Xiaobo Zhou, University of Colorado at
   Francis Leung, Illinois Institute of Technology       Colorado Springs
PROCESSOR DESIGN

  This book grew out of the course Superscalar Processor Design at Carnegie Mellon
  University. This course has been taught at CMU since 1995. Many teaching assis¬
  tants of this course have left their indelible touch in the contents of this book. They
  include Bryan Black, Scott Cape, Yuan Chou, Alex Dean, Trung Diep, John Faistl,
  Andrew Huang, Deepak Limaye, Chris Nelson, Chris Newburn, Derek Noonburg,
  Kyle Oppenheim, Ryan Rakvic, and Bob Rychlik. Hundreds of students have taken
  this course at CMU; many of them provided inputs that also helped shape this book.
  Since 2000, Professor James Hoe at CMU has taken this course even further. We
  both are indebted to the nurturing we experienced while at CMU, and we hope that
  this book will help perpetuate CMU’s historical reputation of producing some of
  the best computer architects and processor designers.
      A draft version of this textbook has also been used at the University of
  Wisconsin since 2000. Some of the problems at the end of each chapter were actu¬
  ally contributed by students at the University of Wisconsin. We appreciate their test
  driving of this book.
      John Paul Shen, Director,
      Microarchitecture Research, Intel Labs, Adjunct Professor,
      ECE Department, Carnegie Mellon University
      Mikko H. Lipasti, Assistant Professor,
      ECE Department, University of Wisconsin
      June 2004
      Soli Deo Gloria
