                                                                                          CHAPTER
                                                                                            4
Superscalar Organization

    CHAPTER OUTLINE

    4.1 Limitations of Scalar Pipelines
    4.2 From Scalar to Superscalar Pipelines
    4.3 Superscalar Pipeline Overview
    4.4 Summary

             References
             Homework Problems

While pipelining has proved to be an extremely effective microarchitecture tech¬
nique, the type of scalar pipelines presented in Chapter 2 have a number of short¬
comings or limitations. Given the never-ending push for higher performance, these
limitations must be overcome in order to continue to provide further speedup for
existing programs. The solution is superscalar pipelines that are able to achieve per¬
formance levels beyond those possible with just scalar pipelines.
     Superscalar machines go beyond just a single-instruction pipeline by being
able to simultaneously advance multiple instructions through the pipeline stages.
They incorporate multiple functional units to achieve greater concurrent processing
of multiple instructions and higher instruction execution throughput. Another
foundational attribute of superscalar processors is the ability to execute instructions
in an order different from that specified by the original program. The sequential
ordering of instructions in standard programs implies some unnecessary prece¬
dences between the instructions. The capability of executing instructions out of
program order relieves this sequential imposition and allows more parallel processing
of instructions without requiring modification of the original program. This and the
following chapters attempt to codify the body of knowledge on superscalar processor
design in a systematic fashion. This chapter focuses on issues related to the pipeline
organization of superscalar machines. The techniques that address the dynamic

             interaction between the superscalar machine and the instructions being processed
             are presented in Chapter 5. Case studies of two commercial superscalar processors
             are presented in Chapters 6 and 7, while Chapter 8 provides a broad survey of his¬
             torical and current designs.

             4.1 Limitations of Scalar Pipelines
             Scalar pipelines are characterized by a single-instruction pipeline of k stages. All
             instructions, regardless of type, traverse through the same set of pipeline stages. At
             most, one instruction can be resident in each pipeline stage at any one time, and the
             instructions advance through the pipeline stages in a lockstep fashion. Except for the
             pipeline stages that are stalled, each instruction stays in each pipeline stage for
             exactly one cycle and advances to the next stage in the next cycle. Such rigid scalar
             pipelines have three fundamental limitations:
                 1. The maximum throughput for a scalar pipeline is bounded by one instruction
                    per cycle.
                 2. The unification of all instruction types into one pipeline can yield an ineffi¬
                    cient design.
                 3. The stalling of a lockstep or rigid scalar pipeline induces unnecessary pipe¬
                    line bubbles.
             We elaborate on these limitations in Sections 4.1.1 to 4.1.3.

             4.1.1 Upper Bound on Scalar Pipeline Throughput
             As stated in Chapter 1 and as shown in Equation (4.1), processor performance can
             be increased either by increasing instructions per cycle (IPC) and/or frequency or
             by decreasing the total instruction count.

              Performance = l- X inStr-UCtionS X 1 = IPC x frequency
                              instruction count cycle cycle time instruction count
                                                                                               (4.1)
             Frequency can be increased by employing a deeper pipeline. A deeper pipeline has
             fewer logic gate levels in each pipeline stage, which leads to a shorter cycle time
             and a higher frequency. However, there is a point of diminishing return due to the
             hardware overhead of pipelining. Furthermore, a deeper pipeline can potentially
             incur higher penalties, in terms of the number of penalty cycles, for dealing with
             inter-instruction dependences. The additional average cycles per instruction (CPI)
             overhead due to this higher penalty can possibly eradicate the benefit due to the
             reduction of cycle time.
                  Regardless of the pipeline depth, a scalar pipeline can only initiate the process¬
             ing of at most one instruction in every machine cycle. Essentially, the average IPC
             for a scalar pipeline is fundamentally bounded by one. To get more instruction
             throughput, especially when deeper pipelining is no longer the most cost-effective

way to get performance, the ability to initiate more than one instruction in every
machine cycle is necessary. To achieve an IPC greater than one, a pipelined
processor must be able to initiate the processing of more than one instruction in
every machine cycle. This will require increasing the width of the pipeline to facilitate
having more than one instruction resident in each pipeline stage at any one time.
We identify such pipelines as parallel pipelines.

4.1.2 Inefficient Unification into a Single Pipeline
Recall that the second idealized assumption of pipelining is that all the repeated
computations to be processed by the pipeline are identical. For instruction pipelines,
this is clearly not the case. There are different instruction types that require different
sets of subcomputations. In unifying these different requirements into one pipeline,
difficulties and/or inefficiencies can result. Looking at the unification of different
instruction types into the TYP pipeline in Chapter 2, we can observe that in the
earlier pipeline stages (such as IF, ID, and RD stages) there is significant uniformity.
However, in the execution stages (such as ALU and MEM stages) there is sub¬
stantial diversity. In fact, in the TYP example, we have ignored floating-point instruc¬
tions on purpose due to the difficulty of unifying them with the other instruction types.
It is for this reason that at one point in time during the “RISC revolution,” floating¬
point instructions were categorized as inherently CISC and considered to be violating
RISC principles.
     Certain instruction types make their unification into a single pipeline quite
difficult. These include floating-point instructions and certain fixed-point instruc¬
tions (such as multiply and divide instructions) that require multiple execution
cycles. Instructions that require long and possibly variable latencies are difficult to
unify with simple instructions that require only a single cycle latency. As the disparity
between CPU and memory speeds continues to widen, the latency (in terms of
number of machine cycles) of memory instructions will continue to increase. Other
than latency differences, the hardware resources required to support the execution of
these different instruction types are also quite different. With the continued push for
faster hardware, more specialized execution units customized for specific instruction
types will be required. This will also contribute to the need for greater diversity in
the execution stages of the instruction pipeline.
     Consequently, the forced unification of all the instruction types into a single pipe¬
line becomes either impossible or extremely inefficient for future high-performance
processors. For parallel pipelines there is a strong motivation not to unify all the
execution hardware into one pipeline, but instead to implement multiple different
execution units or subpipelines in the execution portion of parallel pipelines. We
call such parallel pipelines diversified pipelines.

4.1.3 Performance Lost due to a Rigid Pipeline
Scalar pipelines are rigid in the sense that instructions advance through the pipeline
stages in a lockstep fashion. Instructions enter a scalar pipeline according to program
order, i.e., in order. When there are no stalls in the pipeline, all the instructions in the
pipeline stages advance synchronously and the program order of instructions is

             maintained. When an instruction is stalled in a pipeline stage due to its dependence
             on a leading instruction, that instruction is held in the stalled pipeline stage while all
             leading instructions are allowed to proceed down the pipeline stages. Because of
             the rigid nature of a scalar pipeline, if a dependent instruction is stalled in pipeline
             stage /, then all earlier stages, i.e., stages 1, 2,...,/- 1, containing trailing instruc¬
             tions are also stalled. All i stages of the pipeline are stalled until the instruction in
             stage i is forwarded its dependent operand. After the inter-instruction dependence is
             satisfied, then all i stalled instructions can again advance synchronously down the
             pipeline. For a rigid scalar pipeline, a stalled stage in the middle of the pipeline
             affects all earlier stages of the pipeline; essentially the stalling of stage i is propa¬
             gated backward through all the preceding stages of the pipeline.
                  The backward propagation of stalling from a stalled stage in a scalar pipeline
             induces unnecessary pipeline bubbles or idling pipeline stages. While an instruc¬
             tion is stalled in stage i due to its dependence on a leading instruction, there may
             be another instruction trailing the stalled instruction which does not have a depen¬
             dence on any leading instruction that would require its stalling. For example, this
             independent trailing instruction could be in stage i - 1 and would be unnecessarily
              stalled due to the stalling of the instruction in stage i. According to program
              semantics, it is not necessary for this instruction to wait in stage i - 1. If this
              instruction is allowed to bypass the stalled instruction and continue down the pipe¬
              line stages, an idling cycle of the pipeline can be eliminated, which effectively
              reduces the penalty due to the stalled instruction by one cycle; see Figure 4.1. If
              multiple instructions are able and allowed to bypass the stalled instruction, then
              multiple penalty cycles can be eliminated or “covered” in the sense that idling
              pipeline stages are given useful instructions to process. Potentially all the penalty
              cycles due to the stalled instruction can be covered. Allowing the bypassing of a
              stalled leading instruction by trailing instructions is referred to as an out-of-order
              execution of instructions. A rigid scalar pipeline does not allow out-of-order exe¬
              cution and hence can incur unnecessary penalty cycles in enforcing inter-instruction
              dependences. Parallel pipelines that support out-of-order execution are called
              dynamic pipelines.

                                                                  A
                                                                      Backward
                                                                      propagation
                                                                      of stalling

                                   Figure 4.1
                                   Unnecessary Stall Cycles Induced by Backward
                                   Propagation of Stalling in a Rigid Pipeline.

4.2 From Scalar to Superscalar Pipelines
Superscalar pipelines can be viewed as natural descendants of the scalar pipelines
and involve extensions to alleviate the three limitations (see Section 4.1) with scalar
pipelines. Superscalar pipelines are parallel pipelines, instead of scalar pipelines, in
that they are able to initiate the processing of multiple instructions in every machine
cycle. In addition, superscalar pipelines are diversified pipelines in employing
multiple and heterogeneous functional units in their execution stage(s). Finally,
superscalar pipelines can be implemented as dynamic pipelines in order to achieve
the best possible performance without requiring reordering of instructions by the
compiler. These three characterizing attributes of superscalar pipelines will be further
elaborated in this section.

4.2.1 Parallel Pipelines
The degree of parallelism of a machine can be measured by the maximum number of
instructions that can be concurrently in progress at any one time. A stage scalar pipe¬
line can have k instructions concurrently resident in the machine and can potentially
achieve a factor-of-A: speedup over a nonpipelined machine. Alternatively, the same
speedup can be achieved by employing k copies of the nonpipelined machine to pro¬
cess k instructions in parallel. These two forms of machine parallelism are illustrated in
Figure 4.2(b) and (c), and they can be denoted temporal machine parallelism and spa¬
tial machine parallelism, respectively. Temporal and spatial parallelism of the same
degree can yield about the same factor of potential speedup. Clearly, temporal parallel¬
ism via pipelining requires less hardware than spatial parallelism, which requires repli¬
cation of the entire processing unit. Parallel pipelines can be viewed as employing both
temporal and spatial machine parallelism, as illustrated in Figure 4.2(d), to achieve
higher instruction processing throughput in an efficient manner.
     The speedup of a scalar pipeline is measured with respect to a nonpipelined
design and is primarily determined by the depth of the scalar pipeline. For parallel
pipelines, or superscalar pipelines, the speedup now is usually measured with re¬
spect to a scalar pipeline and is primarily determined by the width of the parallel
pipeline. A parallel pipeline with width s can concurrently process up to s instruc¬
tions in each of its pipeline stages, which can lead to a potential speedup of s over
a scalar pipeline. Figure 4.3 illustrates a parallel pipeline of width s = 3.
     Significant additional hardware resources are required for implementing parallel
pipelines. Each pipeline stage can potentially process and advance up to s instruc¬
tions in every machine cycle. Hence, the logic complexity of each pipeline stage
can increase by a factor of s. In the worst case, the circuitry for interstage intercon¬
nection can increase by a factor of s2 if an s x s crossbar is used to connect all s
instruction buffers from one stage to all s instruction buffers of the next stage. In
order to support concurrent register file accesses by s instructions, the number of
read and write ports of the register file must be increased by a factor of s. Similarly,
additional I-cache and D-cache access ports must be provided.
    As shown in Chapter 2, the Intel i486 is a five-stage scalar pipeline
[Crawford, 1990]. The sequel to the i486 was the Pentium microprocessor from

                                     (a) No parallelism (b) Temporal parallelism

                                                                                               JL

                                                 (c) Spatial parallelism

                                                  (d) Parallel pipeline

                        Figure 4.2
                        Machine Parallelism: (a) No Parallelism (Nonpipelined); (b) Temporal
                        Parallelism (Pipelined); (c) Spatial Parallelism (Multiple Units);
                        (d) Combined Temporal and Spatial Parallelism.

             Intel [Intel Corp., 1993]. The Pentium microprocessor is a superscalar machine
             implementing a parallel pipeline of width s = 2. It essentially implements two i486
             pipelines; see Figure 4.4. Multiple instructions can be fetched and decoded by the
             first two stages of the parallel pipeline in every machine cycle. In each cycle,
             potentially two instructions can be issued into the two execution pipelines, i.e., the
             U pipe and the V pipe. The goal is to maximize the number of dual-issue cycles.
             The superscalar Pentium microprocessor can achieve a peak execution rate of two
             instructions per machine cycle.
                  As compared to the scalar pipeline of i486, the Pentium parallel pipeline
             requires significant additional hardware resources. First, the five pipeline stages

    Figure 4.3
    A Parallel Pipeline of Width 5= 3.

                                 1
    IF                      IF         IF

   D1                       D1         D1 1

   E)2 |             D2                      D2

   EX |              EX                      EX

   WB |
                  “T
                    WB

                   U pipe
                                         T   WB

                                            V pipe
   (a)                           (b)
                                                                       E   X A M P   E
Figure 4.4
(a) The Five-Stage i486 Scalar Pipeline;                                     *__r
(b) The Five-Stage Pentium Parallel Pipeline
of Width s= 2.

             have doubled in width. The two execution pipes can accommodate up to two
             instructions in each of the last three stages of the pipeline. The execute stage can
             perform an ALU operation or access the D-cache. Hence, additional ports to the
             register file must be provided to support the concurrent execution of two ALU
             operations in every cycle. If the two instructions in the execute stage are both
             load/store instructions, then the D-cache must provide dual access. A true dual­
              ported D-cache is expensive to implement. Instead, the Pentium D-cache is imple¬
              mented as a single-ported D-cache with eight-way interleaving. Simultaneous
              accesses to two different banks by the two load/store instructions in the U and V
              pipes can be supported. If there is a bank conflict, i.e., both load/store instructions
              must access the same bank, then the two D-cache accesses are serialized.

              4.2.2 Diversified Pipelines
              The hardware resources required to support the execution of different instruction
              types can vary significantly. For a scalar pipeline, all the diverse requirements for
              the execution of all instruction types must be unified into a single pipeline. The
              resultant pipeline can be highly inefficient. Each instruction type only requires a
              subset of the execution stages, but it must traverse all the execution stages. Every
              instruction is idling as it traverses the unnecessary stages and incurs significant
              dynamic external fragmentation. The execution latency for all instruction types is
              equal to the total number of execution stages. This can result in unnecessary stalling
              of trailing instructions and/or require additional forwarding paths.
                  This inefficiency due to unification into one single pipeline is naturally
              addressed in parallel pipelines by employing multiple different functional units
              in the execution stage(s). Instead of implementing s identical pipes in an s-wide
              parallel pipeline, in the execution portion of the parallel pipeline, diversified
              execution pipes can be implemented; see Figure 4.5. In this example, four exe¬
              cution pipes, or functional units, of differing pipe depths are implemented. The
              RD stage dispatches instructions to the four execution pipes based on the
              instruction types.
                  There are a number of advantages in implementing diversified execution
              pipes. Each pipe can be customized for a particular instruction type, resulting in
              efficient hardware design. Each instruction type incurs only the necessary latency
              and makes use of all the stages of an execution pipe. This is certainly more effi¬
              cient than implementing s identical copies of a universal execution pipe each of
              which can execute all instruction types. If all inter-instruction dependences
              between different instruction types are resolved prior to dispatching, then once
              instructions are issued into the individual execution pipes, no further stalling can
              occur due to instructions in other pipes. This allows the distributed and indepen¬
              dent control of each execution pipe.
                 The design of a diversified parallel pipeline does require special considerations.
              One important consideration is the number and mix of functional units. Ideally the
              number of functional units should match the available instruction-level parallelism
              of the program, and the mix of functional units should match the dynamic mix
              of instruction types of the program. Most first-generation superscalar processors

                     Figure 4.5
                     A Diversified Parallel Pipeline with Four
                     Execution Pipes.

simply integrated a second execution pipe for processing floating-point instruc¬
tions with the existing scalar pipe for processing non-floating-point instructions. As
superscalar designs evolved from two-issue machines to four-issue machines, typi¬
cally four functional units are implemented for executing integer, floating-point,
load/store, and branch instructions. Some recent designs incorporate multiple integer
units, some of which are dedicated to long-latency integer operations such as multiply
and divide, and others are dedicated to the processing of special operations for
image, graphics, and signal processing applications.
     Similar to pipelining, the employment of a multiplicity of diversified functional
units in the design of a high-performance CPU is not a recent invention. The CDC
6600 incorporates both pipelining and the use of multiple functional units
[Thornton, 1964]. The CPU of the CDC 6600 employs 10 diversified functional
units, as shown in Figure 4.6. The 10 functional units operate on data stored in 24
operating registers, which consist of 8 address registers (18 bits), 8 index registers
(18 bits), and 8 floating-point registers (60 bits). The 10 functional units operate
independently and consist of a fixed-point adder (18 bits), a floating-point adder
(60 bits), two multiply units (60 bits), a divide unit (60 bits), a shift unit (60 bits), a
boolean unit (60 bits), two increment units, and a branch unit. The CDC 6600 CPU
is a pipelined processor with two decoding stages preceding the execution portion;

                                 Figure 4.6
                                 The CDC 6600 with 10 Diversified Functional Units
                                 in Its CPU.

              however, the 10 functional units are not pipelined and have variable execution
              latencies. For example, a fixed-point add requires 3 cycles, and a floating-point
              multiply (divide) requires 10 (29) cycles. The goal of the CDC 6600 CPU is to sustain
              an issue rate of one instruction per machine cycle.
                  Another superscalar microprocessor employed a similar mix of functional
              units as the CDC 6600. Just prior to the formation of the PowerPC alliance with
              IBM and Apple, Motorola had developed a very clean design of a wide superscalar
              microprocessor called the 88110 [Diefendorf and Allen, 1992]. Interestingly, the
              88110 also employs 10 functional units; see Figure 4.7. The 10 functional units
              consist of two integer units, a bit field unit, a floating-point add unit, a multiply
              unit, a divide unit, two graphic units, a load/store unit, and an instruction sequencing/
              branch unit. Most of the units have single-cycle latency. With the exception of the
              divide unit, the other units with multicycle latencies are all pipelined. In terms of
              the total number of functional units, the 88110 represents one of the wider super¬
              scalar designs.

              4.2.3 Dynamic Pipelines
              In any pipelined design, buffers are required between pipeline stages. In a scalar rigid
              pipeline, a single-entry buffer is placed between two consecutive pipeline stages

                                                                                                                     Bus
                                                      Target instruction          Instruction
                                                                                                                  interface
                                                           cache                    cache                            unit

                    General                                       Instruction
     History                     Floating-point                                                                    Data
     buffer         register                                       sequencer                                       cache
                      file        register file                 and branch unit

      Integer       Integer       Bit field   Multiplier   Floating-point   Divider        Graphics   Graphics      Load/
        unit          unit          unit        unit          add unit       unit          add unit   pack unit   store unit

                                                       Writeback busses

Figure 4.7
The Motorola 88110 Superscalar Microprocessor.
Source: Diefendorf and Allen, 1992.
                                                                                                                     L_J

(stages i and i + 1), as shown in Figure 4.8(a). The buffer holds all essential control
and data bits for the instruction that has just traversed stage i of the pipeline and is
ready to traverse stage i + 1 in the next machine cycle. Single-entry buffers are quite
easy to control. In every machine cycle, the buffer’s current content is used as input
to stage i +1; and at the end of the cycle, the buffer latches in the result produced by
stage i. Essentially the buffer is clocked in every machine cycle. The exception
occurs when the instruction in the buffer must be held back and prevented from tra¬
versing stage / +1. In that case, the clocking of the buffer is disabled, and the instruc¬
tion is stalled in the buffer. Clearly if this buffer is stalled in a scalar rigid pipeline, all
stages preceding stage i must also be stalled. Hence, in a scalar rigid pipeline, if there
is no stalling, then every instruction remains in each buffer for exactly one machine
cycle and then advances to the next buffer. All the instructions enter and leave each
buffer in exactly the same order as specified in the original sequential code.
     In a parallel pipeline, multientry buffers are needed between two consecutive
pipeline stages as shown in Figure 4.8(b). Multientry buffers can be viewed as sim¬
ple extensions of the single-entry buffers. Multiple instructions can be latched into
each multientry buffer in every machine cycle. In the next cycle, these instructions
can then traverse the next pipeline stage. If all the instructions in a multientry buffer
are required to advance simultaneously in a lockstep fashion, then the control of the

                          Stage i                  I Stage i
                                                                              11 l• 1• • If
                                                                                         i1
                          Buffer (1)

                          Stage i + 1

                                            T
                                              '1

                                              '1
                                                   | Buffer (n)

                                                   | Stage i + 1
                                                                       11      ,1 v•••, iuI
                                                                              1v1i
                                                                                  jL n (in order)

                                                                                  jL n (in order)

                                                                                  T
                                            (a)                                   (b)

                              Stage i                    zz ...
                                                                                   .1
                                                                                 , (in order)
                              Buffer (25 n)

                              Stage i + 1
                                                    I I
                                                   FT H
                                                              f I (out of order)
                                                                   i                    i

                                                             (C)

                          Figure 4.8
                          Interpipeline-Stage Buffers: (a) Single-Entry Buffer; (b) Multientry
                          Buffer; (c) Multientry Buffer with Reordering.

              multientry buffer is similar to that of the single-entry buffer. The entire multientry
              buffer is either clocked or stalled in each machine cycle. However, such operation of
              the parallel pipeline may induce unnecessary stalling of some of the instructions in a
              multientry buffer. For more efficient operation of a parallel pipeline, much more
              sophisticated multientry buffers are needed.
                   Each entry of the simple multientry buffer of Figure 4.8(b) is hardwired to one
              write port and one read port, and there is no interaction between the multiple entries.
              One enhancement to this simple buffer is to add connectivity between the entries to
              facilitate movement of data between entries. For example, the entries can be con¬
              nected into a linear chain like a shift register and function as a FIFO queue. Another
              enhancement is to provide a mechanism for independent accessing of each entry in
              the buffer. This will require the ability to explicitly address each individual entry in
              the buffer and independently control the reading and writing of each entry. If each
              input/output port of the buffer is given the ability to access any entry in the buffer,
              then such a multientry buffer will effectively resemble a small multiported RAM.
              With such a buffer an instruction can remain in an entry of the buffer for many
              machine cycles and can be updated or modified while resident in that buffer. A further
              enhancement can incorporate associative accessing of the entries in the buffer. Instead
              of using conventional addressing to index into an entry in the buffer, the content of an

entry can be used as an associative tag to index into that entry. With such accessing
mechanism, the multientry buffer becomes a small associative cache memory.
     Superscalar pipelines differ from (rigid) scalar pipelines in one key aspect,
which is the use of complex multientry buffers for buffering instructions in flight.
In order to minimize unnecessary stalling of instructions in a parallel pipeline,
trailing instructions must be allowed to bypass a stalled leading instruction. Such
bypassing can change the order of execution of instructions from the original
sequential order of the static code. With out-of-order execution of instructions,
there is the potential of approaching the data flow limit of instruction execution;
i.e., instructions are executed as soon as their operands are available. A parallel
pipeline that supports out-of-order execution of instructions is called a dynamic
pipeline. A dynamic pipeline achieves out-of-order execution via the use of complex
multientry buffers that allow instructions to enter and leave the buffers in different
orders. Such a reordering multientry buffer is shown in Figure 4.8(c).
    Figure 4.9 illustrates a parallel diversified pipeline of width s = 3 that is a dynamic
pipeline. The execution portion of the pipeline, consisting of the four pipelined

                Figure 4.9
                A Dynamic Pipeline of Width s= 3.

             functional units, is bracketed by two reordering multientry buffers. The first buffer,
             called the dispatch buffer, is loaded with decoded instructions according to program
             order and then dispatches instructions to the functional units potentially in an order
             different from the program order. Hence instructions can leave the dispatch buffer in
             a different order than the order in which they enter the dispatch buffer. This pipeline
             also implements a set of diverse functional units with different latencies.
                  With potential out-of-order issuing into the functional units and/or the variable
             latencies of the functional units, instructions can finish execution out of order. To
             ensure that exceptions can be handled according to the original program order, the
             instructions must be completed (i.e., the machine state must be updated), in program
             order. When instructions finish execution out of order, another reordering multientry
             buffer is needed at the back end of the execution portion of the pipeline to ensure in­
             order completion. This buffer, called the completion buffer, buffers the instructions
             that may have finished execution out of order and retires the instructions in order by
             outputting instructions to the final writeback stage in program order. Such a dynamic
             pipeline facilitates the out-of-order execution of instructions in order to achieve the
             shortest possible execution time, and yet is able to provide precise exception by retir¬
             ing the instructions and updating the machine state according to the program order.

              4.3 Superscalar Pipeline Overview
              This section presents an overview of the critical issues involved in the design of
              superscalar pipelines. The focus is on the organization, or structural design, of super¬
              scalar pipelines. Issues and techniques related to the dynamic interaction of machine
              organization and instruction semantics and the optimization of the resultant machine
              performance are covered in Chapter 5. Essentially this chapter focuses on the
              design of the machine organization, while Chapter 5 takes into account the interac¬
              tion between the machine and the program.
                   Similar to the use of the six-stage TYP pipeline in Chapter 2 as a vehicle for
              presenting scalar pipeline design, we use the six-stage TEM superscalar pipeline
              shown in Figure 4.10 as a “template” for discussion on the organization of super¬
              scalar pipelines. Compared to scalar pipelines, there is far more variety and greater
              diversity in the implementation of superscalar pipelines. The TEM superscalar
              pipeline should not be viewed as an actual implementation of a typical or represen¬
              tative superscalar pipeline. The six stages of the TEM superscalar pipeline should
              be viewed as logical pipeline stages which may or may not correspond to six physical
              pipeline stages. The six stages of the TEM superscalar pipeline provide a nice
              framework or outline for discussing the six major portions of, or six major tasks
              performed by, most superscalar pipeline organizations.
                  The six stages of the TEM superscalar pipeline are fetch, decode, dispatch,
              execute, complete, and retire. The execute stage can include multiple (pipelined)
              functional units of different types with different execution latencies. This necessitates
              the dispatch stage to distribute instructions of different types to their corresponding
              functional units. With out-of-order execution of instructions in the execute stage,
              the complete stage is needed to reorder the instructions and ensure the in-order

                                                   Instruction buffer

                                                   Dispatch buffer

                                                   Issuing buffer

                                                   Completion buffer

                                                   Store buffer

                       Figure 4.10
                       The Six-Stage Template (TEM) Superscalar
                       Pipeline.

updating of the machine state. Note also that there are multientry buffers separating
these six stages. The complexity of these buffers can vary depending on their func¬
tionality and location in the superscalar pipeline. These six stages and design
issues related to them are now addressed in turn.

4.3.1 Instruction Fetching
Unlike a scalar pipeline, a superscalar pipeline, being a parallel pipeline, is capable of
fetching more than one instruction from the I-cache in every machine cycle. Given a
superscalar pipeline of width s, its fetch stage should be able to fetch s instructions
from the I-cache in every machine cycle. This implies that the physical organization
of the I-cache must be wide enough that each row of the I-cache array can store

    u
   Address

              Tag
                            1ii ii1ii 1      }c Cache
                                             J 1line
                                                          Address

                                                           A          Tag
                                                                                  ,11
                                                                                  111 111 111              Cache
                                                                                                           line

     73
      £
              Tag
                      •
                              ii ii ii                       73
                                                             £
                                                                              •
                                                                                   1
                                                                                   1
                                                                                   1    1 11I
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        1
     &
      o       Tag
              Tag
                                                                      Tag          111

                          (a)                                                     (b)

  Figure 4.11
  Organization of a Wide 1-Cache: (a) One Cache Line is Equal to One Physical Row; (b) One Cache Line is
  Equal to Two Physical Rows.

                 5 instructions and that an entire row can be accessed at one time. In our current discus¬
                 sion, we assume that the access latency of the I-cache is one cycle and that the fetch
                 width is equal to the row width. Typically in such a wide cache organization, a cache
                 line corresponds to a physical row in the cache array; it is also possible that a cache
                 line can span several physical rows of the cache array, as illustrated in Figure 4.11.
                      The primary objective of the fetch stage is to maximize the instruction-fetching
                 bandwidth. The sustained throughput achieved by the fetch stage will impact the
                 overall throughput of the superscalar pipeline, because the throughput of all subse¬
                 quent stages depends on and cannot possibly exceed the throughput of the fetch
                 stage. Two primary impediments to achieving the maximum throughput of
                 5 instructions fetched per cycle are (1) the misalignment of the 5 instructions being
                 fetched, called tht fetch group, with respect to the row organization of the I-cache
                 array; and (2) the presence of control-flow changing instructions in the fetch group.
                      In every machine cycle, the fetch stage uses the program counter (PC) to
                 index into the I-cache to fetch the instruction pointed to by the PC along with the
                 next 5-1 instructions, i.e., the 5 instructions of the fetch group. If the entire fetch
                 group is stored in the same row of the cache array, then all 5 instructions can be
                 fetched. On the other hand, if the fetch group crosses a row boundary, then not
                 all s instructions can be fetched in that cycle (assuming that only one row of the
                 I-cache can be accessed in each cycle). Hence, only those instructions in the first
                 row can be fetched; the remaining instructions will require another cycle for their
                 fetching. The fetch bandwidth is effectively reduced by one-half, for it now
                 requires two cycles to fetch 5 instructions. This is due to the misalignment of the
                 fetch group with respect to the row boundaries of the I-cache array, as illustrated in
Figure 4.12. Such misalignments reduce the effective fetch bandwidth. In the case
                 where each cache line corresponds to a physical row, as shown in Figure 4.11(a),
                 then the crossing of a row boundary also corresponds to the crossing of a cache line
                 boundary, which can incur additional problems. If a fetch group spans two cache
                 lines, then it can induce an I-cache miss involving the second line even though the

                                  X
                   PC = XX00001
                            t               t
                                      00   01      10      11
                          ,000
                           001

                            111

                                                  Fetch group
                                           - Row width ►!
                   Figure 4.12
                   Misalignment of the Fetch Group Relative to the Row
                   Boundaries of the 1-Cache Array.

first line is resident. Even if both lines are resident in the I-cache, the physical
accessing of multiple cache lines in one cycle is problematic.
     There are two possible solutions to the misalignment problem. The first solution
is a static technique employed at compile time. The compiler can be given informa¬
tion on the organization of the I-cache, e.g., its indexing scheme and row size.
Based on this information, instructions can be appropriately placed in memory loca¬
tions so as to ensure the aligning of fetch groups with physical rows. For example,
every instruction that is the target of a branch can be placed in a memory location
that is mapped to the first instruction of a row. This will increase the probability of
fetching s instructions from the beginning of a row. Such techniques have been
implemented and are reasonably effective. A problem with this solution is that the
object code is tuned to a particular I-cache organization and may not be properly
aligned for other I-cache organizations. Another problem is that the static code
now can occupy a larger address range, which can potentially lead to a higher I-cache
miss rate.
     The second solution to the misalignment problem involves using hardware
at run time. Alignment hardware can be incorporated to ensure that s instructions
are fetched in every cycle even if the fetch group crosses a row boundary (but
not a cache line boundary). Such alignment hardware is incorporated in the IBM
RS/6000 design; we now briefly describe this design [Grohoski, 1990; Oehler and
Groves, 1990].
     The RS/6000 employs a two-way set-associative I-cache with a line size of
16 instructions (64 bytes). Each row of the I-cache array stores four associative
sets (two per set) of instructions. Hence, each line of the I-cache spans four physical
rows, as shown in Figure 4.13. The physical I-cache array is actually composed of
four independent subarrays (denoted 0,1,2, and 3), which can be accessed in parallel.
One instruction can be fetched from each subarray in every I-cache access. Which

        Odd
     directory
        sets
      A&B

                    TLB
                     hit
                     and
                   buffer
       Even
                   control
     directory
        sets        logic
      A&B

                                                            Instruction buffer network

                  Interlock,
                  dispatch,
                   branch,
                  execution
                    logic

 Figure 4.13
 Organization of the RS/6000 Two-Way Set-Associative 1-Cache with Auto-Realignment.

                  of the two instructions (either A or B) in the associative set is accessed depends on
                  which of the two has a tag match with the address. The instruction addresses are
                  allocated in an interleaved fashion across the four subarrays.
                       If the PC happens to point to the first subarray, i.e., subarray 0, then four con¬
                  secutive instructions can be simultaneously fetched from the four subarrays. All
                  four of these instructions reside in the same physical row of the I-cache, and all
                  four subarrays are accessed using the same row address. On the other hand, if the
                  PC indexes into the middle of the row, e.g., the first instruction of the fetch group
                  resides in subarray 2, then the four consecutive instructions in the fetch group will
                  span across two rows. The RS/6000 deals with this problem by detecting when the
                  starting address points to a subarray other than subarray 0 and automatically incre¬
                  menting the row address of the nonconsecutive subarrays. This is done by the
                  “T-logic” hardware associated with each subarray. For example, if the PC indexes
                  into subarray 2, then subarrays 2 and 3 will be accessed with the same row address
                  presented to them. However the T-logic of subarrays 0 and 1 will detect this condi¬
                  tion and automatically increment the row address presented to subarrays 0 and 1.

Consequently the two instructions fetched from subarrays 0 and 1 will actually be
from the next physical row of the I-cache.
     Therefore, regardless of the starting address and where that address points in
an I-cache row, four consecutive instructions can always be fetched in every cycle
as long as the fetch group does not cross a cache line boundary. When a fetch
group crosses a cache line boundary, only instructions in the first cache line can
be fetched in that cycle. Given the fact that the cache line of the RS/6000 consists
of 16 instructions, and that there are 16 possible starting addresses of a word in
a cache line, on the average the fetch bandwidth of this I-cache organization is
(13/16) x 4 + (1/16) x 3 + (1/16) x 2 + (1/16) x 1 = 3.625 instructions per cycle.
    Although the fetch group can begin in any one of the four subarrays, only
subarrays 0, 1, and 2 require the T-logic hardware. The row address of subarray 3
never needs to be incremented regardless of the starting subarray of a fetch group.
The instruction buffer network in the RS/6000 contains a rotating network which
can rotate the four fetched instructions so as to present the four instructions, at its
output, in original program order. This design of the I-cache is quite sophisticated
and can ensure high fetch bandwidth even if the fetch group is misaligned
with respect to the row organization of the I-cache. However, it is quite hardware
intensive and was made feasible because the RS/6000 was implemented on
multiple chips.
     Other than the misalignment problem, the second impediment to sustaining
the maximum fetch bandwidth of s instructions per cycle is the presence of control­
flow changing instructions within the fetch group. If one of the instructions in the
middle of the fetch group is a conditional branch, then the subsequent instructions
in the fetch group will be discarded if the branch is taken. Consequently, when this
happens, the fetch bandwidth is effectively reduced. This problem is fundamen¬
tally due to the presence of control dependences between instructions and is
related to the handling of conditional branches. This topic, viewed as more related
to the dynamic interaction between the machine and the program, is addressed in
greater detail in Chapter 5, which covers techniques for dealing with control
dependences and branch instructions.

4.3.2 Instruction Decoding
Instruction decoding involves the identification of the individual instructions,
determination of the instruction types, and detection of inter-instruction depen¬
dences among the group of instructions that have been fetched but not yet dis¬
patched. The complexity of the instruction decoding task is strongly influenced by
two factors, namely, the ISA and the width of the parallel pipeline. For a typical
RISC instruction set with fixed-length instructions and simple instruction formats,
the decoding task is quite straightforward. No explicit effort is needed to determine
the beginning and ending of each instruction. The relatively few different instruc¬
tion formats and addressing modes make the distinguishing of instruction types
reasonably easy. By simply decoding a small portion, e.g., one op code byte, of an
instruction, the instruction type and the format used can be determined and the

             remaining fields of the instruction and their interpretation can be quickly deter¬
             mined. A RISC instruction set simplifies the instruction decoding task.
                  For a RISC scalar pipeline, instruction decoding is quite trivial. Frequently the
             decode stage is used for accessing the register operands and is merged with the
             register read stage. However, for a RISC parallel pipeline with multiple instruc¬
             tions being simultaneously decoded, the decode stage must identify dependences
             between these instructions and determine the independent instructions that can be
             dispatched in parallel. Furthermore, to support efficient instruction fetching, the
             decode stage must quickly identify control-flow changing branch instructions
             among the instructions being decoded in order to provide quick feedback to the
             fetch stage. These two tasks in conjunction with accessing many register operands
             can make the logic for the decode stage of a RISC parallel pipeline somewhat
             complex. A large number of comparators are needed for determining register
             dependences between instructions. The register files must be multiported and able
             to support many simultaneous accesses. Multiple busses are also needed to route
             the accessed operands to their appropriate destination buffers. It is possible that
             the decode stage can become the critical stage in the overall superscalar pipeline.
                  For a CISC parallel pipeline, the instruction decoding task can become even
             more complex and usually requires multiple pipeline stages. For such a parallel
             pipeline, the identification of individual instructions and their types is no longer
             trivial. Both the Intel Pentium and the AMD K5 employ two pipeline stages for
             decoding IA32 instructions. On the more deeply pipelined Intel Pentium Pro, a
             total of five machine cycles are required to access the I-cache and decode the IA32
              instructions. The use of variable instruction lengths imposes an undesirable
              sequentiality to the instruction decoding task; the leading instruction must be
              decoded and have its length determined before the beginning of the next instruction
              can be identified. Consequently, the simultaneous parallel decoding of multiple
              instructions can become quite challenging. In the worst case, it must be assumed
              that a new instruction can begin anywhere within the fetch group, and a large
              number of decoders are used to simultaneously and “speculatively” decode instruc¬
              tions, starting at every byte boundary. This is extremely complex and can be quite
              inefficient.
                   There is an additional burden on the instruction decoder of a CISC parallel
              pipeline. The decoder must translate the architected instructions into internal low­
              level operations that can be directly executed by the hardware. Such a translation
              process was first described by Patt, Hwu, and Shebanow in their seminal paper on
              the high-performance substrate (HPS), which decomposed complex VAX CISC
              instructions into RISC-like primitives [Patt et al., 1985]. These internal operations
              resemble RISC instructions and can be viewed as vertical micro-instructions. In
              the AMD K5 these operations are called RISC operations or ROPs (pronounced
              “ar-ops”). In the Intel P6 these internal operations are identified as micro-operations
              or [lops (pronounced “you-ops”). Each IA32 instruction is translated into one or
              more ROPs or flops. According to Intel, on average, one IA32 instruction is trans¬
              lated into 1.5 to 2.0 flops. In these CISC parallel pipelines, between the instruction
              decoding and instruction completion stages, all instructions in flight within the

                                   Macro-instruction bytes from IFU

          Figure 4.14
          The Fetch/Decode Unit of the Intel P6 Superscalar Pipeline.

machine are these internal operations. In this book, for convenience we will adopt
the Intel terminology and refer to these internal operations as pops.
     The instruction decoder for the Intel Pentium Pro is presented as an illustrative
example of instruction decoding for a CISC parallel pipeline. A diagram of the
fetch/decode unit of the P6 is shown in Figure 4.14. In each machine cycle, the
I-cache can deliver 16 aligned bytes to the instruction queue. Three parallel decod¬
ers simultaneously decode instruction bytes from the instruction queue. The first
decoder at the front of the queue is capable of decoding all IA32 instructions,
while the other two decoders have more limited capability and can only decode
simple IA32 instructions such as register-to-register instructions.
   The decoders translate IA32 instructions into the internal three-address pops.
The pops employ the load/store model. Each IA32 instruction with complex
addressing modes is translated into multiple pops. The first (generalized) decoder
can generate up to four pops per cycle in response to the decoding of an I A3 2
instruction. Each of the other two (restricted) decoders can generate only one pop
per cycle in response to the decoding of a simple IA32 instruction. In each
machine cycle at least one IA32 instruction is decoded by the generalized decoder,
leading to the generation of one or more pops. The goal is to go beyond this and
have the other two restricted decoders also decode two simple IA32 instructions
that trail the leading IA32 instruction in the same machine cycle. In the most ideal
case the three parallel decoders can generate a total of six pops in one machine
cycle. For those complex IA32 instructions that require more than four pops to
translate, when they reach the front of the instruction queue, the generalized
decoder will invoke a pops sequencer to emit microcode, which is simply a pre¬
programmed sequence of normal pops. These pops will require two or more
machine cycles to generate. All the pops generated by the three parallel decoders
are loaded into the reorder buffer (ROB), which has 40 entries to hold up to
40 pops, to await dispatching to the functional units.

                  For many superscalar processors, especially those that implement wide and/or
             CISC parallel pipelines, the instruction decoding hardware can be extremely com¬
             plex and require partitioning into multiple pipeline stages. When the number of
             decoding stages is increased, the branch penalty, in terms of number of machine
             cycles, is also increased. Hence, it is not desirable to just keep increasing the depth
             of the decoding portion of the parallel pipeline. To help alleviate this complexity,
             a technique called predecoding has been proposed and implemented.
                  Predecoding moves a part of the decoding task to the other side, i.e., the input
             side, of the I-cache. When an I-cache miss occurs and a new cache line is being
             brought in from the memory, the instructions in that cache line are partially
             decoded by decoding hardware placed between the memory and the I-cache. The
             instructions and some additional decoded information are then stored in the I-cache.
             The decoded information, in the form of predecode bits, simplifies the instruction
             decoding task when the instructions are fetched from the I-cache. Hence, part of
             the decoding is performed only once when instructions are loaded into the I-cache,
             instead of every time when these instructions are fetched from the I-cache. With
             some of the decoding hardware having been moved to the input side of the I-cache,
             the instruction decoding complexity of the parallel pipeline can be simplified.
                  The AMD K5 is an example of a CISC superscalar pipeline that employs
             aggressive predecoding of IA32 instructions as they are fetched from memory and
             prior to their being loaded into the I-cache. In a single bus transaction a total of
             eight instruction bytes are fetched from memory. These bytes are predecoded, and
              five additional bits are generated by the predecoder for each of the instruction
             bytes. These five predecode bits contain information about the location of the start
             and end of an I A3 2 instruction, the number of qops (or ROPs) needed to translate
             that IA32 instruction, and the location of op codes and prefixes. These additional
             predecode bits are stored in the I-cache along with the original instruction’s bytes.
             Consequently, the original I-cache line size of 128 bits (16 bytes) is increased by
             an additional 80 bits; see Figure 4.15. In each I-cache access, the 16 instruction
             bytes are fetched along with the 80 predecode bits. The predecode bits significantly
             simplify instruction decoding and allow the simultaneous decoding of multiple
             IA32 instructions by four identical decoders/translators that can generate up to
             four |lops in each cycle.
                  There are two forms of overhead associated with predecoding. The I-cache miss
             penalty can be increased due to the necessity of predecoding the instruction bytes
             fetched from memory. This is not a serious problem if the I-cache miss rate is very
             low. The other overhead involves the storing of the predecode bits in the I-cache
             and the consequent increase of the I-cache size. For the K5 the size of the I-cache is
             increased by about 50%. There is clearly a tradeoff between the aggressiveness of
             predecoding and the I-cache size increase.
                  Predecoding is not just limited to alleviating the sequential bottleneck in parallel
             decoding of multiple CISC instructions in a CISC parallel pipeline. It can also be
             used to support RISC parallel pipelines. RISC instructions can be predecoded when
             they are being loaded into the I-cache. The predecode bits can be used to identify
             control-flow changing branch instructions within the fetch group and to explicitly

                          From memory
               8 instruction bytes \ 64 —             Bytel    Byte2
                                                                              Byte8j

                                                              5 bits 5 bits                5 bits

                                                      Bytel       Byte2
                                                                               ... Byte8

                                                                                                               1
       Up to 4 ROPs ROP1 ROP2 ROP3 ROP4                                                             E   £   A M P   E

Figure 4.15
The Predecoding Mechanism of the AMD K5.                                                                    T_r

identify subgroups of independent instructions within the fetch group. For example,
the PowerPC 620 employs 7 predecode bits for each instruction word in the I-cache.
The UltraSPARC, MIPS R10000, and HP PA-8000 also employ either 4 or 5 prede¬
code bits for each instruction.
     As superscalar pipelines become wider and the number of instructions that must
be simultaneously decoded increases, the instruction decoding task will become
more of a bottleneck and more aggressive use of predecoding can be expected. The
predecoder partially decodes the instructions, and effectively transforms the original
undecoded instructions into a format that makes the final decoding task easier. One
can view the predecoder as translating the instructions fetched from memory into
different instructions that are then loaded into the I-cache. To expand this view,
the possibility of enhancing the predecoder to do run-time object code translation
between ISAs could be interesting.

4.3.3 Instruction Dispatching
Instruction dispatching is necessary for superscalar pipelines. In a scalar pipeline,
all instructions regardless of their type flow through the same single pipeline. Super¬
scalar pipelines are diversified pipelines that employ a multiplicity of heteroge¬
neous functional units in their execution portion. Different types of instructions are
executed by different functional units. Once the type of an instruction is identified in
the decode stage, it must be routed to the appropriate functional unit for execution;
this is the task of instruction dispatching.
    Although superscalar pipelines are parallel pipelines, both the instruction
fetching and instruction decoding tasks are usually carried out in a centralized
fashion; i.e., all the instructions are managed by the same controller. Although
multiple instructions are fetched in a cycle, all instructions must be fetched from
the same I-cache. Hence all the instructions in the fetch group are accessed from the

              I-cache at the same time, and they are all deposited into the same buffer. Instruction
              decoding is done in a centralized fashion because in the case of CISC instructions,
              all the bytes in the fetch group must be decoded collectively by a centralized
              decoder in order to identify the individual instructions. Even with RISC instruc¬
              tions, the decoder must identify inter-instruction dependences, which also requires
              centralized instruction decoding.
                   On the other hand, in a diversified pipeline all the functional units can operate
              independently in a distributed fashion in executing their own types of instructions
              once the inter-instruction dependences are resolved. Consequently, going from
              instruction decoding to instruction execution, there is a change from centralized
              processing of instructions to distributed processing of instructions. This change is
              carried out by, and is the reason for, the instruction dispatching stage in a superscalar
              pipeline. This is illustrated in Figure 4.16.
                   Another mechanism that is necessary between instruction decoding and instruc¬
              tion execution is the temporary buffering of instructions. Prior to its execution, an
              instruction must have all its operands. During decoding, register operands are
              fetched from the register files. In a superscalar pipeline it is possible that some of
              these operands are not yet ready because earlier instructions that update these regis¬
              ters have not finished their execution. When this situation occurs, an obvious solution
              is to stall the decoding stage until all register operands are ready. This solution seri¬
              ously restricts the decoding throughput and is not desirable. A better solution is to
              fetch those register operands that are ready and go ahead and advance these

                                                             1
                                    FU1 I        FU 2         FU3 1               FUn
                                   ~T~J                     “IT
                                                   Instruction execution

                             Figure 4.16
                            The Necessity of Instruction Dispatching in a Superscalar Pipeline.

     Dispatch
                                          i                       station (dispatch buffer)
     (issue)                                                    I Centralized  reservation
                                          1
                                                ]a
     Execute «

                                                            ]
                                                                              buffer
                                                            J Completion
                                          1
     Figure 4.17
     Centralized Reservation Station.

instructions into a separate buffer to await those register operands that are not ready.
When all register operands are ready, those instructions can then exit this buffer and
be issued into the functional units for execution. Borrowing the term used in the
Tomasulo’s algorithm employed in the IBM 360/91 [Tomasulo, 1967], we denote
such a temporary instruction buffer as a reservation station. The use of a reservation
station decouples instruction decoding and instruction execution and provides a
buffer to take up the slack between decoding and execution stages due to the temporal
variation of throughput rates in the two stages. This eliminates unnecessary stalling
of the decoding stage and prevents unnecessary starvation of the execution stage.
    Based on the placement of the reservation station relative to instruction dis¬
patching, two types of reservation station implementations are possible. If a single
buffer is used at the source side of dispatching, we identify this as a centralized
reservation station. On the other hand, if multiple buffers are placed at the destina¬
tion side of dispatching, they are identified as distributed reservation stations.
Figures 4.17 and 4.18 illustrate the two ways of implementing reservation stations.
     The Intel Pentium Pro implements a centralized reservation station. In such an
implementation, one reservation station with many entries feeds all the functional
units. Instructions are dispatched from this centralized reservation station directly
to all the functional units to begin execution. On the other hand, the PowerPC 620
employs distributed reservation stations. In this implementation, each functional
unit has its own reservation station on the input side of the unit. Instructions are
dispatched to the individual reservation stations based on instruction type. These
instructions remain in these reservation stations until they are ready to be issued
into the functional units for execution. Of course, these two implementations of

                            Dispatch
                                                                 i                 J Dispatch
                                                                                                buffer

                                                                 T
                                              n             n         n          n              n       Distributed
                                                                                                        reservation
                           Issue
                                           \„ 1„                  i
                                                                                                        stations

                                                                        |                           i

                           Execute <

                                                                                    ]

                                                                 t
                           Finish
                                                                                                  buffer
                                                                                   J Completion
                            Complete

                            Figure 4.18
                            Distributed Reservation Stations.

 iTDTDl
 E   X A M P        E
                        reservation stations represent only the two extreme alternatives. Hybrids of these
               L_
                        two approaches are also possible. For example, the MIPS R10000 employs one
                        such hybrid implementation. We identified such hybrid implementations as clus¬
                        tered reservation stations. With clustered reservation stations, instructions are dis¬
                        patched to multiple reservation stations, and each reservation station can feed or be
                        shared by more than one functional unit. Typically the reservation stations and
                        functional units are clustered based on instruction or data types.
                             Reservation station design involves certain tradeoffs. A centralized reserva¬
                        tion station allows all instruction types to share the same reservation station and
                        will likely achieve the best overall utilization of all the reservation station entries.
                        However, a centralized implementation can incur the greatest complexity in its hard¬
                        ware design. It requires centralized control and a buffer that is highly multiported
                        to allow multiple concurrent accesses. Distributed reservation stations can be single­
                        ported buffers, each with only a small number of entries. However, each reservation
                        station’s idling entries cannot be used by instructions destined for execution in
                        other functional units. The overall utilization of all the reservation station entries
                        will be lower. It is also likely that one reservation station can saturate when all its
                        entries are occupied and hence induce stalls in instruction dispatching.
                             With the different alternatives for implementing reservation stations, we need to
                        clarify our use of certain terms. In this book the term dispatching implies the asso¬
                        ciating of instruction types with functional unit types after instructions have been
                        decoded. On the other hand, the term issuing always means the initiation of execution
                        in functional units. In a distributed reservation station design, these two events occur

separately. Instructions are dispatched from the centralized decode/dispatch buffer
to the individual reservation stations first, and when all their operands are available,
then they are issued into the individual functional units for execution. With a cen¬
tralized reservation station, the dispatching of instructions from the centralized
reservation station does not occur until all their operands are ready. All instructions,
regardless of type, are held in the centralized reservation station until they are ready
to execute, at which time instructions are dispatched directly into the individual
functional units to begin execution. Hence, in a machine with a centralized reserva¬
tion station, the associating of instructions to individual functional units occurs at the
same time as their execution is initiated. Therefore, with a centralized reservation
station, instruction dispatching and instruction issuing occur at the same time, and
these two terms become interchangeable. This is illustrated in Figure 4.17.
4.3.4 Instruction Execution
The instruction execution stage is the heart of a superscalar machine. The current
trend in superscalar pipeline design is toward more parallel and more diversified
pipelines. This translates into having more functional units and having these func¬
tional units be more specialized. By specializing them for executing specific
instruction types, these functional units can be more performance efficient. Early
scalar pipelined processors have essentially one functional unit. All instruction
types (excluding floating-point instructions that are executed by a separate floating¬
point coprocessor chip) are executed by the same functional unit. In the TYP pipe¬
line example, this functional unit is a two-stage pipelined unit consisting of the
ALU and MEM stages of the TYP pipeline. Most first-generation superscalar pro¬
cessors are parallel pipelines with two diversified functional units, one executing
integer instructions and the other executing floating-point instructions. These early
superscalar processors simply integrated floating-point execution in the same
instruction pipeline instead of employing a separate coprocessor unit.
     Current superscalar processors can employ multiple integer units, and some
have multiple floating-point units. These are the two most fundamental functional
unit types. Some of these units are becoming quite sophisticated and are capable
of executing more than one operation involving more than two source operands
in each cycle. Figure 4.19(a) illustrates the integer execution unit of the TI
SuperSPARC which contains a cascaded ALU configuration [Blanck and
Krueger, 1992]. Three ALUs are included in this two-stage pipelined unit, and up
to two integer operations can be issued into this unit in one cycle. If they are inde¬
pendent, then both operations are executed in the first stage using ALUO and
ALU2. If the second operation depends on the first, then the first one is executed
in ALU2 during the first stage with the second one executed in ALUC in the sec¬
ond stage. Implementing such a functional unit allows more cycles in which two
instructions are simultaneously issued.
     The floating-point unit in the IBM RS/6000 is implemented as a two-stage pipe¬
lined multiply-add-fused (MAF) unit that takes three inputs (A, B, C) and performs
(A x B) + C. This is illustrated in Figure 4.19(b). The MAF unit is motivated by
the most common use of floating-point multiplication to carry out the dot-product
operation D = (A x B) + C. If the compiler is able to merge many multiply-add

                                                                                     J
                                                                                   AXB

                                                                                        (A X B) + Cl

                                                                                 Round/Normalize

 Jl J,                                                                                   (b)

                     Figure 4.19
    t_f              (a) Integer Functional Unit in the Tl SuperSPARC; (b) Floating-Point Unit in the
                     IBM RS/6000.

              pairs of instructions into single MAF instructions, and the MAF unit can sustain the
              issuing of one MAF instruction in every cycle, then an effective throughput of two
              floating-point instructions per cycle can be achieved using only one MAF unit. The
              normal floating-point multiply instruction is actually executed by the MAF unit as
                  x B) + 0, while the floating-point add instruction is performed by the MAF unit as
               (A X 1) + C. Since the MAF unit is pipelined, even without executing MAF instruc¬
              tions, it can still sustain an execution rate of one floating-point instruction per cycle.
                   In addition to executing integer ALU instructions, an integer unit can be used
              for generating memory addresses and executing branch and load/store instruc¬
              tions. However, in most recent designs separate branch and load/store units have
              been incorporated. The branch unit is responsible for updating the PC, while the
              load/store unit is directly connected to the D-cache. Other specialized functional
              units have emerged for supporting graphics and image processing applications.
              For example, in the Motorola 88110 there is a dedicated functional unit for bit
   T_f        manipulation and two functional units for supporting pixel processing. For many
              of the signal processing and multimedia applications, the common data type is a
              byte. Frequently 4 bytes are packed into a 32-bit word for simultaneous processing
              by specialized 32-bit functional units for increased throughput. In the TriMedia
              VLIW processor intended for such applications, such functional units are employed
              [Slavenburg et al., 1996]. For example, the TriMedia-1 processor can execute the
              quadavg instruction in one cycle. The quadavg instruction sums four rounded

                                              2222
              averages and is quite useful in MPEG decoding for decompressing compressed
              video images; it carries out the following computation.

                         quadavg =
                                        (a + e+1) (b+f+1) (c + g+1) (d + h + 1)                         (4.2)

The eight variables denote 8-byte operands with a, b, c, and d stored as one 32-bit
quantity and e,f, g, and h stored as another 32-bit quantity. The functional unit
takes as input these two 32-bit operands and produces the quadavg result in one
cycle. This single-cycle operation replaces numerous add and divide instructions
that would have been required if the eight single-byte operands were manipu¬
lated individually. With the widespread deployment of multimedia applications,
such specialized functional units that operate on special data types have
emerged.
     What is the best mix of functional units for a superscalar pipeline is an inter¬
esting question. The answer is dependent on the application domain. If we use the
statistics from Chapter 2 of typical programs having 40% ALU instructions, 20%
branches, and 40% load/store instructions, then we can have a 4-2-4 rule of thumb.
For every four ALU units, we should have two branch units and four load/store
units. Many of the current leading superscalar processors have four or more ALU­
type functional units (including both integer and floating-point units). Most of
them have only one branch unit but are able to speculate beyond one conditional
branch instruction. However, most of these processors have only one load/store
unit; some are able to process two load/store instructions in every cycle with some
constraints. Clearly there seems be an imbalance in having too few load/store
units. The reason is that implementing multiple load/store units that operate in par¬
allel in accessing the same D-cache is a difficult task. It requires the D-cache to be
multiported. Multiported memory modules involve very complex circuit design
and can significantly slow down the memory speed.
    In many designs multiple memory banks are used to simulate a truly multiported
memory. A memory is partitioned into multiple banks. Each bank can perform a
read/write operation in a machine cycle. If the effective addresses of two load/
store instructions happen to reside on different banks, then both instructions can be
carried out by the two different banks at the same time. However, if there is a bank
conflict, then the two instructions must be serialized. Multibanked D-caches have
                                                                                         E   X A M P   L   E
been used to simulate multiported D-caches. For example, the Intel Pentium pro¬
cessor uses an eight-banked D-cache to simulate a two-ported D-cache [Intel
Corp., 1993]. A truly multiported memory can guarantee conflict-free simulta¬
neous accesses. Typically, more read ports than write ports are needed. Multiple
read ports can be implemented by having multiple copies of the memory. All
memory writes are broadcast to all the copies, with all the copies having identical
content. Each copy can provide a small number of read ports with the total number
of read ports being the sum of all the read ports on all the copies. For example, a
memory with four read ports and two write ports can be implemented as two copies
of simpler memory modules, each with only two write ports and two read ports.
Implementing multiple, especially more than two, load/store units to operate in
parallel can be a challenge in designing wide superscalar pipelines.
     The amount of resource parallelism in the instruction execution portion is
determined by the combination of spatial and temporal parallelism. Having multi¬
ple functional units is a form of spatial parallelism. Alternatively, parallelism can
be obtained via pipelining of these functional units, which is a form of temporal

              parallelism. For example, instead of implementing a dual-ported D-cache, in some
              current designs D-cache access is pipelined into two pipeline stages so that two
              load/store instructions can be concurrently serviced by the D-cache. Currently,
              there is a general trend toward implementing deeper pipelines in order to reduce
              the cycle time and increase the clock speed. Spatial parallelism also tends to
              require greater hardware complexity and silicon real estate. Temporal parallelism
              makes more efficient use of hardware but does increase the overall instruction pro¬
              cessing latency and potentially pipeline stall penalties due to inter-instruction
              dependences.
                   In real superscalar pipeline designs, we often see that the total number of
              functional units exceeds the actual width of the parallel pipeline. Typically the
              width of a superscalar pipeline is determined by the number of instructions that
              can be fetched, decoded, or completed in every machine cycle. However, because
              of the dynamic variation of instruction mix and the resultant nonuniform distribu¬
              tion of instruction mix during program execution on a cycle-by-cycle basis, there
              is a potential dynamic mismatch of instruction mix and functional unit mix. The
              former varies in time and the latter stays fixed. Because of the specialization and
              heterogeneity of the functional units the total number of functional units must
              exceed the width of the superscalar pipeline to avoid having the instruction execu¬
              tion portion become the bottleneck due to excessive structural dependences related
              to the unavailability of certain functional unit types. Some of the aggressive com¬
              piler back ends actually try to smooth out this dynamic variation of instruction mix
              to ensure a better sustained match with the functional unit mix. Of course, differ¬
              ent application programs can exhibit a different inherent overall mix of instruction
              types. The compiler can only make localized adjustments to achieve some perfor¬
              mance gain. Studies have been done in assessing the best number and mix of func¬
              tional units based on SPEC benchmarks [Jourdan et al., 1995].
                   With a large number of functional units, there is additional hardware complexity
              other than the functional units themselves. Results from the outputs of functional
              units need to be forwarded to inputs of the functional units. A multiplicity of busses
              are required, and potentially logic for bus control and arbitration is needed. Usually a
              full crossbar interconnection network is too costly and not absolutely necessary. The
              mechanism for routing operands between functional units introduces another form of
              structural dependence. The interconnect mechanism also contributes to the latency of
              the execution stage(s) of the pipeline. In order to support data forwarding the reserva¬
              tion station(s) must monitor the busses for tag matches, indicating the availability of
              needed operands, and latch in the operands when they are broadcasted on the busses.
              Potentially the complexity of the instruction execution stage can grow at the rate of
              n2, where n is the total number of functional units.

              4.3.5 Instruction Completion and Retiring
              An instruction is considered completed when it finishes execution and updates the
              machine state. An instruction finishes execution when it exits the functional unit
              and enters the completion buffer. Subsequently it exits the completion buffer and
              becomes completed. When an instruction finishes execution, its result may only

reside in nonarchitected buffers. However, when it is completed, its result is written
into an architecture register. With instructions that actually update memory loca¬
tions, there can be a time period between when they are architecturally completed
and when the memory locations are updated. For example, a store instruction can be
architecturally completed when it exits the completion buffer and enters the store
buffer to wait for the availability of a bus cycle in order to write to the D-cache. This
store instruction is considered retired when it exits the store buffer and updates the
D-cache. Hence, in this book instruction completion involves the updating of the
machine state, whereas instruction retiring involves the updating of the memory
state. For instructions that do not update the memory, retiring occurs at the same
time as completion. So, in a distributed reservation station machine, an instruction
can go through the following phases: fetch, decode, dispatch, issue, execute, finish,
complete, and retire. Issuing and finishing simply refer to starting execution and
ending execution, respectively. Some of the superscalar processor vendors use
these terms in slightly different ways. Frequently, dispatching and issuing are used
almost interchangeably, similar to completion and retiring. Sometimes completion is
used to mean finishing execution, and retiring is used to mean updating the machine’s
architectural state. There is yet no standardization on the use of these terms.
    During the execution of a program, interrupts and exceptions can occur that
will disrupt the execution flow of a program. Superscalar processors employing
dynamic pipelines that facilitate out-of-order execution must be able to deal with
such disruptions of program execution. Interrupts are usually induced by the
external environment such as I/O devices or the operating system. These occur in
an asynchronous fashion with respect to the program execution. When an interrupt
occurs, the program execution must be suspended to allow the operating system to
service the interrupt. One way to do this is to stop fetching new instructions and
allow the instructions that are already in the pipeline to finish execution, at which
time the state of the machine can be saved. Once the interrupt has been serviced
by the operating system, the saved machine state can be restored and the original
program can resume execution.
    Exceptions are induced by the execution of the instructions of the program.
An instruction can induce an exception due to arithmetic operations, such as divid¬
ing by zero and floating-point overflow or underflow. When such exceptions
occur, the results of the computation may no longer be valid and the operating sys¬
tem may need to intervene to log such exceptions. Exceptions can also occur due
to the occurrence of page faults in a paging-based virtual memory system. Such
exceptions can occur when instructions reference the memory. When such excep¬
tions occur, a new page must be brought in from secondary storage, which can
require on the order of thousands of machine cycles. Consequently, the execution
of the program that induced the page fault is usually suspended, and the execution
of a new program is initiated in the multiprogramming environment. After the
page fault has been serviced, the original program can then resume execution.
     It is important that the architectural state of the machine present at the time the
excepting instruction is executed be saved so that the program can resume execu¬
tion after the exception is serviced. Machines that are capable of supporting this

              suspension and resumption of execution of a program at the granularity of each
              individual instruction are said to have precise exception. Precise exception
              involves being able to checkpoint the state of the machine just prior to the execu¬
              tion of the excepting instruction and then resume execution by restoring the check­
              pointed state and restarting execution at the excepting instruction. In order to
              support precise exception, the superscalar processor must maintain its architec¬
              tural state and evolve this machine state in such a way as if the instructions in the
              program are executed one at a time according to the original program order. The
              reason is that when an exception occurs, the state the machine is in at that time
              must reflect the condition that all instructions preceding the excepting instruction
              have completed while no instructions following the excepting instruction have
              completed. For a dynamic pipeline to have precise exception, this sequential
              evolving of the architectural state must be maintained even though instructions are
              actually executed out of program order.
                   In a dynamic pipeline, instructions are fetched and decoded in program order
              but are executed out of program order. Essentially, instructions can enter the res¬
              ervation station(s) in order but exit the reservation station(s) out of order. They
              also finish execution out of order. To support precise exception, instruction com¬
              pletion must occur in program order so as to update the architectural state of the
              machine in program order. In order to accommodate out-of-order finishing of exe¬
              cution and in-order completion of instructions, a reorder buffer is needed in the
              instruction completion stage of the parallel pipeline. As instructions finish execu¬
              tion, they enter the reorder buffer out of order, but they exit the reorder buffer
              in program order. As they exit the reorder buffer, they are considered architec¬
              turally completed. This is illustrated in Figure 4.20 with the reservation station
              and the reorder buffer bounding the out-of-order region of the pipeline or essen¬
              tially the instruction execution portion of the pipeline. The terms adopted in this
              book, referring to the various phases of instruction processing, are illustrated in
              Figure 4.20.
                  Precise exception is handled by the instruction completion stage using the
              reorder buffer. When an exception occurs, the excepting instruction is tagged in
              the reorder buffer. The completion stage checks each instruction before that
              instruction is completed. When a tagged instruction is detected, it is not allowed to
              be completed. All the instructions prior to the tagged instructions are allowed to be
              completed. The machine state is then checkpointed or saved. The machine state
              includes all the architected registers and the program counter. The remaining
              instructions in the pipeline, some of which may have already finished execution,
              are discarded. After the exception has been serviced, the checkpointed machine
              state is restored and execution resumes with the fetching of the instruction that
              triggered the original exception.
                   Early work on support for providing precise exceptions in a processor that
              supports out-of-order execution was conducted by Acosta et al. [1986], Sohi and
              Vajapeyam [1987], and Smith and Pleszkun [1988]. An early proposal describing
              the Metaflow processor, which was never completed, also provides interesting
              insights for the curious reader [Popescu et al., 1991].

 Figure 4.20
 A Dynamic Pipeline with Reservation Station and Reorder Buffer.

4.4 Summary
Figure 4.20 represents an archetype of a contemporary out-of-order superscalar
pipeline. It has an in-order front end, an out-of-order execution core, and an in-order
back end. Both the front-end and back-end pipeline stages can advance multiple
instructions per machine cycle. Instructions can remain in the reservation stations
for one or more cycles while waiting for their source operands. Once the source
operands are available, an instruction is issued from the reservation station into the
execution unit. After execution, the instruction enters the reorder buffer (or comple¬
tion buffer). Instructions in the reorder buffer are completed according to program

              order. In fact the reorder buffer is managed as a circular queue with instructions
              arranged according to the program order.
                   This chapter focuses on the superscalar pipeline organization and highlights
              the issues associated with the various pipeline stages. So far, we have addressed
              mostly the static structures of superscalar pipelines. Chapter 5 will get into the
              dynamic behavior of superscalar processors. We have chosen to present superscalar
              pipeline organization at a fairly high level, avoiding the implementation details.
              The main purpose of this chapter is to provide a bridge from scalar to superscalar
              pipelines and to convey a high-level framework for superscalar pipelines that will
              be a useful navigational aid when we get into the plethora of superscalar processor
              techniques in Chapter 5.

              REFERENCES
                  Acosta, R., J. Kilestrup, and H. Torng: “An instruction issuing approach to enhancing per¬
                  formance in multiple functional unit processors,” IEEE Trans, on Computers, C35, 9, 1986,
                  pp. 815-828.
                  Blanck, G., and S. Krueger: “The SuperS PARC microprocessor,” Proc. IEEE COMP CON,
                  1992, pp. 136-141.
                  Crawford, J.: “The execution pipeline of the Intel i486 CPU,” Proc. COMP CON Spring’90,
                  1990, pp. 254-258.
                  Diefendorf, K., and M. Allen: “Organization of the Motorola 88110 superscalar RISC
                  microprocessor,” IEEE MICRO, 12, 2, 1992, pp. 40-63.
                  Grohoski, G.: “Machine organization of the IBM RISC System/6000 processor,” IBM
                  Journal of Research and Development, 34, 1, 1990, pp. 37-58.
                  Intel Corp.: Pentium Processor User’s Manual, Vol. 3: Architecture and Programming
                  Manual. Santa Clara, CA: Intel Corp., 1993.
                  Jourdan, S., P. Sainrat, and D. Litaize: “Exploring configurations of functional units in an
                  out-of-order superscalar processor,” Proc. 22nd Annual Int. Symposium on Computer
                  Architecture, 1995, pp. 117-125.
                  Oehler, R. R., and R. D. Groves: “IBM RISC System/6000 processor architecture,” IBM
                  Journal of Research and Development, 34, 1, 1990, pp. 23-36.
                  Patt, Y., W. Hwu, and M. Shebanow: “HPS, a new microarchitecture: Introduction and
                  rationale,” Proc. 18th Annual Workshop on Microprogramming (MICRO-18), 1985,
                  pp. 103-108.
                  Popescu, V., M. Schulz, J. Spracklen, G. Gibson, B. Lightner, and D. Isaman: “The Meta¬
                  flow architecture,” IEEE Micro., June 1991, pp. 10-13, 63-73.
                  Slavenburg, G., S. Rathnam, and H. Dijkstra: “The TriMedia TM-1 PCI VLIW media pro¬
                  cessor,” Proc. Hot Chips 8, 1996, pp. 171-178.
                  Smith, J., and A. Pleszkun: “Implementing precise interrupts in pipelined processors,”
                  IEEE Trans, on Computers, 37, 5, 1988, pp. 562-573.
                  Sohi, G., and S. Vajapeyam: “Instruction issue logic for high-performance, interruptible
                  pipelined processors,” Proc. 14th Annual Int. Symposium on Computer Architecture, 1987,
                  pp. 27-34.

  Thornton, J. E.: “Parallel operation in the Control Data 6600,” AFIPS Proc. FJCC part 2,
  vol. 26, 1964, pp. 33-40.
  Tomasulo, R.: “An efficient algorithm for exploiting multiple arithmetic units,” IBM Journal
  of Research and Development, 11, 1967, pp. 25-33.

HOMEWORK PROBLEMS
   P4.1 Is it reasonable to build a scalar pipeline that supports out-of-order exe¬
         cution? If so, describe a code execution scenario where such a pipeline
         would perform better than a conventional in-order scalar pipeline.
   P4.2 Superscalar pipelines require replication of pipeline resources across
         each parallel pipeline, naively including the replication of cache ports.
        In practice, however, a two-wide superscalar pipeline may have two
        data cache ports but only a single instruction cache port. Explain why
        this is possible, but also discuss why a single instruction cache port can
        perform worse than two (replicated) instruction cache ports.
   P4.3 Section 4.3.1 suggests that a compiler can generate object code where
        branch targets are aligned at the beginning of physical cache lines to
          increase the likelihood of fetching multiple instructions from the
          branch target in a single cycle. However, given a fixed number of
          instructions between taken branches, this approach may simply shift
          the unused fetch slots from before the branch target to after the branch
          that terminates sequential fetch at the target. For example, moving the
          code at label 0 so it aligns with a physical cache line will not improve
          fetch efficiency, since the wasted fetch slot shifts from the beginning
          of the physical line to the end.

        be cond, labelO
     labelO:
        add rl, r2, r3
                                             be   v
                                 Original code: Physical cache line
                                                  • • • add emp be
                                                      Wasted
                                                      slot
        emp cond, rl, r5
        be cond, labell          Optimized code: Physical cache line

                                             be   ... add emp be | j
                                                      Lie ^—1—
                                                                       Wasted
                                                                       slot

          Discuss the relationship between fetch block size and the dynamic
          distance between taken branches. Describe how one affects the other,
          describe how important is branch target alignment for small vs. large
          fetch blocks and short vs. long dynamic distance, and describe how
          well static compiler-based target alignment might work in all cases.

                  P4.4 The auto-realigning instruction fetch hardware shown in Figure 4.13
                       still fails to achieve full-width fetch bandwidth (i.e., four instructions
                       per cycle). Describe a more aggressive organization that is always able
                       to fetch four instructions per cycle. Comment on the additional hard¬
                       ware such an organization implies.
                  P4.5 One idea to eliminate the branch misprediction penalty is to build a
                       machine that executes both paths of a branch. In a two to three paragraph
                       essay, explain why this may or may not be a good idea.
                  P4.6 Section 4.3.2 discusses adding predecode bits to the instruction cache
                       to simplify the task of decoding instructions after they have been
                       fetched. A logical extension of predecode bits is to simply store the
                       instructions in decoded form in a decoded instruction cache; this is par¬
                       ticularly attractive for processors like the Pentium Pro that dynamically
                       translate fetched instructions into a sequence of simpler RISC-like
                       instructions for the core to execute. Identify and describe at least one
                       factor that complicates the building of decoded instruction caches for
                       processors that translate from a complex instruction set to a simpler
                       RISC-like instruction set.
                  P4.7 What is the most important advantage of a centralized reservation station
                       over distributed reservation stations?
                  P4.8 In an in-order pipelined processor, pipeline latches are used to hold
                       result operands from the time an execution unit computes them until
                       they are written back to the register file during the writeback stage. In
                       an out-of-order processor, rename registers are used for the same pur¬
                       pose. Given a four-wide out-of-order processor TYP pipeline, compute
                       the minimum number of rename registers needed to prevent rename
                       register starvation from limiting concurrency. What happens to this
                       number if frequency demands force a designer to add five extra pipeline
                       stages between dispatch and execute, and five more stages between
                       execute and retire/writeback?
                  P4.9 A banked or interleaved cache can be an effective approach for allowing
                       multiple loads or stores to be performed in one cycle. Sketch out the
                       data flow for a two-way interleaved data cache attached to two load/
                       store units. Now sketch the data flow for an eight-way interleaved data
                       cache attached to four load/store units. Comment on how well inter¬
                       leaving scales or does not scale.
                 P4.10 The Pentium 4 processor operates its integer arithmetic units at double
                       the nominal clock frequency of the rest of the processor. This is
                       accomplished by pipelining the integer adder into two stages, comput¬
                       ing the low-order 16 bits in the first cycle and the high-order 16 bits in
                       the second cycle. Naively, this appears to increase ALU latency from
                       one cycle to two cycles. However, assuming that two dependent

       instructions are both arithmetic instructions, it is possible to issue the
       second instruction in the cycle immediately following issue of the first
       instruction, since the low-order bits of the second instruction are
       dependent only on the low-order bits of the first instruction. Sketch out
       a pipeline diagram of such an ALU along with the additional bypass
       paths needed to handle this optimized case.
P4.ll Given the ALU configuration described in Problem 4.10, specify how
       many cycles a trailing dependent instruction of each of the following
       types must delay, following the issue of a leading arithmetic instruction:
       arithmetic, logical (and/or/xor), shift left, shift right.
P4.12 Explain why the kind of bit-slice pipelining described in Problem 4.10
      cannot be usefully employed to pipeline dependent floating-point arith¬
      metic instructions.

P4.13 Assume a four-wide superscalar processor that attempts to retire four
      instructions per cycle from the reorder buffer. Explain which data
       dependences need to be checked at this time, and sketch the dependence¬
       checking hardware.
P4.14 Four-wide superscalar processors rarely sustain throughput much
       greater than one instruction per cycle (IPC). Despite this fact, explain
       why four-wide retirement is still useful in such a processor.
P4.15 Most general-purpose instruction sets have recently added multimedia
      extensions to support vector-like operations over arrays of small data
      types. For example, Intel IA32 has added the MMX and SSE instruction
      set extensions for this purpose. A single multimedia instruction will load,
       say, eight 8-bit operands into a 64-bit register in parallel, while arithmetic
       instructions will perform the same operation on all eight operands in
       single-instruction, multiple data (SIMD) fashion. Describe the changes
       you would have to make to the fetch, decode, dispatch, issue, execute,
       and retire logic of a typical superscalar processor to accommodate these
       instructions.

P4.16 The PowerPC instruction set provides support for a fused floating¬
      point multiply-add operation that multiplies two of its input registers
      and adds the product to the third input register. Explain how the addition
      of such an instruction complicates the decode, dispatch, issue, and exe¬
      cute stages of a typical superscalar processor. What effect do you think
      these changes will have on the processor’s cycle time?
P4.17 The semantics of the fused multiply-add instruction described in
      Problem 4.16 can be mimicked by issuing a separate floating-point add
      and floating-point multiply whenever such an instruction is decoded.
      In fact, the MIPS R10000 does just that; rather than supporting this
      instruction (which also exists in the MIPS instruction set) directly, the

                         decoder simply inserts the add/multiply instruction pair into the execution
                         window. Identify and discuss at least two reasons why this approach
                         could reduce performance as measured in instructions per cycle.
                  P4.18 Does the ALU mix for the Motorola 88110 processor shown in Figure 4.7
                        agree with the IBM instruction mix provided in Section 2.2.4.37 If not,
                        how would you change the ALU mix?

              Terms and Buzzwords
              These problems are similar to the “Jeopardy Game” on TV. The “answers” are
              given and you are to provide the best correct “questions.” For each “answer” there
              may be more than one appropriate “question”; you need to provide the best one.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.19 A: A mechanism that tracks out-of-order execution and maintains specu¬
                        lative machine state.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.20 A: It will significantly reduce the machine cycle time, but can increase
                        the branch penalty.

                         Q: What are ?
                  P4.21 A: Additional I-cache bits generated at cache refill time to ease the
                         decoding/dispatching task.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.22 A: A program attribute that causes inefficiencies in a superscalar fetch
                         unit.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.23 A: The internal RISC-like instruction executed by the Pentium Pro (P6)
                        microarchitecture.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.24 A: The logical pipeline stage that assigns an instruction to the appropri¬
                        ate execution unit.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.25 A: An early processor design that incorporated 10 diverse functional
                         units.

                         Q: What is ?
                  P4.26 A: A new instruction that allows a scalar pipeline to achieve more than
                        one floating-point operation per cycle.

      Q: What is ?
P4.27 A: An effective technique for allowing more than one memory operation
      to be performed per cycle.

      Q: What is ?
P4.28 A: A useful architectural property that simplifies the task of writing
      low-level operating system code.

P4.29 A: The first research paper to describe run-time, hardware translation

      Q: What was ?
      of one instruction set to another, simpler one.

P4.30 A: The first real processor to implement run-time, hardware translation

      Q: What was ?
      of one instruction set to another, simpler one.

P4.31 A: This attribute of most RISC instruction sets substantially simplifies

      Q: What was ?
      the task of decoding multiple instructions in parallel.
