Foreword

 H     aving used and explored the internals of the wildly successful Windows 3.1 operat-
       ing system, I immediately recognized the world-changing nature of Windows NT 3.1
  when Microsoft released it in 1993. David Cutler, the architect and engineering leader for
  Windows NT, had created a version of Windows that was secure, reliable, and scalable,
  but with the same user interface and ability to run the same software as its older yet
  more immature sibling. Helen Custer’s book Inside Windows NT was a fantastic guide to
  its design and architecture, but I believed that there was a need for and interest in a book
  that went deeper into its working details. VAX/VMS Internals and Data Structures, the

  you could get with text, and I decided that I was going to write the Windows NT version
  of that book.

                                                                                          -
  ware company. To learn about Windows NT, I read documentation, reverse-engineered
  its code, and wrote systems monitoring tools like Regmon and Filemon that helped me
  understand the design by coding them and using them to observe the under-the-hood
  views they gave me of Windows NT’s operation. As I learned, I shared my newfound
  knowledge in a monthly “NT Internals” column in Windows NT Magazine, the magazine
  for Windows NT administrators. Those columns would serve as the basis for the chapter-
  length versions that I’d publish in Windows Internals, the book I’d contracted to write
  with IDG Press.

     My book deadlines came and went because my book writing was further slowed by
  my full-time job and time I spent writing Sysinternals (then NTInternals) freeware and
  commercial software for Winternals Software, my startup. Then, in 1996, I had a shock
  when Dave Solomon published Inside Windows NT, 2nd Edition. I found the book both
  impressive and depressing. A complete rewrite of the Helen’s book, it went deeper and
  broader into the internals of Windows NT like I was planning on doing, and it incorpo-
  rated novel labs that used built-in tools and diagnostic utilities from the Windows NT
  Resource Kit and Device Driver Development Kit (DDK) to demonstrate key concepts and
  behaviors. He’d raised the bar so high that I knew that writing a book that matched the
  quality and depth he’d achieved was even more monumental than what I had planned.

     As the saying goes, if you can’t beat them, join them. I knew Dave from the Windows
  conference speaking circuit, so within a couple of weeks of the book’s publication I
  sent him an email proposing that I join him to coauthor the next edition, which would
  document what was then called Windows NT 5 and would eventually be renamed as
Windows 2000. My contribution would be new chapters based on my NT Internals
column about topics Dave hadn’t included, and I’d also write about new labs that used
my Sysinternals tools. To sweeten the deal, I suggested including the entire collection of
Sysinternals tools on a CD that would accompany the book—a common way to distribute
software with books and magazines.

   Dave was game. First, though, he had to get approval from Microsoft. I had caused
Microsoft some public relations complications with my public revelations that Windows NT
Workstation and Windows NT Server were the same exact code with different behaviors
based on a Registry setting. And while Dave had full Windows NT source access, I didn’t,
and I wanted to keep it that way so as not to create intellectual property issues with the
software I was writing for Sysinternals or Winternals, which relied on undocumented APIs.
The timing was fortuitous because by the time Dave asked Microsoft, I’d been repairing my
relationship with key Windows engineers, and Microsoft tacitly approved.

   Writing Inside Windows 2000 with Dave was incredibly fun. Improbably and
completely coincidentally, he lived about 20 minutes from me (I lived in Danbury,
Connecticut and he lived in Sherman, Connecticut). We’d visit each other’s houses for
marathon writing sessions where we’d explore the internals of Windows together, laugh
at geeky jokes and puns, and pose technical questions that would pit him and me in
                                                                                        -
bugger, and Sysinternals tools. (Don’t rub it in if you talk to him, but I always won.)

one of the most commercially successful operating systems of all time. We brought in

Vista. Alex is among the best reverse engineers and operating systems experts in the
world, and he added both breadth and depth to the book, matching or exceeding our
high standards for legibility and detail. The increasing scope of the book, combined with
Windows itself growing with new capabilities and subsystems, resulted in the 6th Edition
exceeding the single-spine publishing limit we’d run up against with the 5th Edition, so
we split it into two volumes.

   I had already moved to Azure when writing for the sixth edition got underway, and by
the time we were ready for the seventh edition, I no longer had time to contribute to the
book. Dave Solomon had retired, and the task of updating the book became even more
challenging when Windows went from shipping every few years with a major release and
version number to just being called Windows 10 and releasing constantly with feature
and functionality upgrades. Pavel Yosifovitch stepped in to help Alex with Part 1, but he
too became busy with other projects and couldn’t contribute to Part 2. Alex was also
busy with his startup CrowdStrike, so we were unsure if there would even be a Part 2.

                                                                                  Foreword   xxi
                Fortunately, Andrea came to the rescue. He and Alex have updated a broad swath of
             the system in Part 2, including the startup and shutdown process, Registry subsystem,
             and UWP. Not just content to provide a refresh, they’ve also added three new chapters

             the Windows Internals book series being the most technically deep and accurate word on
             the inner workings on Windows, one of the most important software releases in history,
             is secure, and I’m proud to have my name still listed on the byline.

                A memorable moment in my career came when we asked David Cutler to write the
             foreword for Inside Windows 2000. Dave Solomon and I had visited Microsoft a few times
             to meet with the Windows engineers and had met David on a few of the trips. However,
             we had no idea if he’d agree, so were thrilled when he did. It’s a bit surreal to now be
             on the other side, in a similar position to his when we asked David, and I’m honored to
             be given the opportunity. I hope the endorsement my foreword represents gives you

             Cutler’s did for buyers of Inside Windows 2000.

                                                                                   Mark Russinovich

                                                                                           Microsoft

                                                                                         March 2021
                                                                               Bellevue, Washington

xxii   Foreword
