Introduction

   W      indows Internals, Seventh Edition, Part 2 is intended for advanced computer
          professionals (developers, security researchers, and system administrators) who
   want to understand how the core components of the Microsoft Windows 10 (up to and
   including the May 2021 Update, a.k.a. 21H1) and Windows Server (from Server 2016 up
   to Server 2022) operating systems work internally, including many components that are
   shared with Windows 11X and the Xbox Operating System.

      With this knowledge, developers can better comprehend the rationale behind design

   decisions to create more powerful, scalable, and secure software. They will also improve
   their skills at debugging complex problems rooted deep in the heart of the system, all

      System administrators can leverage this information as well because understand-
   ing how the operating system works “under the hood” facilitates an understanding of
   the expected performance behavior of the system. This makes troubleshooting system
   problems much easier when things go wrong and empowers the triage of critical issues
   from the mundane.

                                                                                         -
   ing system can misbehave and be misused, causing undesirable behavior, while also un-
   derstanding the mitigations and security features offered by modern Windows systems
   against such scenarios. Forensic experts can learn which data structures and mechanisms

      Whoever the reader might be, after reading this book, they will have a better under-
   standing of how Windows works and why it behaves the way it does.

History of the book
   This is the seventh edition of a book that was originally called Inside Windows NT
   (Microsoft Press, 1992), written by Helen Custer (prior to the initial release of Microsoft
   Windows NT 3.1). Inside Windows NT
   NT and provided key insights into the architecture and design of the system. Inside
   Windows NT, Second Edition (Microsoft Press, 1998) was written by David Solomon. It
   updated the original book to cover Windows NT 4.0 and had a greatly increased level of
   technical depth.

                                                                                                 xxiii
                 Inside Windows 2000, Third Edition (Microsoft Press, 2000) was authored by David
              Solomon and Mark Russinovich. It added many new topics, such as startup and shutdown,

              kernel changes in Windows 2000, such as the Windows Driver Model (WDM), Plug and
              Play, power management, Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI), encryption, the
              job object, and Terminal Services. Windows Internals, Fourth Edition (Microsoft Press, 2004)
              was the Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 update and added more content focused
              on helping IT professionals make use of their knowledge of Windows internals, such as us-
              ing key tools from Windows SysInternals and analyzing crash dumps.

                  Windows Internals, Fifth Edition (Microsoft Press, 2009) was the update for Windows
              Vista and Windows Server 2008. It saw Mark Russinovich move on to a full-time job
              at Microsoft (where he is now the Azure CTO) and the addition of a new co-author,
              Alex Ionescu. New content included the image loader, user-mode debugging facil-
              ity, Advanced Local Procedure Call (ALPC), and Hyper-V. The next release, Windows
              Internals, Sixth Edition (Microsoft Press, 2012), was fully updated to address the many
              kernel changes in Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2, with many new hands-on

        Seventh edition changes

              of allowing the authors to publish parts of the book more quickly than others (March
              2012 for Part 1, and September 2012 for Part 2). At the time, however, this split was purely
              based on page counts, with the same overall chapters returning in the same order as
              prior editions.

              brought together the Windows 8 and Windows Phone 8 kernels, and eventually incorpo-
              rated the modern application environment in Windows 8.1, Windows RT, and Windows
              Phone 8.1. The convergence story was complete with Windows 10, which runs on desk-
              tops, laptops, cell phones, servers, Xbox One, HoloLens, and various Internet of Things

                 With the seventh edition (Microsoft Press, 2017), the authors did just that, joined for

              insider” and overall book manager. Working alongside Alex Ionescu, who like Mark,
              had moved on to his own full-time job at CrowdStrike (where is now the VP of endpoint

   engineering), Pavel made the decision to refactor the book’s chapters so that the two
   parts could be more meaningfully cohesive manuscripts instead of forcing readers to
   wait for Part 2 to understand concepts introduced in Part 1. This allowed Part 1 to stand
   fully on its own, introducing readers to the key concepts of Windows 10’s system archi-
   tecture, process management, thread scheduling, memory management, I/O handling,
   plus user, data, and platform security. Part 1 covered aspects of Windows 10 up to and
   including Version 1703, the May 2017 Update, as well as Windows Server 2016.

   Changes in Part 2
   With Alex Ionescu and Mark Russinovich consumed by their full-time jobs, and Pavel

   champion. The authors are grateful to Andrea Allievi for having eventually stepped up
   to carry on the mantle and complete the series. Working with advice and guidance from

   book around and brought his own vision to the series.

      Realizing that chapters on topics such as networking and crash dump analysis were
   beyond today’s readers’ interests, Andrea instead added exciting new content around
   Hyper-V, which is now a key part of the Windows platform strategy, both on Azure and
   on client systems. This complements fully rewritten chapters on the boot process, on
   new storage technologies such as ReFS and DAX, and expansive updates on both system
   and management mechanisms, alongside the usual hands-on experiments, which have
   been fully updated to take advantage of new debugger technologies and tooling.

       The long delay between Parts 1 and 2 made it possible to make sure the book was
   fully updated to cover the latest public build of Windows 10, Version 2103 (May 2021
   Update / 21H1), including Windows Server 2019 and 2022, such that readers would not be
   “behind” after such a long gap long gap. As Windows 11 builds upon the foundation of
   the same operating system kernel, readers will be adequately prepared for this upcom-
   ing version as well.

Hands-on experiments
   Even without access to the Windows source code, you can glean much about Windows
   internals from the kernel debugger, tools from SysInternals, and the tools developed

   aspect of the internal behavior of Windows, the steps for trying the tool yourself are
   listed in special “EXPERIMENT” sections. These appear throughout the book, and we

                                                                                   Introduction   xxv
              encourage you to try them as you’re reading. Seeing visible proof of how Windows works
              internally will make much more of an impression on you than just reading about it will.

        Topics not covered
              Windows is a large and complex operating system. This book doesn’t cover everything
              relevant to Windows internals but instead focuses on the base system components. For
              example, this book doesn’t describe COM+, the Windows distributed object-oriented pro-
              gramming infrastructure, or the Microsoft .NET Framework, the foundation of managed
              code applications. Because this is an “internals” book and not a user, programming, or sys-

        A warning and a caveat
              Because this book describes undocumented behavior of the internal architecture and
              the operation of the Windows operating system (such as internal kernel structures and
              functions), this content is subject to change between releases. By “subject to change,” we
              don’t necessarily mean that details described in this book will change between releases,
              but you can’t count on them not changing. Any software that uses these undocumented
              interfaces, or insider knowledge about the operating system, might not work on future
              releases of Windows. Even worse, software that runs in kernel mode (such as device
              drivers) and uses these undocumented interfaces might experience a system crash when
              running on a newer release of Windows, resulting in potential loss of data to users of
              such software.

                 In short, you should never use any internal Windows functionality, registry key,
              behavior, API, or other undocumented detail mentioned in this book during the devel-
              opment of any kind of software designed for end-user systems or for any other purpose
              other than research and documentation. Always check with the Microsoft Software

        Assumptions about you
              The book assumes the reader is comfortable with working on Windows at a power-user
              level and has a basic understanding of operating system and hardware concepts, such as
              CPU registers, memory, processes, and threads. Basic understanding of functions, point-

Organization of this book
   The book is divided into two parts (as was the sixth edition), the second of which you’re
   holding in your hands.

      ■   Chapter 8, “System mechanisms,” provides information about the important
          internal mechanisms that the operating system uses to provide key services to
          device drivers and applications, such as ALPC, the Object Manager, and synchro-
          nization routines. It also includes details about the hardware architecture that
          Windows runs on, including trap processing, segmentation, and side channel
          vulnerabilities, as well as the mitigations required to address them.

      ■   Chapter 9, “Virtualization technologies,” describes how the Windows OS uses the
          virtualization technologies exposed by modern processors to allow users to cre-
          ate and use multiple virtual machines on the same system. Virtualization is also
          extensively used by Windows to provide a new level of security. Thus, the Secure
          Kernel and Isolated User Mode are extensively discussed in this chapter.

      ■   Chapter 10, “Management, diagnostics, and tracing,” details the fundamental
                                                                                         -
          tion, and diagnostics. In particular, the Windows registry, Windows services, WMI,
          and Task Scheduling are introduced along with diagnostics services like Event
          Tracing for Windows (ETW) and DTrace.

      ■

                                                                                               -
          ports, with particular detail on NTFS and ReFS.

      ■

          when the system starts and shuts down, and the operating system components

          brought on by UEFI, such as Secure Boot, Measured Boot, and Secure Launch.

Conventions
   The following conventions are used in this book:

      ■   Boldface type is used to indicate text that you type as well as interface items that
          you are instructed to click or buttons that you are instructed to press.

                                                                                   Introduction    xxvii
                    ■   Italic type is used to indicate new terms.

                    ■   Code elements appear in italics or in a monospaced font, depending on context.

                    ■                                                                                     -
                        talized—for example, the Save As dialog box.

                    ■   Keyboard shortcuts are indicated by a plus sign (+) separating the key names. For
                        example, Ctrl+Alt+Delete means that you press the Ctrl, Alt, and Delete keys at
                        the same time.

          About the companion content
                We have included companion content to enrich your learning experience. You can down-
                load the companion content for this book from the following page:

                   MicrosoftPressStore.com/WindowsInternals7ePart2/downloads

          Acknowledgments
                The book contains complex technical details, as well as their reasoning, which are often
                hard to describe and understand from an outsider’s perspective. Throughout its history,

                to provide access to the vast swath of knowledge that exists within the company and
                the rich development history behind the Windows operating system. For this Seventh
                Edition, Part 2, the authors are grateful to Andrea Allievi for having joined as a main
                author and having helped spearhead most of the book and its updated content.

                    Apart from Andrea, this book wouldn’t contain the depth of technical detail or the
                level of accuracy it has without the review, input, and support of key members of the
                Windows development team, other experts at Microsoft, and other trusted colleagues,
                friends, and experts in their own domains.

                    It is worth noting that the newly written Chapter 9, “Virtualization technologies”
                wouldn’t have been so complete and detailed without the help of Alexander Grest and
                Jon Lange, who are world-class subject experts and deserve a special thanks, in particu-
                lar for the days that they spent helping Andrea understand the inner details of the most
                obscure features of the hypervisor and the Secure Kernel.

       Alex would like to particularly bring special thanks to Arun Kishan, Mehmet Iyigun,
   David Weston, and Andy Luhrs, who continue to be advocates for the book and Alex’s
   inside access to people and information to increase the accuracy and completeness
   of the book.

      Furthermore, we want to thank the following people, who provided technical
   review and/or input to the book or were simply a source of support and help to the
   authors: Saar Amar, Craig Barkhouse, Michelle Bergeron, Joe Bialek, Kevin Broas, Omar
   Carey, Neal Christiansen, Chris Fernald, Stephen Finnigan, Elia Florio, James Forshaw,
   Andrew Harper, Ben Hillis, Howard Kapustein, Saruhan Karademir, Chris Kleynhans,
   John Lambert, Attilio Mainetti, Bill Messmer, Matt Miller, Jake Oshins, Simon Pope,

   Matthew Woolman, and Adam Zabrocki.

      We continue to thank Ilfak Guilfanov of Hex-Rays (http://www.hex-rays.com) for
   the IDA Pro Advanced and Hex-Rays licenses granted to Alex Ionescu, including most
   recently a lifetime license, which is an invaluable tool for speeding up the reverse engi-
   neering of the Windows kernel. The Hex-Rays team continues to support Alex’s research
   and builds relevant new decompiler features in every release, which make writing a book
   such as this possible without source code access.

      Finally, the authors would like to thank the great staff at Microsoft Press (Pearson)
   who have been behind turning this book into a reality. Loretta Yates, Charvi Arora, and
   their support staff all deserve a special mention for their unlimited patience from turning
   a contract signed in 2018 into an actual book two and a half years later.

Errata and book support
   We’ve made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this book and its companion content.
   You can access updates to this book—in the form of a list of submitted errata and their
   related corrections at

      MicrosoftPressStore.com/WindowsInternals7ePart2/errata

     If you discover an error that is not already listed, please submit it to us at the
   same page.

      For additional book support and information, please visit

      http://www.MicrosoftPressStore.com/Support.

                                                                                      Introduction   xxix
                Please note that product support for Microsoft software and hardware is not offered
             through the previous addresses. For help with Microsoft software or hardware, go to

                http://support.microsoft.com.

       Stay in touch
             Let’s keep the conversation going! We’re on Twitter: @MicrosoftPress.

