CHAPTER 8

System mechanisms

  T he Windows operating system provides several base mechanisms that kernel-mode components
    such as the executive, the kernel, and device drivers use. This chapter explains the following system
  mechanisms and describes how they are used:

     ■   Processor execution model, including ring levels, segmentation, task states, trap dispatching,
         including interrupts, deferred procedure calls (DPCs), asynchronous procedure calls (APCs),
         timers, system worker threads, exception dispatching, and system service dispatching

     ■   Speculative execution barriers and other software-side channel mitigations

     ■   The executive Object Manager

     ■   Synchronization, including spinlocks, kernel dispatcher objects, wait dispatching, and user-

         and slim reader-writer (SRW) locks

     ■   Advanced Local Procedure Call (ALPC) subsystem

     ■

     ■   WoW64

     ■   User-mode debugging framework

    Additionally, this chapter also includes detailed information on the Universal Windows Platform
  (UWP) and the set of user-mode and kernel-mode services that power it, such as the following:

     ■   Packaged Applications and the AppX Deployment Service

     ■   Centennial Applications and the Windows Desktop Bridge

     ■   Process State Management (PSM) and the Process Lifetime Manager (PLM)

     ■   Host Activity Moderator (HAM) and Background Activity Moderator (BAM)

Processor execution model
    This section takes a deep look at the internal mechanics of Intel i386–based processor architecture and
    its extension, the AMD64-based architecture used on modern systems. Although the two respective

      We discuss concepts such as segmentation, tasks, and ring levels, which are critical mechanisms, and
    we discuss the concept of traps, interrupts, and system calls.

    Segmentation
    High-level programming languages such as C/C++ and Rust are compiled down to machine-level code,
    often called assembler or assembly code. In this low-level language, processor registers are accessed
    directly, and there are often three primary types of registers that programs access (which are visible
    when debugging code):

       ■   The Program Counter (PC), which in x86/x64 architecture is called the Instruction Pointer (IP)
           and is represented by the EIP (x86) and RIP (x64) register. This register always points to the line
           of assembly code that is executing (except for certain 32-bit ARM architectures).

       ■   The Stack Pointer (SP), which is represented by the ESP (x86) and RSP (x64) register. This register
           points to the location in memory that is holding the current stack location.

       ■   Other General Purpose Registers (GPRs) include registers such as EAX/RAX, ECX/RCX, EDX/RDX,
           ESI/RSI and R8, R14, just to name a few examples.

       Although these registers can contain address values that point to memory, additional registers
    are involved when accessing these memory locations as part of a mechanism called protected mode
    segmentation. This works by checking against various segment registers, also called selectors:

       ■

           segment (CS) register.

       ■

           segment (SS) register.

       ■   Accesses to other registers are determined by a segment override, which encoding can be used

       These selectors live in 16-bit segment registers and are looked up in a data structure called the
    Global Descriptor Table (GDT). To locate the GDT, the processor uses yet another CPU register, the GDT

                                Table       Ring
          28-bit Offset         Indicator   Level
                                (TI)        (0-3)

FIGURE 8-1

   The offset located in the segment selector is thus looked up in the GDT, unless the TI bit is set, in
which case a different structure, the Local Descriptor Table
register instead and is not used anymore in the modern Windows OS. The result is in a segment entry

This entry, called segment descriptor in modern operating systems, serves two critical purposes:

   ■                                      ring level, also called the Code Privilege Level (CPL) at which
       code running with this segment selector loaded will execute. This ring level, which can be from

       Operating systems such as Windows use Ring 0 to run kernel mode components and drivers,
       and Ring 3 to run applications and services.

                                                                                        Long Mode or
        Compatibility Mode segment. The former is used to allow the native execution of x64 code,
        whereas the latter activates legacy compatibility with x86. A similar mechanism exists on x86
        systems, where a segment can be marked as a 16-bit segment or a 32-bit segment.

   ■                                                                    Descriptor Privilege Level (DPL),
                                                                                                            -
       ern systems, the processor still enforces (and applications still expect) this to be set up correctly.

                                                                     base address, which will add that value
to any value already loaded in a register that is referencing this segment with an override. A correspond-
ing segment limit

   ■                                                                                                        -

       at the current swap state                                    swapgs instruction, and load either

        at the appropriate offset, which is limited to a 32-bit base address only. This is done for compat-
        ibility reasons with certain operating systems, and the limit is ignored.

   ■   If the Code Segment is a Compatibility Mode segment, then read the base address as normal
       from the appropriate GDT entry (or LDT entry if the TI bit is set). The limit is enforced and vali-
       dated against the offset in the register following the segment override.

    to achieve a sort of thread-local register

                                                                                                           -

       Therefore, segmentation is used to achieve these two effects on Windows—encode and enforce the
    level of privilege that a piece of code can execute with at the processor level and provide direct access to

    since the GDT is pointed to by a CPU register—the GDTR—each CPU can have its own GDT. In fact, this is

    that the TEB of the currently executing thread on the current processor is equally present in its segment.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing the GDT on an x64 system
       You can view the contents of the GDT, including the state of all segments and their base addresses
       (when relevant) by using the dg debugger command, if you are doing remote debugging or

       starting segment and the ending segment, which will be 10 and 50 in this example:
       0: kd> dg 10 50
                                                           P Si Gr Pr Lo
       Sel        Base              Limit          Type    l ze an es ng Flags
       ---- ----------------- ----------------- ---------- - -- -- -- -- --------
       0010 00000000`00000000 00000000`00000000 Code RE Ac 0 Nb By P Lo 0000029b
       0018 00000000`00000000 00000000`00000000 Data RW Ac 0 Bg By P Nl 00000493
       0020 00000000`00000000 00000000`ffffffff Code RE Ac 3 Bg Pg P Nl 00000cfb
       0028 00000000`00000000 00000000`ffffffff Data RW Ac 3 Bg Pg P Nl 00000cf3
       0030 00000000`00000000 00000000`00000000 Code RE Ac 3 Nb By P Lo 000002fb
       0050 00000000`00000000 00000000`00003c00 Data RW Ac 3 Bg By P Nl 000004f3

           The key segments here are 10h, 18h, 20h, 28h, 30h, and 50h. (This output was cleaned up a bit
       to remove entries that are not relevant to this discussion.)

       the number 0 under the Pl column , the letters “Lo” under the Long column, and the type being

       compatibility mode), which is the segment used for executing x86 code under the WoW64 sub-

       the stack, data, and extended segment.

address of the TEB will be stored when running under compatibility mode, as was explained earlier.

which can be done with the following commands if you are doing local or remote kernel debug-
ging (these commands will not work with a crash dump):
lkd> rdmsr c0000101
msr[c0000101] = ffffb401`a3b80000

lkd> rdmsr c0000102
msr[c0000102] = 000000e5`6dbe9000

  You can compare these values with those of @$pcr and @$teb, which should show you the
same values, as below:
lkd> dx -r0 @$pcr
@$pcr                   : 0xffffb401a3b80000 [Type: _KPCR *]

lkd> dx -r0 @$teb
@$teb                   : 0xe56dbe9000 [Type: _TEB *]

EXPERIMENT: Viewing the GDT on an x86 system
On an x86 system, the GDT is laid out with similar segments, but at different selectors, addition-
                                                       swapgs functionality, and due to the lack of
Long Mode, the number of selectors is a little different, as you can see here:
kd> dg 8 38
                                  P Si Gr Pr Lo
Sel    Base     Limit     Type    l ze an es ng Flags
---- -------- -------- ---------- - -- -- -- -- --------
0008 00000000 ffffffff Code RE Ac 0 Bg Pg P Nl 00000c9b
0010 00000000 ffffffff Data RW Ac 0 Bg Pg P Nl 00000c93
0018 00000000 ffffffff Code RE    3 Bg Pg P Nl 00000cfa
0020 00000000 ffffffff Data RW Ac 3 Bg Pg P Nl 00000cf3
0030 80a9e000 00006020 Data RW Ac 0 Bg By P Nl 00000493
0038 00000000 00000fff Data RW    3 Bg By P Nl 000004f2

data, and extended segment.

                                                                                                -

for segmentation on these systems.

    Lazy segment loading
    Based on the description and values of the segments described earlier, it may be surprising to investi-

    the following segments:

    CS = 1Bh (18h | 3)

    ES, DS = 23 (20h | 3)

       Yet, during a system call in Ring 0, the following segments would be found:

    CS = 08h (08h | 0)

    ES, DS = 23 (20h | 3)

       Similarly, an x64 thread executing in kernel mode would also have its ES and DS segments set to 2Bh
    (28h | 3). This discrepancy is due to a feature known as lazy segment loading                        -
    lessness of the Descriptor Privilege Level (DPL) of a data segment when the current Code Privilege Level

    access data of a lower DPL—but not the contrary—setting DS and/or ES to their “proper” values upon
    entering the kernel would also require restoring them when returning to user mode.

                                                                                                      -
    ing costs to system call and interrupt handling. As such, Windows always uses the Ring 3 data segment
    values, avoiding these associated costs.

    Task state segments
    Other than the code and data segment registers, there is an additional special register on both x86 and
    x64 architectures: the Task Register (TR), which is also another 16-bit selector that acts as an offset in
    the GDT. In this case, however, the segment entry is not associated with code or data, but rather with
    a task
    is called the Task State—in the case of Windows, the current thread. These task states, represented
    by segments (Task State Segment, or TSS), are used in modern x86 operating systems to construct a

    section). At minimum, a TSS represents a page directory (through the CR3 register), such as a PML4 on
    x64 systems (see Part 1, Chapter 5, “Memory management,” for more information on paging), a Code
    Segment, a Stack Segment, an Instruction Pointer, and up to four Stack Pointers (one for each ring
    level). Such TSSs are used in the following scenarios:

       ■

           used by the processor to correctly handle interrupts and exceptions by loading the Ring 0 stack
           from the TSS if the processor was currently running in Ring 3.

   ■

       requires a dedicated TSS with a custom debug fault handler and kernel stack.

   ■

   ■

       occurs. Similarly, this is used to load the NMI handler on a safe kernel stack.

   ■

       the same reasons, can run on a dedicated, safe, kernel stack.

On x64 systems, the ability to have multiple TSSs was removed because the functionality had been
relegated to mostly this one need of executing trap handlers that run on a dedicated kernel stack. As
such, only a single TSS is now used (in the case of Windows, at 040h), which now has an array of eight
possible stack pointers, called the Interrupt Stack Table (IST). Each of the preceding traps is now associ-
ated with an IST Index instead of a custom TSS. In the next section, as we dump a few IDT entries, you
will see the difference between x86 and x64 systems and their handling of these traps.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the TSSs on an x86 system
   On an x86 system, we can look at the system-wide TSS at 28h by using the same dg command
   utilized earlier:
   kd> dg 28 28
                                     P Si Gr Pr Lo
   Sel    Base     Limit     Type    l ze an es ng Flags
   ---- -------- -------- ---------- - -- -- -- -- --------
   0028 8116e400 000020ab TSS32 Busy 0 Nb By P Nl 0000008b

   the dx or dt commands:
   kd> dx (nt!_KTSS*)0x8116e400
   (nt!_KTSS*)0x8116e400                     : 0x8116e400 [Type: _KTSS *]
       [+0x000] Backlink             : 0x0 [Type: unsigned short]
       [+0x002] Reserved0            : 0x0 [Type: unsigned short]
       [+0x004] Esp0                 : 0x81174000 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x008] Ss0                  : 0x10 [Type: unsigned short]

                                                                        Esp0 and Ss0
   Windows never uses hardware-based task switching outside of the trap conditions described
   earlier. As such, the only use for this particular TSS is to load the appropriate kernel stack during
   a hardware interrupt.

    “Meltdown” architectural processor vulnerability, this stack pointer will be the kernel stack

    whereas on systems that are vulnerable, this will point to the transition stack inside of the

                                                                                                    dg
    to look at it:
    kd> dg a0 a0
                                      P Si Gr Pr Lo
    Sel    Base     Limit     Type    l ze an es ng Flags
    ---- -------- -------- ---------- - -- -- -- -- --------
    00A0 81170590 00000067 TSS32 Avl 0 Nb By P Nl 00000089

                                         .tss command instead of dx, which will format the various

    case, the input parameter is the task selector (A0h).
    kd> .tss a0

    eax=00000000 ebx=00000000 ecx=00000000 edx=00000000 esi=00000000 edi=00000000
    eip=81e1a718 esp=820f5470 ebp=00000000 iopl=0         nv up di pl nz na po nc
    cs=0008 ss=0010 ds=0023 es=0023 fs=0030 gs=0000                  efl=00000000

    hal!HalpMcaExceptionHandlerWrapper:
    81e1a718 fa              cli

       Note how the segment registers are set up as described in the “Lazy segment loading” section

                                                   .tss
    Directory. In the “Trap dispatching” section, we revisit this TSS when using the !idt command.

    EXPERIMENT: Viewing the TSS and the IST on an x64 system
    On an x64 system, the dg command unfortunately has a bug that does not correctly show 64-bit
    segment base addresses, so obtaining the TSS segment (40h) base address requires dumping
    what appear to be two segments, and combining the high, middle, and low base address bytes:
    0: kd> dg 40 48
                                                        P Si Gr Pr Lo
    Sel        Base              Limit          Type    l ze an es ng Flags
    ---- ----------------- ----------------- ---------- - -- -- -- -- --------
    0040 00000000`7074d000 00000000`00000067 TSS32 Busy 0 Nb By P Nl 0000008b
    0048 00000000`0000ffff 00000000`0000f802 <Reserved> 0 Nb By Np Nl 00000000

                                                    0xFFFFF8027074D000. To showcase yet another
                                                                            TssBase, which con-

      0: kd> dx @$pcr->TssBase
      @$pcr->TssBase                   : 0xfffff8027074d000 [Type: _KTSS64 *]
          [+0x000] Reserved0           : 0x0 [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x004] Rsp0                : 0xfffff80270757c90 [Type: unsigned __int64]

                                            RSP0, which, similarly to x86, contains the address of the
      kernel stack for the current thread (on systems without the “Meltdown” hardware vulnerability)
      or the address of the transition stack in the Processor Descriptor Area.

         On the system on which this experiment was done, a 10th Generation Intel processor was
      used; therefore, RSP0 is the current kernel stack:
      0: kd> dx @$thread->Tcb.InitialStack
      @$thread->Tcb.InitialStack : 0xfffff80270757c90 [Type: void *]

                                                                                                    -

      the Interrupt Dispatch Table (IDT) references these stacks:
      0: kd> dx @$pcr->TssBase->Ist
      @$pcr->TssBase->Ist     [Type: unsigned __int64 [8]]
          [0]              : 0x0 [Type: unsigned __int64]
          [1]              : 0xfffff80270768000 [Type: unsigned __int64]
          [2]              : 0xfffff8027076c000 [Type: unsigned __int64]
          [3]              : 0xfffff8027076a000 [Type: unsigned __int64]
          [4]              : 0xfffff8027076e000 [Type: unsigned __int64]

      Now that the relationship between ring level, code execution, and some of the key segments in the

   segments (and their ring level) in the upcoming section on trap dispatching. Before discussing trap

   the Meltdown hardware side-channels attack.

Hardware side-channel vulnerabilities
   Modern CPUs can compute and move data between their internal registers very quickly (in the order

   instruct the CPU to move data from the CPU registers into the main memory and vice versa. There
   are different kinds of memory that are accessible from the main CPU. Memory located inside the CPU
   package and accessible directly from the CPU execution engine is called cache and has the character-
   istic of being fast and expensive. Memory that is accessible from the CPU through an external bus is
   usually the RAM (Random Access Memory) and has the characteristic of being slower, cheaper, and big

     on memories of different speeds and sizes (the more memory is closer to the CPU, the more memory is
                                                                                                             -
     ferent levels of fast cache memory, which is directly accessible by the execution engine of each physical

                                                                                                            -
     cessors, the L3 cache usually does not exist).

        CPU

                                                L2 Cache
                                   L1 Cache
                    Core 1
                   Registers

                                                              L3 Cache
                                                L2 Cache                                   SSD
                                   L1 Cache

                    Core 2
                   Registers
                                                           Shared

          Size:     ~ 2KB         64 KB       256 KB        2 - 32 KB     8 -128 KB    128 GB - 2 TB
          Speed:    250 ps         1 ns       3 - 10 ns    10 + 20 ns    50 - 100 ns    50 - 100 µs

     FIGURE 8-2 Caches and storage memory of modern CPUs and their average size and access time.

     though it is still slower). Access time to the main memory is instead a hundred times slower. This means
     that in case the CPU executes all the instructions in order, many times there would be huge slowdowns
     due to instructions accessing data located in the main memory. To overcome this problem, modern
     CPUs implement various strategies. Historically, those strategies have led to the discovery of side-chan-
     nel attacks (also known as speculative attacks), which have been proven to be very effective against the
     overall security of the end-user systems.

        To correctly describe side-channel hardware attacks and how Windows mitigates them, we should
     discuss some basic concepts regarding how the CPU works internally.

     Out-of-order execution
     A modern microprocessor executes machine instructions thanks to its pipeline. The pipeline contains
     many stages, including instruction fetch, decoding, register allocation and renaming, instructions
     reordering, execution, and retirement. A common strategy used by the CPUs to bypass the memory
     slowdown problem is the capability of their execution engine to execute instructions out of order as
     soon as the required resources are available. This means that the CPU does not execute the instructions
     in a strictly sequential order, maximizing the utilization of all the execution units of the CPU core as
     exhaustive as possible. A modern processor can execute hundreds of instructions speculatively before
     it is certain that those instructions will be needed and committed (retired).

       One problem of the described out-of-order execution regards branch instructions. A conditional
                                                                                                     -
     pends on the previously executed instructions. When calculating the condition depends on previous

instructions that access slow RAM memory, there can be slowdowns. In that case, the execution engine

memory bus to complete the memory access) before being able to continue in the out-of-order execu-
tion of the following instructions belonging to the correct path. A similar problem happens in the case
of indirect branches. In this case, the execution engine of the CPU does not know the target of a branch
(usually a jump or a call) because the address must be fetched from the main memory. In this context,
the term speculative execution                                                                          -
tions in parallel or in an out-of-order way, but the results are not retired into permanent registers, and

The CPU branch predictor
How does the CPU know which branch (path) should be executed before the branch condition has
been completely evaluated? (The issue is similar with indirect branches, where the target address is
not known). The answer lies in two components located in the CPU package: the branch predictor and
the branch target predictor.

   The branch predictor is a complex digital circuit of a CPU that tries to guess which path a branch

that tries to predict the target of indirect branches before it is known. While the actual hardware imple-
mentation heavily depends on the CPU manufacturer, the two components both use an internal cache
called Branch Target Buffer (BTB), which records the target address of branches (or information about
what the conditional branch has previously done in the past) using an address tag generated through
an indexing function, similar to how the cache generates the tag, as explained in the next section. The

time, the execution pipeline is stalled, forcing the CPU to wait for the condition or target address to be
fetched from the main memory. The second time the same branch is executed, the target address in

of an example branch target predictor.

                                                                Branch Target Buffer

                                                           Idx Address Tag      Target
 Virtual address: 0xFFFF AAAA9F43AA17

                                                           12    9F43AA17    0x9F528092

                                         F(Addr)

                                         Indexing
                                         Function

FIGURE 8-3 The scheme of a sample CPU branch predictor.

   In case the prediction was wrong, and the wrong path was executed speculatively, then the instruc-

fed into the CPU pipeline and the execution restarts from the correct branch. This case is called branch

     misprediction. The total number of wasted CPU cycles is not worse than an in-order execution wait-
     ing for the result of a branch condition or indirect address evaluation. However, different side effects
     of the speculative execution can still happen in the CPU, like the pollution of the CPU cache lines.
     Unfortunately, some of these side effects can be measured and exploited by attackers, compromising
     the overall security of the system.

     The CPU cache(s)
     As introduced in the previous section, the CPU cache is a fast memory that reduces the time needed for

     sizes (usually 64 or 128 bytes) called lines or cache blocks. When a cache line is copied from memory
     into the cache, a cache entry is created. The cache entry will include the copied data as well as a tag
     identifying the requested memory location. Unlike the branch target predictor, the cache is always in-
     dexed through physical addresses (otherwise, it would be complex to deal with multiple mappings and

     Whereas the higher bits usually represent the tag, the lower bits represent the cache line and the offset
     into the line. A tag is used to uniquely identify which memory address the cache block belongs to, as

     cache (in any cache lines that might contain data from that address. Some caches have different ways
                                                                                                            -
     cation is in the cache, a cache hit has occurred, and the processor immediately reads or writes the data
     from/in the cache line. Otherwise, a cache miss has occurred. In this case, the CPU allocates a new entry
     in the cache and copies data from main memory before accessing it.

                  48-bits one-way 256 blocks CACHE                             Block size: 256 byte
                                      0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 A0 B0 C0 D0 E0 F0     TAG
                                  0
                                 10
                                 20
                                 30
                                 40                                                                        CPU
                                 50
                                 60             DATA                                   0x019F56
                                 70
                                                                                                       Physical Address
                  0x019F566030

                                 80
                                 90
                                                                                                      0x00019F56 60 30
                                 A0
                                 B0
                                 C0
                                 D0
                                 E0
                                 F0
     RAM Memory

     FIGURE 8-4 A sample 48-bit one-way CPU cache.

     of virtual address space. In the sample, the CPU is reading 48 bytes of data located at virtual address

   In a similar way, when the CPU is instructed to write some new content to a memory address, it

data back to the physical RAM as well, depending on the caching type (write-back, write-through,
uncached, and so on) applied to the memory page. (Note that this has an important implication in
multiprocessor systems: A cache coherency protocol must be designed to prevent situations in which
another CPU will operate on stale data after the main CPU has updated a cache block. (Multiple CPU
cache coherency algorithms exist and are not covered in this book.)

   To make room for new entries on cache misses, the CPU sometime should evict one of the existing
cache blocks. The algorithm the cache uses to choose which entry to evict (which means which block
will host the new data) is called the placement policy. If the placement policy can replace only one block
for a particular virtual address, the cache is called direct mapped
way and is direct mapped). Otherwise, if the cache is free to choose any entry (with the same block
number) to hold the new data, the cache is called fully associative. Many caches implement a compro-
mise in which each entry in main memory can go to any one of N places in the cache and are described
as N-ways set associative. A way is thus a subdivision of a cache, with each way being of equal size and

can store data belonging to four different physical addresses indexing the same cache block (with dif-
ferent tags) in four different cache sets.

                         Offset
Line
                       Data RAM                Tag RAM

Index

    Set
                                  Way                    Tag

FIGURE 8-5 A four-way set associative cache.

Side-channel attacks
As discussed in the previous sections, the execution engine of modern CPUs does not write the result of
the computation until the instructions are actually retired. This means that, although multiple instruc-
tions are executed out of order and do not have any visible architectural effects on CPU registers and
memory, they have microarchitectural side effects, especially on the CPU cache. At the end of the year

     2017, novel attacks were demonstrated against the CPU out-of-order engines and their branch predic-
     tors. These attacks relied on the fact that microarchitectural side effects can be measured, even though
     they are not directly accessible by any software code.

       The two most destructive and effective hardware side-channel attacks were named Meltdown
     and Spectre.

     Meltdown
     Meltdown (which has been later called Rogue Data Cache load, or RDCL) allowed a malicious user-
     mode process to read all memory, even kernel memory, when it was not authorized to do so. The at-
     tack exploited the out-of-order execution engine of the processor and an inner race condition between
     the memory access and privilege check during a memory access instruction processing.

                                                                                                            -
     tions that do so are callable from user mode). The process then executes an illegal kernel memory
                                                                                    probe array). The process
     cannot access the kernel memory, so an exception is generated by the processor. The exception is
     caught by the application. Otherwise, it would result in the termination of the process. However, due to
     the out-of-order execution, the CPU has already executed (but not retired, meaning that no architec-
     tural effects are observable in any CPU registers or RAM) the instructions following the illegal memory

           The malicious application then probes the entire cache by measuring the time needed to access each

     which is taken from the original Meltdown research paper (available at the https://meltdownattack.com/

                   500
     Access time
       (cycles)

                   400
                   300
                   200
                         0     50       100          150   200   250
                                              Page

     FIGURE 8-6 CPU time employed for accessing a 1 MB probe array.

     data can be read one byte per time and one byte can have only 256 values, knowing the exact page in
     the array that led to a cache hit allows the attacker to know which byte is stored in the kernel memory.

     Spectre

     explained in the previous section, but the main CPU components exploited by Spectre are the branch
     predictor and branch target predictor. Two variants of the Spectre attack were initially presented.
     Both are summarized by three phases:

   1.   In the setup phase, from a low-privileged process (which is attacker-controlled), the attacker
        performs multiple repetitive operations that mistrain the CPU branch predictor. The goal is to

        indirect branch.

   2.   In the second phase, the attacker forces a victim high-privileged application (or the same pro-
        cess) to speculatively execute instructions that are part of a mispredicted branch. Those instruc-

        channel (usually the CPU cache).

   3.                                                                                                 -
        tion stored in the CPU cache (microarchitectural channel) by probing the entire cache (the same
        methods employed in the Meltdown attack). This reveals secrets that should be secured in the
        victim high-privileged address space.

(which can be the same or different than the address space that the attacker controls), by forcing the CPU
branch predictor to execute the wrong branch of a conditional branch speculatively. The branch is usu-
ally part of a function that performs a bound check before accessing some nonsecret data contained
in a memory buffer. If the buffer is located adjacent to some secret data, and if the attacker controls
the offset supplied to the branch condition, she can repetitively train the branch predictor supplying

that implements the bound check branch. The CPU branch predictor is trained to always follow the
initial legit path. However, this time, the path would be wrong (the other should be taken). The instruc-
tions accessing the memory buffer are thus speculatively executed and result in a read outside the
boundaries, which targets the secret data. The attacker can thus read back the secrets by probing the
entire cache (similar to the Meltdown attack).

   The second variant of Spectre exploits the CPU branch target predictor; indirect branches can be
poisoned by an attacker. The mispredicted path of an indirect branch can be used to read arbitrary
memory of a victim process (or the OS kernel) from an attacker-controlled context. As shown in
                                                                                                           -
ing the CPU to build enough information in the BTB to speculatively execute instructions located at
an address chosen by the attacker. In the victim address space, that address should point to a gad-
get. A gadget is a group of instructions that access a secret and store it in a buffer that is cached in a
controlled way (the attacker needs to indirectly control the content of one or more CPU registers in the
victim, which is a common case when an API accepts untrusted input data).

a service provided by the target higher-privileged entity (a process or the OS kernel). The code that
implements the service must implement similar indirect branches as the attacker-controlled process.
The CPU branch target predictor in this case speculatively executes the gadget located at the wrong
target address. This, as for Variant 1 and Meltdown, creates microarchitectural side effects in the CPU
cache, which can be read from the low-privileged context.

                      kernelbase.dll                                         kernelbase.dll
        0x105F0 + ∆    _imp_NtSetEvent:                        0x105F0 + Ω    _imp_NtSetEvent:
                          dl @ntdll!gadget                                       dl @ntdll!NtSetEvent

        0x110BC + ∆    SetEvent:                               0x110BC + Ω    SetEvent:
                          call [_imp_NtSetEvent]                                 call [_imp_NtSetEvent]

       CALL                                           CPU                                              Speculate
                      ntdll.dll                                              ntdll.dll
       0x2147A + ∆     gadget:                     CPU Branch 0x2147A + Ω     gadget:
                          ret                       Predictor                    mov eax, array$[esp-4]
                                                                                 mov d1, [eax+ecx*4]
                                                                                 mov eax, _array2$[esp-4]

       0x24026 + ∆     NtSetEvent:                             0x24026 + Ω    NtSetEvent:
                          mov      eax,0Eh                                       mov      eax,0Eh
                          sysenter                                               sysenter

                              Attacker process                                            Victim process
                               (low privileged)                                          (high privileged)

     FIGURE 8-7 A scheme of Spectre attack Variant 2.

     Other side-channel attacks
     After Spectre and Meltdown attacks were originally publicly released, multiple similar side-channel
     hardware attacks were discovered. Even though they were less destructive and effective compared to
     Meltdown and Spectre, it is important to at least understand the overall methodology of those new
     side-channel attacks.

        Speculative store bypass (SSB) arises due to a CPU optimization that can allow a load instruction,
     which the CPU evaluated not to be dependent on a previous store, to be speculatively executed before
     the results of the store are retired. If the prediction is not correct, this can result in the load operation
     reading stale data, which can potentially store secrets. The data can be forwarded to other operations
     executed during speculation. Those operations can access memory and generate microarchitectural
     side effects (usually in the CPU cache). An attacker can thus measure the side effects and recover the
     secret value.

        The Foreshadow (also known as L1TF) is a more severe attack that was originally designed for
     stealing secrets from a hardware enclave (SGX) and then generalized also for normal user-mode

     speculative execution engine of modern CPUs. In particular:

        ■     Speculation on inaccessible virtual memory. In this scenario, when the CPU accesses some data
              stored at a virtual address described by a Page table entry (PTE) that does not include the pres-
              ent bit (meaning that the address is is not valid) an exception is correctly generated. However,
              if the entry contains a valid address translation, the CPU can speculatively execute the instruc-
              tions that depend on the read data. As for all the other side-channel attacks, those instructions
              are not retired by the processor, but they produce measurable side effects. In this scenario, a
              user-mode application would be able to read secret data stored in kernel memory. More seri-
              ously, the application, under certain circumstances, would also be able to read data belonging

       to another virtual machine: when the CPU encounters a nonpresent entry in the Second Level
       Address Translation table (SLAT) while translating a guest physical address (GPA), the same side
       effects can happen. (More information on the SLAT, GPAs, and translation mechanisms are pres-
       ent in Chapter 5 of Part 1 and in Chapter 9, “Virtualization technologies”).

   ■

       more than one execution pipeline per physical core, which can execute in an out-of-order way
       multiple instruction streams using a single shared execution engine (this is Symmetric multi-
       threading, or SMT, as explained later in Chapter 9.) In those processors, two logical processors
       (LPs) share a single cache. Thus, while an LP is executing some code in a high-privileged context,
       the other sibling LP can read the side effects produced by the high-privileged code executed
       by the other LP. This has very severe effects on the global security posture of a system. Similar to

       even spoil secrets stored in another high-security virtual-machine just by waiting for the virtual

       is part of the Group 4 vulnerabilities.

   Microarchitectural side effects are not always targeting the CPU cache. Intel CPUs use other
intermediate high-speed buffers with the goal to better access cached and noncached memory
and reorder micro-instructions. (Describing all those buffers is outside the scope of this book.) The
Microarchitectural Data Sampling (MDS) group of attacks exposes secrets data located in the following
microarchitectural structures:

   ■   Store buffers While performing store operations, processors write data into an internal tem-
       porary microarchitectural structure called store buffer, enabling the CPU to continue to execute
       instructions before the data is actually written in the cache or main memory (for noncached
       memory access). When a load operation reads data from the same memory address as an ear-
       lier store, the processor may be able to forward data directly from the store buffer.

   ■   Fill buffers
                                                                                                -
       mediary between the CPU cache and the CPU out-of-order execution engine. They may retain
       data from prior memory requests, which may be speculatively forwarded to a load operation.

   ■   Load ports Load ports are temporary internal CPU structures used to perform load opera-
       tions from memory or I/O ports.

    Microarchitectural buffers usually belong to a single CPU core and are shared between SMT threads.
This implies that, even if attacks on those structures are hard to achieve in a reliable way, the specula-
tive extraction of secret data stored into them is also potentially possible across SMT threads (under

   In general, the outcome of all the hardware side-channel vulnerabilities is the same: secrets will be
spoiled from the victim address space. Windows implements various mitigations for protecting against
Spectre, Meltdown, and almost all the described side-channel attacks.

Side-channel mitigations in Windows
     This section takes a peek at how Windows implements various mitigations for defending against side-
     channel attacks. In general, some side-channel mitigations are implemented by CPU manufacturers
     through microcode updates. Not all of them are always available, though; some mitigations need to
     be enabled by the software (Windows kernel).

     KVA Shadow

                                                                                                              -
     tween the kernel and user page tables. Speculative execution allows the CPU to spoil kernel data when
     the processor is not at the correct privilege level to access it, but it requires that a valid page frame
     number be present in the page table translating the target kernel page. The kernel memory targeted
     by the Meltdown attack is generally translated by a valid leaf entry in the system page table, which
     indicates only supervisor privilege level is allowed. (Page tables and virtual address translation are cov-

     page tables for each process:

        ■   The kernel page tables map the entire process address space, including kernel and user pages.
            In Windows, user pages are mapped as nonexecutable to prevent kernel code to execute mem-
            ory allocated in user mode (an effect similar to the one brought by the hardware SMEP feature).

        ■   The User page tables (also called shadow page tables) map only user pages and a minimal set
            of kernel pages, which do not contain any sort of secrets and are used to provide a minimal
            functionality for switching page tables, kernel stacks, and to handle interrupts, system calls, and
            other transitions and traps. This set of kernel pages is called transition address space.

        In the transition address space, the NT kernel usually maps a data structure included in the proces-

     shadow

     Administrator-level privileges) in processes that do not have mapped any kernel page that may contain
     secrets. The Meltdown attack is not effective anymore; kernel pages are not mapped as valid in the

     happen. When the user process invokes a system call, or when an interrupt happens while the CPU is
     executing code in the user-mode process, the CPU builds a trap frame on a transition stack, which, as

     of the shadow trap handler that handles the interrupt or system call. The latter normally switches to
     the kernel page tables, copies the trap frame on the kernel stack, and then jumps to the original trap

     executed with the entire address space mapped.

Initialization
The NT kernel determines whether the CPU is susceptible to Meltdown attack early in phase -1 of its
initialization, after the processor feature bits are calculated, using the internal KiDetectKvaLeakage
                                                                             KiKvaLeakage variable to 1 for
all Intel processors except Atoms (which are in-order processors).

   In case the internal KiKvaLeakage
KiEnableKvaShadowing

stacks. Transition stacks (which are 512 bytes in size) are prepared by writing a small data structure,

linked against its nontransition kernel stack (accessible only after the page tables have been switched),

thread has a proper kernel stack. The scheduler set a kernel stack as active by linking it in the processor
PRCB when a new thread is selected to be executed. This is a key difference compared to the IST stacks,
which exist as one per processor.

                                    0                                      0
           Transition Space                                                                                         Kernel Space
                                                      n
                                                   io
                                               sit
               RSP 0                       r an tack                                 IST Stack                      KTHREAD
                              + 0x200     T S
                …                                         BASE/TOP                                             0
                                    0                                + 0x5FE0
               IST 0                                                                              TOP

                                                                                                                     Kernel Stack*
                                         IST                                    KIST_LINK_FRAME
                                      Transition                     + 0x6000
    +           …             + 0x1D0   Stack    TOP
                                                                                                  BASE

                              + 0x200 KIST_BASE_FRAME                      0
               IST 2                                      BASE
                                    0
                                                                                     IST Stack

Memory          …                        IST                                                             + 0x6000

             IoMapBase                Transition                                                                       BASE/TOP
                              + 0x1D0   Stack    TOP
                                        KIST_BASE_FRAME
                              + 0x200                                + 0x5FE0
         Processor’s TSS                                  BASE                                    TOP
                                                                                KIST_LINK_FRAME
                                                                     + 0x6000                     BASE

FIGURE 8-8

   The KiEnableKvaShadowing
algorithm (explained later in this section). The result of the determination (global entries or PCIDs) is
stored in the global KiKvaShadowMode
KiShadowProcessorAllocation, which maps the per-processor shared data structures in the shadow page

shadow page tables are created (and the IRQL is dropped to passive level). The shadow trap handlers are

Shadow page tables
Shadow (or user) page tables are allocated by the memory manager using the internal MiAllocate
ProcessShadow
for the new process are initially created empty. The memory manager then copies all the kernel
shadow top-level page table entries of the SYSTEM process in the new process shadow page table.

     This allows the OS to quickly map the entire transition address space (which lives in kernel and is

     KiShadowProcessorAllocation routine, which uses memory manager services to map individual chunks
     of memory in the shadow page tables and to rebuild the entire page hierarchy.

     can write in the process page tables to map or unmap chunks of memory. When a request to allocate
     or map new memory into a user process address space, it may happen that the top-level page table
     entry for a particular address would be missing. In this case, the memory manager allocates all the
     pages for the entire page-table hierarchy and stores the new top-level PTE in the kernel page tables.

     top-level PTE on the shadow page table. Otherwise, the address will be not present in the user-map-
     ping after the trap handler correctly switches the page tables before returning to user mode.

     kernel page tables. To prevent false sharing of addresses close to the chunk of memory being mapped
     in the transition address space, the memory manager always recreates the page table hierarchy map-
     ping for the PTE(s) being shared. This implies that every time the kernel needs to map some new pages
     in the transition address space of a process, it must
     page tables (the internal MiCopyTopLevelMappings routine performs exactly this operation).

     TLB flushing algorithm

     (translation look-aside buffer). The TLB is a cache used by the processor to quickly translate the virtual ad-
     dresses that are used while executing code or accessing data. A valid entry in the TLB allows the processor

                                                                                                                   -
     nel address space is mostly unique and shared between all processes. Intel and AMD introduced differ-

     detail in the Intel and AMD architecture manuals and are not further discussed in this book.

                                                                                                                   -

                                                                                                               -
     lowing two goals:

        ■   No valid kernel entries will be ever maintained in the TLB when executing a thread user-code.
            Otherwise, this could be leveraged by an attacker with the same speculation techniques used in
            Meltdown, which could lead her to read secret kernel data.

        ■

trap exit. It can run on a system that either supports only the global/non-global bit or also PCIDs. In the

while a page table switch happens (the system changes the value of the CR3 register). Systems with
PCID support labels kernel pages with PCID 2, whereas user pages are labelled with PCID 1. The global
and non-global bits are ignored in this case.

   When the current-executing thread ends its quantum, a context switch is initialized. When the
kernel schedules execution for a thread belonging to another process address space, the TLB algorithm
assures that all the user pages are removed from the TLB (which means that in systems with global/

kernel entries are removed (or invalidated) from the TLB. This is easily achievable: on processors with
global/non-global bit support, just a reload of the page tables forces the processor to invalidate all the
non-global pages, whereas on systems with PCID support, the user-page tables are reloaded using the
User PCID, which automatically invalidates all the stale kernel TLB entries.

   The strategy allows kernel trap entries, which can happen when an interrupt is generated while the
system was executing user code or when a thread invokes a system call, not to invalidate anything in

TABLE 8-1

Configuration Type                               User Pages           Kernel Pages         Transition Pages

                                                 Non-global           Global               N/D

                                                 PCID 1, non-global   PCID 2, non-global   PCID 1, non-global

                                                 Global               Non-global           Global

Hardware indirect branch controls (IBRS, IBPB, STIBP, SSBD)
Processor manufacturers have designed hardware mitigations for various side-channel attacks. Those
mitigations have been designed to be used with the software ones. The hardware mitigations for side-
channel attacks are mainly implemented in the following indirect branch controls mechanisms, which

   ■   Indirect Branch Restricted Speculation (IBRS) completely disables the branch predictor (and
       clears the branch predictor buffer) on switches to a different security context (user vs kernel
       mode or VM root vs VM non-root). If the OS sets IBRS after a transition to a more privileged
       mode, predicted targets of indirect branches cannot be controlled by software that was ex-
       ecuted in a less privileged mode. Additionally, when IBRS is on, the predicted targets of indirect
       branches cannot be controlled by another logical processor. The OS usually sets IBRS to 1 and
       keeps it on until it returns to a less privileged security context.

       The implementation of IBRS depends on the CPU manufacturer: some CPUs completely disable
       branch predictors buffers when IBRS is set to on (describing an inhibit behavior), while some

            mitigation control works in a very similar way to IBPB, so usually the CPU implement only IBRS.

        ■   Indirect Branch Predictor Barrier (IBPB)
            it is set to 1, creating a barrier that prevents software that executed previously from controlling
            the predicted targets of indirect branches on the same logical processor.

        ■   Single Thread Indirect Branch Predictors (STIBP) restricts the sharing of branch prediction
            between logical processors on a physical CPU core. Setting STIBP to 1 on a logical processor
            prevents the predicted targets of indirect branches on a current executing logical processor
            from being controlled by software that executes (or executed previously) on another logical
            processor of the same core.

        ■   Speculative Store Bypass Disable (SSBD) instructs the processor to not speculatively execute
            loads until the addresses of all older stores are known. This ensures that a load operation does
            not speculatively consume stale data values due to bypassing an older store on the same logi-
            cal processor, thus protecting against Speculative Store Bypass attack (described earlier in the
            “Other side-channel attacks” section).

        The NT kernel employs a complex algorithm to determine the value of the described indirect branch

     trap entries, and trap exits. On compatible systems, the system runs kernel code with IBRS always on (ex-
     cept when Retpoline is enabled). When no IBRS is available (but IBPB and STIBP are supported), the kernel

     another security context). SSBD, when supported by the CPU, is always enabled in kernel mode.

     mitigations enabled or just with STIBP on (depending on STIBP pairing being enabled, as explained in
     the next section). The protection against Speculative Store Bypass must be manually enabled if needed
     through the global or per-process Speculation feature. Indeed, all the speculation mitigations can be

     to an individual setting. Table 8-2 describes individual feature settings and their meaning.

     TABLE 8-2

     Name                                              Value    Meaning

                                                       0x1      Disable IBRS except for non-nested root partition

                                                       0x2

                                                       0x4

                                                       0x8      Always set SSBD in kernel and user

                                                       0x10     Set SSBD only in kernel mode (leaving user-mode
                                                                code to be vulnerable to SSB attacks)

                                                       0x20     Always keep STIBP on for user-threads, regardless of
                                                                STIBP pairing

Name                                              Value     Meaning

                                                  0x40      Disables the default speculation mitigation strategy
                                                            (for AMD systems only) and enables the user-to-user

                                                            controls are set when running in kernel mode.

                                                  0x80      Always disable STIBP pairing

                                                  0x100     Always disable Retpoline

                                                  0x200     Enable Retpoline regardless of the CPU support of
                                                            IBPB or IBRS (Retpoline needs at least IBPB to prop-
                                                            erly protect against Spectre v2)

                                                  0x20000 Disable Import Optimization regardless of Retpoline

Retpoline and import optimization

not acceptable for games and mission-critical applications, which were running with a lot of perfor-
mance degradation. The mitigation that was bringing most of the performance degradation was IBRS

possible without using any hardware mitigations thanks to the memory fence instructions. A good

execute any new operations speculatively before the fence itself completes. Only when the fence com-

to execute (and to speculate) new opcodes. The second variant of Spectre was still requiring hardware
mitigations, though, which implies all the performance problems brought by IBRS and IBPB.

speculative execution. Instead of performing a vulnerable indirect call, the processor jumps to a safe

the new target thanks to a “return” operation.

FIGURE 8-9 Retpoline code sequence of x86 CPUs.

   In Windows, Retpoline is implemented in the NT kernel, which can apply the Retpoline code se-
quence to itself and to external driver images dynamically through the Dynamic Value Relocation Table
(DVRT). When a kernel image is compiled with Retpoline enabled (through a compatible compiler), the

                                                                                                               -

     but augmented with a variable size padding. The entry in the DVRT includes all the information that

     external drivers compiled with Retpoline support can run also on older OS versions, which will simply
     skip parsing the entries in the DVRT table.

        Note The DVRT was originally developed for supporting kernel ASLR (Address Space Layout
        Randomization, discussed in Chapter 5 of Part 1). The table was later extended to include
        Retpoline descriptors. The system can identify which version of the table an image includes.

         In phase -1 of its initialization, the kernel detects whether the processor is vulnerable to Spectre, and,
     in case the system is compatible and enough hardware mitigations are available, it enables Retpoline
     and applies it to the NT kernel image and the HAL. The RtlPerformRetpolineRelocationsOnImage rou-
     tine scans the DVRT and replaces each indirect branch described by an entry in the table with a direct
     branch, which is not vulnerable to speculative attacks, targeting the Retpoline code sequence. The
     original target address of the indirect branch is saved in a CPU register (R10 in AMD and Intel proces-
     sors), with a single instruction that overwrites the padding generated by the compiler. The Retpoline

        Before being started, boot drivers are physically relocated by the internal MiReloadBootLoadedDrivers

     boot drivers, the NT kernel, and HAL images are allocated in a contiguous virtual address space by
     the Windows Loader and do not have an associated control area, rendering them not pageable. This
     means that all the memory backing the images is always resident, and the NT kernel can use the same
     RtlPerformRetpolineRelocationsOnImage function to modify each indirect branch in the code directly.
                                                                                               PERFORM_
     RETPOLINE_RELOCATIONS                                                                               -

        Note

        for further details) initializes and protects some of them. It is illegal for drivers and the NT
        kernel itself to modify code sections of protected drivers.

        Runtime drivers, as explained in Chapter 5 of Part 1, are loaded by the NT memory manager, which

page fault handler. Windows applies Retpoline on the shared pages pointed by the prototype PTEs. If
the same section is also mapped by a user-mode application, the memory manager creates new private
pages and copies the content of the shared pages in the private ones, reverting Retpoline (and Import

   Note
   Retpoline cannot be enabled because it would not be able to protect against Spectre v2. In
   this situation, only hardware mitigations can be applied. Enhanced IBRS (a new hardware
   mitigation) solves the performance problems of IBRS.

The Retpoline bitmap
One of the original design goals (restraints) of the Retpoline implementation in Windows was to sup-
port a mixed environment composed of drivers compatible with Retpoline and drivers not compatible
with it, while maintaining the overall system protection against Spectre v2. This implies that drivers
that do not support Retpoline should be executed with IBRS on (or STIBP followed by an IBPB on kernel
entry, as discussed previously in the ”Hardware indirect branch controls” section), whereas others can
run without any hardware speculation mitigations enabled (the protection is brought by the Retpoline
code sequences and memory fences).

   To dynamically achieve compatibility with older drivers, in the phase 0 of its initialization, the NT

space contains Retpoline compatible code; a 0 means the opposite. The NT kernel then sets to 1 the
bits referring to the address spaces of the HAL and NT images (which are always Retpoline compatible).
Every time a new kernel image is loaded, the system tries to apply Retpoline to it. If the application suc-
ceeds, the respective bits in the Retpoline bitmap are set to 1.

    The Retpoline code sequence is augmented to include a bitmap check: Every time an indirect branch
is performed, the system checks whether the original call target resides in a Retpoline-compatible
module. In case the check succeeds (and the relative bit is 1), the system executes the Retpoline code

Retpoline bitmap is 0), a Retpoline exit sequence is initialized. The RUNNING_NON_RETPOLINE_CODE

                                                                                        SPEC_CONTROL
                                                                                                           -
ware mitigations provide the needed protection).

   When the thread quantum ends, and the scheduler selects a new thread, it saves the Retpoline
status (represented by the presence of the RUNNING_NON_RETPOLINE_CODE
processors in the KTHREAD data structure of the old thread. In this way, when the old thread is selected
again for execution (or a kernel trap entry happens), the system knows that it needs to re-enable the
needed hardware speculation mitigations with the goal of keeping the system always protected.

     Import optimization
     Retpoline entries in the DVRT also describe indirect branches targeting imported functions. An im-
     ported control transfer entry in the DVRT describes this kind of branch by using an index referring to

     pointers compiled by the loader.) After the Windows loader has compiled the IAT, it is unlikely that its

     it is not needed to transform an indirect branch targeting an imported function to a Retpoline one be-
     cause the NT kernel can ensure that the virtual addresses of the two images (caller and callee) are close
     enough to directly invoke the target (less than 2 GB).

     FIGURE 8-10 Different indirect branches on the ExAllocatePool function.

        Import optimization (internally also known as “import linking”) is the feature that uses Retpoline
     dynamic relocations to transform indirect calls targeting imported functions into direct branches. If
     a direct branch is used to divert code execution to an imported function, there is no need to apply
     Retpoline because direct branches are not vulnerable to speculation attacks. The NT kernel ap-
     plies Import Optimization at the same time it applies Retpoline, and even though the two features

     Optimization, Windows has been able to gain a performance boost even on systems that are not vul-
     nerable to Spectre v2. (A direct branch does not require any additional memory access.)

     STIBP pairing
     In hyperthreaded systems, for protecting user-mode code against Spectre v2, the system should run
     user threads with at least STIBP on. On nonhyperthreaded systems, this is not needed: protection
     against a previous user-mode thread speculation is already achieved thanks to the IBRS being enabled
     while previously executing kernel-mode code. In case Retpoline is enabled, the needed IBPB is emitted

     branch prediction buffer is empty before executing the code of the user thread.

          Leaving STIBP enabled in a hyper-threaded system has a performance penalty, so by default
     it is disabled for user-mode threads, leaving a thread to be potentially vulnerable by speculation
     from a sibling SMT thread. The end-user can manually enable STIBP for user threads through the

mitigation option.

   The described scenario is not ideal. A better solution is implemented in the STIBP pairing mecha-
nism. STIBP pairing is enabled by the I/O manager in phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization (using the
KeOptimizeSpecCtrlSettings function) only under certain conditions. The system should have hyper-
                                                                                                          -
ible only on non-nested virtualized environments or when Hyper-V is disabled (refer to Chapter 9 for
further details.)

in the EPROCESS data structure), which is represented by a 64-bit number. The system security domain
                                                                                                  -
istrative token. Nonsystem security domains are assigned at process creation time (by the internal
PspInitializeProcessSecurity function) following these rules:

   ■   If the new process is created without a new primary token explicitly assigned to it, it obtains the
       same security domain of the parent process that creates it.

   ■

       CreateProcessAsUser or CreateProcessWithLogon APIs, for example), a new user security domain
       ID is generated for the new process, starting from the internal PsNextSecurityDomain symbol.
       The latter is incremented every time a new domain ID is generated (this ensures that during the
       system lifetime, no security domains can collide).

   ■   Note that a new primary token can be also assigned using the NtSetInformationProcess API
       (with the ProcessAccessToken
       the API to succeed, the process should have been created as suspended (no threads run in it). At
       this stage, the process still has its original token in an unfrozen state. A new security domain is
       assigned following the same rules described earlier.

   Security domains can also be assigned manually to different processes belonging to the
same group. An application can replace the security domain of a process with another one
of a process belonging to the same group using the NtSetInformationProcess API with the
ProcessCombineSecurityDomainsInformation class. The API accepts two process handles and replaces

open each other with the PROCESS_VM_WRITE and PROCESS_VM_OPERATION access rights.

    Security domains allow the STIBP pairing mechanism to work. STIBP pairing links a logical proces-
sor (LP) with its sibling (both share the same physical core. In this section, we use the term LP and CPU
interchangeably). Two LPs are paired by the STIBP pairing algorithm (implemented in the internal
KiUpdateStibpPairing function) only when the security domain of the local CPU is the same as the one
of the remote CPU, or one of the two LPs is Idle. In these cases, both the LPs can run without STIBP be-
ing set and still be implicitly protected against speculation (there is no advantage in attacking a sibling
CPU running in the same security context).

        The STIBP pairing algorithm is implemented in the KiUpdateStibpPairing function and includes a full
     state machine. The routine is invoked by the trap exit handler (invoked when the system exits the kernel

     pairing state of an LP can become stale mainly for two reasons:

        ■     The NT scheduler has selected a new thread to be executed in the current CPU. If the new thread

              This allows the STIBP pairing algorithm to re-evaluate the pairing state of the two.

        ■     When the sibling CPU exits from its idle state, it requests the remote CPU to re-evaluate its
              STIBP pairing state.

        Note that when an LP is running code with STIBP enabled, it is protected from the sibling CPU
     speculation. STIBP pairing has been developed based also on the opposite notion: when an LP executes
     with STIBP enabled, it is guaranteed that its sibling CPU is protected against itself. This implies that
     when a context switches to a different security domain, there is no need to interrupt the sibling CPU
     even though it is running user-mode code with STIBP disabled.

        The described scenario is not true only when the scheduler selects a VP-dispatch thread (backing
     a virtual processor of a VM in case the Root scheduler is enabled; see Chapter 9 for further details)
     belonging to the VMMEM process. In this case, the system immediately sends an IPI to the sibling
     thread for updating its STIBP pairing state. Indeed, a VP-dispatch thread runs guest-VM code, which
     can always decide to disable STIBP, moving the sibling thread in an unprotected state (both runs with
     STIBP disabled).

        EXPERIMENT: Querying system side-channel mitigation status
        Windows exposes side-channel mitigation information through the SystemSpeculationControl
        Information and SystemSecureSpeculationControlInformation information classes used by the
        NtQuerySystemInformation native API. Multiple tools exist that interface with this API and show
        to the end user the system side-channel mitigation status:

         ■

               supported by Microsoft, which is open source and available at the following GitHub
               repository: https://github.com/microsoft/SpeculationControl

         ■     The SpecuCheck tool, developed by Alex Ionescu (one of the authors of this book),
               which is open source and available at the following GitHub repository:
               https://github.com/ionescu007/SpecuCheck

         ■     The SkTool, developed by Andrea Allievi (one of the authors of this book) and distributed
               (at the time of this writing) in newer Insider releases of Windows.

             All of the three tools yield more or less the same results. Only the SkTool is able to show the

mitigations have been enabled in your system. Download SpecuCheck and execute it by open-
ing a command prompt window (type cmd in the Cortana search box). You should get output like
the following:
SpecuCheck v1.1.1    --   Copyright(c) 2018 Alex Ionescu
https://ionescu007.github.io/SpecuCheck/ --    @aionescu
--------------------------------------------------------

Mitigations for CVE-2017-5754 [rogue data cache load]
--------------------------------------------------------
[-] Kernel VA Shadowing Enabled:                         yes
     > Unnecessary due lack of CPU vulnerability:     no
     > With User Pages Marked Global:                 no
     > With PCID Support:                           yes
     > With PCID Flushing Optimization (INVPCID):   yes

Mitigations for CVE-2018-3620 [L1 terminal fault]
[-] L1TF Mitigation Enabled:                             yes
     > Unnecessary due lack of CPU vulnerability:      no
     > CPU Microcode Supports Data Cache Flush:       yes
     > With KVA Shadow and Invalid PTE Bit:           yes

  (The output has been trimmed for space reasons.)

   You can also download the latest Windows Insider release and try the SkTool. When launched
with no command-line arguments, by default the tool displays the status of the hypervisor and

with the /mitigations command-line argument:
Hypervisor / Secure Kernel / Secure Mitigations Parser Tool 1.0

Querying Speculation Features... Success!
   This system supports Secure Speculation Controls.

System Speculation Features.
   Enabled: 1
   Hardware support: 1
   IBRS Present: 1
   STIBP Present: 1
   SMEP Enabled: 1
   Speculative Store Bypass Disable (SSBD) Available: 1
   Speculative Store Bypass Disable (SSBD) Supported by OS: 1
   Branch Predictor Buffer (BPB) flushed on Kernel/User transition: 1
   Retpoline Enabled: 1
   Import Optimization Enabled: 1
   SystemGuard (Secure Launch) Enabled: 0 (Capable: 0)
   SystemGuard SMM Protection (Intel PPAM / AMD SMI monitor) Enabled: 0

Secure system Speculation Features.
   KVA Shadow supported: 1
   KVA Shadow enabled: 1
   KVA Shadow TLB flushing strategy: PCIDs
   Minimum IBPB Hardware support: 0
   IBRS Present: 0 (Enhanced IBRS: 0)

            STIBP Present: 0
            SSBD Available: 0 (Required: 0)
            Branch Predictor Buffer (BPB) flushed on Kernel/User transition: 0
            Branch Predictor Buffer (BPB) flushed on User/Kernel and VTL 1 transition: 0
            L1TF mitigation: 0
            Microarchitectural Buffers clearing: 1

Trap dispatching
     Interrupts and exceptions are operating system conditions that divert the processor to code outside
                                                                                          trap refers to a

     control to a trap handler
     illustrates some of the conditions that activate trap handlers.

        The kernel distinguishes between interrupts and exceptions in the following way. An interrupt is an
     asynchronous event (one that can occur at any time) that is typically unrelated to what the processor is
     executing. Interrupts are generated primarily by I/O devices, processor clocks, or timers, and they can
     be enabled (turned on) or disabled (turned off). An exception, in contrast, is a synchronous condition
                                                                      Aborts, such as machine checks, are
                                                                                                          -
     tions and aborts are sometimes called faults, such as when talking about a page fault or a double fault.
     Running a program for a second time with the same data under the same conditions can reproduce
     exceptions. Examples of exceptions include memory-access violations, certain debugger instructions,
     and divide-by-zero errors. The kernel also regards system service calls as exceptions (although techni-

                                      Trap handlers
                                        Interrupt
                                          Interrupt
                                            Interrupt
                                          service
                Interrupt                   service
                                              service
                                         routines
                                           routines
                                             routines

                                        Interrupt
                                          Interrupt
                                          service
                                             System
       System service call                  service
                                         routines
                                             services
                                           routines

                                                          Interrupt
                                                            Interrupt
     Hardware exceptions (Exception      Exception          service
                                                              Exception
                                                              service
      Software exceptions  frame)        dispatcher        routines
                                                               handlers
                                                             routines

                                        Interrupt
                                          Interrupt
                                       Virtual
                                          servicememory
          Virtual address                   service
                                            manager’s
                                         routines
                                           routines
              exceptions                      pager

     FIGURE 8-11 Trap dispatching.

                                                                                                          -
tion is caused by a hardware problem, whereas a divide-by-zero exception is the result of a software
bug. Likewise, an I/O device can generate an interrupt, or the kernel itself can issue a software interrupt
(such as an APC or DPC, both of which are described later in this chapter).

current Code Segment (CS) is in CPL 0 or below (i.e., if the current thread was running in kernel mode or
user mode). In the case where the thread was already running in Ring 0, the processor saves (or pushes)
on the current stack the following information, which represents a kernel-to-kernel transition.

   ■

   ■   The current code segment (CS)

   ■   The current program counter (EIP/RIP)

   ■   Optionally, for certain kind of exceptions, an error code

looks up the current TSS based on the Task Register (TR) and switches to the SS0/ESP0 on x86 or simply
RSP0 on x64, as described in the “Task state segments” section earlier in this chapter. Now that the pro-
cessor is executing on the kernel stack, it saves the previous SS (the user-mode value) and the previous

had happened. Second, it allows the operating system to know (based on the saved CS value) where
the trap came from—for example, to know if an exception came from user-mode code or from a
kernel system call.

machine state—including registers such as EAX, EBX, ECX, EDI, and so on is saved in a trap frame, a
data structure allocated by Windows in the thread's kernel stack. The trap frame stores the execution

                                         dt nt!_KTRAP_FRAME command in the kernel debugger, or,

Part 1.) The kernel handles software interrupts either as part of hardware interrupt handling or synchro-
nously when a thread invokes kernel functions related to the software interrupt.

   In most cases, the kernel installs front-end, trap-handling functions that perform general trap-

if the condition was a device interrupt, a kernel hardware interrupt trap handler transfers control to the
interrupt service routine (ISR) that the device driver provided for the interrupting device. If the condition
was caused by a call to a system service, the general system service trap handler transfers control to the

handle. These are sometimes called spurious or unexpected traps. The trap handlers typically execute

     the system function KeBugCheckEx, which halts the computer when the kernel detects problematic
     or incorrect behavior that, if left unchecked, could result in data corruption. The following sections
     describe interrupt, exception, and system service dispatching in greater detail.

     Interrupt dispatching
     Hardware-generated interrupts typically originate from I/O devices that must notify the processor
     when they need service. Interrupt-driven devices allow the operating system to get the maximum
     use out of the processor by overlapping central processing with I/O operations. A thread starts an I/O
     transfer to or from a device and then can execute other useful work while the device completes the

     keyboards, disk drives, and network cards are generally interrupt driven.

     to initiate thread dispatching and to break into the execution of a thread asynchronously. The kernel can

        The kernel installs interrupt trap handlers to respond to device interrupts. Interrupt trap handlers
     transfer control either to an external routine (the ISR) that handles the interrupt or to an internal kernel
     routine that responds to the interrupt. Device drivers supply ISRs to service device interrupts, and the
     kernel provides interrupt-handling routines for other types of interrupts.

                                                                                                               -
     rupts, the types of interrupts the kernel supports, how device drivers interact with the kernel (as a part
     of interrupt processing), and the software interrupts the kernel recognizes (plus the kernel objects that
     are used to implement them).

     Hardware interrupt processing
     On the hardware platforms supported by Windows, external I/O interrupts come into one of the inputs
     on an interrupt controller, for example an I/O Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (IOAPIC).

     Controllers (LAPIC), which ultimately interrupt the processor on a single input line.

     Once the processor is interrupted, it queries the controller to get the global system interrupt vector
     (GSIV), which is sometimes represented as an interrupt request (IRQ) number. The interrupt controller
     translates the GSIV to a processor interrupt vector, which is then used as an index into a data structure
     called the interrupt dispatch table
     the matching IDT entry for the interrupt vector.

     Based on the information in the IDT entry, the processor can transfer control to an appropriate inter-
     rupt dispatch routine running in Ring 0 (following the process described at the start of this section), or
     it can even load a new TSS and update the Task Register (TR), using a process called an interrupt gate.

kernel and HAL routines for each exception and internally handled interrupt, as well as with pointers to
thunk

interrupt vectors 0–31 are marked as reserved for processor traps, which are described in Table 8-3.

TABLE 8-3 Processor traps

Vector (Mnemonic)    Meaning

0 (#DE)              Divide error

1 (#DB)              Debug trap

2 (NMI)              Nonmaskable interrupt

3 (#BP)              Breakpoint trap

4 (#OF)

5 (#BR)              Bound fault

6 (#UD)

7 (#NM)

8 (#DF)              Double fault

9 (#MF)              Coprocessor fault (no longer used)

10 (#TS)             TSS fault

11 (#NP)             Segment fault

12 (#SS)             Stack fault

13 (#GP)             General protection fault

14 (#PF)             Page fault

15                   Reserved

16 (#MF)

17 (#AC)             Alignment check fault

18 (#MC)             Machine check abort

19 (#XM)             SIMD fault

20 (#VE)             Virtualization exception

21 (#CP)             Control protection exception

22-31                Reserved

   The remainder of the IDT entries are based on a combination of hardcoded values (for example,
vectors 30 to 34 are always used for Hyper-V-related VMBus interrupts) as well as negotiated values

example, a keyboard controller might send interrupt vector 82 on one particular Windows system and
67 on a different one.

     EXPERIMENT: Viewing the 64-bit IDT
     You can view the contents of the IDT, including information on what trap handlers Windows has
     assigned to interrupts (including exceptions and IRQs), using the !idt kernel debugger command.
     The !idt
     interrupts (and, on 64-bit machines, the processor trap handlers).

       The following example shows what the output of the !idt command looks like on an x64 system:
     0: kd> !idt

     Dumping IDT: fffff8027074c000

     00:     fffff8026e1bc700 nt!KiDivideErrorFault
     01:     fffff8026e1bca00 nt!KiDebugTrapOrFault     Stack = 0xFFFFF8027076E000
     02:     fffff8026e1bcec0 nt!KiNmiInterrupt         Stack = 0xFFFFF8027076A000
     03:     fffff8026e1bd380 nt!KiBreakpointTrap
     04:     fffff8026e1bd680 nt!KiOverflowTrap
     05:     fffff8026e1bd980 nt!KiBoundFault
     06:     fffff8026e1bde80 nt!KiInvalidOpcodeFault
     07:     fffff8026e1be340 nt!KiNpxNotAvailableFault
     08:     fffff8026e1be600 nt!KiDoubleFaultAbort     Stack = 0xFFFFF80270768000
     09:     fffff8026e1be8c0 nt!KiNpxSegmentOverrunAbort
     0a:     fffff8026e1beb80 nt!KiInvalidTssFault
     0b:     fffff8026e1bee40 nt!KiSegmentNotPresentFault
     0c:     fffff8026e1bf1c0 nt!KiStackFault
     0d:     fffff8026e1bf500 nt!KiGeneralProtectionFault
     0e:     fffff8026e1bf840 nt!KiPageFault
     10:     fffff8026e1bfe80 nt!KiFloatingErrorFault
     11:     fffff8026e1c0200 nt!KiAlignmentFault
     12:     fffff8026e1c0500 nt!KiMcheckAbort          Stack = 0xFFFFF8027076C000
     13:     fffff8026e1c0fc0 nt!KiXmmException
     14:     fffff8026e1c1380 nt!KiVirtualizationException
     15:     fffff8026e1c1840 nt!KiControlProtectionFault
     1f:     fffff8026e1b5f50 nt!KiApcInterrupt
     20:     fffff8026e1b7b00 nt!KiSwInterrupt
     29:     fffff8026e1c1d00 nt!KiRaiseSecurityCheckFailure
     2c:     fffff8026e1c2040 nt!KiRaiseAssertion
     2d:     fffff8026e1c2380 nt!KiDebugServiceTrap
     2f:     fffff8026e1b80a0 nt!KiDpcInterrupt
     30:     fffff8026e1b64d0 nt!KiHvInterrupt
     31:     fffff8026e1b67b0 nt!KiVmbusInterrupt0
     32:     fffff8026e1b6a90 nt!KiVmbusInterrupt1
     33:     fffff8026e1b6d70 nt!KiVmbusInterrupt2
     34:     fffff8026e1b7050 nt!KiVmbusInterrupt3
     35:     fffff8026e1b48b8 hal!HalpInterruptCmciService (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea59fe0)
     b0:     fffff8026e1b4c90 ACPI!ACPIInterruptServiceRoutine (KINTERRUPT ffffb88062898dc0)
     ce:     fffff8026e1b4d80 hal!HalpIommuInterruptRoutine (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a9e0)
     d1:     fffff8026e1b4d98 hal!HalpTimerClockInterrupt (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a7e0)
     d2:     fffff8026e1b4da0 hal!HalpTimerClockIpiRoutine (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a6e0)
     d7:     fffff8026e1b4dc8 hal!HalpInterruptRebootService (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a4e0)
     d8:     fffff8026e1b4dd0 hal!HalpInterruptStubService (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a2e0)
     df:     fffff8026e1b4e08 hal!HalpInterruptSpuriousService (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a1e0)
     e1:     fffff8026e1b8570 nt!KiIpiInterrupt
     e2:     fffff8026e1b4e20 hal!HalpInterruptLocalErrorService (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a3e0)

   e3:      fffff8026e1b4e28 hal!HalpInterruptDeferredRecoveryService
                             (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a0e0)
   fd:      fffff8026e1b4ef8 hal!HalpTimerProfileInterrupt (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a8e0)
   fe:      fffff8026e1b4f00 hal!HalpPerfInterrupt (KINTERRUPT fffff8026ea5a5e0)

     On the system used to provide the output for this experiment, the ACPI SCI ISR is at interrupt
   number B0h. You can also see that interrupt 14 (0Eh) corresponds to KiPageFault
                                                                       KiPageFault, which is a type

   pointer next to them. These correspond to the traps explained in the section on “Task state seg-
   ments” from earlier, which require dedicated safe kernel stacks for processing. The debugger
   knows these stack pointers by dumping the IDT entry, which you can do as well by using the dx
   command and dereferencing one of the interrupt vectors in the IDT. Although you can obtain the

                                    IdtBase.
   0: kd> dx @$pcr->IdtBase[2].IstIndex
   @$pcr->IdtBase[2].IstIndex : 0x3 [Type: unsigned short]

   0: kd> dx @$pcr->IdtBase[0x12].IstIndex
   @$pcr->IdtBase[0x12].IstIndex : 0x2 [Type: unsigned short]

      If you compare the IDT Index values seen here with the previous experiment on dumping the

   Each processor has a separate IDT (pointed to by their own IDTR) so that different processors can

clock interrupt, but only one processor updates the system clock in response to this interrupt. All the
processors, however, use the interrupt to measure thread quantum and to initiate rescheduling when a

handle certain device interrupts.

Programmable interrupt controller architecture
Traditional x86 systems relied on the i8259A Programmable Interrupt Controller (PIC), a standard that origi-
nated with the original IBM PC. The i8259A PIC worked only with uniprocessor systems and had only eight
                                                                                                second-
ary

Because PICs had such a quirky way of handling more than 8 devices, and because even 15 became a bottle-
neck, as well as due to various electrical issues (they were prone to spurious interrupts) and the limitations of
uniprocessor support, modern systems eventually phased out this type of interrupt controller, replacing it
with a variant called the i82489 Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC).

     APIC and the integration of both an I/O APIC (IOAPIC) connected to external hardware devices to a
     Local APIC (LAPIC), connected to the processor core. With time, the MPS standard was folded into the

     compatibility with uniprocessor operating systems and boot code that starts a multiprocessor system
     in uniprocessor mode, APICs support a PIC compatibility mode with 15 interrupts and delivery of inter-

        As mentioned, the APIC consists of several components: an I/O APIC that receives interrupts from
     devices, local APICs that receive interrupts from the I/O APIC on the bus and that interrupt the CPU
     they are associated with, and an i8259A-compatible interrupt controller that translates APIC input into
     PIC-equivalent signals. Because there can be multiple I/O APICs on the system, motherboards typically
     have a piece of core logic that sits between them and the processors. This logic is responsible for imple-
     menting interrupt routing algorithms that both balance the device interrupt load across processors and
     attempt to take advantage of locality, delivering device interrupts to the same processor that has just

     the I/O APIC with its own routing logic to support various features such as interrupt steering, but device

        Because the x64 architecture is compatible with x86 operating systems, x64 systems must provide

     Windows refused to run on systems that did not have an APIC because they use the APIC for inter-
     rupt control, whereas x86 versions of Windows supported both PIC and APIC hardware. This changed
     with Windows 8 and later versions, which only run on APIC hardware regardless of CPU architecture.

     this register to store the current software interrupt priority level (in the case of Windows, called the
     IRQL) and to inform the IOAPIC when it makes routing decisions. More information on IRQL handling
     will follow shortly.

                  CPU 0                       CPU 1

            Processor Core              Processor Core

              Local APIC                  Local APIC

                                                i8259A-
        Device                 I/O
                                               equivalent
     interrupts               APIC
                                                  PIC

     FIGURE 8-12 APIC architecture.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing the PIC and APIC

multiprocessor by using the !pic and !apic
output of the !pic command on a uniprocessor. Note that even on a system with an APIC, this
command still works because APIC systems always have an associated PIC-equivalent for emulat-
ing legacy hardware.
lkd> !pic
----- IRQ Number ----- 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0A 0B 0C 0D 0E 0F
Physically in service: Y . . . . . . . . Y Y Y . . . .
Physically masked:      Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Physically requested:   Y . . . . . . . . Y Y Y . . . .
Level Triggered:        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                            !apic command on a system running with Hyper-V enabled, which
you can see due to the presence of the SINTI
Controller (SynIC), described in Chapter 9. Note that during local kernel debugging, this com-
mand shows the APIC associated with the current processor—in other words, whichever proces-

at a crash dump or remote system, you can use the ~ (tilde) command followed by the processor
number to switch the processor of whose local APIC you want to see. In either case, the number
next to the ID: label will tell you which processor you are looking at.
lkd> !apic
Apic (x2Apic mode) ID:1 (50014) LogDesc:00000002 TPR 00
TimeCnt: 00000000clk SpurVec:df FaultVec:e2 error:0
Ipi Cmd: 00000000`0004001f Vec:1F FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high
Timer..: 00000000`000300d8 Vec:D8 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Linti0.: 00000000`000100d8 Vec:D8 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Linti1.: 00000000`00000400 Vec:00 NMI         Dest=Self           edg high
Sinti0.: 00000000`00020030 Vec:30 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high
Sinti1.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sinti2.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sinti3.: 00000000`000000d1 Vec:D1 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high
Sinti4.: 00000000`00020030 Vec:30 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high
Sinti5.: 00000000`00020031 Vec:31 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high
Sinti6.: 00000000`00020032 Vec:32 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high
Sinti7.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sinti8.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sinti9.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sintia.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sintib.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sintic.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sintid.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sintie.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
Sintif.: 00000000`00010000 Vec:00 FixedDel    Dest=Self           edg high       m
TMR: 95, A5, B0
IRR:
ISR:

           The various numbers following the Vec labels indicate the associated vector in the IDT with

        Interrupt Processor Interrupt (IPI) vector, and interrupt number 0xE2 handles APIC errors. Going
        back to the !idt
        Interrupt (meaning that an IPI was recently used to send an APC from one processor to another),

           The following output is for the !ioapic

        IRQ 9 (the System Control Interrupt, or SCI) is associated with vector B0h, which in the !idt output
        from the earlier experiment was associated with ACPI.SYS.
        0: kd> !ioapic
        Controller at 0xfffff7a8c0000898 I/O APIC at VA 0xfffff7a8c0012000
        IoApic @ FEC00000 ID:8 (11) Arb:0
        Inti00.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti01.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti02.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti03.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti04.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti05.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti06.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti07.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti08.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti09.: ff000000`000089b0 Vec:B0 LowestDl Lg:ff000000         lvl high
        Inti0A.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m
        Inti0B.: 00000000`000100ff Vec:FF FixedDel Ph:00000000         edg high               m

     Software interrupt request levels (IRQLs)
     Although interrupt controllers perform interrupt prioritization, Windows imposes its own interrupt
     priority scheme known as interrupt request levels (IRQLs). The kernel represents IRQLs internally as a
     number from 0 through 31 on x86 and from 0 to 15 on x64 (and ARM/ARM64), with higher numbers

         Interrupts are serviced in priority order, and a higher-priority interrupt preempts the servicing of
     a lower-priority interrupt. When a high-priority interrupt occurs, the processor saves the interrupted

                                                                                                              -

     saved machine state. The interrupted thread resumes executing where it left off. When the kernel low-
     ers the IRQL, lower-priority interrupts that were masked might materialize. If this happens, the kernel
     repeats the process to handle the new interrupts.

                 x86                                                                 x64
31               High                                               15            High/Profile
30             Power fail
                                                                    14   Interprocessor interrupt/Power
29      Interprocessor interrupt
28               Clock                                              13               Clock
27           Profile/Synch                                          12               Synch
                                            Hardware
26              Device n
                                            interrupts              11             Device n
                   •
                   •
                   •
                                                                    4                  ••
                                                                                        •
5 Corrected Machine Check Interrupt
4                  ••                                               3               Device 1
                    •
3              Device 1                                             2            Dispatch/DPC
            DPC/dispatch
                                            Software
2
                 APC
                                            interrupts               1               APC
1
0            Passive/Low                    Normal thread           0             Passive/Low
                                            execution

FIGURE 8-13 x86 and x64 interrupt request levels (IRQLs).

    IRQL priority levels have a completely different meaning than thread-scheduling priorities (which
are described in Chapter 5 of Part 1). A scheduling priority is an attribute of a thread, whereas an IRQL
is an attribute of an interrupt source, such as a keyboard or a mouse. In addition, each processor has an
IRQL setting that changes as operating system code executes. As mentioned earlier, on x64 systems,
the IRQL is stored in the CR8 register that maps back to the TPR on the APIC.

                                                                                                                          -

by calling KeRaiseIrql and KeLowerIrql or, more commonly, indirectly via calls to functions that acquire

the current level interrupt the processor, whereas interrupts from sources with IRQLs equal to or be-
low the current level are masked until an executing thread lowers the IRQL.

                                          IRQL setting
                                            High/Profile
       Processor A
                                   Interprocessor interrupt/Power
       IRQL = Clock
                                               Clock
                                               Synch
                                             Device n

Interrupts masked on                             ••
                                                  •
          Processor A                                                            Processor B
                                              Device 1
                                                                           IRQL = DPC/dispatch
                                           Dispatch/DPC
                                               APC                         Interrupts masked on
                                            Passive/Low                    Processor B

FIGURE 8-14 Masking interrupts.

                                                                                                             -

                                                                                                            -
     rupt source. This elevation masks all interrupts at and below that IRQL (on that processor only), which

     lower level. The masked interrupts are either handled by another processor or held back until the IRQL
     drops. Therefore, all components of the system, including the kernel and device drivers, attempt to
     keep the IRQL at passive level (sometimes called low level). They do this because device drivers can re-

     periods. Thus, when the system is not performing any interrupt work (or needs to synchronize with it)
     or handling a software interrupt such as a DPC or APC, the IRQL is always 0. This obviously includes any
                                                                                                            -
     fects on system operation. In fact, returning to a user-mode thread with the IRQL above 0 results in an
     immediate system crash (bugcheck) and is a serious driver bug.

     another due to preemption—run at IRQL 2 (hence the name dispatch level), meaning that the proces-
     sor behaves in a single-threaded, cooperative fashion at this level and above. It is, for example, illegal to
     wait on a dispatcher object (more on this in the “Synchronization” section that follows) at this IRQL, as
     a context switch to a different thread (or the idle thread) would never occur. Another restriction is that
     only nonpaged memory can be accessed at IRQL DPC/dispatch level or higher.

     resident results in a page fault. When a page fault occurs, the memory manager initiates a disk I/O and

     the scheduler to perform a context switch (perhaps to the idle thread if no user thread is waiting to

     level or higher at the time of the disk read). A further problem results in the fact that I/O completion

     complete because the completion APC would not get a chance to run.

        If either of these two restrictions is violated, the system crashes with an IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL
     or a DRIVER_IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL crash code. (See Chapter 10, “Management, diagnostics, and
     tracing” for a thorough discussion of system crashes.) Violating these restrictions is a common bug in

     type of bug.

        Conversely, this also means that when working at IRQL 1 (also called APC level), preemption is still
     active and context switching can occur. This makes IRQL 1 essentially behave as a thread-local IRQL
     instead of a processor-local IRQL, since a wait operation or preemption operation at IRQL 1 will cause
                                                                               KTHREAD structure, as seen

     thread at passive level (IRQL 0) can still preempt a thread running at APC level (IRQL 1), because below
     IRQL 2, the scheduler decides which thread controls the processor.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the IRQL
                                                   !irql debugger command. The saved IRQL rep-
   resents the IRQL at the time just before the break-in to the debugger, which raises the IRQL to a
   static, meaningless value:
   kd> !irql
   Debugger saved IRQL for processor 0x0 -- 0 (LOW_LEVEL)

   is the processor control region (PCR), whereas its extension, the processor region control block
   (PRCB), contains the saved IRQL in the DebuggerSavedIRQL
   a remote kernel debugger will raise the IRQL to HIGH_LEVEL to stop any and all asynchronous
   processor operations while the user is debugging the machine, which would cause the output
   of !irql to be meaningless. This “saved” value is thus used to indicate the IRQL right before the
   debugger is attached.

                                                                                    interprocessor in-
   terrupt (IPI) to request that another processor perform an action, such as dispatching a particular
   thread for execution or updating its translation look-aside buffer (TLB) cache. The system clock
   generates an interrupt at regular intervals, and the kernel responds by updating the clock and
   measuring thread execution time. The HAL provides interrupt levels for use by interrupt-driven

   software interrupts (described later in this chapter) to initiate thread scheduling and to asynchro-

Mapping interrupt vectors to IRQLs

On systems without an APIC-based architecture, the mapping between the GSIV/IRQ and the IRQL had
to be strict. To avoid situations where the interrupt controller might think an interrupt line is of higher

                                                                                                           -
terrupt is not tied to its GSIV/IRQ, but rather to the interrupt vector: the upper 4 bits of the vector map
back to the priority. Since the IDT can have up to 256 entries, this gives a space of 16 possible priorities
(for example, vector 0x40 would be priority 4), which are the same 16 numbers that the TPR can hold,
which map back to the same 16 IRQLs that Windows implements!

appropriate interrupt vector for the interrupt, and program the IOAPIC to use that vector for the asso-

choose an interrupt vector that maps back to that priority. These decisions are performed by the Plug
and Play manager working in concert with a type of device driver called a bus driver, which determines
the presence of devices on its bus (PCI, USB, and so on) and what interrupts can be assigned to a device.

     The bus driver reports this information to the Plug and Play manager, which decides—after taking into
     account the acceptable interrupt assignments for all other devices—which interrupt will be assigned to
     each device. Then it calls a Plug and Play interrupt arbiter, which maps interrupts to IRQLs. This arbiter
     is exposed by the HAL, which also works with the ACPI bus driver and the PCI bus driver to collectively
     determine the appropriate mapping. In most cases, the ultimate vector number is selected in a round-

     later in this section shows how the debugger can query this information from the interrupt arbiter.

     Outside of arbitered interrupt vectors associated with hardware interrupts, Windows also has a num-

     Table 8-4.

     TABLE 8-4

     Vector        Usage

                   APC interrupt

     0x2F          DPC interrupt

     0x30          Hypervisor interrupt

     0x31-0x34     VMBus interrupt(s)

     0x35          CMCI interrupt

     0xCD          Thermal interrupt

     0xCE          IOMMU interrupt

     0xCF          DMA interrupt

     0xD1          Clock timer interrupt

     0xD2          Clock IPI interrupt

     0xD3          Clock always on interrupt

     0xD7          Reboot Interrupt

     0xD8          Stub interrupt

     0xD9          Test interrupt

     0xDF          Spurious interrupt

     0xE1          IPI interrupt

     0xE2          LAPIC error interrupt

     0xE3          DRS interrupt

     0xF0          Watchdog interrupt

     0xFB          Hypervisor HPET interrupt

     0xFD

     0xFE          Performance interrupt

Predefined IRQLs

   ■   The kernel typically uses high                                         KeBugCheckEx and mask-
       ing out all interrupts or when a remote kernel debugger is attached. The profile level shares the

       enabled. The performance interrupt, associated with such features as Intel Processor Trace (Intel
       PT) and other hardware performance monitoring unit (PMU) capabilities, also runs at this level.

   ■   Interprocessor interrupt level is used to request another processor to perform an action, such

       Deferred Recovery Service (DRS) level also shares the same value and is used on x64 systems
       by the Windows Hardware Error Architecture (WHEA) for performing recovery from certain
       Machine Check Errors (MCE).

   ■   Clock
       to measure and allot CPU time to threads.

   ■   The synchronization IRQL is internally used by the dispatcher and scheduler code to protect

       highest level right after the device IRQLs.

   ■   The device IRQLs are used to prioritize device interrupts. (See the previous section for how hard-
       ware interrupt levels are mapped to IRQLs.)

   ■   The corrected machine check interrupt level is used to signal the operating system after a serious

       the Machine Check Error (MCE) interface.

   ■   DPC/dispatch-level and APC-level interrupts are software interrupts that the kernel and device
       drivers generate. (DPCs and APCs are explained in more detail later in this chapter.)

   ■   The lowest IRQL, passive
       thread execution takes place and all interrupts can occur.

Interrupt objects

The kernel provides a portable mechanism—a kernel control object called an interrupt object, or
KINTERRUPT—that allows device drivers to register ISRs for their devices. An interrupt object contains
all the information the kernel needs to associate a device ISR with a particular hardware interrupt,
including the address of the ISR, the polarity and trigger mode of the interrupt, the IRQL at which the
device interrupts, sharing state, the GSIV and other interrupt controller data, as well as a host of perfor-
mance statistics.

        These interrupt objects are allocated from a common pool of memory, and when a device driver
     registers an interrupt (with IoConnectInterrupt or IoConnectInterruptEx), one is initialized with all the
     necessary information. Based on the number of processors eligible to receive the interrupt (which is
     indicated by the device driver when specifying the interrupt affinity
     for each one—in the typical case, this means for every processor on the machine. Next, once an inter-
                                                                  InterruptObject) of each eligible processor

     kernel updates the DispatchAddress                KINTERRUPT data structure) to point to the function
     KiChainedDispatch                                            InterruptListEntry

     then KiInterruptDispatch is used instead.

        The interrupt object also stores the IRQL associated with the interrupt so that KiInterruptDispatch or
     KiChainedDispatch can raise the IRQL to the correct level before calling the ISR and then lower the IRQL

     to the interrupt object (or any other argument for that matter) on the initial dispatch because the initial
     dispatch is done by hardware.

        When an interrupt occurs, the IDT points to one of 256 copies of the KiIsrThunk function, each one
     having a different line of assembly code that pushes the interrupt vector on the kernel stack (because
     this is not provided by the processor) and then calling a shared KiIsrLinkage function, which does the
     rest of the processing. Among other things, the function builds an appropriate trap frame as explained
                                                                                                           -
                                                                             InterruptObject array and using
     the interrupt vector on the stack as an index, dereferencing the matching pointer. On the other hand,

     value of the registry value BugCheckUnexpectedInterrupts
                                                                                 KeBugCheckEx, or the inter-
     rupt is silently ignored, and execution is restored back to the original control point.

                                                                               KiInterruptDispatchNoLock,
     which is used for interrupts that do not have an associated kernel-managed spinlock (typically used by
     drivers that want to synchronize with their ISRs), KiInterruptDispatchNoLockNoEtw for interrupts that do
     not want ETW performance tracing, and KiSpuriousDispatchNoEOI for interrupts that are not required
     to send an end-of-interrupt signal since they are spurious.

              KiInterruptDispatchNoEOI, which is used for interrupts that have programmed the APIC in
     Auto-End-of-Interrupt (Auto-EOI) mode—because the interrupt controller will send the EOI signal au-

     interrupt routines take advantage of the “no-lock” dispatch code because the HAL does not require the
     kernel to synchronize with its ISR.

   Another kernel interrupt handler is KiFloatingDispatch, which is used for interrupts that require

ISRs might need to use these registers (such as the video card ISR performing a quick drawing opera-
tion). When connecting an interrupt, drivers can set the FloatingSave argument to TRUE, requesting

this greatly increases interrupt latency.) Note that this is supported only on 32-bit systems.

   Regardless of which dispatch routine is used, ultimately a call to the ServiceRoutine
                                                                                        message signaled
interrupts (MSI), which are explained later, this is a pointer to KiInterruptMessageDispatch, which will
then call the MessageServiceRoutine

those based on NDIS or StorPort (more on driver frameworks is explained in Chapter 6 of Part 1, “I/O

                                                                        0
                                                                        2
                                                                        3
                              CPU                   CPU

                             I/O APIC           CPU Local
      Peripheral Device                           APIC
          Controller
                        0        ISR Address                            n
                        2                                     CPU Interrupt
                        3           Spinlock
                                                              Dispatch Table
                                 Dispatcher
                                    Interrupt
                                     Object

                      n
               CPU KPRCB

                                                            Read from device
                               Raise IRQL
                               Grab Spinlock                Acknowledge-
               Dispatch                                     Interrupt
                Code
                               Drop Spinlock
                                                            Request DPC
              KilsrLinkage
                               Lower IRQL

                              KiInterruptDispatch              Driver ISR
FIGURE 8-15

         Associating an ISR with a particular level of interrupt is called connecting an interrupt object, and dissoci-
     ating an ISR from an IDT entry is called disconnecting an interrupt object. These operations, accomplished by
     calling the kernel functions IoConnectInterruptEx and IoDisconnectInterruptEx, allow a device driver to “turn
     on” an ISR when the driver is loaded into the system and to “turn off” the ISR if the driver is unloaded.

                                                                                                           -
     dling directly with interrupt hardware (which differs among processor architectures) and from needing
     to know any details about the IDT. This kernel feature aids in creating portable device drivers because it

                                                                                                             -
     nize the execution of the ISR with other parts of a device driver that might share data with the ISR. (See
     Chapter 6 in Part 1 for more information about how device drivers respond to interrupts.)

         We also described the concept of a chained dispatch, which allows the kernel to easily call more than
     one ISR for any interrupt level. If multiple device drivers create interrupt objects and connect them
     to the same IDT entry, the KiChainedDispatch routine calls each ISR when an interrupt occurs at the
                                                                                   daisy-chain
     in which several devices share the same interrupt line. The chain breaks when one of the ISRs claims
     ownership for the interrupt by returning a status to the interrupt dispatcher.

        If multiple devices sharing the same interrupt require service at the same time, devices not acknowl-
     edged by their ISRs will interrupt the system again once the interrupt dispatcher has lowered the IRQL.
     Chaining is permitted only if all the device drivers wanting to use the same interrupt indicate to the ker-
     nel that they can share the interrupt (indicated by the ShareVector

     the sharing requirements of each.

        EXPERIMENT: Examining interrupt internals
        Using the kernel debugger, you can view details of an interrupt object, including its IRQL, ISR
                                                                             !idt debugger command and
        check whether you can locate an entry that includes a reference to I8042KeyboardInterruptService,
        the ISR routine for the PS2 keyboard device. Alternatively, you can look for entries pointing to
        Stornvme.sys or Scsiport.sys or any other third-party driver you recognize. In a Hyper-V virtual

        device entry:
        70:     fffff8045675a600 i8042prt!I8042KeyboardInterruptService (KINTERRUPT ffff8e01cbe3b280)

           To view the contents of the interrupt object associated with the interrupt, you can simply click
        on the link that the debugger offers, which uses the dt command, or you can manually use the
        dx
        6: kd> dt nt!_KINTERRUPT ffff8e01cbe3b280
           +0x000 Type             : 0n22
           +0x002 Size             : 0n256
           +0x008 InterruptListEntry : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0x00000000`00000000 - 0x00000000`00000000 ]

   +0x018 ServiceRoutine   : 0xfffff804`65e56820
                             unsigned char i8042prt!I8042KeyboardInterruptService
   +0x020 MessageServiceRoutine : (null)
   +0x028 MessageIndex     : 0
   +0x030 ServiceContext   : 0xffffe50f`9dfe9040 Void
   +0x038 SpinLock         : 0
   +0x040 TickCount        : 0
   +0x048 ActualLock       : 0xffffe50f`9dfe91a0 -> 0
   +0x050 DispatchAddress : 0xfffff804`565ca320    void nt!KiInterruptDispatch+0
   +0x058 Vector           : 0x70
   +0x05c Irql             : 0x7 ''
   +0x05d SynchronizeIrql : 0x7 ''
   +0x05e FloatingSave     : 0 ''
   +0x05f Connected        : 0x1 ''
   +0x060 Number           : 6
   +0x064 ShareVector      : 0 ''
   +0x065 EmulateActiveBoth : 0 ''
   +0x066 ActiveCount      : 0
   +0x068 InternalState    : 0n4
   +0x06c Mode             : 1 ( Latched )
   +0x070 Polarity         : 0 ( InterruptPolarityUnknown )
   +0x074 ServiceCount     : 0
   +0x078 DispatchCount    : 0
   +0x080 PassiveEvent     : (null)
   +0x088 TrapFrame        : (null)
   +0x090 DisconnectData   : (null)
   +0x098 ServiceThread    : (null)
   +0x0a0 ConnectionData   : 0xffffe50f`9db3bd90 _INTERRUPT_CONNECTION_DATA
   +0x0a8 IntTrackEntry    : 0xffffe50f`9d091d90 Void
   +0x0b0 IsrDpcStats      : _ISRDPCSTATS
   +0x0f0 RedirectObject   : (null)
   +0x0f8 Padding          : [8] ""

   In this example, the IRQL that Windows assigned to the interrupt is 7, which matches the fact

from the DispatchAddress                           KiInterruptDispatch-style interrupt with no
additional optimizations or sharing.

   If you wanted to see which GSIV (IRQ) was associated with the interrupt, there are two ways

INTERRUPT_CONNECTION_DATA structure embedded in the ConnectionData
                                                      dt command to dump the
pointer from your system as follows:
6: kd> dt 0xffffe50f`9db3bd90 _INTERRUPT_CONNECTION_DATA Vectors[0]..
nt!_INTERRUPT_CONNECTION_DATA
   +0x008 Vectors      : [0]
      +0x000 Type         : 0 ( InterruptTypeControllerInput )
      +0x004 Vector       : 0x70
      +0x008 Irql         : 0x7 ''
      +0x00c Polarity     : 1 ( InterruptActiveHigh )
      +0x010 Mode         : 1 ( Latched )
      +0x018 TargetProcessors :

              +0x000 Mask         : 0xff
              +0x008 Group        : 0
              +0x00a Reserved     : [3] 0
           +0x028 IntRemapInfo :
              +0x000 IrtIndex     : 0y000000000000000000000000000000 (0)
              +0x000 FlagHalInternal : 0y0
              +0x000 FlagTranslated : 0y0
              +0x004 u            : <anonymous-tag>
           +0x038 ControllerInput :
              +0x000 Gsiv         : 1

        The Type indicates that this is a traditional line/controller-based input, and the Vector
     and Irql
     ControllerInput
     different kind of interrupt, such as a Message Signaled Interrupt (more on this later), you would
     dereference the MessageRequest

        Another way to map GSIV to interrupt vectors is to recall that Windows keeps track of this
     translation when managing device resources through what are called arbiters
     type, an arbiter maintains the relationship between virtual resource usage (such as an interrupt
     vector) and physical resources (such as an interrupt line). As such, you can query the ACPI IRQ
     arbiter and obtain this mapping. Use the !apciirqarb command to obtain information on the
     ACPI IRQ arbiter:
     6: kd> !acpiirqarb

     Processor 0 (0, 0):
     Device Object: 0000000000000000
     Current IDT Allocation:
     ...
       000000070 - 00000070 D ffffe50f9959baf0 (i8042prt) A:ffffce0717950280 IRQ(GSIV):1
     ...

       Note that the GSIV for the keyboard is IRQ 1, which is a legacy number from back in the IBM
     PC/AT days that has persisted to this day. You can also use !arbiter 4 (4 tells the debugger to

         6: kd> !arbiter 4

         DEVNODE ffffe50f97445c70 (ACPI_HAL\PNP0C08\0)
           Interrupt Arbiter "ACPI_IRQ" at fffff804575415a0
             Allocated ranges:
               0000000000000001 - 0000000000000001       ffffe50f9959baf0          (i8042prt)

     note that in either output, you are given the owner of the vector, in the type of a device object (in
                                                             !devobj command to get information on
     the i8042prt device in this example (which corresponds to the PS/2 driver):
     6: kd> !devobj 0xFFFFE50F9959BAF0
     Device object (ffffe50f9959baf0) is for:
      00000049 \Driver\ACPI DriverObject ffffe50f974356f0

Current Irp 00000000 RefCount 1 Type 00000032 Flags 00001040
SecurityDescriptor ffffce0711ebf3e0 DevExt ffffe50f995573f0 DevObjExt ffffe50f9959bc40
DevNode ffffe50f9959e670
ExtensionFlags (0x00000800) DOE_DEFAULT_SD_PRESENT
Characteristics (0x00000080) FILE_AUTOGENERATED_DEVICE_NAME
AttachedDevice (Upper) ffffe50f9dfe9040 \Driver\i8042prt
Device queue is not busy.

    The device object is associated to a device node                                                  -
es. You can now dump these resources with the !devnode
ask for both raw and translated resource information:
6: kd> !devnode ffffe50f9959e670 f
DevNode 0xffffe50f9959e670 for PDO 0xffffe50f9959baf0
  InstancePath is "ACPI\LEN0071\4&36899b7b&0"
  ServiceName is "i8042prt"
  TargetDeviceNotify List - f 0xffffce0717307b20 b 0xffffce0717307b20
  State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
  Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
  CmResourceList at 0xffffce0713518330 Version 1.1 Interface 0xf Bus #0
    Entry 0 - Port (0x1) Device Exclusive (0x1)
      Flags (PORT_MEMORY PORT_IO 16_BIT_DECODE
      Range starts at 0x60 for 0x1 bytes
    Entry 1 - Port (0x1) Device Exclusive (0x1)
      Flags (PORT_MEMORY PORT_IO 16_BIT_DECODE
      Range starts at 0x64 for 0x1 bytes
    Entry 2 - Interrupt (0x2) Device Exclusive (0x1)
      Flags (LATCHED
      Level 0x1, Vector 0x1, Group 0, Affinity 0xffffffff
...
  TranslatedResourceList at 0xffffce0713517bb0 Version 1.1 Interface 0xf             Bus #0
    Entry 0 - Port (0x1) Device Exclusive (0x1)
      Flags (PORT_MEMORY PORT_IO 16_BIT_DECODE
      Range starts at 0x60 for 0x1 bytes
    Entry 1 - Port (0x1) Device Exclusive (0x1)
      Flags (PORT_MEMORY PORT_IO 16_BIT_DECODE
      Range starts at 0x64 for 0x1 bytes
    Entry 2 - Interrupt (0x2) Device Exclusive (0x1)
      Flags (LATCHED
      Level 0x7, Vector 0x70, Group 0, Affinity 0xff

    The device node tells you that this device has a resource list with three entries, one of which
is an interrupt entry corresponding to IRQ 1. (The level and vector numbers represent the GSIV

IRQL as 7 (this is the level number) and the interrupt vector as 0x70.

   On ACPI systems, you can also obtain this information in a slightly easier way by reading the
extended output of the !acpiirqarb command introduced earlier. As part of its output, it displays
the IRQ to IDT mapping table:
Interrupt Controller (Inputs: 0x0-0x77):
    (01)Cur:IDT-70 Ref-1 Boot-0 edg hi         Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
    (02)Cur:IDT-80 Ref-1 Boot-1 edg hi         Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-1 lev unk
    (08)Cur:IDT-90 Ref-1 Boot-0 edg hi         Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk

            (09)Cur:IDT-b0 Ref-1 Boot-0 lev hi         Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (0e)Cur:IDT-a0 Ref-1 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (10)Cur:IDT-b5 Ref-2 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (11)Cur:IDT-a5 Ref-1 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (12)Cur:IDT-95 Ref-1 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (14)Cur:IDT-64 Ref-2 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (17)Cur:IDT-54 Ref-1 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (1f)Cur:IDT-a6 Ref-1 Boot-0 lev low        Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk
            (41)Cur:IDT-96 Ref-1 Boot-0 edg hi         Pos:IDT-00 Ref-0 Boot-0 lev unk

        resources, and other related concepts, see Chapter 6 in Part 1.

     Line-based versus message signaled–based interrupts
     Shared interrupts are often the cause of high interrupt latency and can also cause stability issues. They
     are typically undesirable and a side effect of the limited number of physical interrupt lines on a com-

     Memory Stick, Secure Digital, and other formats, all the controllers that are part of the same physical
                                                                                                            -
     ent device drivers as a shared interrupt vector. This adds latency as each one is called in a sequence to
     determine the actual controller that is sending the interrupt for the media device.

         A much better solution is for each device controller to have its own interrupt and for one driver to
     manage the different interrupts, knowing which device they came from. However, consuming four tra-
     ditional IRQ lines for a single device quickly leads to IRQ line exhaustion. Additionally, PCI devices are
     each connected to only one IRQ line anyway, so the media card reader cannot use more than one IRQ

        Other problems with generating interrupts through an IRQ line is that incorrect management of the
     IRQ signal can lead to interrupt storms or other kinds of deadlocks on the machine because the signal
                                                                                                              -
     cally receive an EOI signal as well.) If either of these does not happen due to a bug, the system can end

     interrupts provide poor scalability in multiprocessor environments. In many cases, the hardware has

     manager selected for this interrupt, and device drivers can do little about it.

                                                                                          message-signaled
     interrupts (MSI). Although it was an optional component of the standard that was seldom found in
     client machines (and mostly found on servers for network card and storage controller performance),
     most modern systems, thanks to PCI Express 3.0 and later, fully embrace this model. In the MSI world, a

     this is essentially treated like a Direct Memory Access (DMA) operation as far as hardware is concerned.
     This action causes an interrupt, and Windows then calls the ISR with the message content (value) and

the address where the message was delivered. A device can also deliver multiple messages (up to 32) to
the memory address, delivering different payloads based on the event.

which is introduced in PCI 3.0, adds support for 32-bit messages (instead of 16-bit), a maximum of 2048
different messages (instead of just 32), and more importantly, the ability to use a different address
(which can be dynamically determined) for each of the MSI payloads. Using a different address allows
the MSI payload to be written to a different physical address range that belongs to a different proces-
sor, or a different set of target processors, effectively enabling nonuniform memory access (NUMA)-
aware interrupt delivery by sending the interrupt to the processor that initiated the related device
request. This improves latency and scalability by monitoring both load and the closest NUMA node
during interrupt completion.

    In either model, because communication is based across a memory value, and because the content
is delivered with the interrupt, the need for IRQ lines is removed (making the total system limit of MSIs
equal to the number of interrupt vectors, not IRQ lines), as is the need for a driver ISR to query the
device for data related to the interrupt, decreasing latency. Due to the large number of device inter-

latency further by directly delivering the interrupt data to the concerned ISR.

utilize the term “GSIV” instead of IRQ because it more generically describes an MSI vector (which is

(GPIO) pin on an embedded device. And, additionally, on ARM and ARM64 systems, neither of these

8-16, you can see the Device Manager on two computer systems showing both traditional IRQ-based
GSIV assignments, as well as MSI values, which are negative.

FIGURE 8-16 IRQ and MSI-based GSIV assignment.

     Interrupt steering

                                                                                                           -
     tween 2 and 16 processors in a single processor group, Windows enables a piece of functionality called
     interrupt steering to help with power and latency needs on modern consumer systems. Thanks to this fea-
     ture, interrupt load can be spread across processors as needed to avoid bottlenecking a single CPU, and
     the core parking engine, which was described in Chapter 6 of Part 1, can also steer interrupts away from
     parked cores to avoid interrupt distribution from keeping too many processors awake at the same time.

        Interrupt steering capabilities are dependent on interrupt controllers— for example, on ARM systems
     with a GIC, both level sensitive and edge (latched) triggered interrupts can be steered, whereas on APIC
     systems (unless running under Hyper-V), only level-sensitive interrupts can be steered. Unfortunately,

     why Windows also implements an additional interrupt redirection model to handle these situations.

         When steering is enabled, the interrupt controller is simply reprogrammed to deliver the GSIV to a
                                                                                redirection must be used, then
     all processors are delivery targets for the GSIV, and whichever processor received the interrupt manu-
     ally issues an IPI to the target processor to which the interrupt should be steered toward.

                                                                                                                 -
     ity through a system information class that is handled by KeIntSteerAssignCpuSetForGsiv as part of the
     Real-Time Audio capabilities of Windows 10 and the CPU Set feature that was described in the “Thread

     of processors that can be chosen by the user-mode application, as long as it has the Increase Base
     Priority privilege, which is normally only granted to administrators or local service accounts.

     Interrupt affinity and priority

                                                                                  InterruptPolicyValue in the

                                                                                     https://docs.
     microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/kernel/interrupt-affinity-and-priority.

TABLE 8-5

Policy                                          Meaning

IrqPolicyMachineDefault
                                                default machine policy, which (for machines with less than eight logical
                                                processors) is to select any available processor on the machine.

IrqPolicyAllCloseProcessors                     On a NUMA machine, the Plug and Play manager assigns the in-
                                                terrupt to all the processors that are close to the device (on
                                                the same node). On non-NUMA machines, this is the same as
                                                IrqPolicyAllProcessorsInMachine.

IrqPolicyOneCloseProcessor                      On a NUMA machine, the Plug and Play manager assigns the interrupt
                                                to one processor that is close to the device (on the same node). On non-
                                                NUMA machines, the chosen processor will be any available processor
                                                on the system.

IrqPolicyAllProcessorsInMachine                 The interrupt is processed by any available processor on the machine.

IrqPolicySpecifiedProcessors

IrqPolicySpreadMessagesAcrossAllProcessors      Different message-signaled interrupts are distributed across an optimal
                                                set of eligible processors, keeping track of NUMA topology issues, if pos-
                                                sible. This requires MSI-X support on the device and platform.

IrqPolicyAllProcessorsInGroupWhenSteered        The interrupt is subject to interrupt steering, and as such, the interrupt
                                                should be assigned to all processor IDTs as the target processor will be
                                                dynamically selected based on steering rules.

priority, based on the values in Table 8-6.

TABLE 8-6 IRQ priorities

Priority               Meaning

IrqPriorityUndefined   No particular priority is required by the device. It receives the default priority (IrqPriorityNormal).

IrqPriorityLow         The device can tolerate high latency and should receive a lower IRQL than usual (3 or 4).

IrqPriorityNormal      The device expects average latency. It receives the default IRQL associated with its interrupt vec-
                       tor (5 to 11).

IrqPriorityHigh        The device requires as little latency as possible. It receives an elevated IRQL beyond its normal
                       assignment (12).

   As discussed earlier, it is important to note that Windows is not a real-time operating system, and
as such, these IRQ priorities are hints given to the system that control only the IRQL associated with
the interrupt and provide no extra priority other than the Windows IRQL priority-scheme mechanism.
Because the IRQ priority is also stored in the registry, administrators are free to set these values for
drivers should there be a requirement of lower latency for a driver not taking advantage of this feature.

     Software interrupts
     Although hardware generates most interrupts, the Windows kernel also generates software interrupts
     for a variety of tasks, including these:

        ■   Initiating thread dispatching

        ■   Non-time-critical interrupt processing

        ■   Handling timer expiration

        ■   Asynchronously executing a procedure in the context of a particular thread

        ■   Supporting asynchronous I/O operations

        These tasks are described in the following subsections.

     Dispatch or deferred procedure call (DPC) interrupts

     A DPC is typically an interrupt-related function that performs a processing task after all device inter-
     rupts have already been handled. The functions are called deferred because they might not execute
     immediately. The kernel uses DPCs to process timer expiration (and release threads waiting for the

     DPC IRQL but not really through a regular kernel DPC). Device drivers use DPCs to process interrupts
     and perform actions not available at higher IRQLs. To provide timely service for hardware interrupts,
     Windows—with the cooperation of device drivers—attempts to keep the IRQL below device IRQL lev-
     els. One way that this goal is achieved is for device driver ISRs to perform the minimal work necessary
     to acknowledge their device, save volatile interrupt state, and defer data transfer or other less time-
     critical interrupt processing activity for execution in a DPC at DPC/dispatch IRQL. (See Chapter 6 in Part
     1 for more information on the I/O system.)

        In the case where the IRQL is passive or at APC level, DPCs will immediately execute and block all
     other non-hardware-related processing, which is why they are also often used to force immediate
     execution of high-priority system code. Thus, DPCs provide the operating system with the capability

     can no longer continue executing, perhaps because it has terminated or because it voluntarily enters a
     wait state, the kernel calls the dispatcher directly to perform an immediate context switch. Sometimes,
     however, the kernel detects that rescheduling should occur when it is deep within many layers of code.
     In this situation, the kernel requests dispatching but defers its occurrence until it completes its current
     activity. Using a DPC software interrupt is a convenient way to achieve this delayed processing.

     synchronize access to scheduling-related kernel structures. This disables additional software interrupts
     and thread dispatching. When the kernel detects that dispatching should occur, it requests a DPC/dis-
     patch-level interrupt; but because the IRQL is at or above that level, the processor holds the interrupt in
     check. When the kernel completes its current activity, it sees that it will lower the IRQL below DPC/dis-
     patch level and checks to see whether any dispatch interrupts are pending. If there are, the IRQL drops
     to DPC/dispatch level, and the dispatch interrupts are processed. Activating the thread dispatcher by

using a software interrupt is a way to defer dispatching until conditions are right. A DPC is represented
by a DPC object, a kernel control object that is not visible to user-mode programs but is visible to de-
vice drivers and other system code. The most important piece of information the DPC object contains
is the address of the system function that the kernel will call when it processes the DPC interrupt. DPC
routines that are waiting to execute are stored in kernel-managed queues, one per processor, called
DPC queues. To request a DPC, system code calls the kernel to initialize a DPC object and then places it
in a DPC queue.

   By default, the kernel places DPC objects at the end of one of two DPC queues belonging to the
processor on which the DPC was requested (typically the processor on which the ISR executed). A
device driver can override this behavior, however, by specifying a DPC priority (low, medium, medium-
high, or high, where medium is the default) and by targeting the DPC at a particular processor. A DPC
                                      targeted DPC. If the DPC has a high priority, the kernel inserts the
DPC object at the front of the queue; otherwise, it is placed at the end of the queue for all other priorities.

IRQL (APC or passive level), the kernel processes DPCs. Windows ensures that the IRQL remains at DPC/

is, the kernel “drains” the queue), calling each DPC function in turn. Only when the queue is empty will
the kernel let the IRQL drop below DPC/dispatch level and let regular thread execution continue. DPC

                                                      IRQL setting
 DPC    1 A timer expires, and the kernel                table
          queues a DPC that will release
          any threads waiting on the              High
          timer. The kernel then          Power failure
          requests a software interrupt.                           3 After the DPC interrupt,
                                                           •         control transfers to the
                                                           •
                                                           •         (thread) dispatcher.
        2 When the IRQL drops below
          DPC/dispatch level, a DPC       DPC/dispatch                  Dispatcher
          interrupt occurs.                        APC
                                               Passive
       DPC                 DPC
                DPC
               queue

                                          4 The dispatcher executes each DPC routine
                                            in the DPC queue, emptying the queue as
                                            it proceeds. If required, the dispatcher also
                                            reschedules the processor.

FIGURE 8-17 Delivering a DPC.

   DPC priorities can affect system behavior another way. The kernel usually initiates DPC queue
draining with a DPC/dispatch-level interrupt. The kernel generates such an interrupt only if the DPC is
directed at the current processor (the one on which the ISR executes) and the DPC has a priority higher
than low. If the DPC has a low priority, the kernel requests the interrupt only if the number of outstand-
ing DPC requests (stored in the DpcQueueDepth
threshold (called MaximumDpcQueueDepth
processor within a time window is low.

     is either high or medium-high, the kernel immediately signals the target CPU (by sending it a dispatch IPI)
     to drain its DPC queue, but only as long as the target processor is idle. If the priority is medium or low, the
     number of DPCs queued on the target processor (this being the DpcQueueDepth again) must exceed a
     threshold (the MaximumDpcQueueDepth) for the kernel to trigger a DPC/dispatch interrupt. The system
     idle thread also drains the DPC queue for the processor it runs on. Although DPC targeting and priority

     8-7 summarizes the situations that initiate DPC queue draining. Medium-high and high appear, and are,
     in fact, equal priorities when looking at the generation rules. The difference comes from their insertion in
     the list, with high interrupts being at the head and medium-high interrupts at the tail.

     TABLE 8-7 DPC interrupt generation rules

     DPC Priority    DPC Targeted at ISR’s Processor                    DPC Targeted at Another Processor

     Low             DPC queue length exceeds maximum DPC queue         DPC queue length exceeds maximum DPC queue
                     length, or DPC request rate is less than minimum   length, or system is idle
                     DPC request rate

     Medium          Always                                             DPC queue length exceeds maximum DPC queue
                                                                        length, or system is idle

     Medium-High     Always                                             Target processor is idle

     High            Always                                             Target processor is idle

        Additionally, Table 8-8 describes the various DPC adjustment variables and their default values, as

     set by using the SystemDpcBehaviorInformation system information class.

     TABLE 8-8 DPC interrupt generation variables

     Variable                      Definition                                               Default Override Value

                                   Number of DPCs queued before an interrupt will be        4       DpcQueueDepth
                                   sent even for Medium or below DPCs

                                   Number of DPCs per clock tick where low DPCs will        3       MinimumDpcRate
                                   not cause a local interrupt to be generated

                                   Number of DPCs per clock tick before the maximum         20      IdealDpcRate
                                   DPC queue depth is decremented if DPCs are pending
                                   but no interrupt was generated

                                   Number of clock ticks before the maximum DPC             20      AdjustDpcThreshold

        Because user-mode threads execute at low IRQL, the chances are good that a DPC will interrupt
                                                                                                                     -

     faults, or create or wait for dispatcher objects (explained later in this chapter). They can, however, ac-
     cess nonpaged system memory addresses, because system address space is always mapped regardless
     of what the current process is.

   Because all user-mode memory is pageable and the DPC executes in an arbitrary process context,
DPC code should never access user-mode memory in any way. On systems that support Supervisor
Mode Access Protection (SMAP) or Privileged Access Neven (PAN), Windows activates these features
for the duration of the DPC queue processing (and routine execution), ensuring that any user-mode
memory access will immediately result in a bugcheck.

    Another side effect of DPCs interrupting the execution of threads is that they end up “stealing”
from the run time of the thread; while the scheduler thinks that the current thread is executing, a DPC
is executing instead. In Chapter 4, Part 1, we discussed mechanisms that the scheduler uses to make
up for this lost time by tracking the precise number of CPU cycles that a thread has been running and
deducting DPC and ISR time, when applicable.

                         wall time (also sometimes called clock time—the real-life passage of time) is still
being spent on something else. Imagine a user currently streaming their favorite song off the Internet:
If a DPC were to take 2 seconds to run, those 2 seconds would result in the music skipping or repeat-
ing in a small loop. Similar impacts can be felt on video streaming or even keyboard and mouse input.
Because of this, DPCs are a primary cause for perceived system unresponsiveness of client systems or
workstation workloads because even the highest-priority thread will be interrupted by a running DPC.
                                                                        threaded DPCs. Threaded DPCs,
as their name implies, function by executing the DPC routine at passive level on a real-time priority
(priority 31) thread. This allows the DPC to preempt most user-mode threads (because most application

and other priority 31 threads to preempt the routine.

   The threaded DPC mechanism is enabled by default, but you can disable it by adding a DWORD val-
ue named ThreadDpcEnable

KeInitializeThreadedDpc API, which sets the DPC internal type to ThreadedDpcObject. Because threaded
DPCs can be disabled, driver developers who make use of threaded DPCs must write their routines
following the same rules as for nonthreaded DPC routines and cannot access paged memory, perform
dispatcher waits, or make assumptions about the IRQL level at which they are executing. In addition,
they must not use the KeAcquire/ReleaseSpinLockAtDpcLevel APIs because the functions assume the
CPU is at dispatch level. Instead, threaded DPCs must use KeAcquire/ReleaseSpinLockForDpc, which
performs the appropriate action after checking the current IRQL.

system administrator. As such, the vast majority of DPCs still execute nonthreaded and can result in
perceived system lag. Windows employs a vast arsenal of performance tracking mechanisms to diag-

through performance counters, as well as through precise ETW tracing.

     EXPERIMENT: Monitoring DPC activity
     You can use Process Explorer to monitor DPC activity by opening the System Information dialog
     box and switching to the CPU tab, where it lists the number of interrupts and DPCs executed each
     time Process Explorer refreshes the display (1 second by default):

                                     DpcLastCount DpcTime, and DpcData (which contains the
   with Dpc, such as DpcRequestRate, DpcLastCount,
   DpcQueueDepth and DpcCount for both nonthreaded and threaded DPCs). Additionally, newer
   versions of Windows also include an IsrDpcStats                       _ISRDPCSTATS

   nonthreaded) versus the number that have executed:
   lkd> dx new { QueuedDpcCount = @$prcb->DpcData[0].DpcCount + @$prcb->DpcData[1].DpcCount,
   ExecutedDpcCount = ((nt!_ISRDPCSTATS*)@$prcb->IsrDpcStats)->DpcCount },d
       QueuedDpcCount   : 3370380
       ExecutedDpcCount : 1766914 [Type: unsigned __int64]

      The discrepancy you see in the example output is expected; drivers might have queued a DPC
   that was already in the queue, a condition that Windows handles safely. Additionally, a DPC

   execute on a different processor, such as when the driver uses KeSetTargetProcessorDpc (the API
   allows a driver to target the DPC to a particular processor.)

              DPCTimeout, DpcWatchdogPeriod, and DpcWatchdogProfileOffset.

  The DPC Watchdog is responsible for monitoring all execution of code at DISPATCH_LEVEL or
above, where a drop in IRQL has not been registered for quite some time. The DPC Timeout, on the

20 seconds, and all DISPATCH_LEVEL (and above) execution times out after 2 minutes. Both limits are
                                                        DPCTimeout
limit, whereas the DpcWatchdogPeriod controls the combined execution of all the code running at
high IRQL). When these thresholds are hit, the system will either bugcheck with DPC_WATCHDOG_
VIOLATION (indicating which of the situations was encountered), or, if a kernel debugger is attached,
raise an assertion that can be continued.

   Driver developers who want to do their part in avoiding these situations can use the
KeQueryDpcWatchdogInformation
                    KeShouldYieldProcessor API takes these values (and other system state values) into
consideration and returns to the driver a hint used for making a decision whether to continue its DPC
work later, or if possible, drop the IRQL back to PASSIVE_LEVEL                                        -
ing, but the driver was holding a lock or synchronizing with a DPC in some way).

   On the latest builds of Windows 10, each PRCB also contains a DPC Runtime History Table
(DpcRuntimeHistoryHashTable
functions that have recently executed and the amount of CPU cycles that they spent running. When

     access to a UI tool, but more importantly, this data is also now used by the kernel.

        When a driver developer queues a DPC through KeInsertQueueDpc, the API will enumerate the

                                                                            LongDpcRuntimeThreshold regis-

     this is the case, the LongDpcPresent                       DpcData structure mentioned earlier.

     thread), the kernel now also creates a DPC Delegate Thread. These are highly unique threads that

     thread selection algorithms. They are merely kept in the back pocket of the kernel for its own purposes.

     delegate threads. Note that in this case, these threads have a real Thread ID (TID), and the Processor
     column should be treated as such for them.

     FIGURE 8-18 The DPC delegate threads on a 16-CPU system.

   Whenever the kernel is dispatching DPCs, it checks whether the DPC queue depth has passed the
threshold of such long-running

by looking at the properties of the currently executing thread: Is it idle? Is it a real-time thread? Does

kernel may decide to schedule the DPC delegate thread instead, essentially swapping the DPC from its
thread-starving position into a dedicated thread, which has the highest priority possible (still execut-
ing at DISPATCH_LEVEL). This gives a chance to the old preempted thread (or any other thread in the
standby list) to be rescheduled to some other CPU.

    This mechanism is similar to the Threaded DPCs we explained earlier, with some exceptions. The
delegate thread still runs at DISPATCH_LEVEL. Indeed, when it is created and started in phase 1 of the
NT kernel initialization (see Chapter 12 for more details), it raises its own IRQL to DISPATCH level, saves
it in the WaitIrql
a context switch to another standby or ready thread (via the KiSwapThread routine.) Thus, the delegate
DPCs provide an automatic balancing action that the system takes, instead of an opt-in that driver
developers must judiciously leverage on their own.

   If you have a newer Windows 10 system with this capability, you can run the following command in
the kernel debugger to take a look at how often the delegate thread was needed, which you can infer
from the amount of context switches that have occurred since boot:

lkd> dx @$cursession.Processes[0].Threads.Where(t => t.KernelObject.ThreadName->
ToDisplayString().Contains("DPC Delegate Thread")).Select(t => t.KernelObject.Tcb.
ContextSwitches),d
    [44]             : 2138 [Type: unsigned long]
    [52]             : 4 [Type: unsigned long]
    [60]             : 11 [Type: unsigned long]
    [68]             : 6 [Type: unsigned long]
    [76]             : 13 [Type: unsigned long]
    [84]             : 3 [Type: unsigned long]
    [92]             : 16 [Type: unsigned long]
    [100]            : 19 [Type: unsigned long]
    [108]            : 2 [Type: unsigned long]
    [116]            : 1 [Type: unsigned long]
    [124]            : 2 [Type: unsigned long]
    [132]            : 2 [Type: unsigned long]
    [140]            : 3 [Type: unsigned long]
    [148]            : 2 [Type: unsigned long]
    [156]            : 1 [Type: unsigned long]
    [164]            : 1 [Type: unsigned long]

Asynchronous procedure call interrupts

Asynchronous procedure calls (APCs) provide a way for user programs and system code to execute
in the context of a particular user thread (and hence a particular process address space). Because
APCs are queued to execute in the context of a particular thread, they are subject to thread schedul-
ing rules and do not operate within the same environment as DPCs—namely, they do not operate at
DISPATCH_LEVEL and can be preempted by higher priority threads, perform blocking waits, and access
pageable memory.

        That being said, because APCs are still a type of software interrupt, they must somehow still be able

                                                       APC_LEVEL
     operate under the same restrictions as a DPC, there are still certain limitations imposed that developers

        APCs are described by a kernel control object, called an APC object. APCs waiting to execute reside
     in one of two kernel-managed APC queues. Unlike the DPC queues, which are per-processor (and di-
     vided into threaded and nonthreaded), the APC queues are per-thread—with each thread having two
     APC queues: one for kernel APCs and one for user APCs.

        When asked to queue an APC, the kernel looks at the mode (user or kernel) of the APC and then
     inserts it into the appropriate queue belonging to the thread that will execute the APC routine. Before

     When an APC is queued against a thread, that thread may be in one of the three following situations:

        ■   The thread is currently running (and may even be the current thread).

        ■   The thread is currently waiting.

        ■   The thread is doing something else (ready, standby, and so on).

                                                                                                  alertable
     state whenever performing a wait. Unless APCs have been completely disabled for a thread, for kernel
     APCs, this state is ignored—the APC always aborts the wait, with consequences that will be explained
                              user APCs however, the thread is interrupted only if the wait was alertable and
     instantiated on behalf of a user-mode component or if there are other pending user APCs that already
     started aborting the wait (which would happen if there were lots of processors trying to queue an APC
     to the same thread).

     either perform an alertable wait or go through a ring transition or context switch that revisits the User

     raising the IRQL to APC_LEVEL, notifying the processor that it must look at the kernel APC queue of its
     currently running thread. And, in both scenarios, if the thread was doing “something else,” some transi-
     tion that takes it into either the running or waiting state needs to occur. As a practical result of this,

        We mentioned that APCs could be disabled for a thread, outside of the previously described scenar-

     being to simply keep their IRQL at APC_LEVEL or above while executing some piece of code. Because
                                                                                                           -
     plained, if the processor is already at APC_LEVEL (or higher), the interrupt is masked out. Therefore, it is
     only once the IRQL has dropped to PASSIVE_LEVEL that the pending interrupt is delivered, causing the
     APC to execute.

   The second mechanism, which is strongly preferred because it avoids changing interrupt controller
state, is to use the kernel API KeEnterGuardedRegion, pairing it with KeLeaveGuardedRegion when you
want to restore APC delivery back to the thread. These APIs are recursive and can be called multiple
times in a nested fashion. It is safe to context switch to another thread while still in such a region
                                                                                 SpecialApcDisable and
not per-processor state.

   Similarly, context switches can occur while at APC_LEVEL, even though this is per-processor state.
                                                              WaitIrql and then sets the processor
IRQL to the WaitIrql of the new incoming thread (which could be PASSIVE_LEVEL). This creates an

Such a possibility is common and entirely normal, proving that when it comes to thread execution, the
scheduler outweighs any IRQL considerations. It is only by raising to DISPATCH_LEVEL, which disables
thread preemption, that IRQLs supersede the scheduler. Since APC_LEVEL is the only IRQL that ends up
behaving this way, it is often called a thread-local IRQL
approximation for the behavior described herein.

   Regardless of how APCs are disabled by a kernel developer, one rule is paramount: Code can neither
return to user mode with the APC at anything above PASSIVE_LEVEL nor can SpecialApcDisable be set
to anything but 0. Such situations result in an immediate bugcheck, typically meaning some driver has
forgotten to release a lock or leave its guarded region.

    In addition to two APC modes, there are two types of APCs for each mode—normal APCs and spe-
cial APCs—both of which behave differently depending on the mode. We describe each combination:

   ■   Special Kernel APC This combination results in an APC that is always inserted at the tail of
       all other existing special kernel APCs in the APC queue but before any normal kernel APCs. The
       kernel routine receives a pointer to the arguments and to the normal routine of the APC and
       operates at APC_LEVEL, where it can choose to queue a new, normal APC.

   ■   Normal Kernel APC This type of APC is always inserted at the tail end of the APC queue, al-
       lowing for a special kernel APC to queue a new normal kernel APC that will execute soon there-
       after, as described in the earlier example. These kinds of APCs can not only be disabled through
       the mechanisms presented earlier but also through a third API called KeEnterCriticalRegion
       (paired with KeLeaveCriticalRegion), which updates the KernelApcDisable counter in KTHREAD
       but not SpecialApcDisable.

   ■                                 kernel routine at APC_LEVEL, sending it pointers to the argu-
       ments and the normal routine
       drop the IRQL to PASSIVE_LEVEL and execute the normal routine as well, with the input argu-
       ments passed in by value this time. Once the normal routine returns, the IRQL is raised back to
       APC_LEVEL again.

   ■   Normal User APC This typical combination causes the APC to be inserted at the tail of the
       APC queue and for the kernel routine                        APC_LEVEL in the same way as the
       preceding bullet. If a normal routine is still present, then the APC is prepared for user-mode

            delivery (obviously, at PASSIVE_LEVEL) through the creation of a trap frame and exception
            frame that will eventually cause the user-mode APC dispatcher in Ntdll.dll to take control of the
            thread once back in user mode, and which will call the supplied user pointer. Once the user-
            mode APC returns, the dispatcher uses the NtContinue or NtContinueEx system call to return to
            the original trap frame.

        ■   Note that if the kernel routine ended up clearing out the normal routine, then the thread, if
            alerted, loses that state, and, conversely, if not alerted, becomes alerted, and the user APC

            performed by the KeTestAlertThread
            executed in user mode, even though the kernel routine cancelled the dispatch.

        ■   Special User APC This combination of APC is a recent addition to newer builds of Windows 10
            and generalizes a special dispensation that was done for the thread termination APC such that

            (noncurrent) thread requires the use of an APC, but it must also only occur once all kernel-mode

            quite well, but it would mean that a user-mode developer could avoid termination by perform-

                                                                                kernel routine of a User
     APC was KiSchedulerApcTerminate. In this situation, the User APC was recognized as being “special”

     pending” state was always set, which forced execution of the APC at the next user-mode ring transi-
     tion or context switch to this thread.

     This functionality, however, being solely reserved for the termination code path, meant that develop-
     ers who want to similarly guarantee the execution of their User APC, regardless of alertability state,
     had to resort to using more complex mechanisms such as manually changing the context of the
     thread using SetThreadContext, which is error-prone at best. In response, the QueueUserAPC2 API was
     created, which allows passing in the QUEUE_USER_APC_FLAGS_SPECIAL_USER_APC
     exposing similar functionality to developers as well. Such APCs will always be added before any other
     user-mode APCs (except the termination APC, which is now extra special) and will ignore the alertable

     as a special user APC.

        Table 8-9 summarizes the APC insertion and delivery behavior for each type of APC.

        The executive uses kernel-mode APCs to perform operating system work that must be completed
     within the address space (in the context) of a particular thread. It can use special kernel-mode APCs to
     direct a thread to stop executing an interruptible system service, for example, or to record the results

     kernel-mode APCs to make a thread suspend or terminate itself or to get or set its user-mode execu-
     tion context. The Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) uses kernel-mode APCs to emulate the delivery
     of UNIX signals to Subsystem for UNIX Application processes.

TABLE 8-9 APC insertion and delivery

APC Type                   Insertion Behavior                    Delivery Behavior

Special (kernel)           Inserted right after the last spe-
                           cial APC (at the head of all other    drops, and the thread is not in a guarded region. It is
                           normal APCs)
                                                                 the APC.

Normal (kernel)            Inserted at the tail of the kernel-                               APC_LEVEL as soon as IRQL
                           mode APC list                         drops, and the thread is not in a critical (or guarded)

                                                                 inserting the APC. Executes the normal routine, if any,
                                                                 at PASSIVE_LEVEL after the associated kernel routine
                                                                 was executed. It is given arguments returned by the as-
                                                                 sociated kernel routine (which can be the original argu-
                                                                 ments used during insertion or new ones).

Normal (user)              Inserted at the tail of the user-                                 APC_LEVEL as soon as IRQL
                           mode APC list
                                                                 set (indicating that an APC was queued while the thread
                                                                 was in an alertable wait state). It is given pointers to

                                                                 Executes the normal routine, if any, in user mode at
                                                                 PASSIVE_LEVEL after the associated kernel routine is
                                                                 executed. It is given arguments returned by the associ-
                                                                 ated kernel routine (which can be the original argu-
                                                                 ments used during insertion or new ones). If the normal
                                                                 routine was cleared by the kernel routine, it performs a
                                                                 test-alert against the thread.

User Thread               Inserted at the head of the user-                                                                -
Terminate APC             mode APC list                          lows similar rules as described earlier but delivered
(KiSchedulerApcTerminate)                                        at PASSIVE_LEVEL on return to user mode, no matter
                                                                 what. It is given arguments returned by the thread-
                                                                 termination special APC.

Special (user)             Inserted at the head of the           Same as above, but arguments are con-
                           user-mode APC list but after the      trolled by the caller of QueueUserAPC2
                           thread terminates APC, if any.        (NtQueueApcThreadEx2
                                                                 KeSpecialUserApcKernelRoutine function that re-inserts
                                                                 the APC, converting it from the initial special kernel
                                                                 APC to a special user APC.

   Another important use of kernel-mode APCs is related to thread suspension and termination. Because
these operations can be initiated from arbitrary threads and directed to other arbitrary threads, the
kernel uses an APC to query the thread context as well as to terminate the thread. Device drivers often
block APCs or enter a critical or guarded region to prevent these operations from occurring while they are
holding a lock; otherwise, the lock might never be released, and the system would hang.

goes into a wait state, another thread in another process can be scheduled to run. When the device

initiated the I/O so that it can copy the results of the I/O operation to the buffer in the address space
of the process containing that thread. The I/O system uses a special kernel-mode APC to perform this
action unless the application used the SetFileIoOverlappedRange API or I/O completion ports. In that
case, the buffer will either be global in memory or copied only after the thread pulls a completion item
from the port. (The use of APCs in the I/O system is discussed in more detail in Chapter 6 of Part 1.)

        Several Windows APIs—such as ReadFileEx, WriteFileEx, and QueueUserAPC—use user-mode APCs.
                     ReadFileEx and WriteFileEx functions allow the caller to specify a completion routine

     alertable wait state. A thread can enter a wait state either by waiting for an object handle and specify-
     ing that its wait is alertable (with the Windows WaitForMultipleObjectsEx function) or by testing directly
     whether it has a pending APC (using SleepEx). In both cases, if a user-mode APC is pending, the kernel

     when the APC routine completes. Unlike kernel-mode APCs, which can execute at APC_LEVEL, user-
     mode APCs execute at PASSIVE_LEVEL.

        APC delivery can reorder the wait queues—the lists of which threads are waiting for what, and in
     what order they are waiting. (Wait resolution is described in the section “Low-IRQL synchronization,”
     later in this chapter.) If the thread is in a wait state when an APC is delivered, after the APC routine

     are used to suspend a thread from execution, if the thread is waiting for any objects, its wait is removed
     until the thread is resumed, after which that thread will be at the end of the list of threads waiting to
     access the objects it was waiting for. A thread performing an alertable kernel-mode wait will also be
     woken up during thread termination, allowing such a thread to check whether it woke up as a result of
     termination or for a different reason.

     Timer processing
                                                                                                            -
     denced by its high IRQL value (CLOCK_LEVEL) and due to the critical nature of the work it is responsible
     for. Without this interrupt, Windows would lose track of time, causing erroneous results in calcula-
     tions of uptime and clock time—and worse, causing timers to no longer expire, and threads never to
     consume their quantum. Windows would also not be a preemptive operating system, and unless the
     current running thread yielded the CPU, critical background tasks and scheduling could never occur on
     a given processor.

     Timer types and intervals
                                                                                                          -
     chine, and subsequently allowed drivers, applications, and administrators to modify the clock interval

     Programmable Interrupt Timer (PIT) chip that has been present on all computers since the PC/AT or
     the Real Time Clock (RTC). The PIT works on a crystal that is tuned at one-third the NTSC color carrier

     various achievable multiples to reach millisecond-unit intervals, starting at 1 ms all the way up to 15 ms.

     run at various intervals that are also powers of two. On RTC-based systems, the APIC Multiprocessor

   The PIT and RTC have numerous issues: They are slow, external devices on legacy buses, have poor
granularity, force all processors to synchronize access to their hardware registers, are a pain to emu-
late, and are increasingly no longer found on embedded hardware devices, such as IoT and mobile. In
response, hardware vendors created new types of timers, such as the ACPI Timer, also sometimes called
the Power Management (PM) Timer, and the APIC Timer (which lives directly on the processor). The

Timer, or HPET, which a much-improved version of the RTC. On systems with an HPET, it is used instead
of the RTC or PIC. Additionally, ARM64 systems have their own timer architecture, called the Generic

on a given system, using the following order:

   1.
        virtual machine.

   2.

   3.

   4.
        kind of HPET.

   5.   If no HPET was found, use the RTC.

   6.

   7.
        which should never happen.

    The HPET and the LAPIC Timer have one more advantage—other than only supporting the typical
periodic                                                           one shot mode. This capability will
allow recent versions of Windows to leverage a dynamic tick model, which we explain later.

Timer granularity
Some types of Windows applications require very fast response times, such as multimedia applications.

rate (that functionality was added later, through enhanced timers, which we cover in an upcoming sec-
tion); instead, they end up increasing the resolution of all timers in the system, potentially causing other
timers to expire more frequently, too.

         That being said, Windows tries its best to restore the clock timer back to its original value whenever
     it can. Each time a process requests a clock interval change, Windows increases an internal reference
     count and associates it with the process. Similarly, drivers (which can also change the clock rate) get
     added to the global reference count. When all drivers have restored the clock and all processes that

        EXPERIMENT: Identifying high-frequency timers
        Due to the problems that high-frequency timers can cause, Windows uses Event Tracing for

        interval, displaying the time of the occurrence and the requested interval. The current interval
        is also shown. This data is of great use to both developers and system administrators in identify-
        ing the causes of poor battery performance on otherwise healthy systems, as well as to decrease
        overall power consumption on large systems. To obtain it, simply run powercfg /energy
                                                                                           /energy, and
                                                 energy-report.html, similar to the one shown here:
                                                 energy-report.html

   Scroll down to the Platform Timer Resolution section, and you see all the applications that

call. Timer resolutions are shown in hundreds of nanoseconds, so a period of 20,000 corresponds
to 2 ms. In the sample shown, two applications—namely, Microsoft Edge and the TightVNC
remote desktop server—each requested a higher resolution.

                                                                                    EPROCESS

   +0x4a8 TimerResolutionLink : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0xfffffa80'05218fd8 - 0xfffffa80'059cd508 ]
   +0x4b8 RequestedTimerResolution : 0
   +0x4bc ActiveThreadsHighWatermark : 0x1d
   +0x4c0 SmallestTimerResolution : 0x2710
   +0x4c8 TimerResolutionStackRecord : 0xfffff8a0'0476ecd0 _PO_DIAG_STACK_RECORD

    Note that the debugger shows you an additional piece of information: the smallest timer resolu-
tion that was ever requested by a given process. In this example, the process shown corresponds
to PowerPoint 2010, which typically requests a lower timer resolution during slideshows but not
during slide editing mode. The EPROCESS
this, and the stack could be parsed by dumping the PO_DIAG_STACK_RECORD structure.

               TimerResolutionLink
resolution, through the ExpTimerResolutionListHead doubly linked list. Parsing this list with the
debugger data model can reveal all processes on the system that have, or had, made changes to
the timer resolution, when the powercfg command is unavailable or information on past pro-

resolution, as did the Remote Desktop Client, and Cortana. WinDbg Preview, however, now only
previously requested it but is still requesting it at the moment this command was written.
lkd> dx -g Debugger.Utility.Collections.FromListEntry(*(nt!_LIST_ENTRY*)&nt!ExpTimerReso
lutionListHead, "nt!_EPROCESS", "TimerResolutionLink").Select(p => new { Name = ((char*)
p.ImageFileName).ToDisplayString("sb"), Smallest = p.SmallestTimerResolution, Requested =
p.RequestedTimerResolution}),d
======================================================
=         = Name               = Smallest = Requested =
======================================================
= [0]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [1]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [2]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [3]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [4]     - mstsc.exe          - 10000    - 0         =
= [5]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [6]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [7]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [8]     - DbgX.Shell.exe     - 10000    - 10000     =
= [9]     - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [10]    - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [11]    - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [12]    - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [13]    - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =
= [14]    - msedge.exe         - 10000    - 0         =

        = [15]    - msedge.exe        - 10000    - 0         =
        = [16]    - msedge.exe        - 10000    - 0         =
        = [17]    - msedge.exe        - 10000    - 0         =
        = [18]    - msedge.exe        - 10000    - 0         =
        = [19]    - SearchApp.exe     - 40000    - 0         =
        ======================================================

     Timer expiration
     As we said, one of the main tasks of the ISR associated with the interrupt that the clock source gener-
     ates is to keep track of system time, which is mainly done by the KeUpdateSystemTime routine. Its sec-
     ond job is to keep track of logical run time, such as process/thread execution times and the system tick
     time, which is the underlying number used by APIs such as GetTickCount that developers use to time
     operations in their applications. This part of the work is performed by KeUpdateRunTime. Before doing
     any of that work, however, KeUpdateRunTime checks whether any timers have expired.

        Windows timers can be either absolute timers, which implies a distinct expiration time in the future,
     or relative timers, which contain a negative expiration value used as a positive offset from the current
     time during timer insertion. Internally, all timers are converted to an absolute expiration time, although
     the system keeps track of whether this is the “true” absolute time or a converted relative time. This dif-
     ference is important in certain scenarios, such as Daylight Savings Time (or even manual clock changes).

     but a relative timer—say, one set to expire “in two hours”—would not feel the effect of the clock

     the kernel reprograms the absolute time associated with relative timers to match the new settings.

                                                                                                           -
     tiples, each multiple of the system time that a timer could be associated with is an index called a hand,
     which is stored in the timer object's dispatcher header. Windows used that fact to organize all driver
     and application timers into linked lists based on an array where each entry corresponds to a possible
     multiple of the system time. Because modern versions of Windows 10 no longer necessarily run on a
     periodic tick (due to the dynamic tick
     46 bits of the due time (which is in 100 ns units). This gives each hand an approximate “time” of 28 ms.

     hands could have expiring timers, Windows can no longer just check the current hand. Instead, a bit-

     the bitmap and checked during every clock interrupt.

       Regardless of method, these 256 linked lists live in what is called the timer table—which is in the
     PRCB—enabling each processor to perform its own independent timer expiration without needing to

     tables, for a total of 512 linked lists.

     Because each processor has its own timer table, each processor also does its own timer expiration

                                                                                                      -
tion time to avoid any incoherent state. Therefore, to determine whether a clock has expired, it is only
necessary to check if there are any timers on the linked list associated with the current hand.

  Driver                              Process

                 Timer 1   Timer 2              Timer 3    Timer 4

         CPU 0                                                           CPU 1
      Timer Table                                                     Timer Table
           255                                                            255

            0                                                              0

      Timer Hand                                                      Timer Hand

 31                    0                                         31                  0

FIGURE 8-19 Example of per-processor timer lists.

   Although updating counters and checking a linked list are fast operations, going through every
timer and expiring it is a potentially costly operation—keep in mind that all this work is currently being
performed at CLOCK_LEVEL, an exceptionally elevated IRQL. Similar to how a driver ISR queues a DPC

draining mechanism knows timers need expiration. Likewise, when updating process/thread runtime, if
the clock ISR determines that a thread has expired its quantum, it also queues a DPC software interrupt

processing of run-time updates because each processor is running a different thread and has different

    DPCs are provided primarily for device drivers, but the kernel uses them, too. The kernel most fre-
quently uses a DPC to handle quantum expiration. At every tick of the system clock, an interrupt occurs
at clock IRQL. The clock interrupt handler (running at clock IRQL) updates the system time and then
decrements a counter that tracks how long the current thread has run. When the counter reaches 0, the

priority task that should be done at DPC/dispatch IRQL. The clock interrupt handler queues a DPC to

interrupt has a lower priority than do device interrupts, any pending device interrupts that surface
before the clock interrupt completes are handled before the DPC interrupt occurs.

      Once the IRQL eventually drops back to DISPATCH_LEVEL, as part of DPC processing, these two

      TABLE 8-10

          KPRCB Field                        Type                Description

          LastTimerHand                      Index (up to 256)   The last timer hand that was processed by this processor. In recent
                                                                 builds, part of TimerTable because there are now two tables.

          ClockOwner                         Boolean             Indicates whether the current processor is the clock owner.

          TimerTable                                             List heads for the timer table lists (256, or 512 on more recent builds).

          DpcNormalTimerExpiration           Bit                 Indicates that a DISPATCH_LEVEL interrupt has been raised to request
                                                                 timer expiration.

         Chapter 4 of Part 1 covers the actions related to thread scheduling and quantum expiration. Here,
      we look at the timer expiration work. Because the timers are linked together by hand, the expira-
      tion code (executed by the DPC associated with the PRCB in the TimerExpirationDpc
      KiTimerExpirationDpc) parses this list from head to tail. (At insertion time, the timers nearest to the

      within this hand.) There are two primary tasks to expiring a timer:

                   ■   The timer is treated as a dispatcher synchronization object (threads are waiting on the timer as
                       part of a timeout or directly as part of a wait). The wait-testing and wait-satisfaction algorithms
                       will be run on the timer. This work is described in a later section on synchronization in this chap-
                       ter. This is how user-mode applications, and some drivers, make use of timers.

                   ■   The timer is treated as a control object associated with a DPC callback routine that executes
                       when the timer expires. This method is reserved only for drivers and enables very low latency
                       response to timer expiration. (The wait/dispatcher method requires all the extra logic of wait
                       signaling.) Additionally, because timer expiration itself executes at DISPATCH_LEVEL, where
                       DPCs also run, it is perfectly suited as a timer callback.

         As each processor wakes up to handle the clock interval timer to perform system-time and run-time
      processing, it therefore also processes timer expirations after a slight latency/delay in which the IRQL
      drops from CLOCK_LEVEL to DISPATCH_LEVEL
                                                                                                               -
      tion processing that might occur if the processor had associated timers.
     Processor 0

                                                                                                     Time
     Processor 1

                                                                                                     Time
                            Time Interrupt             Software Timer Expiration

      FIGURE 8-20 Timer expiration.

Processor selection
A critical determination that must be made when a timer is inserted is to pick the appropriate table to
                                                                                                timer serial-
ization is disabled. If it is, it then checks whether the timer has a DPC associated with its expiration, and

If the timer has no DPC associated with it, or if the DPC has not been bound to a processor, the kernel
                                                                                                         -
tion on core parking, see Chapter 4 of Part 1.) If the current processor is parked, it picks the next closest
neighboring unparked processor in the same NUMA node; otherwise, the current processor is used.

   This behavior is intended to improve performance and scalability on server systems that make use
of Hyper-V, although it can improve performance on any heavily loaded system. As system timers pile

with the execution of timer expiration code, which increases latency and can even cause heavy delays
or missed DPCs. Additionally, timer expiration can start competing with DPCs typically associated with
driver interrupt processing, such as network packet code, causing systemwide slowdowns. This process
is exacerbated in a Hyper-V scenario, where CPU 0 must process the timers and DPCs associated with
potentially numerous virtual machines, each with their own timers and associated devices.

                                                                                                      -
tion load is fully distributed among unparked logical processors. The timer object stores its associated
processor number in the dispatcher header on 32-bit systems and in the object itself on 64-bit systems.

  CPU       CPU       CPU       CPU              CPU       CPU       CPU       CPU
   0         1         2         3                0         1         2         3

        Timers Queue on CPU 0                     Timers Queued on Current CPU

FIGURE 8-21 Timer queuing behaviors.

much. Additionally, it makes each timer expiration event (such as a clock tick) more complex because a
processor may have gone idle but still have had timers associated with it, meaning that the processor(s)

asynchronous behaviors in timer expiration, which may not always be desired. This complexity makes

can ultimately remain to manage the clock. Therefore, on client systems, timer serialization is enabled if
Modern Standby is available, which causes the kernel to choose CPU 0 no matter what. This allows CPU
0 to behave as the default clock owner—the processor that will always be active to pick up clock inter-
rupts (more on this later).

     Note This behavior is controlled by the kernel variable KiSerializeTimerExpiration, which is
     initialized based on a registry setting whose value is different between a server and client
     installation. By modifying or creating the value SerializeTimerExpiration

     other than 0 or 1, serialization can be disabled, enabling timers to be distributed among
     processors. Deleting the value, or keeping it as 0, allows the kernel to make the decision
     based on Modern Standby availability, and setting it to 1 permanently enables serialization
     even on non-Modern Standby systems.

     EXPERIMENT: Listing system timers
     You can use the kernel debugger to dump all the current registered timers on the system, as well as
     information on the DPC associated with each timer (if any). See the following output for a sample:
     0: kd> !timer
     Dump system timers

     Interrupt time: 250fdc0f 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:27.739]

     PROCESSOR 0 (nt!_KTIMER_TABLE fffff8011bea6d80 - Type 0 - High precision)
     List Timer             Interrupt Low/High Fire Time                  DPC/thread

     PROCESSOR 0 (nt!_KTIMER_TABLE fffff8011bea6d80 - Type 1 - Standard)
     List Timer             Interrupt Low/High Fire Time                 DPC/thread
      1 ffffdb08d6b2f0b0   0807e1fb 80000000 [         NEVER         ] thread ffffdb08d748f480
      4 ffffdb08d7837a20   6810de65 00000008 [12/21/2020 04:29:36.127]
      6 ffffdb08d2cfc6b0   4c18f0d1 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:31:33.230] netbt!TimerExpiry
                                                                       (DPC @ ffffdb08d2cfc670)
        fffff8011fd3d8a8 A fc19cdd1 00589a19 [ 1/ 1/2100 00:00:00.054] nt!ExpCenturyDpcRoutine
                                                                       (DPC @ fffff8011fd3d868)
      7 ffffdb08d8640440   3b22a3a3 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:31:04.772] thread ffffdb08d85f2080
        ffffdb08d0fef300   7723f6b5 00000001 [12/21/2020 03:39:54.941]
                                  FLTMGR!FltpIrpCtrlStackProfilerTimer (DPC @ ffffdb08d0fef340)
     11 fffff8011fcffe70   6c2d7643 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:32:27.052] nt!KdpTimeSlipDpcRoutine
                                                                        (DPC @ fffff8011fcffe30)
        ffffdb08d75f0180   c42fec8e 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:34:54.707] thread ffffdb08d75f0080
     14 fffff80123475420   283baec0 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:33.060] tcpip!IppTimeout
                                                                        (DPC @ fffff80123475460)
     . . .
     58 ffffdb08d863e280 P 3fec06d0 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:31:12.803] thread ffffdb08d8730080
        fffff8011fd3d948 A 90eb4dd1 00000887 [ 1/ 1/2021 00:00:00.054] nt!ExpNextYearDpcRoutine
                                                                        (DPC @ fffff8011fd3d908)
     . . .
     104 ffffdb08d27e6d78 P 25a25441 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:28.699]
                                       tcpip!TcpPeriodicTimeoutHandler (DPC @ ffffdb08d27e6d38)
         ffffdb08d27e6f10 P 25a25441 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:28.699]
                                       tcpip!TcpPeriodicTimeoutHandler (DPC @ ffffdb08d27e6ed0)
     106 ffffdb08d29db048 P 251210d3 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:27.754]
                                  CLASSPNP!ClasspCleanupPacketTimerDpc (DPC @ ffffdb08d29db088)

       fffff80122e9d110   258f6e00 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:28.575]
                                        Ntfs!NtfsVolumeCheckpointDpc (DPC @ fffff80122e9d0d0)
   108 fffff8011c6e6560    19b1caef 00000002 [12/21/2020 03:44:27.661]
                                    tm!TmpCheckForProgressDpcRoutine (DPC @ fffff8011c6e65a0)
   111 ffffdb08d27d5540 P 25920ab5 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:28.592]
                                  storport!RaidUnitPendingDpcRoutine (DPC @ ffffdb08d27d5580)
       ffffdb08d27da540 P 25920ab5 00000000 [12/21/2020 03:30:28.592]
                                  storport!RaidUnitPendingDpcRoutine (DPC @ ffffdb08d27da580)
   . . .

   Total Timers: 221, Maximum List: 8
   Current Hand: 139

      In this example, which has been shortened for space reasons, there are multiple driver-
   associated timers, due to expire shortly, associated with the Netbt.sys and Tcpip.sys drivers (both
   related to networking), as well as Ntfs, the storage controller driver drivers. There are also back-
   ground housekeeping timers due to expire, such as those related to power management, ETW,

   kernel-mode timers that are used for wait dispatching. You can use !thread on the thread point-
   ers to verify this.

   that checks for Daylight Savings Time time-zone changes, the timer that checks for the arrival
   of the upcoming year, and the timer that checks for entry into the next century. One can easily
   locate them based on their typically distant expiration time, unless this experiment is performed
   on the eve of one of these events.

Intelligent timer tick distribution

wakes up several times (the solid arrows) even when there are no associated expiring timers (the dotted
arrows). Although that behavior is required as long as processor 1 is running (to update the thread/pro-
cess run times and scheduling state), what if processor 1 is idle (and has no expiring timers)? Does it still
need to handle the clock interrupt? Because the only other work required that was referenced earlier is to

keeping processor (in this case, processor 0) and allow other processors to remain in their sleep state; if
they wake, any time-related adjustments can be performed by resynchronizing with processor 0.

   Windows does, in fact, make this realization (internally called intelligent timer tick distribution),

to handle its expiring timers, creating a much larger gap (sleeping period). The kernel uses a variable
KiPendingTimerBitmaps
processors need to receive a clock interval for the given timer hand (clock-tick interval). It can then

      appropriately program the interrupt controller, as well as determine to which processors it will send an
      IPI to initiate timer processing.
     Processor 0

                                                                                    Time
     Processor 1

                                                                                    Time
                            Time Interrupt      Software Timer Expiration

      FIGURE 8-22 Intelligent timer tick distribution applied to processor 1.

         Leaving as large a gap as possible is important due to the way power management works in proces-
      sors: as the processor detects that the workload is going lower and lower, it decreases its power consump-

      and enter deeper and deeper idle/sleep states, such as turning off caches. However, if the processor has
      to wake again, it will consume energy and take time to power up; for this reason, processor designers will
      risk entering these lower idle/sleep states (C-states) only if the time spent in a given state outweighs the
      time and energy it takes to enter and exit the state. Obviously, it makes no sense to spend 10 ms to enter a
      sleep state that will last only 1 ms. By preventing clock interrupts from waking sleeping processors unless
      needed (due to timers), they can enter deeper C-states and stay there longer.

      Timer coalescing
      Although minimizing clock interrupts to sleeping processors during periods of no timer expiration
      gives a big boost to longer C-state intervals, with a timer granularity of 15 ms, many timers likely will
      be queued at any given hand and expire often, even if just on processor 0. Reducing the amount
      of software timer-expiration work would both help to decrease latency (by requiring less work at
      DISPATCH_LEVEL) as well as allow other processors to stay in their sleep states even longer. (Because

      result in longer sleep times.) In truth, it is not just the number of expiring timers that really affects sleep
      state (it does affect latency), but the periodicity of these timer expirations—six timers all expiring at the
      same hand is a better option than six timers expiring at six different hands. Therefore, to fully optimize
      idle-time duration, the kernel needs to employ a coalescing mechanism to combine separate timer
      hands into an individual hand with multiple expirations.

                   Timer coalescing works on the assumption that most drivers and user-mode applications do not
                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                -

      while a driver polling every second could probably poll every second plus or minus 50 ms without too

 and other times at half a second. Even so, not all timers are ready to be coalesced into coarser granu-
 larities, so Windows enables this mechanism only for timers that have marked themselves as coales-
 cable, either through the KeSetCoalescableTimer kernel API or through its user-mode counterpart,
 SetWaitableTimerEx.

    With these APIs, driver and application developers are free to provide the kernel with the maximum
 tolerance
 time past the requested period at which the timer will still function correctly. (In the previous ex-
 ample, the 1-second timer had a tolerance of 50 ms.) The recommended minimum tolerance is 32 ms,

 any coalescing because the expiring timer could not be moved even from one clock tick to the next.
                                                                                   preferred coalesc-
 ing intervals: 1 second, 250 ms, 100 ms, or 50 ms.

    When a tolerable delay is set for a periodic timer, Windows uses a process called shifting, which
 causes the timer to drift between periods until it gets aligned to the most optimal multiple of the

 is scanned, and a preferred expiration time is generated based on the closest acceptable coalescing

 always pushed out as far as possible past their real expiration point, which spreads out timers as far as
 possible and creates longer sleep times on the processors.

 and are thus coalescable. In one scenario, Windows could decide to coalesce the timers as shown in

 do for some of the clock interrupts on processor 0, possibly removing the latency of requiring a drop
 to DISPATCH_LEVEL at each clock interrupt.
Processor 0

                                                                           Time
Processor 1

                                                                           Time
              Time Interrupt       Software Timer Expiration

 FIGURE 8-23 Timer coalescing.

     Enhanced timers
     Enhanced timers were introduced to satisfy a long list of requirements that previous timer system

     also made timers have inconsistent expiration times, even when there was no need to reduce power (in
     other words, coalescing was an all-or-nothing proposition). Second, the only mechanism in Windows
     for high-resolution timers was for applications and drivers to lower the clock tick globally, which, as

     these timers was now higher, they were not necessarily more precise because regular time expiration
     can happen before

     added features such as timer virtualization and the Desktop Activity Moderator (DAM), which actively de-
     lay the expiration of timers during the resiliency phase of Modern Standby to simulate S3 sleep. However,
     some key system timer activity must still be permitted to periodically run even during this phase.

         These three requirements led to the creation of enhanced timers, which are also internally known as
     Timer2 objects, and the creation of new system calls such as NtCreateTimer2 and NtSetTimer2, as well
     as driver APIs such as ExAllocateTimer and ExSetTimer. Enhanced timers support four modes of behav-
     ior, some of which are mutually exclusive:

        ■   No-wake This type of enhanced timer is an improvement over timer coalescing because it
            provides for a tolerable delay that is only used in periods of sleep.

        ■   High-resolution This type of enhanced timer corresponds to a high-resolution timer with a
            precise clock rate that is dedicated to it. The clock rate will only need to run at this speed when
            approaching the expiration of the timer.

        ■   Idle-resilient This type of enhanced timer is still active even during deep sleep, such as the
            resiliency phase of modern standby.

        ■   Finite This is the type for enhanced timers that do not share one of the previously described
            properties.

     “special” behavior, why create them at all? It turns out that since the new Timer2 infrastructure was a

        ■   It uses self-balancing red-black binary trees instead of the linked lists that form the timer table.

        ■   It allows drivers to specify an enable and disable callback without worrying about manually
            creating DPCs.

        ■   It includes new, clean, ETW tracing entries for each operation, aiding in troubleshooting.

        ■   It provides additional security-in-depth through certain pointer obfuscation techniques and
            additional assertions, hardening against data-only exploits and corruption.

   Therefore, driver developers that are only targeting Windows 8.1 and later are highly recommended
to use the new enhanced timer infrastructure, even if they do not require the additional capabilities.

   Note The documented ExAllocateTimer API does not allow drivers to create idle-resilient
   timers. In fact, such an attempt crashes the system. Only Microsoft inbox drivers can
   create such timers through the ExAllocateTimerInternal API. Readers are discouraged from
   attempting to use this API because the kernel maintains a static, hard-coded list of every

   has knowledge of how many such timers the component is allowed to create. Any violations
   result in a system crash (blue screen of death).

   Enhanced timers also have a more complex set of expiration rules than regular timers because they
end up having two possible due times                       minimum due time                             -
tem clock time at which point the timer is allowed to expire. The second, maximum due time, is the lat-
est system clock time at which the timer should ever expire. Windows guarantees that the timer will ex-
pire somewhere between these two points in time, either because of a regular clock tick every interval
(such as 15 ms), or because of an ad-hoc check for timer expiration (such as the one that the idle thread
does upon waking up from an interrupt). This interval is computed by taking the expected expiration
time passed in by the developer and adjusting for the possible “no wake tolerance” that was passed in.

  As such, a Timer2 object lives in potentially up to two red-black tree nodes—node 0, for the mini-
mum due time checks, and node 1, for the maximum due time checks. No-wake and high-resolution

two nodes? Instead of a single red-black tree, the system obviously needs to have more, which are
called collections

depending on the rules and combinations shown in Table 8-11.

TABLE 8-11 Timer types and node collection indices

Timer type                         Node 0 collection index         Node 1 collection index

No-wake                            NoWake, if it has a tolerance   NoWake, if it has a non-unlimited or no tolerance

                                   Never inserted in this node     Finite

High-resolution                    Hr, always                      Finite, if it has a non-unlimited or no tolerance

Idle-resilient                     NoWake, if it has a tolerance   Ir, if it has a non-unlimited or no tolerance

High-resolution & Idle-resilient   Hr, always                      Ir, if it has a non-unlimited or no tolerance

   Think of node 1 as the one that mirrors the default legacy timer behavior—every clock tick, check if

implies that its minimum due time is the same as its maximum due time. If it has unlimited tolerance;

     sleeping forever.

                                                                                                           -
     posed to expire and never earlier, so node 0 is used for them. However, if their precise expiration time is
     “too early” for the check in node 0, they might be in node 1 as well, at which point they are treated like

     caller provided a tolerance, the system is idle, and there is an opportunity to coalesce the timer.

                                                                                                NoWake collec-
                                                                                           Hr collection other-
     wise. However, on the clock tick, which checks node 1, it must be in the special Ir collection to recognize
     that the timer needs to execute even though the system is in deep sleep.

                                                                                                              -
     ers to behave correctly when checked either at the system clock tick (node 1—enforcing a maximum
     due time) or at the next closest due time computation (node 0—enforcing a minimum due time).

         As each timer is inserted into the appropriate collection (KTIMER2_COLLECTION) and associated
                                              next due time is updated to be the earliest due time of any timer
     in the collection, whereas a global variable (KiNextTimer2Due)
     timer in any collection.

        EXPERIMENT: Listing enhanced system timers

        which are shown at the bottom of the output:
        KTIMER2s:
        Address,           Due time,                            Exp. Type   Callback, Attributes,
        ffffa4840f6070b0   1825b8f1f4 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.089] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (1826ea1ef4
                                                                        [11/30/2020 20:50:18.089])
        ffffa483ff903e48   1825c45674 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.164] (Interrupt) [None] NW P (27ef6380)
        ffffa483fd824960   1825dd19e8 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.326] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (1828d80a68
                                                                        [11/30/2020 20:50:21.326])
        ffffa48410c07eb8   1825e2d9c6 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.364] (Interrupt) [None] NW P (27ef6380)
        ffffa483f75bde38   1825e6f8c4 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.391] (Interrupt) [None] NW P (27ef6380)
        ffffa48407108e60   1825ec5ae8 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.426] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (1828e74b68
                                                                        [11/30/2020 20:50:21.426])
        ffffa483f7a194a0   1825fe1d10 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.543] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (18272f4a10
                                                                        [11/30/2020 20:50:18.543])
        ffffa483fd29a8f8   18261691e3 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.703] (Interrupt) [None] NW P (11e1a300)
        ffffa483ffcc2660   18261707d3 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.706] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (18265bd903
                                                                        [11/30/2020 20:50:17.157])
        ffffa483f7a19e30   182619f439 [11/30/2020 20:50:16.725] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (182914e4b9
                                                                        [11/30/2020 20:50:21.725])
        ffffa483ff9cfe48   182745de01 [11/30/2020 20:50:18.691] (Interrupt) [None] NW P (11e1a300)
        ffffa483f3cfe740   18276567a9 [11/30/2020 20:50:18.897] (Interrupt)
                       Wdf01000!FxTimer::_FxTimerExtCallbackThunk (Context @ ffffa483f3db7360) NWF
                                               (1827fdfe29 [11/30/2020 20:50:19.897]) P (02faf080)

   ffffa48404c02938     18276c5890 [11/30/2020 20:50:18.943] (Interrupt) [None] NW P (27ef6380)
   ffffa483fde8e300     1827a0f6b5 [11/30/2020 20:50:19.288] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (183091c835
                                                                     [11/30/2020 20:50:34.288])
   ffffa483fde88580     1827d4fcb5 [11/30/2020 20:50:19.628] (Interrupt) [None] NWF (18290629b5
                                                                     [11/30/2020 20:50:21.628])

      In this example, you can mostly see No-wake (NW) enhanced timers, with their minimum due
   time shown. Some are periodic (P) and will keep being reinserted at expiration time. A few also

System worker threads
During system initialization, Windows creates several threads in the System process, called system
worker threads, which exist solely to perform work on behalf of other threads. In many cases, threads
executing at DPC/dispatch level need to execute functions that can be performed only at a lower IRQL.

can usurp any thread in the system) at DPC/dispatch level IRQL, might need to access paged pool or
wait for a dispatcher object used to synchronize execution with an application thread. Because a DPC

DPC/dispatch level.

   Some device drivers and executive components create their own threads dedicated to processing
work at passive level; however, most use system worker threads instead, which avoids the unneces-
sary scheduling and memory overhead associated with having additional threads in the system. An

ExQueueWorkItem or IoQueueWorkItem. Device drivers should use only the latter (because this as-
sociates the work item with a Device object, allowing for greater accountability and the handling of
scenarios in which a driver unloads while its work item is active). These functions place a work item on
a queue dispatcher object where the threads look for work. (Queue dispatcher objects are described in
more detail in the section “I/O completion ports” in Chapter 6 in Part 1.)

   The IoQueueWorkItemEx, IoSizeofWorkItem, IoInitializeWorkItem, and IoUninitializeWorkItem APIs

  Work items include a pointer to a routine and a parameter that the thread passes to the routine
when it processes the work item. The device driver or executive component that requires passive-level

can initialize a work item that points to the routine in the driver that waits for the dispatcher object. At

     worker thread processes its work item.

        There are many types of system worker threads:

        ■   Normal worker threads execute at priority 8 but otherwise behave like delayed worker threads.

        ■   Background worker threads execute at priority 7 and inherit the same behaviors as normal
            worker threads.

        ■   Delayed worker threads
            time-critical.

        ■   Critical worker threads execute at priority 13 and are meant to process time-critical work items.

        ■   Super-critical worker threads execute at priority 14, otherwise mirroring their critical counterparts.

        ■   Hyper-critical worker threads execute at priority 15 and are otherwise just like other critical threads.

        ■   Real-time worker threads execute at priority 18, which gives them the distinction of operating in
            the real-time scheduling range (see Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more information), meaning they are
            not subject to priority boosting nor regular time slicing.

       Because the naming of all of these worker queues started becoming confusing, recent versions of
     Windows introduced custom priority worker threads, which are now recommended for all driver devel-
     opers and allow the driver to pass in their own priority level.

        A special kernel function, ExpLegacyWorkerInitialization, which is called early in the boot process,

     optional registry parameters. You may even have seen these details in an earlier edition of this book.
     Note, however, that these variables are there only for compatibility with external instrumentation tools
     and are not actually utilized by any part of the kernel on modern Windows 10 systems and later. This is
     because recent kernels implemented a new kernel dispatcher object, the priority queue (KPRIQUEUE),
     coupled it with a fully dynamic number of kernel worker threads, and further split what used to be a
     single queue of worker threads into per-NUMA node worker threads.

        On Windows 10 and later, the kernel dynamically creates additional worker threads as needed,
     with a default maximum limit of 4096 (see ExpMaximumKernelWorkerThreads                        -
     ured through the registry up to a maximum of 16,384 threads and down to a minimum of 32. You
     can set this using the MaximumKernelWorkerThreads

         Each partition object, which we described in Chapter 5 of Part 1, contains an executive partition,
     which is the portion of the partition object relevant to the executive—namely, the system worker
     thread logic. It contains a data structure tracking the work queue manager for each NUMA node part
     of the partition (a queue manager is made up of the deadlock detection timer, the work queue item
     reaper, and a handle to the actual thread doing the management). It then contains an array of pointers
     to each of the eight possible work queues (EX_WORK_QUEUE). These queues are associated with an
     individual index and track the number of minimum (guaranteed) and maximum threads, as well as how
     many work items have been processed so far.

    Every system includes two default work queues: the ExPool queue and the IoPool queue. The former
is used by drivers and system components using the ExQueueWorkItem API, whereas the latter is meant
for IoAllocateWorkItem
meant to be used by the internal (non-exported) ExQueueWorkItemToPrivatePool API, which takes in
a pool identifier
Store Manager (see Chapter 5 of Part 1 for more information) leverages this capability.

   The executive tries to match the number of critical worker threads with changing work-
loads as the system executes. Whenever work items are being processed or queued, a check is
made to see if a new worker thread might be needed. If so, an event is signaled, waking up the
ExpWorkQueueManagerThread for the associated NUMA node and partition. An additional worker
thread is created in one of the following conditions:

   ■   There are fewer threads than the minimum number of threads for this queue.

   ■

       pending work items in the queue, or the last attempt to try to queue a work item failed.

   Additionally, once every second, for each worker queue manager (that is, for each NUMA node on
each partition) the ExpWorkQueueManagerThread can also try to determine whether a deadlock may

matching increase in the number of work items processed. If this is occurring, an additional worker
thread will be created, regardless of any maximum thread limits, hoping to clear out the potential
deadlock. This detection will then be disabled until it is deemed necessary to check again (such as if
the maximum number of threads has been reached). Since processor topologies can change due to hot
add
keep track of the new processors as well.

                                   worker thread timeout minutes (by default 10, so once every 20
minutes), this thread also checks if it should destroy any system worker threads. Through the same

WorkerThreadTimeoutInSeconds. This is called reaping and ensures that system worker thread counts
do not get out of control. A system worker thread is reaped if it has been waiting for a long time

(meaning the current number of threads are clearing them all out in a timely fashion).

   EXPERIMENT: Listing system worker threads
                                                                                            -
   ity (which is no longer per-NUMA node as before, and certainly no longer global), the kernel
                 !exqueue command can no longer be used to see a listing of system worker threads

       Since the EPARTITION, EX_PARTITION, and EX_WORK_QUEUE data structures are all available
   in the public symbols, the debugger data model can be used to explore the queues and their

     for the main (default) system partition:
     lkd> dx ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
         WorkQueueManagers[0]
     ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
         WorkQueueManagers[0]      : 0xffffa483edea99d0 [Type: _EX_WORK_QUEUE_MANAGER *]
         [+0x000] Partition        : 0xffffa483ede51090 [Type: _EX_PARTITION *]
         [+0x008] Node             : 0xfffff80467f24440 [Type: _ENODE *]
         [+0x010] Event            [Type: _KEVENT]
         [+0x028] DeadlockTimer    [Type: _KTIMER]
         [+0x068] ReaperEvent      [Type: _KEVENT]
         [+0x080] ReaperTimer      [Type: _KTIMER2]
         [+0x108] ThreadHandle     : 0xffffffff80000008 [Type: void *]
         [+0x110] ExitThread       : 0x0 [Type: unsigned long]
         [+0x114] ThreadSeed       : 0x1 [Type: unsigned short]

        Alternatively, here is the ExPool for NUMA Node 0, which currently has 15 threads and has
     processed almost 4 million work items so far!
     lkd> dx ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
         WorkQueues[0][0],d
     ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
         WorkQueues[0][0],d         : 0xffffa483ede4dc70 [Type: _EX_WORK_QUEUE *]
         [+0x000] WorkPriQueue      [Type: _KPRIQUEUE]
         [+0x2b0] Partition         : 0xffffa483ede51090 [Type: _EX_PARTITION *]
         [+0x2b8] Node              : 0xfffff80467f24440 [Type: _ENODE *]
         [+0x2c0] WorkItemsProcessed : 3942949 [Type: unsigned long]
         [+0x2c4] WorkItemsProcessedLastPass : 3931167 [Type: unsigned long]
         [+0x2c8] ThreadCount       : 15 [Type: long]
         [+0x2cc (30: 0)] MinThreads        : 0 [Type: long]
         [+0x2cc (31:31)] TryFailed         : 0 [Type: unsigned long]
         [+0x2d0] MaxThreads        : 4096 [Type: long]
         [+0x2d4] QueueIndex        : ExPoolUntrusted (0) [Type: _EXQUEUEINDEX]
         [+0x2d8] AllThreadsExitedEvent : 0x0 [Type: _KEVENT *]

        You could then look into the ThreadList           WorkPriQueue to enumerate the worker
     threads associated with this queue:
     lkd> dx -r0 @$queue = ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->
         ExPartition)->WorkQueues[0][0]
     @$queue = ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
         WorkQueues[0][0]                 : 0xffffa483ede4dc70 [Type: _EX_WORK_QUEUE *]

     lkd> dx Debugger.Utility.Collections.FromListEntry(@$queue->WorkPriQueue.ThreadListHead,
         "nt!_KTHREAD", "QueueListEntry")
     Debugger.Utility.Collections.FromListEntry(@$queue->WorkPriQueue.ThreadListHead,
         "nt!_KTHREAD", "QueueListEntry")
         [0x0]            [Type: _KTHREAD]
         [0x1]            [Type: _KTHREAD]
         [0x2]            [Type: _KTHREAD]
         [0x3]            [Type: _KTHREAD]
         [0x4]            [Type: _KTHREAD]
         [0x5]            [Type: _KTHREAD]
         [0x6]            [Type: _KTHREAD]

       [0x7]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0x8]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0x9]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0xa]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0xb]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0xc]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0xd]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0xe]              [Type: _KTHREAD]
       [0xf]              [Type: _KTHREAD]

      That was only the ExPool. Recall that the system also has an IoPool, which would be the next
   index (1) on this NUMA Node (0). You can also continue the experiment by looking at private

   lkd> dx ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
       WorkQueues[0][1],d
   ((nt!_EX_PARTITION*)(*(nt!_EPARTITION**)&nt!PspSystemPartition)->ExPartition)->
       WorkQueues[0][1],d         : 0xffffa483ede77c50 [Type: _EX_WORK_QUEUE *]
       [+0x000] WorkPriQueue      [Type: _KPRIQUEUE]
       [+0x2b0] Partition         : 0xffffa483ede51090 [Type: _EX_PARTITION *]
       [+0x2b8] Node              : 0xfffff80467f24440 [Type: _ENODE *]
       [+0x2c0] WorkItemsProcessed : 1844267 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x2c4] WorkItemsProcessedLastPass : 1843485 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x2c8] ThreadCount       : 5 [Type: long]
       [+0x2cc (30: 0)] MinThreads        : 0 [Type: long]
       [+0x2cc (31:31)] TryFailed         : 0 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x2d0] MaxThreads        : 4096 [Type: long]
       [+0x2d4] QueueIndex        : IoPoolUntrusted (1) [Type: _EXQUEUEINDEX]
       [+0x2d8] AllThreadsExitedEvent : 0x0 [Type: _KEVENT *]

Exception dispatching
In contrast to interrupts, which can occur at any time, exceptions are conditions that result directly from
the execution of the program that is running. Windows uses a facility known as structured exception
handling, which allows applications to gain control when exceptions occur. The application can then

execution of the subroutine that raised the exception), or declare back to the system that the exception

                                                                                                          -

book Windows via C/C++
exception handling is made accessible through language extensions (for example, the __try construct

                                                                                                          -
respond to the entry in the IDT that points to the trap handler for a particular exception. Table 8-12 shows

used for exceptions, hardware interrupts are assigned entries later in the table, as mentioned earlier.

        All exceptions, except those simple enough to be resolved by the trap handler, are serviced by a
     kernel module called the exception dispatcher
     handler that can dispose of the exception. Examples of architecture-independent exceptions that the

                                                                                                      -

     TABLE 8-12 x86 exceptions and their interrupt numbers

     Interrupt Number    Exception                          Mnemonic

     0                   Divide Error

     1                   Debug (Single Step)

     2                   Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI)       -

     3                   Breakpoint

     4

     5                   Bounds Check (Range Exceeded)

     6                   Invalid Opcode

     7                   NPX Not Available

     8

     9                   NPX Segment Overrun                -

     10                  Invalid Task State Segment (TSS)

     11                  Segment Not Present

     12

     13                  General Protection

     14

     15                  Intel Reserved                     -

     16

     17                  Alignment Check

     18                  Machine Check

     19

     20                  Virtualization Exception

     21                  Control Protection (CET)

     encountering a breakpoint while executing a program being debugged generates an exception, which
     the kernel handles by calling the debugger. The kernel handles certain other exceptions by returning
     an unsuccessful status code to the caller.

                                                 frame-based exception handlers to deal with these ex-
ceptions. The term frame-based
activation. When a procedure is invoked, a stack frame representing that activation of the procedure
is pushed onto the stack. A stack frame can have one or more exception handlers associated with it,
each of which protects a particular block of code in the source program. When an exception occurs,
the kernel searches for an exception handler associated with the current stack frame. If none exists, the
kernel searches for an exception handler associated with the previous stack frame, and so on, until it

exception handlers.

frame-based technology has been proven to be attackable by malicious users). Instead, a table of
handlers for each function is built into the image during compilation. The kernel looks for handlers as-
sociated with each function and generally follows the same algorithm we described for 32-bit code.

   Structured exception handling is heavily used within the kernel itself so that it can safely verify
whether pointers from user mode can be safely accessed for read or write access. Drivers can make
use of this same technique when dealing with pointers sent during I/O control codes (IOCTLs).

   Another mechanism of exception handling is called vectored exception handling. This method can be

Microsoft Docs at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/debug/vectored-exception-handling.

   When an exception occurs, whether it is explicitly raised by software or implicitly raised by hard-
ware, a chain of events begins in the kernel. The CPU hardware transfers control to the kernel trap
handler, which creates a trap frame (as it does when an interrupt occurs). The trap frame allows the
system to resume where it left off if the exception is resolved. The trap handler also creates an excep-
tion record that contains the reason for the exception and other pertinent information.

   If the exception occurred in kernel mode, the exception dispatcher simply calls a routine to locate a
frame-based exception handler that will handle the exception. Because unhandled kernel-mode excep-

exception handler. Some traps, however, do not lead into an exception handler because the kernel al-
ways assumes such errors to be fatal; these are errors that could have been caused only by severe bugs
in the internal kernel code or by major inconsistencies in driver code (that could have occurred only

fatal errors will result in a bug check with the UNEXPECTED_KERNEL_MODE_TRAP code.

   If the exception occurred in user mode, the exception dispatcher does something more elabo-
rate. The Windows subsystem has a debugger port (this is actually a debugger object, which will be

processes. (In this case, by “port” we mean an ALPC port object, which will be discussed later in this

dispatcher takes is to see whether the process that incurred the exception has an associated debugger

     process. If it does, the exception dispatcher sends a debugger object message to the debug object associ-
     ated with the process (which internally the system refers to as a “port” for compatibility with programs
     that might rely on behavior in Windows 2000, which used an LPC port instead of a debug object).

                                                     Debugger            Debugger
                                                       port            (first chance)
                Trap
               handler
                                                                       Frame-based
              Exception
                                                                         handlers
               record

              Exception                              Debugger            Debugger
              dispatcher                               port           (second chance)

                                                     Exception         Environment
                                                       port             subsystem

                                                       Error          Windows Error
             Function call
                                                       port            Reporting
             ALPC

                                                                       Kernel default
                                                                          handler

     FIGURE 8-24 Dispatching an exception.

     the exception dispatcher switches into user mode, copies the trap frame to the user stack formatted
     as a CONTEXT                                                                                       -
     tured or vectored exception handler. If none is found or if none handles the exception, the exception
     dispatcher switches back into kernel mode and calls the debugger again to allow the user to do more
     debugging. (This is called the second-chance notification.)

     was registered by the environment subsystem that controls this thread. The exception port gives the
     environment subsystem, which presumably is listening at the port, the opportunity to translate the

                                                                                                     -
     sage to a systemwide error port that Csrss (Client/Server Run-Time Subsystem) uses for Windows Error
     Reporting (WER)—which is discussed in Chapter 10—and executes a default exception handler that
     simply terminates the process whose thread caused the exception.

Unhandled exceptions
All Windows threads have an exception handler that processes unhandled exceptions. This exception
handler is declared in the internal Windows start-of-thread function. The start-of-thread function runs
when a user creates a process or any additional threads. It calls the environment-supplied thread start

                             CreateThread call.

   The generic code for the internal start-of-thread functions is shown here:

VOID RtlUserThreadStart(VOID)
{
    LPVOID StartAddress = RCX;    // Located in the initial thread context structure
    LPVOID Argument = RDX;    // Located in the initial thread context structure
    LPVOID Win32StartAddr;
    if (Kernel32ThreadInitThunkFunction != NULL) {
        Win32StartAddr = Kernel32ThreadInitThunkFunction;
    } else {
        Win32StartAddr = StartAddress;
    }
    __try
    {
        DWORD ThreadExitCode = Win32StartAddr(Argument);
        RtlExitUserThread(ThreadExitCode);
    }
    __except(RtlpGetExceptionFilter(GetExceptionInformation()))
    {
        NtTerminateProcess(NtCurrentProcess(), GetExceptionCode());
    }
}

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the real user start address for Windows threads
   The fact that each Windows thread begins execution in a system-supplied function (and not
   the user-supplied function) explains why the start address for thread 0 is the same for every
   Windows process in the system (and why the start addresses for secondary threads are also the
   same). To see the user-supplied function address, use Process Explorer or the kernel debugger.

       Because most threads in Windows processes start at one of the system-supplied wrapper
   functions, Process Explorer, when displaying the start address of threads in a process, skips the
   initial call frame that represents the wrapper function and instead shows the second frame on the

       Process Explorer does display the complete call hierarchy when it displays the call stack.
     Notice the following results when the Stack button is clicked:

    this case, kernel32, because you are dealing with a Windows subsystem application. The third
    frame (line 18) is the main entry point into Notepad.exe.

                                        Configure Symbols menu item located in the Options menu.

System service handling

calls. In the preceding sections, you saw how interrupt and exception handling work; in this section,

result of executing an instruction assigned to system service dispatching. The instruction that Windows
uses for system service dispatching depends on the processor on which it is executing and whether

                                                              User mode

                                                            Kernel mode
  System
service call                        System service
                                    dispatch table
                    System      0
                    service     1
                  dispatcher    2                    System service 2
                                3

                                          •
                                          •
                                          •

                                n

FIGURE 8-25 System service dispatching.

     Architectural system service dispatching
     On most x64 systems, Windows uses the syscall instruction, which results in the change of some of the
     key processor state we have learned about in this chapter, based on certain preprogrammed model
     specific registers (MSRs):

        ■   0xC0000081, known as STAR (SYSCALL Target Address Register)

        ■   0xC0000082, known as LSTAR (Long-Mode STAR)

        ■

     Upon encountering the syscall instruction, the processor acts in the following manner:

        ■   The Code Segment (CS) is loaded from Bits 32 to 47 in STAR, which Windows sets to 0x0010

        ■   The Stack Segment (SS) is loaded from Bits 32 to 47 in STAR plus 8, which gives us 0x0018

        ■   The Instruction Pointer (RIP) is saved in RCX, and the new value is loaded from LSTAR, which
            Windows sets to KiSystemCall64
            or KiSystemCall64Shadow otherwise. (More information on the Meltdown vulnerability was
            provided in the “Hardware side-channel vulnerabilities” section earlier in this chapter.)

        ■

        ■

            user-space values.

     Therefore, although the instruction executes in very few processor cycles, it does leave the processor in an
     insecure and unstable state—the user-mode stack pointer is still loaded, GS is still pointing to the TEB, but
     the Ring Level, or CPL, is now 0, enabling kernel mode privileges. Windows acts quickly to place the pro-

     happen on legacy processors, these are the precise steps that KiSystemCall64 must perform:

     By using the swapgs instruction, GS now points to the PCR, as described earlier in this chapter.

     The current stack pointer (RSP) is saved into the UserRsp
     been loaded, this can be done without using any stack or register.

     The new stack pointer is loaded from the RspBase
     part of the PCR).

     Now that the kernel stack is loaded, the function builds a trap frame, using the format described earlier
     in the chapter. This includes storing in the frame the SegSs set to KGDT_R3_DATA (0x2B), Rsp from the
     UserRsp in the PCR, EFlags from R11, SegCs set to KGDT_R3_CODE (0x33), and storing Rip from RCX.

     how syscall operates.

a syscall) be placed in RCX—yet the syscall instruction overrides RCX with the instruction pointer of the
caller, as shown earlier. Windows is aware of this behavior and copies RCX into R10 before issuing the
syscall

The next steps have to do with processor mitigations such as Supervisor Mode Access Prevention
(SMAP)—such as issuing the stac instruction—and the myriad processor side-channel mitigations, such
as clearing the branch tracing buffers (BTB) or return store buffer (RSB). Additionally, on processors
                                                                                                       -
chronized correctly. Beyond this point, additional elements of the trap frame are stored, such as various
nonvolatile registers and debug registers, and the nonarchitectural handling of the system call begins,
which we discuss in more detail in just a bit.

different instruction is used, which is called sysenter
spend too much time digging into this instruction other than mentioning that its behavior is similar—a
certain amount of processor state is loaded from various MSRs, and the kernel does some additional
work, such as setting up the trap frame. More details can be found in the relevant Intel processor
manuals. Similarly, ARM-based processors use the svc instruction, which has its own behavior and OS-
level handling, but these systems still represent only a small minority of Windows installations.

    There is one more corner case that Windows must handle: processors without Mode Base Execution
Controls (MBEC) operating while Hypervisor Code Integrity (HVCI) is enabled suffer from a design issue
that violates the promises HVCI provides. (Chapter 9 covers HVCI and MBEC.) Namely, an attacker could
allocate user-space executable memory, which HVCI allows (by marking the respective SLAT entry as

the virtual address appear as a kernel page. Because the MMU would see the page as being kernel,
Supervisor Mode Execution Prevention (SMEP) would not prohibit execution of the code, and because

The attacker has now achieved arbitrary kernel-mode code execution, violating the basic tenet of HVCI.

versus user executable bits in the SLAT entry data structures, allowing the hypervisor (or the Secure
                                                                  kernel non executable but user execut-
able. Unfortunately, on processors without this capability, the hypervisor has no choice but to trap all
code privilege level changes and swap between two different sets of SLAT entries—ones marking all
user physical pages as nonexecutable, and ones marking them as executable. The hypervisor traps CPL
changes by making the IDT appear empty (effectively setting its limit to 0) and decoding the underly-
ing instruction, which is an expensive operation. However, as interrupts can directly be trapped by the
hypervisor, avoiding these costs, the system call dispatch code in user space prefers issuing an interrupt
if it detects an HVCI-enabled system without MBEC-like capabilities. The SystemCall bit in the Shared
User Data structure described in Chapter 4, Part 1, is what determines this situation.

Therefore, when SystemCall is set to 1, x64 Windows uses the int 0x2e instruction, which results in a
trap, including a fully built-out trap frame that does not require OS involvement. Interestingly, this
happens to be the same instruction that was used on ancient x86 processors prior to the Pentium Pro,

     and continues to still be supported on x86 systems for backward compatibility with three-decade-old
     software that had unfortunately hardcoded this behavior. On x64, however, int 0x2e can be used only

     Regardless of which instruction is ultimately used, the user-mode system call dispatching code always
     stores a system call index in a register—EAX on x86 and x64, R12 on 32-bit ARM, and X8 on ARM64—

     make things easy, the standard function call processor ABI (application binary interface) is maintained
     across the boundary—for example, arguments are placed on the stack on x86, and RCX (technically R10
     due to the behavior of syscall

     calls that occurred through int 0x2e, the iret instruction restores the processor state based on the
                                             syscall and sysenter, though, the processor once again leverages
     the MSRs and hardcoded registers we saw on entry, through specialized instructions called sysret and
     sysexit

        ■   The Stack Segment (SS) is loaded from bits 48 to 63 in STAR, which Windows sets to 0x0023
            (KGDT_R3_DATA).

        ■   The Code Segment (CS) is loaded from bits 48 to 63 in STAR plus 0x10, which gives us 0x0033
            (KGDT64_R3_CODE).

        ■   The Instruction Pointer (RIP) is loaded from RCX.

        ■

        ■

            kernel-space values.

     Therefore, just like for system call entry, the exit mechanics must also clean up some processor state.
     Namely, RSP is restored to the Rsp
     the entry code we analyzed, similar to all the other saved registers. RCX register is loaded from the
     saved Rip, R11 is loaded from EFlags, and the swapgs instruction is used right before issuing the sysret

     from the trap frame before the sysret instruction. Equivalent actions are taken on for sysexit and
                               eret). Additionally, if CET is enabled, just like in the entry path, the shadow
     stack must correctly be synchronized on the exit path.

        EXPERIMENT: Locating the system service dispatcher
        As mentioned, x64 system calls occur based on a series of MSRs, which you can use the rdmsr
                                                                            KGDT_R0_CODE (0x0010)
        and KGDT64_R3_DATA (0x0023).
        lkd> rdmsr c0000081
        msr[c0000081] = 00230010`00000000

   Next, you can investigate LSTAR, and then use the ln
KiSystemCall64                                                     KiSystemCall64Shadow (for
those that do):
lkd> rdmsr c0000082
msr[c0000082] = fffff804`7ebd3740

lkd> ln fffff804`7ebd3740
(fffff804`7ebd3740)   nt!KiSystemCall64

lkd> rdmsr c0000084
msr[c0000084] = 00000000`00004700

  x86 system calls occur through sysenter,
                                   sysenter which uses a different set of MSRs, including 0x176,
which stores the 32-bit system call handler:
lkd> rdmsr 176
msr[176] = 00000000'8208c9c0

lkd> ln 00000000'8208c9c0
(8208c9c0)   nt!KiFastCallEntry

the int 0x2e handler registered in the IDT with the !idt 2e debugger command:
lkd> !idt 2e

Dumping IDT: fffff8047af03000
2e:            fffff8047ebd3040 nt!KiSystemService

   You can disassemble the KiSystemService or KiSystemCall64 routine with the u

nt!KiSystemService+0x227:
fffff804`7ebd3267 4883c408        add         rsp,8
fffff804`7ebd326b 0faee8          lfence
fffff804`7ebd326e 65c604255308000000 mov       byte ptr gs:[853h],0
fffff804`7ebd3277 e904070000      jmp         nt!KiSystemServiceUser (fffff804`7ebd3980)

   while the MSR handler will fall in
nt!KiSystemCall64+0x227:
fffff804`7ebd3970 4883c408        add         rsp,8
fffff804`7ebd3974 0faee8          lfence
fffff804`7ebd3977 65c604255308000000 mov       byte ptr gs:[853h],0
nt!KiSystemServiceUser:
fffff804`7ebd3980 c645ab02        mov         byte ptr [rbp-55h],2

  This shows you that eventually both code paths arrive in KiSystemServiceUser,
                                                           KiSystemServiceUser which then does
most common actions across all processors, as discussed in the next section.

     Nonarchitectural system service dispatching
                                                                                                                -
     tion in the system service dispatch table. On x86 systems, this table is like the interrupt dispatch table
     described earlier in the chapter except that each entry contains a pointer to a system service rather
     than to an interrupt-handling routine. On other platforms, including 32-bit ARM and ARM64, the table
     is implemented slightly differently; instead of containing pointers to the system service, it contains
     offsets relative to the table itself. This addressing mechanism is more suited to the x64 and ARM64
     application binary interface (ABI) and instruction-encoding format, and the RISC nature of ARM pro-
     cessors in general.

        Note System service numbers frequently change between OS releases. Not only does
        Microsoft occasionally add or remove system services, but the table is also often random-

         Regardless of architecture, the system service dispatcher performs a few common actions on
     all platforms:

        ■

        ■   If this thread belongs to a pico process, forward to the system call pico provider routine
            (see Chapter 3, Part 1, for more information on pico providers).

        ■   If this thread is an UMS scheduled thread, call KiUmsCallEntry to synchronize with the pri-

            UmsPerformingSyscall

        ■                                                      FirstArgument
            the system call number in SystemCallNumber.

        ■   Call the shared user/kernel system call handler (KiSystemServiceStart), which sets the TrapFrame

        ■   Enable interrupt delivery.

     can be interrupted. The next step is to select the correct system call table and potentially upgrade the
     thread to a GUI thread, details of which will be based on the GuiThread and RestrictedGuiThread
                                                                                                            -
                                                              GdiBatchCount

     stack. This is needed to avoid having each system call manually copy the arguments (which would

     as the kernel is accessing them. This operation is done within a special code block that is recognized
     by the exception handlers as being associated to user stack copying, ensuring that the kernel does not

crash in the case that an attacker, or incorrectly written program, is messing with the user stack. Since
system calls can take an arbitrary number of arguments (well, almost), you see in the next section how
the kernel knows how many to copy.

    Note that this argument copying is shallow: If any of the arguments passed to a system service
points to a buffer in user space, it must be probed for safe accessibility before kernel-mode code can
read and/or write from it. If the buffer will be accessed multiple times, it may also need to be captured,
or copied, into a local kernel buffer. The responsibility of this probe and capture operation lies with each
individual system call and is not performed by the handler. However, one of the key operations that the
system call dispatcher must perform is to set the previous mode of the thread. This value corresponds
to either KernelMode or UserMode and must be synchronized whenever the current thread executes
a trap, identifying the privilege level of the incoming exception, trap, or system call. This will allow the
system call, using ExGetPreviousMode, to correctly handle user versus kernel callers.

system call tracing is enabled, the appropriate entry/exit callbacks are called around the system call.
Alternatively, if ETW tracing is enabled but not DTrace, the appropriate ETW events are logged around
                                                                                                        -
                                                                KeSystemCalls variable in the PRCB, which
is exposed as a performance counter that you can track in the Performance & Reliability Monitor.

    At this point, system call dispatching is complete, and the opposite steps will then be taken as part
of system call exit. These steps will restore and copy user-mode state as appropriate, handle user-mode
APC delivery as needed, address side-channel mitigations around various architectural buffers, and
eventually return with one of the CPU instructions relevant for this platform.

Kernel-issued system call dispatching
Because system calls can be performed both by user-mode code and kernel mode, any pointers,
handles, and behaviors should be treated as if coming from user mode—which is clearly not correct.

   To solve this, the kernel exports specialized Zw versions of these calls—that is, instead of
NtCreateFile, the kernel exports ZwCreateFile. Additionally, because Zw functions must be manually
exported by the kernel, only the ones that Microsoft wishes to expose for third-party use are present.
              ZwCreateUserProcess is not exported by name because kernel drivers are not expected to
launch user applications. These exported APIs are not actually simple aliases or wrappers around the Nt
versions. Instead, they are “trampolines” to the appropriate Nt system call, which use the same system
call-dispatching mechanism.

   Like KiSystemCall64 does, they too build a fake hardware trap frame (pushing on the stack the
data that the CPU would generate after an interrupt coming from kernel mode), and they also disable
interrupts, just like a trap would. On x64 systems, for example, the KGDT64_R0_CODE (0x0010) selec-
tor is pushed as CS, and the current kernel stack as RSP. Each of the trampolines places the system call
number in the appropriate register (for example, EAX on x86 and x64), and then calls KiServiceInternal,
which saves additional data in the trap frame, reads the current previous mode, stores it in the trap
frame, and then sets the previous mode to KernelMode (this is an important difference).

     User-issued system call dispatching
     As was already introduced in Chapter 1 of Part 1, the system service dispatch instructions for Windows
     executive services exist in the system library Ntdll.dll. Subsystem DLLs call functions in Ntdll to
     implement their documented functions. The exception is Windows USER and GDI functions, includ-

                                                       WriteFile                                          WriteFile

     for more information on API redirection), which in turn calls the WriteFile

     NtWriteFile function in Ntdll.dll, which in turn executes the appropriate instruction to cause a system
     service trap, passing the system service number representing NtWriteFile.

        The system service dispatcher in Ntoskrnl.exe (in this example, KiSystemService) then calls the real
     NtWriteFile                                                                                         -
     tions, the system service dispatch calls the function in the loadable kernel-mode part of the Windows

     either Win32kbase.sys or Win32kfull.sys on Desktop systems, Win32kmin.sys on Windows 10X systems,
     or Dxgkrnl.sys if this was a DirectX call.

                                                                          Windows USER, GDI
                    Windows kernel APIs                                    or DirectX APIs

           Windows                                         Application
         application    Call WriteFile(…)                                    Call BitBlt(…)

         WriteFile in   Call NtWriteFile    Windows-          Gdi32.dll     Call NtGdiBitBlt   Windows-
       Kernelbase.dll   Return to caller    specific      or User32.dll     Return to caller   specific

       NtWriteFile in                       Used by all NtGdiBitBlt in                         Windows-
                        Return to caller                                    Return to caller
           Ntdll.dll                        subsystems    Win32u.dll                           specific

                                                                                          User mode

                                                                                        Kernel mode
       Software trap                                     Software trap

     KiSystemService    Call NtWriteFile               KiSystemService      Call NtGdiBitBlt
                                                                                Routine
      in Ntoskrnl.exe    Dismiss trap                   in Ntoskrnl.exe      Dismiss trap

       NtWriteFile in Do the operation             Service entry point If not filtered call
                                                                           NtGdiBitBlt
        Ntoskrnl.exe Return to caller                   in Win32k.sys Return to caller

                                                        NtGdiBitBlt in Do the operation
                                                        Win32kfull.sys Return to caller

     FIGURE 8-26 System service dispatching.

System call security
Since the kernel has the mechanisms that it needs for correctly synchronizing the previous mode for
system call operations, each system call service can rely on this value as part of processing. We previ-
                                                 probe
buffer of any sort. By probe, we mean the following:

   1.   Making sure that the address is below MmUserProbeAddress

   2.   Making sure that the address is aligned to a boundary matching how the caller intends to access
        its data—for example, 2 bytes for Unicode characters, 8 bytes for a 64-bit pointer, and so on.

   3.   If the buffer is meant to be used for output, making sure that, at the time the system call begins,
        it is actually writable.

   Note that output buffers could become invalid or read-only at any future point in time, and the
system call must always access them using SEH, which we described earlier in this chapter, to avoid

they will likely be imminently used anyway, SEH must be used to ensure they can be safely read. SEH

must still be taken.

                                                                                 UserMode calls, and all

that a system call must perform, however, because some other dangerous situations can arise:

   ■    The caller may have supplied a handle to an object. The kernel normally bypasses all security
        access checks when referencing objects, and it also has full access to kernel handles (which we
        describe later in the “Object Manager” section of this chapter), whereas user-mode code does
        not. The previous mode is used to inform the Object Manager that it should still perform access
        checks because the request came from user space.

   ■                                                                  OBJ_FORCE_ACCESS_CHECK need
        to be used by a driver to indicate that even though it is using the Zw API, which sets the previ-
        ous mode to KernelMode, the Object Manager should still treat the request as if coming from
        UserMode.

   ■

                                                IO_FORCE_ACCESS_CHECKING
                                                                                    ZwCreateFile
        would change the previous mode to KernelMode and bypass access checks. Potentially, a driver

   ■

        redirection attacks, where privileged kernel-mode code might be incorrectly using various

           ■

               with the Zw interface, must keep in mind that this will reset the previous mode to KernelMode
               and respond accordingly.

      Service descriptor tables
      We previously mentioned that before performing a system call, the user-mode or kernel-mode tram-

      the bottom 12 bits, represents the system call index. The second, which uses the next higher 2 bits (12-
      13), is the table identifier
      types of system services, each stored in a table that can house up to 4096 system calls.

                          Table Index

                                         Index into table       System service number
      31                       13 11                        0

                           0                                        0
                                       Native API                          Native API

                           1                                        1

                                       Unused                              Win32k.sys API

                   KeServiceDescriptorTable            KeServiceDescriptorTableShadow

      FIGURE 8-27 System service number to system service translation.

         The kernel keeps track of the system service tables using three possible arrays—KeServiceDescriptor
      Table, KeServiceDescriptorTableShadow, and KeServiceDescriptorTableFilter. Each of these arrays can
      have up to two entries, which store the following three pieces of data:

           ■   A pointer to the array of system calls implemented by this service table

           ■   The number of system calls present in this service table, called the limit

           ■   A pointer to the array of argument bytes for each of the system calls in this service table

                                                                   KiServiceTable and KiArgumentTable, with a
      little over 450 system calls (the precise number depends on your version of Windows). All threads, by
      default, issue system calls that only access this table. On x86, this is enforced by the ServiceTable pointer
      in the thread object, while all other platforms hardcode the symbol KeServiceDescriptorTable in the
      system call dispatcher.

                                                                                             PsConvertTo
GuiThread
                   GuiThread             RestrictedGuiThread
one is used depends on whether the EnableFilteredWin32kSystemCalls process mitigation option is
enabled, which we described in the “Process-mitigation policies” section of Chapter 7, Part 1. On x86
                             ServiceTable pointer now changes to KeServiceDescriptorTableShadow or
KeServiceDescriptorTableFilter
hardcoded symbol chosen at each system call. (Although less performant, the latter avoids an obvious
hooking point for malicious software to abuse.)

  As you can probably guess, these other arrays include a second entry, which represents the
Windows USER and GDI services implemented in the kernel-mode part of the Windows subsystem,

albeit these still transit through Win32k.sys initially. This second entry points to W32pServiceTable or
W32pServiceTableFilter and W32pArgumentTable or W32pArgumentTableFilter, respectively, and has
about 1250 system calls or more, depending on your version of Windows.

   Note Because the kernel does not link against Win32k.sys, it exports a
   KeAddSystemServiceTable function that allows the addition of an additional entry into
   the KeServiceDescriptorTableShadow and the KeServiceDescriptorTableFilter table if it has

   and PatchGuard protects the arrays once this function has been called, so that the structures
   effectively become read only.

The only material difference between the Filter entries is that they point to system calls in Win32k.sys
with names like stub_UserGetThreadState, while the real array points to NtUserGetThreadState. The for-

STATUS_INVALID_SYSTEM_SERVICE
(such as NtUserGetThreadState), with potential telemetry if auditing is enabled.

The argument tables, on the other hand, are what help the kernel to know how many stack bytes need
to be copied from the user stack into the kernel stack, as explained in the dispatching section earlier.
Each entry in the argument table corresponds to the matching system call with that index and stores
the count of bytes to copy (up to 255). However, kernels for platforms other than x86 employ a mecha-
nism called system call table compaction, which combines the system call pointer from the call table
with the byte count from the argument table into a single value. The feature works as follows:

   1.   Take the system call function pointer and compute the 32-bit difference from the beginning of
        the system call table itself. Because the tables are global variables inside of the same module
        that contains the functions, this range of ±2 GB should be more than enough.

         2.   Take the stack byte count from the argument table and divide it by 4, converting it into an
              argument count
              simply be considered as two “arguments”).

         3.
                                                                                                         bit-
              wise or operation to add the argument count from the second step.

         4.   Override the system call function pointer with the value obtained in step 3.

                                                                                                            -

      pointer dereferences, and it acts as a layer of obfuscation, which makes it harder to hook or patch the
      system call table while making it easier for PatchGuard to defend it.

         EXPERIMENT: Mapping system call numbers to functions and arguments
         You can duplicate the same lookup performed by the kernel when dealing with a system call

         On an x86 system, you can just ask the debugger to dump each system call table, such as
         KiServiceTable with the dps command, which stands for dump pointer symbol               actu--
                                                                              symbol, which will actu
         ally perform a lookup for you. You can then similarly dump the KiArgumentTable (or any of the
         Win32k.sys ones) with the db command or dump bytes.

             A more interesting exercise, however, is dumping this data on an ARM64 or x64 system, due
         to the encoding we described earlier. The following steps will help you do that.

              1.

                   NtMapUserPhysicalPagesScatter:
                   lkd> ?? ((ULONG)(nt!KiServiceTable[3]) >> 4) + (int64)nt!KiServiceTable
                   unsigned int64 0xfffff803`1213e030

                   lkd> ln 0xfffff803`1213e030
                   (fffff803`1213e030)   nt!NtMapUserPhysicalPagesScatter

              2.   You can see the number of stack-based 4-byte arguments this system call takes by
                   taking the 4-bit argument count:
                   lkd> dx (((int*)&(nt!KiServiceTable))[3] & 0xF)
                   (((int*)&(nt!KiServiceTable))[3] & 0xF) : 0

              3.
                   system, the call could take anywhere between 0 and 4 arguments, all of which are in
                   registers (RCX, RDX, R8, and R9).

    4.   You could also use the debugger data model to create a LINQ predicate using projection,
         dumping the entire table, leveraging the fact that the KiServiceLimit variable corresponds
                                                                        W32pServiceLimit for the
         Win32k.sys entries in the shadow descriptor table). The output would look like this:
         lkd> dx @$table = &nt!KiServiceTable
         @$table = &nt!KiServiceTable : 0xfffff8047ee24800 [Type: void *]

         lkd> dx (((int(*)[90000])&(nt!KiServiceTable)))->Take(*(int*)&nt!KiServiceLimit)->
              Select(x => (x >> 4) + @$table)
         (((int(*)[90000])&(nt!KiServiceTable)))->Take(*(int*)&nt!KiServiceLimit)->Select
              (x => (x >> 4) + @$table)
            [0]              : 0xfffff8047eb081d0 [Type: void *]
            [1]              : 0xfffff8047eb10940 [Type: void *]
            [2]              : 0xfffff8047f0b7800 [Type: void *]
            [3]              : 0xfffff8047f299f50 [Type: void *]
            [4]              : 0xfffff8047f012450 [Type: void *]
            [5]              : 0xfffff8047ebc5cc0 [Type: void *]
            [6]              : 0xfffff8047f003b20 [Type: void *]

    5.   You could use a more complex version of this command that would also allow you to
         convert the pointers into their symbolic forms, essentially reimplementing the dps
         command that works on x86 Windows:
lkd> dx @$symPrint = (x => Debugger.Utility.Control.ExecuteCommand(".printf \"%y\\n\"," +
     ((unsigned __int64)x).ToDisplayString("x")).First())
@$symPrint = (x => Debugger.Utility.Control.ExecuteCommand(".printf \"%y\\n\"," +
((unsigned __int64)x).ToDisplayString("x")).First())

lkd> dx (((int(*)[90000])&(nt!KiServiceTable)))->Take(*(int*)&nt!KiServiceLimit)->Select
     (x => @$symPrint((x >> 4) + @$table))
(((int(*)[90000])&(nt!KiServiceTable)))->Take(*(int*)&nt!KiServiceLimit)->Select(x =>
@$symPrint((x >> 4) + @$table))
    [0]              : nt!NtAccessCheck (fffff804`7eb081d0)
    [1]              : nt!NtWorkerFactoryWorkerReady (fffff804`7eb10940)
    [2]              : nt!NtAcceptConnectPort (fffff804`7f0b7800)
    [3]              : nt!NtMapUserPhysicalPagesScatter (fffff804`7f299f50)
    [4]              : nt!NtWaitForSingleObject (fffff804`7f012450)
    [5]              : nt!NtCallbackReturn (fffff804`7ebc5cc0)

    6.
         Win32k.sys entries, you can also use the !chksvctbl -v command in the debugger,
         whose output will include all of this data while also checking for inline hooks that a
         rootkit may have attached:
lkd> !chksvctbl -v
#    ServiceTableEntry           DecodedEntryTarget(Address)               CompactedOffset
==========================================================================================
0    0xfffff8047ee24800                   nt!NtAccessCheck(0xfffff8047eb081d0) 0n-52191996
1    0xfffff8047ee24804      nt!NtWorkerFactoryWorkerReady(0xfffff8047eb10940) 0n-51637248
2    0xfffff8047ee24808             nt!NtAcceptConnectPort(0xfffff8047f0b7800) 0n43188226
3    0xfffff8047ee2480c   nt!NtMapUserPhysicalPagesScatter(0xfffff8047f299f50) 0n74806528
4    0xfffff8047ee24810           nt!NtWaitForSingleObject(0xfffff8047f012450) 0n32359680

         EXPERIMENT: Viewing system service activity
         You can monitor system service activity by watching the System Calls/Sec performance counter in
         the System object. Run the Performance Monitor, click Performance Monitor under Monitoring
         Tools, and click the Add button to add a counter to the chart. Select the System object, select the
         System Calls/Sec counter, and then click the Add button to add the counter to the chart.

         to have hundreds of thousands of system calls a second, especially the more processors the system

WoW64 (Windows-on-Windows)
      WoW64 (Win32 emulation on 64-bit Windows) refers to the software that permits the execution of
      32-bit applications on 64-bit platforms (which can also belong to a different architecture). WoW64 was
      originally a research project for running x86 code in old alpha and MIPS version of Windows NT 3.51. It
      has drastically evolved since then (that was around the year 1995). When Microsoft released Windows
      XP 64-bit edition in 2001, WoW64 was included in the OS for running old x86 32-bit applications in
      the new 64-bit OS. In modern Windows releases, WoW64 has been expanded to support also running
      ARM32 applications and x86 applications on ARM64 systems.

         WoW64 core is implemented as a set of user-mode DLLs, with some support from the kernel for cre-

      such as the process environment block (PEB) and thread environment block (TEB). Changing WoW64
      contexts through Get/SetThreadContext is also implemented by the kernel. Here are the core user-
      mode DLLs responsible for WoW64:

   ■      Wow64.dll Implements the WoW64 core in user mode. Creates the thin software layer that
          acts as a kind of intermediary kernel for 32-bit applications and starts the simulation. Handles
          CPU context state changes and base system calls exported by Ntoskrnl.exe. It also implements

   ■      Wow64win.dll Implements thunking (conversion) for GUI system calls exported by Win32k.
          sys. Both Wow64win.dll and Wow64.dll include thunking code, which converts a calling conven-
          tion from an architecture to another one.

                                                                                                         -
longs to a different architecture. In some cases (like for ARM64) the machine code needs to be emulat-
ed or jitted. In this book, we use the term jitting to refer to the just-in-time compilation technique that
involves compilation of small code blocks (called compilation units) at runtime instead of emulating
and executing one instruction at a time.

   Here are the DLLs that are responsible in translating, emulating, or jitting the machine code, allow-
ing it to be run by the target operating system:

   ■      Wow64cpu.dll Implements the CPU simulator for running x86 32-bit code in AMD64 op-
          erating systems. Manages the 32-bit CPU context of each running thread inside WoW64 and

          and vice versa.

   ■      Wowarmhw.dll Implements the CPU simulator for running ARM32 (AArch32) applications on
          ARM64 systems. It represents the ARM64 equivalent of the Wow64cpu.dll used in x86 systems.

   ■      Xtajit.dll Implements the CPU emulator for running x86 32-bit applications on ARM64
          systems. Includes a full x86 emulator, a jitter (code compiler), and the communication protocol
          between the jitter and the XTA cache server. The jitter can create compilation blocks including
          ARM64 code translated from the x86 image. Those blocks are stored in a local cache.

   The relationship of the WoW64 user-mode libraries (together with other core WoW64 components)

x86 on AMD64                 ARM32 on ARM64                      x86 on ARM64

       x86 32-bit              ARM Thumb-2              x86 32-bit EXEs, DLLs
       EXEs, DLLs                EXEs, DLLs
                                                        CHPE OS EXEs, DLLs
   x86 32-bit                  ARM 32-bit                 CHPE
                Ntdll.dll                   Ntdll.dll            Ntdll.dll      XtaCache Service

   Wow64cpu.dll                 Wowarmhw.dll                     Xtajit.dll       XtaCache.exe

                                                                  WoW64 Core
                 Wow64.dll                     Wow64win.dll
                                                                                    Xtac.exe
                             Native
                                      Ntdll.dll

                                                                                     NT Kernel
                                Ntoskrnl.exe                  Win32k.sys

FIGURE 8-28 The WoW64 architecture.

         Note Older Windows versions designed to run in Itanium machines included a full x86 emula-
         tor integrated in the WoW64 layer called Wowia32x.dll. Itanium processors were not able to

         A newer Insider release version of Windows also supports executing 64-bit x86 code on
         ARM64 systems. A new jitter has been designed for that reason. However emulating AMD64
         code in ARM systems is not performed through WoW64. Describing the architecture of the
         AMD64 emulator is outside the scope of this release of this book.

      The WoW64 core
      As introduced in the previous section, the WoW64 core is platform independent: It creates a software
      layer for managing the execution of 32-bit code in 64-bit operating systems. The actual translation is
      performed by another component called Simulator (also known as Binary Translator), which is platform

      Simulator. While the core of WoW64 is almost entirely implemented in user mode (in the Wow64.dll
      library), small parts of it reside in the NT kernel.

      WoW64 core in the NT kernel
      During system startup (phase 1), the I/O manager invokes the PsLocateSystemDlls routine, which maps
      all the system DLLs supported by the system (and stores their base addresses in a global array) in the
      System process user address space. This also includes WoW64 versions of Ntdll, as described by Table
      8-13. Phase 2 of the process manager (PS) startup resolves some entry points of those DLLs, which are
      stored in internal kernel variables. One of the exports, LdrSystemDllInitBlock, is used to transfer WoW64
      information and function pointers to new WoW64 processes.

      TABLE 8-13 Different Ntdll version list

       Path                           Internal Name   Description

                                      ntdll.dll       The system Ntdll mapped in every user process (except for minimal
                                                      processes). This is the only version marked as required.

                                      ntdll32.dll     32-bit x86 Ntdll mapped in WoW64 processes running in 64-bit x86
                                                      host systems.

                                      ntdll32.dll     32-bit ARM Ntdll mapped in WoW64 processes running in 64-bit
                                                      ARM host systems.

                                      ntdllwow.dll    32-bit x86 CHPE Ntdll mapped in WoW64 processes running in
                                                      64-bit ARM host systems.

         When a process is initially created, the kernel determines whether it would run under WoW64 using
      an algorithm that analyzes the main process executable PE image and checks whether the correct Ntdll
      version is mapped in the system. In case the system has determined that the process is WoW64, when
      the kernel initializes its address space, it maps both the native Ntdll and the correct WoW64 version.

As explained in Chapter 3 of Part 1, each nonminimal process has a PEB data structure that is acces-

and stores a pointer to it in a small data structure (EWoW64PROCESS) linked to the main EPROCESS

the LdrSystemDllInitBlock symbol, including pointers of Wow64 Ntdll exports.

   When a thread is allocated for the process, the kernel goes through a similar process: along with

by a 32-bit TEB.

32-bit CPU context (X86_NT5_CONTEXT or ARM_CONTEXT data structures, depending on the target
architecture), and a pointer of the per-thread WoW64 CPU shared data, which can be used by the
                                                                                               -

contains an initial single thread.

                 WoW64 Process                                     WoW64 Thread

             PCB
                                                                                    TOP
         ID, Token, …
                                                       TCB
         Thread List                                   Kernel Stack
                         EPROCESS

       WoW64Process                                ID, Start Addr,…                 BASE
           •
                                                                         ETHREAD

           •                                       Thread List Entry
           •
           •                                              •
                                                          •
          PEB                                             •
                                                          •
          32-bit PEB                                     TEB
                         EWoW64PROCESS
          Ntdll Type
                                                                                               Kernel-mode
                                                                                                   User-mode
      Native PEB                    32-bit PEB     Native & 32-bit TEB
      Image base           32-bit Image base          Native NT_TIB                 Native Stack
         Flags                         Flags              User Stack                       TOP
      Ldr Database              32-bit Ldr DB        Flags, CSR Info,…
     Os Information           Os Information          WowTebOffset
                                                                                                        WoW64 CPU

            •                        •                         •
            •                        •                                              Guest Context
                                                                                                         Area Info

            •                        •                         •
            •                        •                         •                     Per-thr. Data
     Nt Global Flags          Nt Global Flags          TLS Slot Array                      Flags
                                     CpuFlags         32-bit NT_TIB
                                                                                     32-bit Stack
                                    CrossSection          User Stack
           WoW64INFO                                                                       TOP
                                    Host/Guest       Flags, CSR Info,…
                                     Machine          WowTebOffset
                                                               •
                                                               •
                                                               •
                                                      TLS Slots Array
                                                                                           BASE

FIGURE 8-29

      User-mode WoW64 core
      Aside from the differences described in the previous section, the birth of the process and its initial
      thread happen in the same way as for non-WoW64 processes, until the main thread starts its execu-
      tion by invoking the loader initialization function, LdrpInitialize, in the native version of Ntdll. When the

      the process initialization routine, LdrpInitializeProcess, which, along with a lot of different things (see
      the “Early process initialization” section of Chapter 3 in Part 1 for further details), determines whether
      the process is a WoW64 one, based on the presence of the 32-bit TEB (located after the native TEB and
      linked to it). In case the check succeeded, the native Ntdll sets the internal UseWoW64 global variable
      to 1, builds the path of the WoW64 core library, wow64.dll, and maps it above the 4 GB virtual address

      gets the address of some WoW64 functions that deal with process/thread suspension and APC and
      exception dispatching and stores them in some of its internal variables.

         When the process initialization routine ends, the Windows loader transfers the execution to the
      WoW64 Core via the exported Wow64LdrpInitialize
      new thread starts through that entry point (instead of the classical RtlUserThreadStart). The WoW64
      core obtains a pointer to the CPU WoW64 area stored by the kernel at the TLS slot 1. In case the thread
                                                                                                           -
      lowing steps:

         1.   Tries to load the WoW64 Thunk Logging DLL (wow64log.dll). The Dll is used for logging
              WoW64 calls and is not included in commercial Windows releases, so it is simply skipped.

         2.   Looks up the Ntdll32 base address and function pointers thanks to the LdrSystemDllInitBlock

         3.
                                                                                                                 -
              tem requests and translates their path before invoking the native system calls.

         4.   Initializes the WoW64 service tables, which contains pointers to system services belonging to
              the NT kernel and Win32k GUI subsystem (similar to the standard kernel system services), but
              also Console and NLS service call (both WoW64 system service calls and redirection are cov-
              ered later in this chapter.)

         5.

                                                                              arch                arch> can be

              exported functions are resolved and stored in an internal array called BtFuncs. The array is the

                                                          BtCpuProcessInit function, for example, represents

   6.
        section. A synthesized work item is posted on the section when a WoW64 process calls an
        API targeting another 32-bit process (this operation propagates thunk operations across
        different processes).

   7.   The WoW64 layer informs the simulator (by invoking the exported BtCpuNotifyMapViewOfSection)
        that the main module, and the 32-bit version of Ntdll have been mapped in the address space.

   8.
        Wow64Transition exported variable of the 32-bit version of Ntdll. This allows the system call
        dispatcher to work.

   When the process initialization routine ends, the thread is ready to start the CPU simulation. It

stack for executing the 32-bit version of the LdrInitializeThunk function. The simulation is started via the
            BTCpuSimulate exported function, which will never return to the caller (unless a critical error
in the simulator happens).

File system redirection
To maintain application compatibility and to reduce the effort of porting applications from Win32 to

contains native 64-bit images. WoW64, as it intercepts all the system calls, translates all the path re-
lated APIs and replaces various system paths with the WoW64 equivalent (which depends on the target

TABLE 8-14 WoW64 redirected paths

Path                            Architecture    Redirected Location

                                X86 on AMD64

                                X86 on ARM64
                                                does not exist in SyChpe32)

                                ARM32

                                Native

                                X86

                                ARM32

                                Native

                                X86

                                ARM32

                                      X86

                                      ARM32

                                      X86

                                      ARM32

      are exempted from being redirected such that access attempts to them made by 32-bit applications
      actually access the real one. These directories include the following:

         ■

         ■

         ■

         ■

         ■

         ■

      per-thread basis through the Wow64DisableWow64FsRedirection and Wow64RevertWow64FsRedirection
      functions. This mechanism works by storing an enabled/disabled value on the TLS index 8, which is
      consulted by the internal WoW64 RedirectPath function. However, the mechanism can have issues

      because once redirection is disabled, the system no longer uses it during internal loading either, and

      the other consistent paths introduced earlier is usually a safer methodology for developers to use.

         Note Because certain 32-bit applications might indeed be aware and able to deal with

         even from an application running under WoW64.

      Registry redirection

      component is installed and registered both as a 32-bit binary and a 64-bit binary, the last component
      registered will override the registration of the previous component because they both write to the
      same location in the registry.

     To help solve this problem transparently without introducing any code changes to 32-bit compo-
nents, the registry is split into two portions: Native and WoW64. By default, 32-bit components access
the 32-bit view, and 64-bit components access the 64-bit view. This provides a safe execution environ-
ment for 32-bit and 64-bit components and separates the 32-bit application state from the 64-bit one,
if it exists.

    As discussed later in the “System calls” section, the WoW64 system call layer intercepts all the system
calls invoked by a 32-bit process. When WoW64 intercepts the registry system calls that open or create a
registry key, it translates the key path to point to the WoW64 view of the registry (unless the caller explic-
itly asks for the 64-bit view.) WoW64 can keep track of the redirected keys thanks to multiple tree data

where the system should begin the redirection). WoW64 redirects the registry at these points:

   ■

   ■

   Not the entire hive is split. Subkeys belonging to those root keys can be stored in the private
WoW64 part of the registry (in this case, the subkey is a split key). Otherwise, the subkey can be kept
shared between 32-bit and 64-bit apps (in this case, the subkey is a shared key). Under each of the split
keys (in the position tracked by an anchor node), WoW64 creates a key called WoW6432Node (for x86
application) or WowAA32Node
information. All other portions of the registry are shared between 32-bit and 64-bit applications (for

                                                                                                      -
rection and layout explained earlier. The 32-bit application must write exactly these strings using this
case—any other data will be ignored and written normally.

           RegOpenKeyEx, RegCreateKeyEx, RegOpenKeyTransacted, RegCreateKeyTransacted, and
RegDeleteKeyEx functions permit this:

   ■   KEY_WoW64_64KEY Explicitly opens a 64-bit key from either a 32-bit or 64-bit application

   ■   KEY_WoW64_32KEY Explicitly opens a 32-bit key from either a 32-bit or 64-bit application

X86 simulation on AMD64 platforms
The interface of the x86 simulator for AMD64 platforms (Wow64cpu.dll) is pretty simple. The simulator
process initialization function enables the fast system call interface, depending on the presence of soft-
ware MBEC (Mode Based Execute Control is discussed in Chapter 9). When the WoW64 core starts the
simulation by invoking the BtCpuSimulate
frame (based on the 32-bit CPU context provided by the WoW64 core), initializes the Turbo thunks

      set to the 32-bit version of the LdrInitializeThunk loader function). When the CPU executes the far jump,
      it detects that the call gate targets a 32-bit segment, thus it changes the CPU execution mode to 32-bit.
      The code execution exits 32-bit mode only in case of an interrupt or a system call being dispatched.
      More details about call gates are available in the Intel and AMD software development manuals.

         Note

         to be initialized.

      System calls

      DLLs that perform interprocess communication, such as Rpcrt4.dll). When a 32-bit application requires
      assistance from the OS, it invokes functions located in the special 32-bit versions of the OS libraries.
      Like their 64-bit counterparts, the OS routines can perform their job directly in user mode, or they can
      require assistance from the NT kernel. In the latter case, they invoke system calls through stub func-
      tions like the one implemented in the regular 64-bit Ntdll. The stub places the system call index into a
      register, but, instead of issuing the native 32-bit system call instruction, it invokes the WoW64 system
      call dispatcher (through the Wow64Transition variable compiled by the WoW64 core).

      It emits another far jump for transitioning to the native 64-bit execution mode, exiting from the simula-

      captures the parameters associated with the system call and converts them. The conversion process is
      called “thunking” and allows machine code executed following the 32-bit ABI to interoperate with 64-bit

      values are passed in parameters of each function and accessed through the machine code.

      complex data structures provided by the client (but deal with simple input and output values), the
      Turbo thunks (small conversion routines implemented in the simulator) take care of the conversion and
      directly invoke the native 64-bit API. Other complex APIs need the Wow64SystemServiceEx
      assistance, which extracts the correct WoW64 system call table number from the system call index and
      invokes the correct WoW64 system call function. WoW64 system calls are implemented in the WoW64
      core library and in Wow64win.dll and have the same name as the native system calls but with the
      wh-                               NtCreateFile WoW64 API is called whNtCreateFile.)

          After the conversion has been correctly performed, the simulator issues the corresponding na-
      tive 64-bit system call. When the native system call returns, WoW64 converts (or thunks) any output
      parameters if necessary, from 64-bit to 32-bit formats, and restarts the simulation.

Exception dispatching
Similar to WoW64 system calls, exception dispatching forces the CPU simulation to exit. When an ex-
ception happens, the NT kernel determines whether it has been generated by a thread executing user-
mode code. If so, the NT kernel builds an extended exception frame on the active stack and dispatches
the exception by returning to the user-mode KiUserExceptionDispatcher function in the 64-bit Ntdll (for
more information about exceptions, refer to the “Exception dispatching” section earlier in this chapter).

    Note that a 64-bit exception frame (which includes the captured CPU context) is allocated
in the 32-bit stack that was currently active when the exception was generated. Thus, it needs
to be converted before being dispatched to the CPU simulator. This is exactly the role of the
Wow64PrepareForException function (exported by the WoW64 core library), which allocates space on
the native 64-bit stack and copies the native exception frame from the 32-bit stack in it. It then switches
to the 64-bit stack and converts both the native exception and context records to their relative 32-bit
counterpart, storing the result on the 32-bit stack (replacing the 64-bit exception frame). At this point,
the WoW64 Core can restart the simulation from the 32-bit version of the KiUserExceptionDispatcher
function, which dispatches the exception in the same way the native 32-bit Ntdll would.

    32-bit user-mode APC delivery follows a similar implementation. A regular user-mode APC is
                                      KiUserApcDispatcher. When the 64-bit kernel is about to dispatch
a user-mode APC to a WoW64 process, it maps the 32-bit APC address to a higher range of 64-bit ad-
dress space. The 64-bit Ntdll then invokes the Wow64ApcRoutine routine exported by the WoW64 core
library, which captures the native APC and context record in user mode and maps it back in the 32-bit
stack. It then prepares a 32-bit user-mode APC and context record and restarts the CPU simulation
from the 32-bit version of the KiUserApcDispatcher function, which dispatches the APC the same way
the native 32-bit Ntdll would.

ARM
ARM is a family of Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) architectures originally designed by

result, there have been multiple releases and versions of the ARM architecture, which have quickly
evolved during the years, starting from very simple 32-bit CPUs, initially brought by the ARMv3 genera-
tion in the year 1993, up to the latest ARMv8. The, latest ARM64v8.2 CPUs natively support multiple
execution modes (or states), most commonly AArch32, Thumb-2, and AArch64:

   ■   AArch32 is the most classical execution mode, where the CPU executes 32-bit code only and
       transfers data to and from the main memory through a 32-bit bus using 32-bit registers.

   ■   Thumb-2 is an execution state that is a subset of the AArch32 mode. The Thumb instruction set has
       been designed for improving code density in low-power embedded systems. In this mode, the CPU
       can execute a mix of 16-bit and 32-bit instructions, while still accessing 32-bit registers and memory.

   ■   AArch64 is the modern execution mode. The CPU in this execution state has access to 64-bit
       general purpose registers and can transfer data to and from the main memory through a
       64-bit bus.

          Windows 10 for ARM64 systems can operate in the AArch64 or Thumb-2 execution mode (AArch32
      is generally not used). Thumb-2 was especially used in old Windows RT systems. The current state of

      discussed more in depth in Chapter 9 and in the ARM Architecture Reference Manual.

      Memory models
      In the “Hardware side-channel vulnerabilities” earlier in this chapter, we introduced the concept of

      observed while accessed by multiple processors (MESI is one of the most famous cache coherency
      protocols). Like the cache coherency protocol, modern CPUs also should provide a memory consis-
      tency (or ordering) model for solving another problem that can arise in multiprocessor environments:
      memory reordering. Some architectures (ARM64 is an example) are indeed free to re-order memory

      access instructions (achieving better performance while accessing the slower memory bus). This kind
      of architecture follows a weak memory model, unlike the AMD64 architecture, which follows a strong
      memory model, in which memory access instructions are generally executed in program order. Weak

      lot of synchronization issues when developing multiprocessor software. In contrast, a strong model is
      more intuitive and stable, but it has the big drawback of being slower.

         CPUs that can do memory reordering (following the weak model) provide some machine instruc-
      tions that act as memory barriers. A barrier prevents the processor from reordering memory accesses
      before and after the barrier, helping multiprocessors synchronization issues. Memory barriers are slow;
      thus, they are used only when strictly needed by critical multiprocessor code in Windows, especially in
      synchronization primitives (like spinlocks, mutexes, pushlocks, and so on).

         As we describe in the next section, the ARM64 jitter always makes use of memory barriers while

      execute could be run by multiple threads in parallel at the same time (and thus have potential synchro-
      nization issues. X86 follows a strong memory model, so it does not have the reordering issue, a part of
      generic out-of-order execution as explained in the previous section).

         Note Other than the CPU, memory reordering can also affect the compiler, which, during
         compilation time, can reorder (and possibly remove) memory references in the source
                                                                                compiler reordering,
         whereas the type described in the previous section is processor reordering.

ARM32 simulation on ARM64 platforms
The simulation of ARM32 applications under ARM64 is performed in a very similar way as for x86 under
AMD64. As discussed in the previous section, an ARM64v8 CPU is capable of dynamic switching between
the AArch64 and Thumb-2 execution state (so it can execute 32-bit instructions directly in hardware).
                                                                                                    -
struction, so the WoW64 layer needs to invoke the NT kernel to request the execution mode switch. To do
this, the BtCpuSimulate function, exported by the ARM-on-ARM64 CPU simulator (Wowarmhw.dll), saves
the nonvolatile AArch64 registers in the 64-bit stack, restores the 32-bit context stored in WoW64 CPU

   The NT kernel exception handler (which, on ARM64, is the same as the syscall handler), detects that
the exception has been raised due to a system call, thus it checks the syscall number. In case the num-
ber is the special –1, the NT kernel knows that the request is due to an execution mode change coming
from WoW64. In that case, it invokes the KiEnter32BitMode routine, which sets the new execution state
for the lower EL (exception level) to AArch32, dismisses the exception, and returns to user mode.

   The code starts the execution in AArch32 state. Like the x86 simulator for AMD64 systems, the execu-
tion controls return to the simulator only in case an exception is raised or a system call is invoked. Both
exceptions and system calls are dispatched in an identical way as for the x86 simulator under AMD64.

X86 simulation on ARM64 platforms
The x86-on-ARM64 CPU simulator (Xtajit.dll) is different from other binary translators described in the
previous sections, mostly because it cannot directly execute x86 instructions using the hardware. The
ARM64 processor is simply not able to understand any x86 instruction. Thus, the x86-on-ARM simula-
tor implements a full x86 emulator and a jitter, which can translate blocks of x86 opcodes in AArch64
code and execute the translated blocks directly.

   When the simulator process initialization function (BtCpuProcessInit) is invoked for a new WoW64 pro-

compatibility database.) The simulator then allocates and compiles the Syscall page, which, as the name
implies, is used for emitting x86 syscalls (the page is then linked to Ntdll thanks to the Wow64Transition
variable). At this point, the simulator determines whether the process can use the XTA cache.

    The simulator uses two different caches for storing precompiled code blocks: The internal cache is
allocated per-thread and contains code blocks generated by the simulator while compiling x86 code
executed by the thread (those code blocks are called jitted blocks); the external XTA cache is managed
by the XtaCache service and contains all the jitted blocks generated lazily for an x86 image by the

later in this chapter.) The process initialization routine allocates also the Compile Hybrid Executable
(CHPE) bitmap, which covers the entire 4-GB address space potentially used by a 32-bit process. The
bitmap uses a single bit to indicate that a page of memory contains CHPE code (CHPE is described later
in this chapter.)

         The simulator thread initialization routine (BtCpuThreadInit) initializes the compiler and allocates
      the per-thread CPU state on the native stack, an important data structure that contains the per-thread
      compiler state, including the x86 thread context, the x86 code emitter state, the internal code cache,

      Simulator’s image load notification
      Unlike any other binary translator, the x86-on-ARM64 CPU simulator must be informed any time a new
      image is mapped in the process address space, including for the CHPE Ntdll. This is achieved thanks to
      the WoW64 core, which intercepts when the NtMapViewOfSection native API is called from the 32-bit
      code and informs the Xtajit simulator through the exported BTCpuNotifyMapViewOfSection routine. It

      data, such as

         ■   The CHPE bitmap (which needs to be updated by setting bits to 1 when the target image
             contains CHPE code pages)

         ■

         ■   The XTA cache state for the image

         In particular, whenever a new x86 or CHPE image is loaded, the simulator determines whether it
      should use the XTA cache for the module (through registry and application compatibility shim.) In case
      the check succeeded, the simulator updates the global per-process XTA cache state by requesting to
      the XtaCache service the updated cache for the image. In case the XtaCache service is able to identify

      used to speed up the execution of the image. (The section contains precompiled ARM64 code blocks.)

      Compiled Hybrid Portable Executables (CHPE)

      enough performance to maintain the application responsiveness. One of the major issues is tied to the
      memory ordering differences between the two architectures. The x86 emulator does not know how
      the original x86 code has been designed, so it is obliged to aggressively use memory barriers between
      each memory access made by the x86 image. Executing memory barriers is a slow operation. On aver-

          These are the motivations behind the design of Compiled Hybrid Portable Executables (CHPE). A
      CHPE binary is a special hybrid executable that contains both x86 and ARM64-compatible code, which
      has been generated with full awareness of the original source code (the compiler knew exactly where
      to use memory barriers). The ARM64-compatible machine code is called hybrid (or CHPE) code: it is
      still executed in AArch64 mode but is generated following the 32-bit ABI for a better interoperability
      with x86 code.

        CHPE binaries are created as standard x86 executables (the machine ID is still 014C as for x86); the
      main difference is that they include hybrid code, described by a table in the Hybrid Image metadata

page containing hybrid code described by the Hybrid metadata. When the jitter compiles the x86 code
block and detects that the code is trying to invoke a hybrid function, it directly executes it (using the
32-bit stack), without wasting any time in any compilation.

    The jitted x86 code is executed following a custom ABI, which means that there is a nonstandard
convention on how the ARM64 registers are used and how parameters are passed between functions.
CHPE code does not follow the same register conventions as jitted code (although hybrid code still
follows a 32-bit ABI). This means that directly invoking CHPE code from the jitted blocks built by the
compiler is not directly possible. To overcome this problem, CHPE binaries also include three different
kinds of thunk functions, which allow the interoperability of CHPE with x86 code:

   ■   A pop thunk allows x86 code to invoke a hybrid function by converting incoming (or outgo-
       ing) arguments from the guest (x86) caller to the CHPE convention and by directly transferring
       execution to the hybrid code.

   ■   A push thunk allows CHPE code to invoke an x86 routine by converting incoming (or outgoing)
       arguments from the hybrid code to the guest (x86) convention and by calling the emulator to
       resume execution on the x86 code.

   ■   An export thunk is a compatibility thunk created for supporting applications that detour x86

       exported from CHPE modules still contain a little amount of x86 code (usually 8 bytes), which
       semantically does not provide any sort of functionality but allows detours to be inserted by the
       external application.

   The x86-on-ARM simulator makes the best effort to always load CHPE system binaries instead of stan-
dard x86 ones, but this is not always possible. In case a CHPE binary does not exist, the simulator will load
the standard x86 one from the SysWow64 folder. In this case, the OS module will be jitted entirely.

   EXPERIMENT: Dumping the hybrid code address range table

   of a CHPE image. More information about the tool and how to install it are available in Chapter 9.

      In this experiment, you will dump the hybrid metadata of kernelbase.dll, a system library that
   also has been compiled with CHPE support. You also can try the experiment with other CHPE

                                                                                                       -

   cd c:\Windows\SyChpe32
   link /dump /loadconfig kernelbase.dll > kernelbase_loadconfig.txt

                                                                                                         -

         with Notepad and scroll down until you reach the following text:
         Section contains the following hybrid metadata:

                        4 Version
                 102D900C Address of WowA64 exception handler function pointer
                 102D9000 Address of WowA64 dispatch call function pointer
                 102D9004 Address of WowA64 dispatch indirect call function pointer
                 102D9008 Address of WowA64 dispatch indirect call function pointer (with CFG check)
                 102D9010 Address of WowA64 dispatch return function pointer
                 102D9014 Address of WowA64 dispatch leaf return function pointer
                 102D9018 Address of WowA64 dispatch jump function pointer
                 102DE000 Address of WowA64 auxiliary import address table pointer
                 1011DAC8 Hybrid code address range table
                        4 Hybrid code address range count

             Hybrid Code Address Range Table

                         Address Range
                   ----------------------
                   x86    10001000 - 1000828F (00001000 - 0000828F)
                   arm64 1011E2E0 - 1029E09E (0011E2E0 - 0029E09E)
                   x86    102BA000 - 102BB865 (002BA000 - 002BB865)
                   arm64 102BC000 - 102C0097 (002BC000 - 002C0097)

         range table: two sections contain x86 code (actually not used by the simulator), and two contain
         CHPE code (the tool shows the term “arm64” erroneously.)

      The XTA cache
      As introduced in the previous sections, the x86-on-ARM64 simulator, other than its internal per-thread
      cache, uses an external global cache called XTA cache, managed by the XtaCache protected service,
      which implements the lazy jitter. The service is an automatic start service, which, when started, opens

      service and members of the Administrators group have access to the folder). The service starts its own
                                                                                                         -
      locates the ALPC and lazy jit worker threads before exiting.

         The ALPC worker thread is responsible in dispatching all the incoming requests to the ALPC server.
      In particular, when the simulator (the client), running in the context of a WoW64 process, connects to
      the XtaCache service, a new data structure tracking the x86 process is created and stored in an internal

      (the memory backing the section is internally called Trace buffer). The section is used by the simulator
      to send hints about the x86 code that has been jitted to execute the application and was not present in
      any cache, together with the module ID to which they belong. The information stored in the section is

processed every 1 second by the XTA cache or in case the buffer becomes full. Based on the number of
valid entries in the list, the XtaCache can decide to directly start the lazy jitter.

   When a new image is mapped into an x86 process, the WoW64 layer informs the simulator, which

generated based on the executable image path and its internal binary data. The hashes are important be-
cause they avoid the execution of jitted blocks compiled for an old stale version of the executable image.
                                                                                 module name module
header hash module path hash multi/uniproc            cache file version

   The lazy jitter is the engine of the XtaCache. When the service decides to invoke it, a new version of

low-privileged environment (AppContainer process), which runs in low-priority mode. The only job of
the compiler is to compile the x86 code executed by the simulator. The new code blocks are added to the

   EXPERIMENT: Witnessing the XTA cache
   Newer versions of Process Monitor can run natively on ARM64 environments. You can use

   In this experiment, you need an ARM64 system running at least Windows 10 May 2019 update
   (1903). Initially, you need to be sure that the x86 application used for the experiment has never
   before been executed by the system. In this example, we will install an old x86 version of MPC-HC
   media player, which can be downloaded from https://sourceforge.net/projects/mpc-hc/files/lat-
   est/download. Any x86 application is well suited for this experiment though.

      Install MPC-HC (or your preferred x86 application), but, before running it, open Process

      Then launch MPC-HC and try to play some video. Exit MPC-HC and stop the event capturing in

      this experiment, you are not interested in the registry).

      compile the x86 image on its own and periodically sent information to the XtaCache. Later, the
      lazy jitter would have been invoked by a worker thread in the XtaCache. The latter created a new

      both itself and Xtac:

         If you restart the experiment, you would see different events in Process Monitor: The cache

      execute it directly. As a result, the execution time should be faster. You can also try to delete the

      MPC-HC x86 application again.

      command prompt window and insert the following commands:
      takeown /f c:\windows\XtaCache
      icacls c:\Windows\XtaCache /grant Administrators:F

Jitting and execution
To start the guest process, the x86-on-ARM64 CPU simulator has no other chances than interpreting
or jitting the x86 code. Interpreting the guest code means translating and executing one machine
instruction at time, which is a slow process, so the emulator supports only the jitting strategy: it
dynamically compiles x86 code to ARM64 and stores the result in a guest “code block” until certain
conditions happen:

   ■    An illegal opcode or a data or instruction breakpoint have been detected.

   ■    A branch instruction targeting an already-visited block has been encountered.

   ■    The block is bigger than a predetermined limit (512 bytes).

(indexed by its RVA) already exists. If the block exists in the cache, the simulator directly executes it
using a dispatcher routine, which builds the ARM64 context (containing the host registers values) and
stores it in the 64-bit stack, switches to the 32-bit stack, and prepares it for the guest x86 thread state.

pop thunk used for transferring the execution from a CHPE to an x86 context.

   When the execution of the code block ends, the dispatcher does the opposite: It saves the new x86
context in the 32-bit stack, switches to the 64-bit stack, and restores the old ARM64 context containing
the state of the simulator. When the dispatcher exits, the simulator knows the exact x86 virtual address
where the execution was interrupted. It can then restart the emulation starting from that new memory
address. Similar to cached entries, the simulator checks whether the target address points to a memory
page containing CHPE code (it knows this information thanks to the global CHPE bitmap). If that is the

cache, and directly executes it.

executing native images. Otherwise, it needs to invoke the compiler for building the native translated
code block. The compilation process is split into three phases:

   1.   The parsing stage builds instructions descriptors for each opcode that needs to be added in
        the code block.

   2.   The optimization

   3.              code generation

   The generated code block is then added to the per-thread local cache. Note that the simulator
cannot add it in the XTA cache, mainly for security and performance reasons. Otherwise, an attacker
would be allowed to pollute the cache of a higher-privileged process (as a result, the malicious code

the simulator does not have enough CPU time to generate highly optimized code (even though there is

         However, information about the compiled x86 blocks, together with the ID of the binary hosting
      the x86 code, are inserted into the list mapped by the shared Trace buffer. The lazy jitter of the XTA
      cache knows that it needs to compile the x86 code jitted by the simulator thanks to the Trace buffer. As

      than the others.

      System calls and exception dispatching
      Under the x86-on-ARM64 CPU simulator, when an x86 thread performs a system call, it invokes the
      code located in the syscall page allocated by the simulator, which raises the exception 0x2E. Each x86
      exception forces the code block to exit. The dispatcher, while exiting from the code block, dispatches
      the exception through an internal function that ends up in invoking the standard WoW64 exception
      handler or system call dispatcher (depending on the exception vector number.) Those have been al-
      ready discussed in the previous X86 simulation on AMD64 platforms section of this chapter.

         EXPERIMENT: Debugging WoW64 in ARM64 environments
         Newer releases of WinDbg (the Windows Debugger) are able to debug machine code run under
         any simulator. This means that in ARM64 systems, you will be able to debug native ARM64, ARM
         Thumb-2, and x86 applications, whereas in AMD64 systems, you can debug only 32- and 64-bit
         x86 programs. The debugger is also able to easily switch between the native 64-bit and 32-bit
         stacks, which allows the user to debug both native (including the WoW64 layer and the emulator)
         and guest code (furthermore, the debugger also supports CHPE.)

            In this experiment, you will open an x86 application using an ARM64 machine and switch

         installing one of the kits, open the ARM64 version of Windbg (available from the Start menu.)

         generates, like Data Misaligned and in-page I/O errors (these exceptions are already handled
                                          Debug menu, click Event Filters                          Data
         Misaligned event and check the Ignore option box from the Execution group. Repeat the same
         for the In-page I/O                                                                            -

   Click Close, and then from the main debugger interface, select Open Executable from the
File
folder. (In this example, we are using notepad.exe, but any x86 application works.) Also open

correctly (refer to the https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/
symbol-path                                                                                     -
                                                                             k command:
0:000> k
# Child-SP          RetAddr           Call Site
00 00000000`001eec70 00007ffb`bd47de00 ntdll!LdrpDoDebuggerBreak+0x2c
01 00000000`001eec90 00007ffb`bd47133c ntdll!LdrpInitializeProcess+0x1da8
02 00000000`001ef580 00007ffb`bd428180 ntdll!_LdrpInitialize+0x491ac
03 00000000`001ef660 00007ffb`bd428134 ntdll!LdrpInitialize+0x38
04 00000000`001ef680 00000000`00000000 ntdll!LdrInitializeThunk+0x14

   The simulator is still not loaded at this time: The native and CHPE Ntdll have been mapped
into the target binary by the NT kernel, while the WoW64 core binaries have been loaded by the
native Ntdll just before the breakpoint via the LdrpLoadWow64 function. You can check that by
enumerating the currently loaded modules (via the lm command) and by moving to the next
frame in the stack via the .f+ command. In the disassembly window, you should see the invoca-
tion of the LdrpLoadWow64 routine:
00007ffb`bd47dde4 97fed31b bl            ntdll!LdrpLoadWow64 (00007ffb`bd432a50)

         Now resume the execution with the g command (or F5 key). You should see multiple modules
      being loaded in the process address space and another breakpoint raising, this time under the
      x86 context. If you again display the stack via the k command, you can notice that a new column

      0:000:x86> k
       #   Arch ChildEBP RetAddr
      00    x86 00acf7b8 77006fb8 ntdll_76ec0000!LdrpDoDebuggerBreak+0x2b
      01   CHPE 00acf7c0 77006fb8 ntdll_76ec0000!#LdrpDoDebuggerBreak$push_thunk+0x48
      02   CHPE 00acf820 76f44054 ntdll_76ec0000!#LdrpInitializeProcess+0x20ec
      03   CHPE 00acfad0 76f43e9c ntdll_76ec0000!#_LdrpInitialize+0x1a4
      04   CHPE 00acfb60 76f43e34 ntdll_76ec0000!#LdrpInitialize+0x3c
      05   CHPE 00acfb80 76ffc3cc ntdll_76ec0000!LdrInitializeThunk+0x14

         If you compare the new stack to the old one, you will see that the stack addresses have drasti-
      cally changed (because the process is now executing using the 32-bit stack). Note also that some

      containing CHPE code. At this point, you can step into and over x86 code, as in regular x86
      operating systems. The simulator takes care of the emulation and hides all the details. To observe
      how the simulator is running, you should move to the 64-bit context through the .effmach
      command. The command accepts different parameters: x86 for the 32-bit x86 context; arm64 or
      amd64 for the native 64-bit context (depending on the target platform); arm for the 32-bit ARM
      Thumb2 context; CHPE for the 32-bit CHPE context. Switching to the 64-bit stack in this case is
      achieved via the arm64 parameter:
      0:000:x86> .effmach arm64
      Effective machine: ARM 64-bit (AArch64) (arm64)
      0:000> k
       # Child-SP          RetAddr           Call Site
      00 00000000`00a8df30 00007ffb`bd3572a8 wow64!Wow64pNotifyDebugger+0x18f54
      01 00000000`00a8df60 00007ffb`bd3724a4 wow64!Wow64pDispatchException+0x108
      02 00000000`00a8e2e0 00000000`76e1e9dc wow64!Wow64RaiseException+0x84
      03 00000000`00a8e400 00000000`76e0ebd8 xtajit!BTCpuSuspendLocalThread+0x24c
      04 00000000`00a8e4c0 00000000`76de04c8 xtajit!BTCpuResetFloatingPoint+0x4828
      05 00000000`00a8e530 00000000`76dd4bf8 xtajit!BTCpuUseChpeFile+0x9088
      06 00000000`00a8e640 00007ffb`bd3552c4 xtajit!BTCpuSimulate+0x98
      07 00000000`00a8e6b0 00007ffb`bd353788 wow64!RunCpuSimulation+0x14
      08 00000000`00a8e6c0 00007ffb`bd47de38 wow64!Wow64LdrpInitialize+0x138
      09 00000000`00a8e980 00007ffb`bd47133c ntdll!LdrpInitializeProcess+0x1de0
      0a 00000000`00a8f270 00007ffb`bd428180 ntdll!_LdrpInitialize+0x491ac
      0b 00000000`00a8f350 00007ffb`bd428134 ntdll!LdrpInitialize+0x38
      0c 00000000`00a8f370 00000000`00000000 ntdll!LdrInitializeThunk+0x14

      thunk has been invoked to restart the simulation to the LdrpDoDebuggerBreak x86 function,
      which caused an exception (managed through the native Wow64RaiseException
      debugger via the Wow64pNotifyDebugger routine. With Windbg and the .effmach command,
      you can effectively debug multiple contexts: native, CHPE, and x86 code. Using the g @$exen-
      try command, you can move to the x86 entry point of Notepad and continue the debug session
      of x86 code or the emulator itself. You can restart this experiment also in different environments,
      debugging an app located in SysArm32, for example.

Object Manager
   As mentioned in Chapter 2 of Part 1, “System architecture,” Windows implements an object model to
   provide consistent and secure access to the various internal services implemented in the executive. This
   section describes the Windows Object Manager, the executive component responsible for creating,
   deleting, protecting, and tracking objects. The Object Manager centralizes resource control operations
   that otherwise would be scattered throughout the operating system. It was designed to meet the goals
   listed after the experiment.

      EXPERIMENT: Exploring the Object Manager

      Manager database. These experiments use the following tools, which you should become famil-

       ■

             information about objects (such as the reference count, the number of open handles, secu-
             rity descriptors, and so forth). WinObjEx64, available on GitHub, is a similar tool with more
             advanced functionality and is open source but not endorsed or signed by Microsoft.

       ■     Process Explorer and Handle from Sysinternals, as well as Resource Monitor (introduced in
             Chapter 1 of Part 1) display the open handles for a process. Process Hacker is another tool
             that shows open handles and can show additional details for certain kinds of objects.

       ■     The kernel debugger !handle extension displays the open handles for a process, as does the
             Io.Handles data model object underneath a Process such as @$curprocess.

           WinObj and WinObjEx64 provide a way to traverse the namespace that the Object Manager

             The Windows Openfiles/query
                                                                    maintain objects list be enabled. (See the

         Openfiles/Local                                                                     Openfiles/
         Local ON command, but you still need to reboot the system for the setting to take effect. Process
         Explorer, Handle, and Resource Monitor do not require object tracking to be turned on because
         they query all system handles and create a per-process object list. Process Hacker queries per-pro-

         The Object Manager was designed to meet the following goals:

         ■    Provide a common, uniform mechanism for using system resources.

         ■    Isolate object protection to one location in the operating system to ensure uniform and consis-
              tent object access policy.

         ■    Provide a mechanism to charge processes for their use of objects so that limits can be placed on
              the usage of system resources.

         ■    Establish an object-naming scheme that can readily incorporate existing objects, such as the

         ■    Support the requirements of various operating system environments, such as the ability of a
              process to inherit resources from a parent process (needed by Windows and Subsystem for

              for UNIX Applications). Although Subsystem for UNIX Applications no longer exists, these facili-
              ties were also useful for the later development of the Windows Subsystem for Linux.

         ■    Establish uniform rules for object retention (that is, for keeping an object available until all pro-

         ■

              objects in the namespace.

         ■    Allow redirection of object names and paths through symbolic links and allow object owners,

              junction points). Combined, these redirection mechanisms compose what is called reparsing.

         Internally, Windows has three primary types of objects: executive objects, kernel objects, and GDI/
      User objects. Executive objects are objects implemented by various components of the executive

      primitive set of objects implemented by the Windows kernel. These objects are not visible to user-

      capabilities, such as synchronization, on which executive objects are built. Thus, many executive objects

   Note The vast majority of GDI/User objects, on the other hand, belong to the Windows

   outside the scope of this book, but you can get more information on them from the

   are wrapped in executive objects, as well as the majority of DirectX objects (Shaders,
   Surfaces, Compositions), which are also wrapped as executive objects.

                    Name
 Owned by the       HandleCount
object manager      ReferenceCount
                    Type

 Owned by the
                     Kernel object
       kernel

 Owned by the
                   Executive object
    executive

FIGURE 8-30 Executive objects that contain kernel objects.

   Details about the structure of kernel objects and how they are used to implement synchronization
are given later in this chapter. The remainder of this section focuses on how the Object Manager works

objects are involved in implementing Windows security access checking; Chapter 7 of Part 1 thoroughly
covers that topic.

Executive objects
Each Windows environment subsystem projects to its applications a different image of the operating
system. The executive objects and object services are primitives that the environment subsystems use
to construct their own versions of objects and other resources.

   Executive objects are typically created either by an environment subsystem on behalf of a user

                                                                  CreateFileW function, implemented
                                                                                     CreateFileW in
turn calls the native Windows service NtCreateFile

         The set of objects an environment subsystem supplies to its applications might be larger or smaller
      than the set the executive provides. The Windows subsystem uses executive objects to export its own

      mutexes and semaphores are directly based on executive objects (which, in turn, are based on cor-
      responding kernel objects). In addition, the Windows subsystem supplies named pipes and mailslots,

      (WSL), its subsystem driver (Lxcore.sys) uses executive objects and services as the basis for presenting
      Linux-style processes, pipes, and other resources to its applications.

      components (or in the case of executive objects directly exported to Windows, in the Windows API ref-
      erence documentation). You can see the full list of object types by running Winobj with elevated rights
      and navigating to the ObjectTypes directory.

         Note The executive implements a total of about 69 object types (depending on the
         Windows version). Some of these objects are for use only by the executive component that

         include Driver, Callback, and Adapter.

      TABLE 8-15 Executive objects exposed to the Windows API

      Object Type                         Represents

      Process                             The virtual address space and control information necessary for the execution of
                                          a set of thread objects.

      Thread                              An executable entity within a process.

                                          A collection of processes manageable as a single entity through the job.

      Section

      Token

                                          An object with a persistent state (signaled or not signaled) that can be used for
                                                                                                     key to be used to refer-
                                          ence the underlying synchronization primitive, avoiding memory usage, making
                                          it usable in low-memory conditions by avoiding an allocation.

      Semaphore                           A counter that provides a resource gate by allowing some maximum number of
                                          threads to access the resources protected by the semaphore.

      Mutex                               A synchronization mechanism used to serialize access to a resource.

      Timer, IRTimer
                                          objects, called Idle Resilient Timers, are used by UWP applications and certain
                                          services to create timers that are not affected by Connected Standby.

      IoCompletion, IoCompletionReserve
                                          I/O operations (known as an I/O completion port in the Windows API). The latter
                                          allows preallocation of the port to combat low-memory situations.

                                     A mechanism to refer to data in the registry. Although keys appear in the Object

                                     values are associated with a key object; key values contain data about the key.

Directory                                                                                                               -
                                     ing other objects or object directories.

SymbolicLink                         A virtual name redirection link between an object in the namespace and another

                                     manage the number of work items that will be performed on the queue, how
                                     many threads should be responsible for the work, and dynamic creation and ter-
                                     mination of worker threads, respecting certain limits the caller can set. Windows
                                     exposes the worker factory object through thread pools.

TmRm (Resource Manager), TmTx                                                                          transactions
(Transaction), TmTm (Transaction     and/or enlistments as part of a resource manager or transaction manager. Objects
Manager), TmEn (Enlistment)          can be created through the CreateTransactionManager, CreateResourceManager,
                                     CreateTransaction, and CreateEnlistment APIs.

RegistryTransaction                  Object used by the low-level lightweight registry transaction API that does not

                                     registry keys.

WindowStation                        An object that contains a clipboard, a set of global atoms, and a group of
                                     Desktop objects.

Desktop                              An object contained within a window station. A desktop has a logical display
                                     surface and contains windows, menus, and hooks.

PowerRequest                         An object associated with a thread that executes, among other things, a call
                                     to SetThreadExecutionState to request a given power change, such as blocking
                                     sleeps (due to a movie being played, for example).

EtwConsumer                          Represents a connected ETW real-time consumer that has registered with the
                                     StartTrace API (and can call ProcessTrace to receive the events on the object queue).

CoverageSampler                      Created by ETW when enabling code coverage tracing on a given ETW session.

EtwRegistration                      Represents the registration object associated with a user-mode (or kernel-mode)
                                     ETW provider that registered with the EventRegister API.

ActivationObject                     Represents the object that tracks foreground state for window handles that are
                                     managed by the Raw Input Manager in Win32k.sys.

ActivityReference                    Tracks processes managed by the Process Lifetime Manager (PLM) and that
                                     should be kept awake during Connected Standby scenarios.

ALPC Port                            Used mainly by the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) library to provide Local RPC
                                     (LRPC) capabilities when using the ncalrpc transport. Also available to internal
                                     services as a generic IPC mechanism between processes and/or the kernel.

Composition,                         Used by DirectX 12 APIs in user-space as part of advanced shader and GPGPU
DxgkCompositionObject,               capabilities, these executive objects wrap the underlying DirectX handle(s).
DxgkCurrentDxgProcessObject,
DxgkDisplayManagerObject,
DxgkSharedBundleObject,

DxgkShartedProtectedSessionObject,
DgxkSharedResource,
DxgkSwapChainObject,
DxgkSharedSyncObject

      CoreMessaging                   Represents a CoreMessaging IPC object that wraps an ALPC port with its own
                                      customized namespace and capabilities; used primarily by the modern Input
                                      Manager but also exposed to any MinUser component on WCOS systems.

      EnergyTracker                   Exposed to the User Mode Power (UMPO) service to allow tracking and aggrega-
                                      tion of energy usage across a variety of hardware and associating it on a per-
                                      application basis.

                                      Manager API, which allows communication between user-mode services and

                                      when using FilterSendMessage.

      Partition                       Enables the memory manager, cache manager, and executive to treat a region
                                      of physical memory as unique from a management perspective vis-à-vis the rest
                                      of system RAM, giving it its own instance of management threads, capabilities,
                                      paging, caching, etc. Used by Game Mode and Hyper-V, among others, to better
                                      distinguish the system from the underlying workloads.

                                      that track anything from the Instruction Pointer (IP) all the way to low-level pro-
                                      cessor caching information stored in the PMU counters.

      RawInputManager                 Represents the object that is bound to an HID device such as a mouse, keyboard,
                                      or tablet and allows reading and managing the window manager input that is
                                      being received by it. Used by modern UI management code such as when Core
                                      Messaging is involved.

      Session
                                                                                                                            -
                                      off/logon for third-party driver usage.

      Terminal                        Only enabled if the terminal thermal manager (TTM) is enabled, this represents
                                      a user terminal on a device, which is managed by the user mode power manager
                                      (UMPO).

      TerminalEventQueue              Only enabled on TTM systems, like the preceding object type, this represents
                                      events being delivered to a terminal on a device, which UMPO communicates

      UserApcReserve                  Similar to IoCompletionReserve in that it allows precreating a data structure
                                      to be reused during low-memory conditions, this object encapsulates an APC

      WaitCompletionPacket            Used by the new asynchronous wait capabilities that were introduced in the user-
                                      mode Thread Pool API, this object wraps the completion of a dispatcher wait as
                                      an I/O packet that can be delivered to an I/O completion port.

      WmiGuid                         Used by the Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) APIs when opening
                                      WMI Data Blocks by GUID, either from user mode or kernel mode, such as with
                                      IoWMIOpenBlock.

        Note Because Windows NT was originally supposed to support the OS/2 operating system,
        the mutex had to be compatible with the existing design of OS/2 mutual-exclusion objects,
        a design that required that a thread be able to abandon the object, leaving it inaccessible.
        Because this behavior was considered unusual for such an object, another kernel object—the
        mutant—was created. Eventually, OS/2 support was dropped, and the object became used by
        the Windows 32 subsystem under the name mutex (but it is still called mutant internally).

Object structure

footer. The Object Manager controls the object headers and footer, whereas the owning executive
components control the object bodies of the object types they create. Each object header also contains
an index to a special object, called the type object, that contains information common to each instance
of the object. Additionally, up to eight optional subheaders exist: The name information header, the
quota information header, the process information header, the handle information header, the audit
information header, the padding information header, the extended information header, and the cre-
ator information header. If the extended information header is present, this means that the object has
a footer, and the header will contain a pointer to it.

                                          Object name

                                         Object directory

                                        Security descriptor
           Object name
           Object directory               Quota charges
Object     Security descriptor
header     Quota charges                Open handles list                Process
           Open handle count                                                1 Process
           Open handles list                                                     2 Process
           Object type
                                                                                      3
           Reference count            Object Type Table
Object
          Object-specific data            034DEF0             Type object
 body
Object     Additional                     2A1DDAF
                                                                Type name
footer     Data                           6D3AED4
                                                                Pool type
                                          0A3C44A1
                                                                Default quota charges
                                          3DF12AB4
                                                                Access types
                                                                Generic access rights mapping
                                                                Synchronizable? (Y/N)
                                                                Methods:
                                                                  Open, close, delete
                                                                  parse, security
                                                                  query name

FIGURE 8-31 Structure of an object.

Object headers and bodies

found in the optional object subheaders.

   In addition to the object header, which contains information that applies to any kind of object, the

structures are located at a variable offset from the start of the object header, the value of which
depends on the number of subheaders associated with the main object header (except, as mentioned

                                                                                              InfoMask

      corresponding bit is set in the InfoMask and then uses the remaining bits to select the correct offset
      into the global ObpInfoMaskToOffset
      the object header.

      TABLE 8-16

      Field                  Purpose

      Handle count           Maintains a count of the number of currently opened handles to the object.

      Pointer count          Maintains a count of the number of references to the object (including one reference for each
                             handle), and the number of usage references for each handle (up to 32 for 32-bit systems, and
                                                                                                           by pointer without
                             using a handle.

      Security descriptor    Determines who can use the object and what they can do with it. Note that unnamed objects, by

      Object type index      Contains the index to a type object that contains attributes common to objects of this type. The
                             table that stores all the type objects is ObTypeIndexTable. Due to a security mitigation, this index is
                                                                                            ObHeaderCookie and the bottom 8
                             bits of the address of the object header itself.

      Info mask              Bitmask describing which of the optional subheader structures described in Table 8-17 are present,
                             except for the creator information subheader, which, if present, always precedes the object. The
                             bitmask is converted to a negative offset by using the ObpInfoMaskToOffset table, with each sub-
                             header being associated with a 1-byte index that places it relative to the other subheaders present.

      Lock

      Object Create Info     Ephemeral information about the creation of the object that is stored until the object is fully in-

         These offsets exist for all possible combinations of subheader presence, but because the subhead-

      hand, the handle information subheader (which is allocated third) has three possible locations because
      it might or might not have been allocated after the quota subheader, itself having possibly been al-
      located after the name information. Table 8-17 describes all the optional object subheaders and their

TABLE 8-17 Optional object subheaders

Name          Purpose                                                   Bit        Offset

Creator       Links the object into a list for all the objects of the   0 (0x1)    ObpInfoMaskToOffset[0])
information   same type and records the process that created the
              object, along with a back trace.

Name          Contains the object name, responsible for making          1 (0x2)    ObpInfoMaskToOffset[InfoMask & 0x3]
information   an object visible to other processes for sharing,
              and a pointer to the object directory, which pro-
              vides the hierarchical structure in which the object
              names are stored.

Handle        Contains a database of entries (or just a single          2 (0x4)    ObpInfoMaskToOffset[InfoMask & 0x7]
information   entry) for a process that has an open handle to the
              object (along with a per-process handle count).

Quota         Lists the resource charges levied against a process       3 (0x8)    ObpInfoMaskToOffset
information   when it opens a handle to the object.

Process       Contains a pointer to the owning process if this is       4 (0x10)   ObpInfoMaskToOffset
information   an exclusive object. More information on exclusive
              objects follows later in the chapter.

Audit         Contains a pointer to the original security descrip-      5 (0x20)   ObpInfoMaskToOffset
information

              enabled to guarantee consistency.

Extended      Stores the pointer to the object footer for objects       6 (0x40)   ObpInfoMaskToOffset
information
              Objects.

Padding       Stores nothing—empty junk space—but is used to            7 (0x80)   ObpInfoMaskToOffset
information   align the object body on a cache boundary, if this
              was requested.

   Each of these subheaders is optional and is present only under certain conditions, either during
system boot or at object creation time. Table 8-18 describes each of these conditions.

TABLE 8-18 Conditions required for presence of object subheaders

Name                     Condition

Creator information      The object type must have enabled the maintain type list
                                                                                maintain object type list               -
                         cussed earlier) enables this for all objects, and Type

Name information         The object must have been created with a name.

Handle information       The object type must have enabled the maintain handle count

Quota information        The object must not have been created by the initial (or idle) system process.

Process information      The object must have been created with the exclusive object                                -

Audit Information

Extended information

Padding Information      The object type must have enabled the cache aligned

         As indicated, if the extended information header is present, an object footer is allocated at the tail of
      the object body. Unlike object subheaders, the footer is a statically sized structure that is preallocated
      for all possible footer types. There are two such footers, described in Table 8-19.

      TABLE 8-19 Conditions required for presence of object footer

      Name                 Condition

      Handle Revocation    The object must be created with ObCreateObjectEx, passing in AllowHandleRevocation in the
      Information          OB_EXTENDED_CREATION_INFO

      Extended User        The object must be created with ObCreateObjectEx, passing in AllowExtendedUserInfo in the
      Information          OB_EXTENDED_CREATION_INFO structure. Silo Context objects are created this way.

      object is being created, in a structure called the object attributes
      name, the root object directory where it should be inserted, the security descriptor for the object, and
      the object attribute flags

         Note When an object is being created through an API in the Windows subsystem (such
         as CreateEvent or CreateFile), the caller does not specify any object attributes—the

         created through Win32 go in the BaseNamedObjects directory, either the global or per-

         part of the object attributes structure. More information on BaseNamedObjects and how
         it relates to the per-session namespace follows later in this chapter.

      TABLE 8-20

      Attributes Flag                  Header Flag Bit                   Purpose

      OBJ_INHERIT                      Saved in the handle table entry   Determines whether the handle to the object will be
                                                                         inherited by child processes and whether a process
                                                                         can use DuplicateHandle to make a copy.

      OBJ_PERMANENT                    PermanentObject                                                                      -
                                                                         ence counts, described later.

      OBJ_EXCLUSIVE                    ExclusiveObject
                                                                         process that created it.

      OBJ_CASE_INSENSITIVE             Not stored, used at run time
                                                                         namespace should be case insensitive. It can be over-
                                                                         ridden by the case insensitive

      OBJ_OPENIF                       Not stored, used at run time
                                                                         name should result in an open, if the object exists,
                                                                         instead of a failure.

      OBJ_OPENLINK                     Not stored, used at run time
                                                                         handle to the symbolic link, not the target.

      OBJ_KERNEL_HANDLE
                                                                         kernel handle (more on this later).

Attributes Flag                    Header Flag Bit                Purpose

OBJ_FORCE_ACCESS_CHECK             Not stored, used at run time
                                                                  from kernel mode, full access checks should be
                                                                  performed.

OBJ_KERNEL_EXCLUSIVE                                              Disables any user-mode process from opening a
                                                                  handle to the object; used to protect the \Device\
                                                                  PhysicalMemory and \Win32kSessionGlobals sec-
                                                                  tion objects.

OBJ_IGNORE_IMPERSONATED_           Not stored, used at run time   Indicates that when a token is being impersonated,
DEVICEMAP                                                         the DOS Device Map of the source user should not

                                                                  DOS Device Map should be maintained for object
                                                                  lookup. This is a security mitigation for certain types

OBJ_DONT_REPARSE                   Not stored, used at run time   Disables any kind of reparsing situation (symbolic
                                                                                                                  -
                                                                  tion), and returns STATUS_REPARSE_POINT_
                                                                  ENCOUNTERED if any such situation occurs. This is a
                                                                  security mitigation for certain types of path redirec-
                                                                  tion attacks.

N/A                                DefaultSecurityQuota                                                                -

N/A                                SingleHandleEntry
                                                                  contains only a single entry and not a database.

N/A                                NewObject
                                                                  yet inserted into the object namespace.

N/A                                DeletedInline                                              not being de-
                                                                  leted through the deferred deletion worker
                                                                  thread but rather inline through a call to
                                                                  ObDereferenceObject(Ex).

   In addition to an object header, each object has an object body whose format and contents are
unique to its object type; all objects of the same type share the same object body format. By creating
an object type and supplying services for it, an executive component can control the manipulation of
data in all object bodies of that type. Because the object header has a static and well-known size, the
Object Manager can easily look up the object header for an object simply by subtracting the size of
the header from the pointer of the object. As explained earlier, to access the subheaders, the Object

    Because of the standardized object header, footer, and subheader structures, the Object Manager
is able to provide a small set of generic services that can operate on the attributes stored in any object

certain objects). These generic services, some of which the Windows subsystem makes available to
Windows applications, are listed in Table 8-21.

   Although all of these services are not generally implemented by most object types, they typically
                                                                                                    -

service for its process objects.

         However, some objects may not directly expose such services and could be internally created as

      WmiGuid object is created, but no handle is exposed to the application for any kind of close or query
      services. The key thing to understand, however, is that there is no single generic creation routine.

         Such a routine would have been quite complicated because the set of parameters required to initial-

      the Object Manager would have incurred additional processing overhead each time a thread called an
      object service to determine the type of object the handle referred to and to call the appropriate ver-
      sion of the service.

      TABLE 8-21 Generic object services

      Service                                 Purpose

      Close                                   Closes a handle to an object, if allowed (more on this later).

      Duplicate                               Shares an object by duplicating a handle and giving it to another process (if
                                              allowed, as described later).

      Inheritance                             If a handle is marked as inheritable, and a child process is spawned with handle
                                              inheritance enabled, this behaves like duplication for those handles.

      Make permanent/temporary                Changes the retention of an object (described later).

      Query object                                                                                                              -
                                              aged at the Object Manager level.

      Query security

      Set security                            Changes the protection on an object.

      Wait for a single object
                                              execution or be associated with an I/O completion port through a wait comple-
                                              tion packet.

      Signal an object and wait for another   Signals the object, performing wake semantics on the dispatcher object backing
                                              it, and then waits on a single object as per above. The wake/wait operation is

      Wait for multiple objects               Associates a wait block with one or more objects, up to a limit (64), which can

                                              port through a wait completion packet.

      Type objects
      Object headers contain data that is common to all objects but that can take on different values for

      descriptor. However, objects also contain some data that remains constant for all objects of a particular

      a handle to objects of that type. The executive supplies terminate and suspend access (among others)

      when creating a new object type. It uses an object of its own, a type object, to record this data. As

section later in this chapter) is set, a type object also links together all objects of the same type (in this

functionality takes advantage of the creator information subheader discussed previously.

                         Process
                          type
                         object

   Process
   Object 1
                      Process            Process            Process
                      Object 2           Object 3           Object 4

FIGURE 8-32 Process objects and the process type object.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing object headers and type objects

   a process object with the dx @$cursession.Processes debugger data model command:
   lkd> dx -r0 &@$cursession.Processes[4].KernelObject
   &@$cursession.Processes[4].KernelObject           : 0xffff898f0327d300 [Type: _EPROCESS *]

      Then execute the !object command with the process object address as the argument:
   lkd> !object 0xffff898f0327d300
   Object: ffff898f0327d300 Type: (ffff898f032954e0) Process
       ObjectHeader: ffff898f0327d2d0 (new version)
       HandleCount: 6 PointerCount: 215645

       Notice that on 32-bit Windows, the object header starts 0x18 (24 decimal) bytes prior to the
   start of the object body, and on 64-bit Windows, it starts 0x30 (48 decimal) bytes prior—the size
   of the object header itself. You can view the object header with this command:
   lkd> dx (nt!_OBJECT_HEADER*)0xffff898f0327d2d0
   (nt!_OBJECT_HEADER*)0xffff898f0327d2d0        : 0xffff898f0327d2d0 [Type: _OBJECT_HEADER *]
       [+0x000] PointerCount     : 214943 [Type: __int64]
       [+0x008] HandleCount      : 6 [Type: __int64]
       [+0x008] NextToFree       : 0x6 [Type: void *]
       [+0x010] Lock             [Type: _EX_PUSH_LOCK]
       [+0x018] TypeIndex        : 0x93 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x019] TraceFlags       : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x019 ( 0: 0)] DbgRefTrace       : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]

          [+0x019 ( 1: 1)] DbgTracePermanent : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01a] InfoMask           : 0x80 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b] Flags              : 0x2 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 0: 0)] NewObject          : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 1: 1)] KernelObject       : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 2: 2)] KernelOnlyAccess : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 3: 3)] ExclusiveObject : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 4: 4)] PermanentObject : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 5: 5)] DefaultSecurityQuota : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 6: 6)] SingleHandleEntry : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01b ( 7: 7)] DeletedInline      : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x01c] Reserved           : 0xffff898f [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x020] ObjectCreateInfo : 0xfffff8047ee6d500 [Type: _OBJECT_CREATE_INFORMATION *]
          [+0x020] QuotaBlockCharged : 0xfffff8047ee6d500 [Type: void *]
          [+0x028] SecurityDescriptor : 0xffffc704ade03b6a [Type: void *]
          [+0x030] Body               [Type: _QUAD]
          ObjectType        : Process
          UnderlyingObject [Type: _EPROCESS]

        Now look at the object type data structure by copying the pointer that !object showed
      you earlier:
      lkd> dx (nt!_OBJECT_TYPE*)0xffff898f032954e0
      (nt!_OBJECT_TYPE*)0xffff898f032954e0           : 0xffff898f032954e0 [Type: _OBJECT_TYPE *]
          [+0x000] TypeList         [Type: _LIST_ENTRY]
          [+0x010] Name             : "Process" [Type: _UNICODE_STRING]
          [+0x020] DefaultObject    : 0x0 [Type: void *]
          [+0x028] Index            : 0x7 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x02c] TotalNumberOfObjects : 0x2e9 [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x030] TotalNumberOfHandles : 0x15a1 [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x034] HighWaterNumberOfObjects : 0x2f9 [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x038] HighWaterNumberOfHandles : 0x170d [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x040] TypeInfo         [Type: _OBJECT_TYPE_INITIALIZER]
          [+0x0b8] TypeLock         [Type: _EX_PUSH_LOCK]
          [+0x0c0] Key              : 0x636f7250 [Type: unsigned long]
          [+0x0c8] CallbackList     [Type: _LIST_ENTRY]

         The output shows that the object type structure includes the name of the object type, tracks
      the total number of active objects of that type, and tracks the peak number of handles and
      objects of that type. The CallbackList
      that are associated with this object type. The TypeInfo

      lkd> dx ((nt!_OBJECT_TYPE*)0xffff898f032954e0)->TypeInfo
      ((nt!_OBJECT_TYPE*)0xffff898f032954e0)->TypeInfo         [Type: _OBJECT_TYPE_INITIALIZER]
          [+0x000] Length           : 0x78 [Type: unsigned short]
          [+0x002] ObjectTypeFlags : 0xca [Type: unsigned short]
          [+0x002 ( 0: 0)] CaseInsensitive : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 1: 1)] UnnamedObjectsOnly : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 2: 2)] UseDefaultObject : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 3: 3)] SecurityRequired : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 4: 4)] MaintainHandleCount : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 5: 5)] MaintainTypeList : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]

       [+0x002 ( 6: 6)] SupportsObjectCallbacks : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002 ( 7: 7)] CacheAligned      : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 0: 0)] UseExtendedParameters : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 7: 1)] Reserved          : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x004] ObjectTypeCode    : 0x20 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x008] InvalidAttributes : 0xb0 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x00c] GenericMapping    [Type: _GENERIC_MAPPING]
       [+0x01c] ValidAccessMask : 0x1fffff [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x020] RetainAccess      : 0x101000 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x024] PoolType          : NonPagedPoolNx (512) [Type: _POOL_TYPE]
       [+0x028] DefaultPagedPoolCharge : 0x1000 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x02c] DefaultNonPagedPoolCharge : 0x8d8 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x030] DumpProcedure     : 0x0 [Type: void (__cdecl*)(void *,_OBJECT_DUMP_CONTROL *)]
       [+0x038] OpenProcedure     : 0xfffff8047f062f40 [Type: long (__cdecl*)
                     (_OB_OPEN_REASON,char,_EPROCESS *,void *,unsigned long *,unsigned long)]
       [+0x040] CloseProcedure    : 0xfffff8047F087a90 [Type: void (__cdecl*)
                                       (_EPROCESS *,void *,unsigned __int64,unsigned __int64)]
       [+0x048] DeleteProcedure : 0xfffff8047f02f030 [Type: void (__cdecl*)(void *)]
       [+0x050] ParseProcedure    : 0x0 [Type: long (__cdecl*)(void *,void *,_ACCESS_STATE *,
                               char,unsigned long,_UNICODE_STRING *,_UNICODE_STRING *,void *,
                                                     _SECURITY_QUALITY_OF_SERVICE *,void * *)]
       [+0x050] ParseProcedureEx : 0x0 [Type: long (__cdecl*)(void *,void *,_ACCESS_STATE *,
                               char,unsigned long,_UNICODE_STRING *,_UNICODE_STRING *,void *,
                    _SECURITY_QUALITY_OF_SERVICE *,_OB_EXTENDED_PARSE_PARAMETERS *,void * *)]
       [+0x058] SecurityProcedure : 0xfffff8047eff57b0 [Type: long (__cdecl*)
                    (void *,_SECURITY_OPERATION_CODE,unsigned long *,void *,unsigned long *,
                                                 void * *,_POOL_TYPE,_GENERIC_MAPPING *,char)]
       [+0x060] QueryNameProcedure : 0x0 [Type: long (__cdecl*)(void *,unsigned char,_
                                OBJECT_NAME_INFORMATION *,unsigned long,unsigned long *,char)]
       [+0x068] OkayToCloseProcedure : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char (__cdecl*)(_EPROCESS *,
                                                                          void *,void *,char)]
       [+0x070] WaitObjectFlagMask : 0x0 [Type: unsigned long]
       [+0x074] WaitObjectFlagOffset : 0x0 [Type: unsigned short]
       [+0x076] WaitObjectPointerOffset : 0x0 [Type: unsigned short]

                                                                                                                      -

through Windows API routines. The information stored in the type initializers is described in Table 8-22.

TABLE 8-22

Attribute                       Purpose

Type name                       The name for objects of this type (Process, Event, ALPC Port, and so on).

Pool type                       Indicates whether objects of this type should be allocated from paged or non-
                                paged memory.

Default quota charges           Default paged and non-paged pool values to charge to process quotas.

Valid access mask               The types of access a thread can request when opening a handle to an object of this
                                type (read, write, terminate, suspend, and so on).

Generic access rights mapping   A mapping between the four generic access rights (read, write, execute, and all) to the

      Attribute                        Purpose

      Retain access                    Access rights that can never be removed by any third-party Object Manager callbacks
                                       (part of the callback list described earlier).

                                       Indicate whether objects must never have names (such as process objects), whether
                                       their names are case-sensitive, whether they require a security descriptor, whether
                                       they should be cache aligned (requiring a padding subheader), whether they sup-

                                       subheader) and/or a type-list linkage (creator information subheader) should be
                                       maintained. The use default object                                     default object
                                                                                 use extended parameters
                                       of the extended parse procedure method, described later.

      Object type code                 Used to describe the type of object this is (versus comparing with a well-known name
                                                                    1, synchronization objects set this to 2, and thread ob-
                                       jects set this to 4
                                       associated with a message.

      Invalid attributes
                                       object type.

      Default object
                                       object, if the object type creator requested one. Note that certain objects, such as

                                       Allows the Object Manager to generically locate the underlying kernel dispatcher
                                       object that should be used for synchronization when one of the generic wait services
                                       shown earlier (WaitForSingleObject, etc.) is called on the object.

      Methods                          One or more routines that the Object Manager calls automatically at certain points in

         Synchronization
      to synchronize its execution by waiting for an object to change from one state to another. A thread can

                                                                                                                              -
      ity to support synchronization is based on three possibilities:

         ■    The executive object is a wrapper for a dispatcher object and contains a dispatcher header, a
              kernel structure that is covered in the section “Low-IRQL synchronization” later in this chapter.

         ■    The creator of the object type requested a default object, and the Object Manager provided one.

         ■    The executive object has an embedded dispatcher object, such as an event somewhere inside

              when registering the object type (described in Table 8-14).

      Object methods
      The last attribute in Table 8-22, methods, comprises a set of internal routines that are similar to C++
      constructors and destructors—that is, routines that are automatically called when an object is created
      or destroyed. The Object Manager extends this idea by calling an object method in other situations
      as well, such as when someone opens or closes a handle to an object or when someone attempts to
                                                                                                            -
      pending on how the object type is to be used.

   When an executive component creates a new object type, it can register one or more methods with

The methods that the Object Manager supports are listed in Table 8-23.

TABLE 8-23 Object methods

Method          When Method Is Called

Open            When an object handle is created, opened, duplicated, or inherited

Close           When an object handle is closed

Delete          Before the Object Manager deletes an object

Query name      When a thread requests the name of an object

Parse           When the Object Manager is searching for an object name

Dump            Not used

Okay to close   When the Object Manager is instructed to close a handle

Security
                object namespace

                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                        -
tines would have required the designers of the Object Manager to anticipate all object types. Not only
would this add extreme complexity to the kernel, but the routines to create an object type are actually
exported by the kernel! Because this enables external kernel components to create their own object
types, the kernel would be unable to anticipate potential custom behaviors. Although this functional-
ity is not documented for driver developers, it is internally used by Pcw.sys, Dxgkrnl.sys, Win32k.sys,

ConnectionPort, NdisCmState, and other objects. Through object-method extensibility, these drivers

   Another reason for these methods is simply to allow a sort of virtual constructor and destructor

additional actions during handle creation and closure, as well as during object destruction. They even
allow prohibiting handle closure and creation, when such actions are undesired—for example, the pro-
tected process mechanism described in Part 1, Chapter 3, leverages a custom handle creation method
to prevent less protected processes from opening handles to more protected ones. These methods
also provide visibility into internal Object Manager APIs such as duplication and inheritance, which are
delivered through generic services.

be used to implement a secondary namespace outside of the purview of the Object Manager. In
                                                                                                         -

these methods.

        The Object Manager only calls routines if their pointer is not set to NULL in the type initializer—with
      one exception: the security routine, which defaults to SeDefaultObjectMethod. This routine does not
      need to know the internal structure of the object because it deals only with the security descriptor for the

      not inside the object body. However, if an object does require its own additional security checks, it can

         The Object Manager calls the open method whenever it creates a handle to an object, which it does

      Desktop objects provide an open method. Indeed, the WindowStation object type requires an open
      method so that Win32k.sys can share a piece of memory with the process that serves as a desktop-
      related memory pool.

         An example of the use of a close method occurs in the I/O system. The I/O manager registers a close

      Object Manager itself can or should do.

         The Object Manager calls a delete method, if one is registered, before it deletes a temporary object
      from memory. The memory manager, for example, registers a delete method for the section object
                                                                                                             -
      tures the memory manager has allocated for a section are deleted before the section object is deleted.
                                                                                                            -
      ings of the memory manager. Delete methods for other types of objects perform similar functions.

         The parse method (and similarly, the query name method) allows the Object Manager to relinquish

      Object Manager namespace. When the Object Manager looks up an object name, it suspends its search
      when it encounters an object in the path that has an associated parse method. The Object Manager
      calls the parse method, passing to it the remainder of the object name it is looking for. There are two
                                                                                                             -

      resume.doc, the Object Manager traverses its name tree until it reaches the device object named
      HarddiskVolume1. It sees that a parse method is associated with this object, and it calls the method,
      passing to it the rest of the object name it was searching for—in this case, the string docs\resume.doc.

   The security method, which the I/O system also uses, is similar to the parse method. It is called

change it.

                                                                                                   -

has a handle to the Desktop object or objects on which its thread or threads have windows visible.
Under the standard security model, it is possible for those threads to close their handles to their desk-
tops because the process has full control of its own objects. In this scenario, the threads end up without
a desktop associated with them—a violation of the windowing model. Win32k.sys registers an okay-to-
close routine for the Desktop and WindowStation objects to prevent this behavior.

Object handles and the process handle table
When a process creates or opens an object by name, it receives a handle that represents its access
to the object. Referring to an object by its handle is faster than using its name because the Object

can also acquire handles to objects by inheriting handles at process creation time (if the creator speci-
                                   CreateProcess call and the handle was marked as inheritable, either
at the time it was created or afterward by using the Windows SetHandleInformation function) or by
receiving a duplicated handle from another process. (See the Windows DuplicateHandle function.)

   All user-mode processes must own a handle to an object before their threads can use the object.

                                                                                                            -
face to reference objects, regardless of their type. Second, the Object Manager has the exclusive right
to create handles and to locate an object that a handle refers to. This means that the Object Manager

caller allows the operation requested on the object in question.

      Note Executive components and device drivers can access objects directly because they
      are running in kernel mode and therefore have access to the object structures in system
      memory. However, they must declare their usage of the object by incrementing the refer-
                                                                                                   -
      tion “Object retention” later in this chapter for more details.) To successfully make use of

      object, and this is not provided for most objects. Instead, device drivers are encouraged to

      although device drivers can get a pointer to the Process object (EPROCESS), the structure is
      opaque, and the Ps*
      (such as most executive objects that wrap a dispatcher object—for example, events or mu-

      end up calling (such as ZwCreateEvent) and use handles instead of object pointers.

      EXPERIMENT: Viewing open handles

      handles. (Click on View, Lower Pane View, and then Handles.) Then open a command prompt

      Explorer shows the following:

         Now pause Process Explorer by pressing the spacebar or selecting View, Update Speed
      and choosing Pause. Then change the current directory with the cd command and press F5 to
      refresh the display. You will see in Process Explorer that the handle to the previous current direc-
      tory is closed, and a new handle is opened to the new current directory. The previous handle is
      highlighted in red, and the new handle is highlighted in green.

can quickly show what handle or handles are being opened but not closed. (Typically, you see

handle leak.

   Resource Monitor also shows open handles to named handles for the processes you select by

   You can also display the open handle table by using the command-line Handle tool from

object handles located in the handle table for a Cmd.exe process before and after changing
                                                                      –a switch is used, which
displays all the handles in the process, similar to Process Explorer.
C:\Users\aione>\sysint\handle.exe -p 8768 -a users
Nthandle v4.22 - Handle viewer
Copyright (C) 1997-2019 Mark Russinovich
Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com
cmd.exe            pid: 8768   type: File              150: C:\Users\Public

         An object handle                                   handle table, pointed to by the executive process
      (EPROCESS) block (described in Chapter 3 of Part 1). The index is multiplied by 4 (shifted 2 bits) to make

      is 4, the second 8, and so on. Using handle 5, 6, or 7 simply redirects to the same object as handle 4,
      while 9, 10, and 11 would reference the same object as handle 8.

      a handle to, and handle values are aggressively reused, such that the next new handle index will reuse

      a three-level scheme, similar to the way that the legacy x86 memory management unit implemented
      virtual-to-physical address translation but with a cap of 24 bits for compatibility reasons, resulting in a
                                                                                                                 -
      try layout on Windows. To save on kernel memory costs, only the lowest-level handle table is allocated
      on process creation—the other levels are created as needed. The subhandle table consists of as many
                                                                                                                 -
      tems, a page is 4096 bytes, divided by the size of a handle table entry (16 bytes), which is 256, minus 1,
      which is a total of 255 entries in the lowest-level handle table. The mid-level handle table contains a full
      page of pointers to subhandle tables, so the number of subhandle tables depends on the size of the
      page and the size of a pointer for the platform. Again using 64-bit systems as an example, this gives
      us 4096/8, or 512 entries. Due to the cap of 24 bits, only 32 entries are allowed in the top-level pointer

       Process

        Handle
         table

                                                               Subhandle
                                                                 table
                                         Middle-level
                                          pointers
                         Top-level
                         pointers

      FIGURE 8-33 Windows process handle table architecture.

   EXPERIMENT: Creating the maximum number of handles
   The test program Testlimit from Sysinternals has an option to open handles to an object until it
   cannot open any more handles. You can use this to see how many handles can be created in a
   single process on your system. Because handle tables are allocated from paged pool, you might
   run out of paged pool before you hit the maximum number of handles that can be created in a
   single process. To see how many handles you can create on your system, follow these steps:

        1.
              need from https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/testlimit.

        2.    Run Process Explorer, click View, and then click System Information. Then click the
              Memory tab. Notice the current and maximum size of paged pool. (To display the

              symbols for the kernel image, Ntoskrnl.exe.) Leave this system information display run-
              ning so that you can see pool utilization when you run the Testlimit program.

        3.    Open a command prompt.

        4.    Run the Testlimit program with the –h switch (do this by typing testlimit –h). When
              Testlimit fails to open a new handle, it displays the total number of handles it was able
              to create. If the number is less than approximately 16 million, you are probably running
              out of paged pool before hitting the theoretical per-process handle limit.

        5.    Close the Command Prompt window; doing this kills the Testlimit process, thus closing
              all the open handles.

objects are 8-byte aligned, and these bits can be assumed to be 0), and the granted access mask (out of
which only 25 bits are needed, since generic rights are never stored in the handle entry) combined with
                        reference usage count, which we describe shortly.

                                                          Audit on close
                                                          Inheritable
                                                          Lock

             Pointer to object header             A I L

                                                          No Rights Upgrade
                                                          Protect from close
                  Access mask           U P Usage Count

                          32 bits

FIGURE 8-34 Structure of a 32-bit handle table entry.

                                                                                                           -
      ple, 44 bits are now needed to encode the object pointer (assuming a processor with four-level paging
      and 48-bits of virtual memory), since objects are 16-byte aligned, and thus the bottom four bits can

      that the reference usage count is encoded in the remaining 16 bits next to the pointer, instead of next to
                                                                                                                    -
      ing 6 bits are spare, and there are still 32-bits of alignment that are also currently spare, for a total of 16

      must now be 53 bits, reducing the usage count bits to only 7.

      should expect the bottom bit to normally be set
      is, it indicates whether processes created by this process will get a copy of this handle in their handle

      SetHandleInformation

      be set with the SetHandleInformation
      access rights should be upgraded if the handle is duplicated to a process with higher privileges.

                                                               OBJECT_HANDLE_INFORMATION structure
      that is passed in to APIs such as ObReferenceObjectByHandle, and map to OBJ_INHERIT (0x2), OBJ_
      AUDIT_OBJECT_CLOSE (0x4), OBJ_PROTECT_CLOSE (0x1), and OBJ_NO_RIGHTS_UPGRADE (0x8), which

                                                    reference usage count in both the encoding of the pointer

      cached number (based on the number of available bits) of preexisting references as part of each handle
      entry and then adds up the usage counts of all processes that have a handle to the object into the
                                                                                                          -
      ences through ObReferenceObject, and the number of cached references for each handle.

                                                                                                              -
      ing any Windows API that takes a handle as input and ends up converting it into an object—the cached
      number of references is dropped, which is to say that the usage count decreases by 1, until it reaches
      0, at which point it is no longer tracked. This allows one to infer exactly the number of times a given

         The debugger command !trueref, when executed with the -v
      each handle referencing an object and exactly how many times it was used (if you count the number

   System components and device drivers often need to open handles to objects that user-mode

with. This is done by creating handles in the kernel handle table (referenced internally with the name
ObpKernelHandleTable), which is associated with the System process. The handles in this table are ac-
cessible only from kernel mode and in any process context. This means that a kernel-mode function
can reference the handle in any process context with no performance impact.

    The Object Manager recognizes references to handles from the kernel handle table when the high
bit of the handle is set—that is, when references to kernel-handle-table handles have values greater

    The kernel handle table also serves as the handle table for the System and minimal processes, and as
such, all handles created by the System process (such as code running in system threads) are implicitly ker-
nel handles because the ObpKernelHandleTable symbol is set the as ObjectTable of the EPROCESS structure

the DuplicateHandle API to extract a kernel handle out into user mode, but this attack has been mitigated
since Windows Vista with the introduction of protected processes, which were described in Part 1.

                                         any handle created by a kernel driver, with the previous mode
                                                                                                    -
vent handles from inadvertently leaking to user space applications.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the handle table with the kernel debugger
   The !handle command in the kernel debugger takes three arguments:
   !handle <handle index> <flags> <processid>

                                                                                         !handle 4

   handle entry,” bit 1 means “display free handles (not just used handles),” and bit 2 means “display
   information about the object that the handle refers to.” The following command displays full
   details about the handle table for process ID 0x1540:
   lkd> !handle 0 7 1540

   PROCESS ffff898f239ac440
       SessionId: 0 Cid: 1540    Peb: 1ae33d000 ParentCid: 03c0
       DirBase: 211e1d000 ObjectTable: ffffc704b46dbd40 HandleCount: 641.
       Image: com.docker.service

   Handle table at ffffc704b46dbd40 with 641 entries in use

   0004: Object: ffff898f239589e0      GrantedAccess: 001f0003 (Protected) (Inherit) Entry:
   ffffc704b45ff010

      Object: ffff898f239589e0 Type: (ffff898f032e2560) Event
          ObjectHeader: ffff898f239589b0 (new version)
              HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 32766

      0008: Object: ffff898f23869770 GrantedAccess: 00000804 (Audit) Entry: ffffc704b45ff020
      Object: ffff898f23869770 Type: (ffff898f033f7220) EtwRegistration
          ObjectHeader: ffff898f23869740 (new version)
              HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 32764

        Instead of having to remember what all these bits mean, and convert process IDs to hexa-
      decimal, you can also use the debugger data model to access handles through the Io.Handles
                                                    dx @$curprocess.Io.Handles[4]
      handle for the current process, including the access rights and name, while the following com-
      mand displays full details about the handles in PID 5440 (that is, 0x1540):
      lkd> dx -r2 @$cursession.Processes[5440].Io.Handles
      @$cursession.Processes[5440].Io.Handles
          [0x4]
              Handle           : 0x4
              Type             : Event
              GrantedAccess    : Delete | ReadControl | WriteDac | WriteOwner | Synch |
      QueryState | ModifyState
              Object           [Type: _OBJECT_HEADER]
          [0x8]
              Handle           : 0x8
              Type             : EtwRegistration
              GrantedAccess
              Object           [Type: _OBJECT_HEADER]
          [0xc]
              Handle           : 0xc
              Type             : Event
              GrantedAccess    : Delete | ReadControl | WriteDac | WriteOwner | Synch |
      QueryState | ModifyState
              Object           [Type: _OBJECT_HEADER]

         You can use the debugger data model with a LINQ predicate to perform more interesting
      searches, such as looking for named section object mappings that are Read/Write:
      lkd> dx @$cursession.Processes[5440].Io.Handles.Where(h => (h.Type == "Section") &&
      (h.GrantedAccess.MapWrite) && (h.GrantedAccess.MapRead)).Select(h => h.ObjectName)
      @$cursession.Processes[5440].Io.Handles.Where(h => (h.Type == "Section") &&
      (h.GrantedAccess.MapWrite) && (h.GrantedAccess.MapRead)).Select(h => h.ObjectName)
          [0x16c]          : "Cor_Private_IPCBlock_v4_5440"
          [0x170]          : "Cor_SxSPublic_IPCBlock"
          [0x354]          : "windows_shell_global_counters"
          [0x3b8]          : "UrlZonesSM_DESKTOP-SVVLOTP$"
          [0x680]          : "NLS_CodePage_1252_3_2_0_0"

EXPERIMENT: Searching for open files with the kernel debugger

a system remotely. You can instead use the !devhandles command to search for handles opened to

    1.
         Device object. You can use the !object command as shown here:
         lkd> !object \Global??\C:
         Object: ffffc704ae684970 Type: (ffff898f03295a60) SymbolicLink
             ObjectHeader: ffffc704ae684940 (new version)
             HandleCount: 0 PointerCount: 1
             Directory Object: ffffc704ade04ca0 Name: C:
             Flags: 00000000 ( Local )
             Target String is '\Device\HarddiskVolume3'
             Drive Letter Index is 3 (C:)

    2.   Next, use the !object command to get the Device object of the target volume name:
         1: kd> !object \Device\HarddiskVolume1
         Object: FFFF898F0820D8F0 Type: (fffffa8000ca0750) Device

    3.   Now you can use the pointer of the Device object with the !devhandles command.

         lkd> !devhandles 0xFFFF898F0820D8F0

         Checking handle table for process 0xffff898f0327d300
         Kernel handle table at ffffc704ade05580 with 7047 entries in use

         PROCESS ffff898f0327d300
             SessionId: none Cid: 0004    Peb: 00000000 ParentCid: 0000
             DirBase: 001ad000 ObjectTable: ffffc704ade05580 HandleCount: 7023.
             Image: System

         019c: Object: ffff898F080836a0 GrantedAccess: 0012019f (Protected) (Inherit)
         (Audit) Entry: ffffc704ade28670
         Object: ffff898F080836a0 Type: (ffff898f032f9820) File
             ObjectHeader: ffff898F08083670 (new version)
                 HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 32767
                 Directory Object: 00000000 Name: \$Extend\$RmMetadata\$TxfLog\
                                                   $TxfLog.blf {HarddiskVolume4}

achieve the same effect with a LINQ predicate, which instantly starts returning results:
lkd> dx -r2 @$cursession.Processes.Select(p => p.Io.Handles.Where(h =>
     h.Type == "File").Where(f => f.Object.UnderlyingObject.DeviceObject ==
     (nt!_DEVICE_OBJECT*)0xFFFF898F0820D8F0).Select(f =>
     f.Object.UnderlyingObject.FileName))
@$cursession.Processes.Select(p => p.Io.Handles.Where(h => h.Type == "File").

         Where(f => f.Object.UnderlyingObject.DeviceObject == (nt!_DEVICE_OBJECT*)
         0xFFFF898F0820D8F0).Select(f => f.Object.UnderlyingObject.FileName))
            [0x0]
            [0x19c]    : "\$Extend\$RmMetadata\$TxfLog\$TxfLog.blf" [Type: _UNICODE_STRING]
            [0x2dc]    : "\$Extend\$RmMetadata\$Txf:$I30:$INDEX_ALLOCATION" [Type: _UNICODE_STRING]
            [0x2e0]    : "\$Extend\$RmMetadata\$TxfLog\$TxfLogContainer00000000000000000002"
                         [Type: _UNICODE_STRING]

      Reserve Objects
                                                                                                                  -
      cations and kernel code to create objects is essential to the normal and desired runtime behavior of any
      piece of Windows code. If an object allocation fails, this usually causes anything from loss of functional-
                                                                                                                -
      tion object). Worse, in certain situations, the reporting of errors that led to object creation failure might
      themselves require new objects to be allocated. Windows implements two special reserve objects to
      deal with such situations: the User APC reserve object and the I/O Completion packet reserve object.
      Note that the reserve-object mechanism is fully extensible, and future versions of Windows might add
      other reserve object types—from a broad view, the reserve object is a mechanism enabling any kernel-
      mode data structure to be wrapped as an object (with an associated handle, name, and security) for
      later use.

          As was discussed earlier in this chapter, APCs are used for operations such as suspension, termina-
      tion, and I/O completion, as well as communication between user-mode applications that want to
      provide asynchronous callbacks. When a user-mode application requests a User APC to be targeted
      to another thread, it uses the QueueUserApc                                          NtQueueApcThread
      system call. In the kernel, this system call attempts to allocate a piece of paged pool in which to store
      the KAPC control object structure associated with an APC. In low-memory situations, this operation
      fails, preventing the delivery of the APC, which, depending on what the APC was used for, could cause
      loss of data or functionality.

         To prevent this, the user-mode application, can, on startup, use the NtAllocateReserveObject system
      call to request the kernel to preallocate the KAPC structure. Then the application uses a different sys-
      tem call, NtQueueApcThreadEx, that contains an extra parameter that is used to store the handle to the
      reserve object. Instead of allocating a new structure, the kernel attempts to acquire the reserve object
      (by setting its InUse bit to true
      the reserve object is released back to the system. Currently, to prevent mismanagement of system
      resources by third-party developers, the reserve object API is available only internally through system

      guarantee that asynchronous callbacks will still be able to return in low-memory situations.

          A similar scenario can occur when applications need failure-free delivery of an I/O completion port
      message or packet. Typically, packets are sent with the PostQueuedCompletionStatus
      dll, which calls the NtSetIoCompletion API. Like the user APC, the kernel must allocate an I/O manager
      structure to contain the completion-packet information, and if this allocation fails, the packet cannot

be created. With reserve objects, the application can use the NtAllocateReserveObject API on startup
to have the kernel preallocate the I/O completion packet, and the NtSetIoCompletionEx system call

APC reserve objects, this functionality is reserved for system components and is used both by the RPC
library and the Windows Peer-To-Peer BranchCache service to guarantee completion of asynchronous
I/O operations.

Object security

object or opens a handle to an existing object, the process must specify a set of desired access rights—
that is, what it wants to do with the object. It can request either a set of standard access rights (such as

Similarly, it might require the ability to suspend or terminate a thread object.

      When a process opens a handle to an object, the Object Manager calls the security reference moni-
tor

access the process is requesting. If it does, the reference monitor returns a set of granted access rights
that the process is allowed, and the Object Manager stores them in the object handle it creates. How
the security system determines who gets access to which objects is explored in Chapter 7 of Part 1.

Manager can quickly check whether the set of granted access rights stored in the handle corresponds

read access to a section object but then calls a service to write to it, the service fails.

      EXPERIMENT: Looking at object security
      You can look at the various permissions on an object by using either Process Hacker, Process
      Explorer, WinObj, WinObjEx64, or AccessChk, which are all tools from Sysinternals or open-

      list (ACL) for an object:

       ■   You can use WinObj or WinObjEx64 to navigate to any object on the system, including
           object directories, right-click the object, and select Properties
           BaseNamedObjects directory, select Properties, and click the Security tab. You should
           see a dialog box like the one shown next. Because WinObjEx64 supports a wider variety of

      delete access to the directory, for example, but the SYSTEM account does (because this is where
      session 0 services with SYSTEM privileges will store their objects).

      ■   Instead of using WinObj or WinObjEx64, you can view the handle table of a process using
          Process Explorer, as shown in the experiment “Viewing open handles” earlier in this chapter,
          or using Process Hacker, which has a similar view. Look at the handle table for the Explorer.exe

          per-session namespace shortly.) You can double-click the object handle and then click the
          Security tab and see a similar dialog box (with more users and rights granted).

      ■

          –o switch as shown in the following output. Note that using AccessChk will also show you
          the integrity level of the object. (See Chapter 7 of Part 1, for more information on integrity
          levels and the security reference monitor.)
              C:\sysint>accesschk -o \Sessions\1\BaseNamedObjects

              Accesschk v6.13 - Reports effective permissions for securable objects
              Copyright (C) 2006-2020 Mark Russinovich
              Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

              \Sessions\1\BaseNamedObjects
                Type: Directory
                RW Window Manager\DWM-1
                RW NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM
                RW DESKTOP-SVVLOTP\aione
                RW DESKTOP-SVVLOTP\aione-S-1-5-5-0-841005
                RW BUILTIN\Administrators
                R Everyone
                   NT AUTHORITY\RESTRICTED

    Windows also supports Ex (Extended) versions of the APIs—CreateEventEx, CreateMutexEx,
CreateSemaphoreEx—that add another argument for specifying the access mask. This makes it possible
for applications to use discretionary access control lists (DACLs) to properly secure their objects without
breaking their ability to use the create object APIs to open a handle to them. You might be wonder-
ing why a client application would not simply use OpenEvent, which does support a desired access
argument. Using the open object APIs leads to an inherent race condition when dealing with a failure
in the open call—that is, when the client application has attempted to open the event before it has
been created. In most applications of this kind, the open API is followed by a create API in the failure
case. Unfortunately, there is no guaranteed way to make this create operation atomic—in other words,
to occur only once.

    Indeed, it would be possible for multiple threads and/or processes to have executed the create API
concurrently, and all attempt to create the event at the same time. This race condition and the extra
complexity required to try to handle it makes using the open object APIs an inappropriate solution
to the problem, which is why the Ex APIs should be used instead.

Object retention
There are two types of objects: temporary and permanent. Most objects are temporary—that is, they
remain while they are in use and are freed when they are no longer needed. Permanent objects remain
until they are explicitly freed. Because most objects are temporary, the rest of this section describes
how the Object Manager implements object retention—that is, retaining temporary objects only as
long as they are in use and then deleting them.

Manager can easily track how many of these processes, and which ones, are using an object. Tracking
these handles represents one part of implementing retention. The Object Manager implements object
                                                  name retention, and it is controlled by the number
of open handles to an object that exists. Every time a process opens a handle to an object, the Object

object and close their handles to it, the Object Manager decrements the open handle counter. When

deletion prevents processes from opening a handle to the object.

   The second phase of object retention is to stop retaining the objects themselves (that is, to delete
them) when they are no longer in use. Because operating system code usually accesses objects by us-
ing pointers instead of handles, the Object Manager must also record how many object pointers it has
dispensed to operating system processes. As we saw, it increments a reference count for an object each
time it gives out a pointer to the object, which is called the pointer count; when kernel-mode compo-

The system also increments the reference count when it increments the handle count, and likewise dec-
rements the reference count when the handle count decrements because a handle is also a reference
to the object that must be tracked.

                           usage reference count, which adds cached references to the pointer count
and is decremented each time a process uses a handle. The usage reference count has been added

      since Windows 8 for performance reasons. When the kernel is asked to obtain the object pointer from
      its handle, it can do the resolution without acquiring the global handle table lock. This means that in
      newer versions of Windows, the handle table entry described in the “Object handles and the process
      handle table” section earlier in this chapter contains a usage reference counter, which is initialized the

      verb use refers to the act of resolving the object pointer from its handle, an operation performed in
      kernel by APIs like the ObReferenceObjectByHandle.

                                                                                                               -
      ing a handle to it. The event has a name, which implies that the Object Manager inserts it in the correct

                                                                                          usage reference count

      count is still 1.)

                      Process A                         System space
            Handles
                            Handle Table           Event object
                                               HandleCount=2
              Index                            ReferenceCount=65536

                                                                       Other structure

        DuplicateHandle

                      Process B

                            Handle Table           Event object
                                               HandleCount=1
                                               ReferenceCount=32770

      FIGURE 8-35 Handles and reference counts.

         Process B initializes, creates the second named event, and signals it. The last operation uses (refer-
      ences) the second event, allowing it also to reach a reference value of 32,770. Process B then opens

      object, bringing its counters to 2 and 32,771. (Remember, the new handle table entry still has its usage

                                          usage reference count to 32,767. The value is added to the
object reference count, which is further increased by 1 unit, and reaches the overall value of 65,539.
Subsequent operations on the handle simply decreases the usage reference count without touching the

though—an operation that releases a reference count on the kernel object. Thus, after the four uses

   When a process closes a handle to an object (an operation that causes the NtClose routine to be
executed in the kernel), the Object Manager knows that it needs to subtract the handle usage reference

                                                                                                    -
tinue to exist because its reference count will become 1 (while its handle count would be 0). However,
when Process B closes its handle to the second event object, the object would be deallocated, because
its reference count reaches 0.

                                                                                                      -
ence count might remain positive, indicating that the operating system is still using the object in some
way. Ultimately, it is only when the reference count drops to 0 that the Object Manager deletes the
object from memory. This deletion has to respect certain rules and also requires cooperation from the

memory (depending on the settings located in their object types), if a dereference occurs at an IRQL
level of DISPATCH_LEVEL or higher and this dereference causes the pointer count to drop to 0, the sys-
tem would crash if it attempted to immediately free the memory of a paged-pool object. (Recall that
such access is illegal because the page fault will never be serviced.) In this scenario, the Object Manager
performs a deferred delete operation, queuing the operation on a worker thread running at passive

                                                                                                          -
ing to delete the object will result in the system attempting to acquire this lock. However, the driver

driver developers must use ObDereferenceObjectDeferDelete to force deferred deletion regardless of

complete more quickly, instead of waiting for the Object Manager to delete the object.

   Because of the way object retention works, an application can ensure that an object and its name
remain in memory simply by keeping a handle open to the object. Programmers who write applications
that contain two or more cooperating processes need not be concerned that one process might delete an

might create a second process to execute a program in the background; it then immediately closes its
handle to the process. Because the operating system needs the second process to run the program, it

          Because object leaks can be dangerous to the system by leaking kernel pool memory and eventu-
      ally causing systemwide memory starvation—and can break applications in subtle ways—Windows
      includes a number of debugging mechanisms that can be enabled to monitor, analyze, and debug
      issues with handles and objects. Additionally, WinDbg comes with two extensions that tap into these
      mechanisms and provide easy graphical analysis. Table 8-24 describes them.

      TABLE 8-24 Debugging mechanisms for object handles

      Mechanism                  Enabled By                                             Kernel Debugger Extension

      Handle Tracing Database                                                           !htrace <handle value> <process ID>
                                 with the User Stack Trace option checked with

      Object Reference Tracing   Per-process-name(s), or per-object-type-pool-tag(s),   !obtrace <object pointer>

      Object Reference Tagging Drivers must call appropriate API                        N/A

        Enabling the handle-tracing database is useful when attempting to understand the use of each
      handle within an application or the system context. The !htrace debugger extension can display the

      the stack trace can pinpoint the code that is creating the handle, and it can be analyzed for a missing
      call to a function such as CloseHandle.

          The object-reference-tracing !obtrace extension monitors even more by showing the stack trace for
      each new handle created as well as each time a handle is referenced by the kernel (and each time it is
      opened, duplicated, or inherited) and dereferenced. By analyzing these patterns, misuse of an object
      at the system level can be more easily debugged. Additionally, these reference traces provide a way to
      understand the behavior of the system when dealing with certain objects. Tracing processes, for ex-

      (such as Process Monitor) and help detect rogue or buggy third-party drivers that might be referencing
      handles in kernel mode but never dereferencing them.

         Note
         the name of its pool tag by looking at the key member of the OBJECT_TYPE structure when
         using the dx command. Each object type on the system has a global variable that references
         this structure—for example, PsProcessType. Alternatively, you can use the !object command,
         which displays the pointer to this structure.

         Unlike the previous two mechanisms, object-reference tagging is not a debugging feature that must

      driver developers to reference and dereference objects, including ObReferenceObjectWithTag and
      ObDereferenceObjectWithTag. Similar to pool tagging (see Chapter 5 in Part 1 for more information on pool
      tagging), these APIs allow developers to supply a four-character tag identifying each reference/dereference
      pair. When using the !obtrace extension just described, the tag for each reference or dereference operation
      is also shown, which avoids solely using the call stack as a mechanism to identify where leaks or under-
      references might occur, especially if a given call is performed thousands of times by the driver.

Resource accounting
Resource accounting, like object retention, is closely related to the use of object handles. A positive
open handle count indicates that some process is using that resource. It also indicates that some pro-
                                                                                                        -
ence count drop to 0, the process that was using the object should no longer be charged for it.

the types of quotas imposed on processes are sometimes diverse and complicated, and the code to

process component might limit users to some maximum number of new processes they can create
or a maximum number of threads within a process. Each of these limits is tracked and enforced in
different parts of the operating system.

   In contrast, the Windows Object Manager provides a central facility for resource accounting. Each
object header contains an attribute called quota charges that records how much the Object Manager

opens a handle to the object.

   Each process on Windows points to a quota structure that records the limits and current values

                                                                NonPagedPoolQuota, PagedPoolQuota,
and PagingFileQuota
Management.) Note that all the processes in an interactive session share the same quota block (and

Object names
An important consideration in creating a multitude of objects is the need to devise a successful system
for keeping track of them. The Object Manager requires the following information to help you do so:

   ■   A way to distinguish one object from another

   ■

shared memory, for example. The executive, in contrast, allows any resource represented by an object

   Object names also satisfy a third requirement, which is to allow processes to share objects. The ex-
                                                                                                      -
ate an object and place its name in the global namespace, and a second process can open a handle to

      before storing the new name in the global namespace. The second is when a process opens a handle to

      handle to the caller; thereafter, the caller uses the handle to refer to the object. When looking up a
      name, the Object Manager allows the caller to select either a case-sensitive or case-insensitive search,
      a feature that supports Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) and other environments that use case-

      Object directories

      possibly even other object directories. The object directory object maintains enough information to
      translate these object names into pointers to the object headers of the objects themselves. The Object
      Manager uses the pointers to construct the object handles that it returns to user-mode callers. Both
      kernel-mode code (including executive components and device drivers) and user-mode code (such as
      subsystems) can create object directories in which to store objects.

         Objects can be stored anywhere in the namespace, but certain object types will always appear in

      component responsible for the creation of Driver objects (through the IoCreateDriver API), only Driver
      objects should exist there.

         Table 8-25 lists the standard object directories found on all Windows systems and what types of ob-

                                                                                                          -
      plications that stick to documented APIs. (See the “Session namespace” section later in this chapter for
      more information.)

      TABLE 8-25 Standard object directories

      Directory                   Types of Object Names Stored

                                  contains the named kernel objects created by Win32 or UWP APIs from within processes
                                  that are running in an App Container.

                                  Symbolic links mapping ARC-style paths to NT-style paths.

                                  Global mutexes, events, semaphores, waitable timers, jobs, ALPC ports, symbolic links,
                                  and section objects.

                                  Callback objects (which only drivers can create).

Directory   Types of Object Names Stored

                                                                                            -

            SystemPartition and BootPartition. Also contains the PhysicalMemory section object

            directories, such as Http used by the Http.sys accelerator driver, and HarddiskN directo-
            ries for each physical hard drive.

            (SERVICE_FILE_SYSTEM_DRIVER or SERVICE_RECOGNIZER_DRIVER).

            Symbolic links for locations where OS drivers can be installed and managed from.

            Windows 10X devices.

                                 SERVICE_FILE_SYSTEM_DRIVER
            (SERVICE_RECOGNIZER_DRIVER) driver and                                                      -

            Contains event objects that signal kernel pool resource conditions, the completion of
            certain operating system tasks, as well as Session objects (at least Session0) represent-
            ing each interactive session, and Partition objects (at least MemoryPartition0) for each
            memory partition. Also contains the mutex used to synchronize access to the Boot

            callback to refer to the correct partition for physical memory and commit resource con-
            ditions, and for memory error detection.

            Section objects for the known DLLs mapped by SMSS at startup time, and a symbolic
            link containing the path for known DLLs.

            directory is used instead to store WoW64 32-bit versions of those DLLs.

            Section objects for mapped national language support (NLS) tables.

            Object type objects for each object type created by ObCreateObjectTypeEx.

            ALPC ports created to represent remote procedure call (RPC) endpoints when Local RPC
            (ncalrpc) is used. This includes explicitly named endpoints, as well as auto-generated
            COM (OLEXXXXX) port names and unnamed ports (LRPC-XXXX, where XXXX is a ran-
            domly generated hexadecimal value).

            Per-session namespace directory. (See the next subsection.)

            If at least one Windows Server Container has been created, such as by using Docker for

            ID of the root job for the container), which then contain the object namespace local to
            that Silo.

            Section objects used by virtualized instances (VAIL) of Win32k.sys and other window
            manager components on Windows 10X devices when launching legacy Win32
            applications. Also contains the Host object directory to represent the other side
            of the connection.

            Windows subsystem ALPC ports, shared section, and window stations in the
            WindowStations object directory. Desktop Window Manager (DWM) also stores its
            ALPC ports, events, and shared sections in this directory, for non-Session 0 sessions.

         Object names are global to a single computer (or to all processors on a multiprocessor computer),
                                                                                                        -

      network. Server code on the remote Windows system calls the Object Manager and the I/O manager

         Because the kernel objects created by non-app-container processes, through the Win32 and UWP API,
      such as mutexes, events, semaphores, waitable timers, and sections, have their names stored in a single
      object directory, no two of these objects can have the same name, even if they are of a different type. This

        The issue with name collision may seem innocuous, but one security consideration to keep in mind
      when dealing with named objects is the possibility of malicious object name squatting. Although object

      current session namespace that can be set with the standard Windows API. This makes it possible for an
      unprivileged application running in the same session as a privileged application to access its objects,
      as described earlier in the object security subsection. Unfortunately, even if the object creator used
                                                                        squatting attack, in which the un-
      privileged application creates the object before the privileged application, thus denying access to the
      legitimate application.

         Windows exposes the concept of a private namespace to alleviate this issue. It allows user-mode
      applications to create object directories through the CreatePrivateNamespace API and associate these
      directories with boundary descriptors created by the CreateBoundaryDescriptor API, which are special
      data structures protecting the directories. These descriptors contain SIDs describing which security
      principals are allowed access to the object directory. In this manner, a privileged application can be
      sure that unprivileged applications will not be able to conduct a denial-of-service attack against its ob-

      Additionally, a boundary descriptor can also contain an integrity level, protecting objects possibly
      belonging to the same user account as the application based on the integrity level of the process. (See
      Chapter 7 of Part 1 for more information on integrity levels.)

           One of the things that makes boundary descriptors effective mitigations against squatting attacks
      is that unlike objects, the creator of a boundary descriptor must have access (through the SID and
      integrity level) to the boundary descriptor. Therefore, an unprivileged application can only create an
      unprivileged boundary descriptor. Similarly, when an application wants to open an object in a private
      namespace, it must open the namespace using the same boundary descriptor that was used to create
      it. Therefore, a privileged application or service would provide a privileged boundary descriptor, which
      would not match the one created by the unprivileged application.

EXPERIMENT: Looking at the base named objects and private objects
You can see the list of base objects that have names with the WinObj tool from Sysinternals or
with WinObjEx64. However, in this experiment, we use WinObjEx64 because it supports addi-
tional object types and because it can also show private namespaces. Run Winobjex64.exe, and
click the BaseNamedObjects node in the tree, as shown here:

     The named objects are listed on the right. The icons indicate the object type:

 ■     Mutexes are indicated with a stop sign.

 ■

 ■     Events are shown as exclamation points.

 ■

 ■     Symbolic links have icons that are curved arrows.

 ■

 ■     Power/network plugs represent ALPC ports.

 ■     Timers are shown as Clocks.

 ■     Other icons such as various types of gears, locks, and chips are used for other object types.

         Now use the Extras menu and select Private Namespaces
      shown here:

      mutex is part of the LoadPerf boundary), and the SID(s) and integrity level associated with it (in
      this case, no explicit integrity is set, and the SID is the one for the Administrators group). Note
      that for this feature to work, you must have enabled kernel debugging on the machine the tool is
      running on (either locally or remotely), as WinObjEx64 uses the WinDbg local kernel debugging
      driver to read kernel memory.

EXPERIMENT: Tampering with single instancing

of single-instancing enforcement through named objects. Notice that when launching the
Wmplayer.exe executable, Windows Media Player appears only once—every other launch simply
results in the window coming back into focus. You can tamper with the handle list by using

    1.   Launch Windows Media Player and Process Explorer to view the handle table (by click-
         ing View, Lower Pane View, and then Handles). You should see a handle whose name

    2.   Right-click the handle and select Close Handle
         that Process Explorer should be started as Administrator to be able to close a handle in
         another process.

    3.   Run Windows Media Player again. Notice that this time a second process is created.

    4.   Go ahead and play a different song in each instance. You can also use the Sound Mixer
         in the system tray (click the Volume icon) to select which of the two processes will have
         greater volume, effectively creating a mixing environment.

   Instead of closing a handle to a named object, an application could have run on its own be-
fore Windows Media Player and created an object with the same name. In this scenario, Windows
Media Player would never run because it would be fooled into believing it was already running
on the system.

      Symbolic links

                                                                                                                  -
      narily hierarchical directory structure.

         The Object Manager implements an object called a symbolic link object, which performs a similar
      function for object names in its object namespace. A symbolic link can occur anywhere within an object

      string that it substitutes for the symbolic link name. It then restarts its name lookup.

          One place in which the executive uses symbolic link objects is in translating MS-DOS-style device
      names into Windows internal device names. In Windows, a user refers to hard disk drives using the names
      C:, D:, and so on, and serial ports as COM1, COM2, and so on. The Windows subsystem creates these
                                                                                                          -
      tory, which can also be done for additional drive letters through the DefineDosDevice API.

      LowMemoryCondition, but due to the introduction of memory partitions (described in Chapter 5 of
      Part 1), the condition that the event signals are now dependent on which partition the caller is running
      in (and should have visibility of). As such, there is now a LowMemoryCondition event for each memory
      partition, and callers must be redirected to the correct event for their partition. This is achieved with

      executed each time the link is parsed by the Object Manager. With WinObjEx64, you can see the

      doing a !object \KernelObjects\LowMemoryCondition command and then dumping the _OBJECT_
      SYMBOLIC_LINK structure with the dx command.)

      FIGURE 8-36 The LowMemoryCondition symbolic link redirection callback.

Session namespace
Services have full access to the global
the namespace. Regular user applications then have read-write (but not delete) access to the global
namespace (minus some exceptions we explain soon.) In turn, however, interactive user sessions are
then given a session-private view of the namespace known as a local namespace. This namespace
provides full read/write access to the base named objects by all applications running within that
                                                                                                  -

Making separate copies of the same parts of the namespace is known as instancing the namespace.

are running an application that creates a named object, each user session must have a private version
                                                                                                   -
ing the same object. If the Win32 application is running under an AppContainer, however, or is a UWP

whose names correspond to the Package SID of the AppContainer (see Chapter 7 of Part 1, for more
information on AppContainer and the Windows sandboxing model).

   The Object Manager implements a local namespace by creating the private versions of the four
                                                                                        n (where
n
event, for example, the Win32 subsystem (as part of the BaseGetNamedObjectDirectory API in

   One more way through which name objects can be accessed is through a security feature called
Base Named Object (BNO) Isolation. Parent processes can launch a child with the ProcThreadAttribute
BnoIsolation                                                                                              -
                                                                                                       -
tory and initial set of objects (such as symbolic links) to support it, and then have NtCreateUserProcess

BnoIsolationHandlesEntry

         Later, BaseGetNamedObjectDirectory queries the Token object to check if BNO Isolation is enabled,

      sort of sandbox for a process without having to use the AppContainer functionality.

         All object-manager functions related to namespace management are aware of the instanced direc-
      tories and participate in providing the illusion that all sessions use the same namespace. Windows sub-

      directory with \??

      named DeviceMap in the executive process object (EPROCESS, which is described further in Chapter 3
      of Part 1) that points to a data structure shared by other processes in the same session.

         The DosDevicesDirectory               DeviceMap structure points at the Object Manager directory

                                                           DosDevicesDirectory          DeviceMap. If the
                                                                             DeviceMap
                                                                                GlobalDosDevicesDirectory
                  DeviceMap

         Under certain circumstances, session-aware applications need to access objects in the global session
      even if the application is running in another session. The application might want to do this to synchro-
      nize with instances of itself running in other remote sessions or with the console session (that is, session

         Session directories are isolated from each other, but as mentioned earlier, regular user applications

      Section and symbolic link objects cannot be globally created unless the caller is running in Session
      0 or if the caller possesses a special privilege named create global object

                                                    ObUnsecureGlobalNames value. By default, these names
      are usually listed:

         ■    netfxcustomperfcounters.1.0

         ■    SharedPerfIPCBlock

         ■

         ■

EXPERIMENT: Viewing namespace instancing
You can see the separation between the session 0 namespace and other session namespaces as

see a subdirectory with a numeric name for each active session. If you open one of these direc-

BaseNamedObjects, which are the local namespace subdirectories of the session. The following

   Next, run Process Explorer and select a process in your session (such as Explorer.exe), and then
view the handle table (by clicking View, Lower Pane View, and then Handles). You should see a
                                                                       n, where n is the session ID.

      Object filtering

      ability to use the altitude
                                                                                                              -
      ers are permitted to intercept calls such as NtOpenThread and NtOpenProcess and even to modify the
      access masks being requested from the process manager. This allows protection against certain opera-
      tions on an open handle—such as preventing a piece of malware from terminating a benevolent security
      process or stopping a password dumping application from obtaining read memory permissions on the
      LSA process. Note, however, that an open operation cannot be entirely blocked due to compatibility is-
      sues, such as making Task Manager unable to query the command line or image name of a process.

                                                            pre and post callbacks, allowing them to prepare

      which can be returned across all calls to the driver or across a pre/post pair. These callbacks can be
      registered with the ObRegisterCallbacks API and unregistered with the ObUnregisterCallbacks API—it is
      the responsibility of the driver to ensure deregistration happens.

         Use of the APIs is restricted to images that have certain characteristics:

         ■    The image must be signed, even on 32-bit computers, according to the same rules set forth in
                                                                                                 /integrity-
              check                           IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_FORCE_INTEGRITY value in the
              PE header. This instructs the memory manager to check the signature of the image regardless of
              any other defaults that might not normally result in a check.

         ■    The image must be signed with a catalog containing cryptographic per-page hashes of the
              executable code. This allows the system to detect changes to the image after it has been loaded
              in memory.

         Before executing a callback, the Object Manager calls the MmVerifyCallbackFunction on the target
      function pointer, which in turn locates the loader data table entry associated with the module owning
                                            LDRP_IMAGE_INTEGRITY_FORCED

Synchronization
      The concept of mutual exclusion is a crucial one in operating systems development. It refers to the guar-
      antee that one, and only one, thread can access a particular resource at a time. Mutual exclusion is neces-

when two threads running on different processors both write data to a circular queue.

Time

                Processor A                            Processor B

               Get queue tail                                •
       Insert data at current location                       •
                                                             •
                      •                               Get queue tail
                      •
                      •
                                                             •
           Increment tail pointer                            •
                                                             •
                      •                  Insert data at current location /*ERROR*/
                      •
                      •                            Increment tail pointer
                                                             •
                                                             •
                                                             •

FIGURE 8-37 Incorrect sharing of memory.

                                                                                                          -

happen on a multiprocessor system, the same error could occur on a single-processor system if the

queue tail pointer.

   Sections of code that access a nonshareable resource are called critical sections. To ensure correct
                                                                                                              -
dating a database, or modifying a shared variable, no other thread can be allowed to access the same

data structure without mutual exclusion.

   The issue of mutual exclusion, although important for all operating systems, is especially impor-
tant (and intricate) for a tightly coupled, symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) operating system such as
Windows, in which the same system code runs simultaneously on more than one processor, sharing
                                                                                                      -
nisms that system code can use to prevent two threads from modifying the same data at the same
time. The kernel provides mutual-exclusion primitives that it and the rest of the executive use to syn-
chronize their access to global data structures.

   Because the scheduler synchronizes access to its data structures at DPC/dispatch level IRQL, the
kernel and executive cannot rely on synchronization mechanisms that would result in a page fault or
reschedule operation to synchronize access to data structures when the IRQL is DPC/dispatch level
or higher (levels known as an elevated or high
kernel and executive use mutual exclusion to protect their global data structures when the IRQL is high
and what mutual-exclusion and synchronization mechanisms the kernel and executive use when the
IRQL is low (below DPC/dispatch level).

      High-IRQL synchronization
      At various stages during its execution, the kernel must guarantee that one, and only one, processor at

      mutually exclusive manner.

      Simple single-processor operating systems sometimes prevent such a scenario by disabling all inter-
      rupts each time they access global data, but the Windows kernel has a more sophisticated solution.
      Before using a global resource, the kernel temporarily masks the interrupts whose interrupt handlers
                                                                                                       -

      causes the dispatcher, which uses the dispatcher database, to run. Therefore, any other part of the
      kernel that uses the dispatcher database raises the IRQL to DPC/dispatch level, masking DPC/dispatch-
      level interrupts before using the dispatcher database.

                                                                                                         -

      processor. The kernel also needs to guarantee mutually exclusive access across several processors.

      Interlocked operations
      The simplest form of synchronization mechanisms relies on hardware support for multiprocessor-
      safe manipulation of integer values and for performing comparisons. They include functions such as
      InterlockedIncrement, InterlockedDecrement, InterlockedExchange, and InterlockedCompareExchange.
      The InterlockedDecrement function, for example, uses the x86 and x64 lock                              -
      ple, lock xadd) to lock the multiprocessor bus during the addition operation so that another processor

      functions are called intrinsic because the code for them is generated in an inline assembler, directly
                                                                                                           -
      rameters onto the stack, calling the function, copying the parameters into registers, and then popping
      the parameters off the stack and returning to the caller would be a more expensive operation than the

      Spinlocks
      The mechanism the kernel uses to achieve multiprocessor mutual exclusion is called a spinlock. A
      spinlock is a locking primitive associated with a global data structure, such as the DPC queue shown

         Processor A                                       Processor B
                •                                               •
                •                                               •
                •                                               •
       Do                                                 Do
         Try to acquire               Spinlock              Try to acquire
         DPC queue                                          DPC queue
         spinlock                                           spinlock
       Until SUCCESS                                      Until SUCCESS

 Begin                                                 Begin
   Remove DPC from queue        DPC              DPC     Add DPC from queue
 End                                                   End
                                      DPC queue
Release DPC queue spinlock                             Release DPC queue spinlock
       Critical section

FIGURE 8-38 Using a spinlock.

                                                                                                          -

lock until it succeeds. The spinlock gets its name from the fact that the kernel (and thus, the processor)
waits, “spinning,” until it gets the lock.

   Spinlocks, like the data structures they protect, reside in nonpaged memory mapped into the
system address space. The code to acquire and release a spinlock is written in assembly language for
speed and to exploit whatever locking mechanism the underlying processor architecture provides. On
many architectures, spinlocks are implemented with a hardware-supported test-and-set operation,
which tests the value of a lock variable and acquires the lock in one atomic instruction. Testing and ac-
quiring the lock in one instruction prevents a second thread from grabbing the lock between the time

such the lock instruction mentioned earlier can also be used on the test-and-set operation, resulting in
the combined lock bts opcode on x86 and x64 processors, which also locks the multiprocessor bus; oth-
erwise, it would be possible for more than one processor to perform the operation atomically. (Without
the lock, the operation is guaranteed to be atomic only on the current processor.) Similarly, on ARM
processors, instructions such as ldrex and strex can be used in a similar fashion.

   All kernel-mode spinlocks in Windows have an associated IRQL that is always DPC/dispatch level or

lower ceases on that processor. Because thread dispatching happens at DPC/dispatch level, a thread
that holds a spinlock is never preempted because the IRQL masks the dispatching mechanisms. This
masking allows code executing in a critical section protected by a spinlock to continue executing so
that it will release the lock quickly. The kernel uses spinlocks with great care, minimizing the number of
instructions it executes while it holds a spinlock. Any processor that attempts to acquire the spinlock

and performing no actual work.

         On x86 and x64 processors, a special pause assembly instruction can be inserted in busy wait loops,
      and on ARM processors, yield                                                          hint to the processor
      that the loop instructions it is processing are part of a spinlock (or a similar construct) acquisition loop.

         ■

             looping.

         ■   On SMT cores, it allows the CPU to realize that the “work” being done by the spinning logical
             core is not terribly important and awards more CPU time to the second logical core instead.

         ■   Because a busy wait loop results in a storm of read requests coming to the bus from the waiting
             thread (which might be generated out of order), the CPU attempts to correct for violations of
             memory order as soon as it detects a write (that is, when the owning thread releases the lock).
             Thus, as soon as the spinlock is released, the CPU reorders any pending memory read opera-
             tions to ensure proper ordering. This reordering results in a large penalty in system perfor-
             mance and can be avoided with the pause instruction.

              If the kernel detects that it is running under a Hyper-V compatible hypervisor, which sup-
              ports the spinlock enlightenment (described in Chapter 9), the spinlock facility can use the
              HvlNotifyLongSpinWait library function when it detects that the spinlock is currently owned
              by another CPU, instead of contiguously spinning and use the pause instruction. The func-
              tion emits a HvCallNotifyLongSpinWait hypercall to indicate to the hypervisor scheduler that
              another VP should take over instead of emulating the spin.

         The kernel makes spinlocks available to other parts of the executive through a set of kernel func-
      tions, including KeAcquireSpinLock and KeReleaseSpinLock. Device drivers, for example, require spin-
      locks to guarantee that device registers and other global data structures are accessed by only one part
      of a device driver (and from only one processor) at a time. Spinlocks are not for use by user programs—
      user programs should use the objects described in the next section. Device drivers also need to protect
      access to their own data structures from interrupts associated with themselves. Because the spinlock

                                                   KeAcquireInterruptSpinLock and KeReleaseInterruptSpinLock

      system looks inside the interrupt object for the associated DIRQL with the interrupt and raises the IRQL
      to the appropriate level to ensure correct access to structures shared with the ISR.

         Devices can also use the KeSynchronizeExecution API to synchronize an entire function with an ISR
      instead of just a critical section. In all cases, the code protected by an interrupt spinlock must execute

      negative performance effects.

      an IRQL of DPC/dispatch level or higher, as explained earlier, code holding a spinlock will crash the
      system if it attempts to make the scheduler perform a dispatch operation or if it causes a page fault.

Queued spinlocks
To increase the scalability of spinlocks, a special type of spinlock, called a queued spinlock, is used in
many circumstances instead of a standard spinlock, especially when contention is expected, and fair-
ness is required.

   A queued spinlock works like this: When a processor wants to acquire a queued spinlock that is

the meantime, a processor waiting for a busy spinlock checks the status not of the spinlock itself but of
                                                                                                             -

synchronization, and the memory location of the bit is not in a single NUMA node that then has to be
snooped through the caches of each logical processor. The second is that instead of a random pro-

queued spinlocks do require additional overhead, including extra interlocked operations, which do add

decide if a queued spinlock is worth it for them.

global                                                                                             processor
control region                                                               LockArray              KPCR
data structure.

   A global spinlock can be acquired by calling KeAcquireQueuedSpinLock with the index into the array
at which the pointer to the spinlock is stored. The number of global spinlocks originally grew in each

                                  KSPIN_LOCK_QUEUE_NUMBER enumeration, but note, however,
that acquiring one of these queued spinlocks from a device driver is an unsupported and heavily

         EXPERIMENT: Viewing global queued spinlocks
         You can view the state of the global queued spinlocks (the ones pointed to by the queued
                                                             !qlocks kernel debugger command. In the
         following example, note that none of the locks are acquired on any of the processors, which is a
         standard situation on a local system doing live debugging.
         lkd> !qlocks
         Key: O = Owner, 1-n = Wait order, blank = not owned/waiting, C = Corrupt

                                      Processor Number
              Lock Name           0     1 2 3 4 5 6      7

         KE    - Unused Spare
         MM    - Unused Spare
         MM    - Unused Spare
         MM    - Unused Spare
         CC    - Vacb
         CC    - Master
         EX    - NonPagedPool
         IO    - Cancel
         CC    - Unused Spare

      In-stack queued spinlocks
      Device drivers can use dynamically allocated queued spinlocks with the KeAcquireInStackQueued
      SpinLock and KeReleaseInStackQueuedSpinLock functions. Several components—including the cache

      global queued spinlocks.

        KeAcquireInStackQueuedSpinLock takes a pointer to a spinlock data structure and a spinlock queue
      handle. The spinlock queue handle is actually a data structure in which the kernel stores information

      usually a stack variable, guaranteeing locality to the caller thread and is responsible for the InStack part
      of the spinlock and API name.

      Reader/writer spin locks
      While using queued spinlocks greatly improves latency in highly contended situations, Windows

      contention in many situations to begin with. The multi-reader, single-writer spinlock, also called
      the executive spinlock, is an enhancement on top of regular spinlocks, which is exposed through
      the ExAcquireSpinLockExclusive, ExAcquireSpinLockShared API, and their ExReleaseXxx counterparts.
      Additionally, ExTryAcquireSpinLockSharedAtDpcLevel and ExTryConvertSharedSpinLockToExclusive
      functions exist for more advanced use cases.

   As the name suggests, this type of lock allows noncontended shared acquisition of a spinlock if no
writer is present. When a writer is interested in the lock, readers must eventually release the lock, and
no further readers will be allowed while the writer is active (nor additional writers). If a driver developer

items, this type of lock can remove contention in the majority of cases, removing the need for the com-
plexity of a queued spinlock.

Executive interlocked operations
The kernel supplies some simple synchronization functions constructed on spinlocks for more
advanced operations, such as adding and removing entries from singly and doubly linked lists.
Examples include ExInterlockedPopEntryList and ExInterlockedPushEntryList for singly linked lists,
and ExInterlockedInsertHeadList and ExInterlockedRemoveHeadList for doubly linked lists. A few
other functions, such as ExInterlockedAddUlong and ExInterlockedAddLargeInteger also exist. All
these functions require a standard spinlock as a parameter and are used throughout the kernel and

   Instead of relying on the standard APIs to acquire and release the spinlock parameter, these func-
tions place the code required inline and also use a different ordering scheme. Whereas the Ke spinlock

test-and-set operation to make the acquisition, these routines disable interrupts on the processor and
immediately attempt an atomic test-and-set. If the initial attempt fails, interrupts are enabled again,
and the standard busy waiting algorithm continues until the test-and-set operation returns 0—in which
case the whole function is restarted again. Because of these subtle differences, a spinlock used for the
executive interlocked functions must not be used with the standard kernel APIs discussed previously.
Naturally, noninterlocked list operations must not be mixed with interlocked operations.

   Note Certain executive interlocked operations silently ignore the spinlock when possible.
                    ExInterlockedIncrementLong or ExInterlockedCompareExchange APIs use
   the same lock
   These functions were useful on older systems (or non-x86 systems) where the lock operation

   inlined in favor of the intrinsic functions.

Low-IRQL synchronization
Executive software outside the kernel also needs to synchronize access to global data structures in a

which it accesses as a global data structure, and device drivers need to ensure that they can gain exclu-
sive access to their devices. By calling kernel functions, the executive can create a spinlock, acquire it,
and release it.

      waiting for a spinlock literally stalls a processor, spinlocks can be used only under the following strictly
      limited circumstances:

         ■   The protected resource must be accessed quickly and without complicated interactions with
             other code.

         ■

             exceptions.

                                                                                                           -
      tive needs to perform other types of synchronization in addition to mutual exclusion, and it must also
      provide synchronization mechanisms to user mode.

         There are several additional synchronization mechanisms for use when spinlocks are not suitable:

         ■

         ■

         ■   Pushlocks

         ■   Executive resources

         ■   Run-once initialization (InitOnce)

         Additionally, user-mode code, which also executes at low IRQL, must be able to have its own locking

         ■   System calls that refer to kernel dispatcher objects (mutants, semaphores, events, and timers)

         ■   Condition variables (CondVars)

         ■   Slim Reader-Writer Locks (SRW Locks)

         ■   Address-based waiting

         ■   Run-once initialization (InitOnce)

         ■   Critical sections

         We look at the user-mode primitives and their underlying kernel-mode support later; for now, we
      focus on kernel-mode objects. Table 8-26 compares and contrasts the capabilities of these mechanisms
      and their interaction with kernel-mode APC delivery.

TABLE 8-26

                      Exposed for      Disables         Disables Special Supports          Supports
                      Use by Device    Normal Kernel-   Kernel-Mode      Recursive         Shared and
                      Drivers          Mode APCs        APCs             Acquisition       Exclusive
                                                                                           Acquisition

                      Yes              Yes              No               Yes               No
mutexes

                      Yes              No               No               No                No
semaphores, events,
timers

                      Yes              Yes              Yes              No                No

Guarded mutexes       Yes              Yes              Yes              No                No

Pushlocks             Yes              No               No               No                Yes

Executive resources   Yes              No               No               Yes               Yes

Rundown protections   Yes              No               No               Yes               No

Kernel dispatcher objects
The kernel furnishes additional synchronization mechanisms to the executive in the form of kernel
objects, known collectively as dispatcher objects. The Windows API-visible synchronization objects ac-
quire their synchronization capabilities from these kernel dispatcher objects. Each Windows API-visible
object that supports synchronization encapsulates at least one kernel dispatcher object. The execu-
                                                                                    WaitForSingleObject
and WaitForMultipleObjects functions, which the Windows subsystem implements by calling analogous
system services that the Object Manager supplies. A thread in a Windows application can synchronize
with a variety of objects, including a Windows process, thread, event, semaphore, mutex, waitable

the kernel can be waited on. Some of these are proper dispatcher objects, whereas others are larger

chapter in the section “What signals an object?”) shows the proper dispatcher objects, so any other
object that the Windows API allows waiting on probably internally contains one of those primitives.

  Two other types of executive synchronization mechanisms worth noting are the executive resource
and the pushlock. These mechanisms provide exclusive access (like a mutex) as well as shared read

they have an API exposed through raw pointers and Ex APIs, and the Object Manager and its handle
system are not involved. The remaining subsections describe the implementation details of waiting for
dispatcher objects.

Waiting for dispatcher objects

                                                                                       NtWaitForXxx class
                                                                                        KeWaitForXxx APIs
deal directly with the dispatcher object.

         Because the Nt API communicates with the Object Manager (ObWaitForXxx class of functions), it
      goes through the abstractions that were explained in the section on object types earlier in this chapter.
                        Nt
      the information in the object type to redirect the wait to the Event              FILE_OBJECT. The Ke
      API, on the other hand, only works with true dispatcher objects—that is to say, those that begin with
      a DISPATCHER_HEADER structure. Regardless of the approach taken, these calls ultimately cause the
      kernel to put the thread in a wait state.

         A completely different, and more modern, approach to waiting on dispatcher objects is to rely on
      asynchronous waiting. This approach leverages the existing I/O completion port infrastructure to as-
      sociate a dispatcher object with the kernel queue backing the I/O completion port, by going through
      an intermediate object called a wait completion packet. Thanks to this mechanism, a thread essentially
      registers a wait but does not directly block on the dispatcher object and does not enter a wait state.
                                                                                                             -

      This allows one or more threads to register wait indications on various objects, which a separate thread

                                                                                       CreateThreadPoolWait
      and SetThreadPoolWait.

      Windows 10, through the DPC Wait Event functionality that is currently reserved for Hyper-V (although

      reserved for kernel-mode drivers, in which a deferred procedure call (DPC, explained earlier in this
      chapter) can be associated with a dispatcher object, instead of a thread or I/O completion port. Similar
      to the mechanism described earlier, the DPC is registered with the object, and when the wait is satis-

      KeInsertQueueDpc). When the dispatcher lock is dropped and the IRQL returns below DISPATCH_
      LEVEL, the DPC executes on the current processor, which is the driver-supplied callback that can now
      react to the signal state of the object.

          Irrespective of the waiting mechanism, the synchronization object(s) being waited on can be in one
      of two states: signaled state or nonsignaled state

      undergoes a state change, from the nonsignaled state to the signaled state (when another thread sets
      an event object, for example).

        To synchronize with an object, a thread calls one of the wait system services that the Object
      Manager supplies, passing a handle to the object it wants to synchronize with. The thread can wait for

      signal routines checks to see whether any threads are waiting for the object and not also waiting for
      other objects to become signaled. If there are, the kernel releases one or more of the threads from their
      waiting state so that they can continue executing.

port, and then calls NtCreateWaitCompletionPacket to create a wait completion packet object and re-
ceive a handle back to it. Then, it calls NtAssociateWaitCompletionPacket, passing in both the handle to
the I/O completion port as well as the handle to the wait completion packet it just created, combined

signaled state, the signal routines realize that no thread is currently waiting on the object, and instead
check whether an I/O completion port has been associated with the wait. If so, it signals the queue ob-
ject associated with the port, which causes any threads currently waiting on it to wake up and consume
the wait completion packet (or, alternatively, the queue simply becomes signaled until a thread comes
in and attempts to wait on it). Alternatively, if no I/O completion port has been associated with the wait,
then a check is made to see whether a DPC is associated instead, in which case it will be queued on the
current processor. This part handles the kernel-only DPC Wait Event mechanism described earlier.

   The following example of setting an event illustrates how synchronization interacts with thread
dispatching:

   ■

   ■

       threads waiting for the event.

   ■   Another thread sets the event.

   ■

       details on thread scheduling, see Chapter 4 of Part 1.)

   Note Some threads might be waiting for more than one object, so they continue waiting,
                        WaitAny wait, which will wake them up as soon as one object (instead
   of all) is signaled.

What signals an object?

during its lifetime and is set to the signaled state by the kernel when the thread terminates. Similarly,
                                                                                                             -
trast, the timer object, like an alarm, is set to “go off” at a certain time. When its time expires, the kernel
sets the timer object to the signaled state.

   When choosing a synchronization mechanism, a programmer must take into account the rules

object is set to the signaled state varies with the type of object the thread is waiting for, as Table 8-27
illustrates.

      TABLE 8-27

      Object Type                    Set to Signaled State When                   Effect on Waiting Threads

      Process                        Last thread terminates.                      All are released.

      Thread                         Thread terminates.                           All are released.

                                     Thread sets the event.                       All are released.

      Event (synchronization type)   Thread sets the event.                       One thread is released and might receive a
                                                                                  boost; the event object is reset.

      Gate (locking type)            Thread signals the gate.
                                                                                  a boost.

      Gate (signaling type)          Thread signals the type.

                                     Thread sets event with a key.
                                                                                  is of the same process as the signaler is
                                                                                  released.

      Semaphore                      Semaphore count drops by 1.                  One thread is released.

                                     Set time arrives or time interval expires.   All are released.

      Timer (synchronization type)   Set time arrives or time interval expires.   One thread is released.

      Mutex                          Thread releases the mutex.                   One thread is released and takes ownership
                                                                                  of the mutex.

      Queue                          Item is placed on queue.                     One thread is released.

         When an object is set to the signaled state, waiting threads are generally released from their wait
      states immediately.

                                                            manual reset event in the Windows API) is used to
      announce the occurrence of some event. When the event object is set to the signaled state, all threads
      waiting for the event are released. The exception is any thread that is waiting for more than one object
      at a time; such a thread might be required to continue waiting until additional objects reach the sig-
      naled state.

          In contrast to an event object, a mutex object has ownership associated with it (unless it was ac-
      quired during a DPC). It is used to gain mutually exclusive access to a resource, and only one thread at
      a time can hold the mutex. When the mutex object becomes free, the kernel sets it to the signaled state
      and then selects one waiting thread to execute, while also inheriting any priority boost that had been
      applied. (See Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more information on priority boosting.) The thread selected by the
      kernel acquires the mutex object, and all other threads continue waiting.

          A mutex object can also be abandoned, something that occurs when the thread currently owning
      it becomes terminated. When a thread terminates, the kernel enumerates all mutexes owned by the
      thread and sets them to the abandoned state, which, in terms of signaling logic, is treated as a signaled
      state in that ownership of the mutex is transferred to a waiting thread.

information on how to put these objects to use in Windows programs, see the Windows reference
                                                                                         Windows
via C/C++ from Microsoft Press.

Object-less waiting (thread alerts)

                                                              condition to occur, and another thread
needs to signal the occurrence of the condition. Although this can be achieved by tying an event to
the condition, this requires resources (memory and handles, to name a couple), and acquisition and
creation of resources can fail while also taking time and being complex. The Windows kernel provides
two mechanisms for synchronization that are not tied to dispatcher objects:

   ■    Thread alerts

   ■    Thread alert by ID

                                                                alertable sleep by using SleepEx (ultimately
resulting in NtDelayExecutionThread). A kernel thread could also choose to use KeDelayExecutionThread.
We previously explained the concept of alertability earlier in the section on software interrupts and APCs.

side uses the NtAlertThread (or KeAlertThread) API to alert the thread, which causes the sleep to abort,
returning the status code STATUS_ALERTED
thread can choose not to enter an alertable sleep state, but instead, at a later time of its choosing, call the
NtTestAlert (or KeTestAlertThread
by suspending itself instead (NtSuspendThread or KeSuspendThread). In this case, the other side can use
NtAlertResumeThread to both alert the thread and then resume it.

   Although this mechanism is elegant and simple, it does suffer from a few issues, beginning with the
fact that there is no way to identify whether the alert was the one related to the wait—in other words,
                            also alerted the waiting thread, which has no way of distinguishing between

user services can leverage this mechanism, third-party developers are not meant to use alerts. Third,
once a thread becomes alerted, any pending queued APCs also begin executing—such as user-mode
                                                                NtAlertThread still requires opening a
handle to the target thread—an operation that technically counts as acquiring a resource, an operation
which can fail. Callers could theoretically open their handles ahead of time, guaranteeing that the alert
will succeed, but that still does add the cost of a handle in the whole mechanism.

   To respond to these issues, the Windows kernel received a more modern mechanism start-
ing with Windows 8, which is the alert by ID. Although the system calls behind this mechanism—
NtAlertThreadByThreadId and NtWaitForAlertByThreadId—are not documented, the Win32 user-mode
wait API that we describe later is. These system calls are extremely simple and require zero resources,

      using only the Thread ID as input. Of course, since without a handle, this could be a security issue, the
      one disadvantage to these APIs is that they can only be used to synchronize with threads within the
      current process.

      NtWaitForAlertByThreadId API, passing in an optional timeout. This makes the thread enter a real wait,
      without alertability being a concern. In fact, in spite of the name, this type of wait is non-alertable, by
      design. Next, the other thread calls the NtAlertThreadByThreadId API, which causes the kernel to look
      up the Thread ID, make sure it belongs to the calling process, and then check whether the thread is in-
      deed blocking on a call to NtWaitForAlertByThreadId
      This simple, elegant mechanism is the heart of a number of user-mode synchronization primitives later
      in this chapter and can be used to implement anything from barriers to more complex synchronization
      methods.

      Data structures
      Three data structures are key to tracking who is waiting, how they are waiting, what they are waiting for,
      and which state the entire wait operation is at. These three structures are the dispatcher header, the wait
      block, and the wait status register
                                                                                                       KWAIT_
      STATUS_REGISTER (and the Flags                              KWAIT_STATE enumeration).

         The dispatcher header

                                                                                                     union
      in programming theory. By using the Type
      example, a mutex can be Abandoned, but a timer can be Relative. Similarly, a timer can be Inserted
      into the timer list, but debugging can only be Active

      Signaled state and the Wait List Head for the wait blocks associated with the object.

         These wait blocks are what represents that a thread (or, in the case of asynchronous waiting, an I/O
      completion port) is tied to an object. Each thread that is in a wait state has an array of up to 64 wait
      blocks that represent the object(s) the thread is waiting for (including, potentially, a wait block point-

      Alternatively, if the alert-by-ID primitives are used, there is a single block with a special indication that
      this is not a dispatcher-based wait. The Object                          Hint
      NtWaitForAlertByThreadId. This array is maintained for two main purposes:

         ■   When a thread terminates, all objects that it was waiting on must be dereferenced, and the wait
             blocks deleted and disconnected from the object(s).

         ■

             and satisfying the wait), all the other objects it may have been waiting on must be dereferenced
             and the wait blocks deleted and disconnected.

each dispatcher object also has a linked list of wait blocks tied to it. This list is kept so that when a dis-
patcher object is signaled, the kernel can quickly determine who is waiting on (or which I/O completion
port is tied to) that object and apply the wait satisfaction logic we explain shortly.

                        balance set manager thread running on each CPU (see Chapter 5 of Part 1 for
more information about the balance set manager) needs to analyze the time that each thread has
been waiting for (to decide whether to page out the kernel stack), each PRCB has a list of eligible wait-
ing threads that last ran on that processor. This reuses the Ready List        KTHREAD structure

following three conditions:

   ■

       to be time-sensitive and not worth the cost of stack swapping).

   ■   The thread must have the EnableStackSwap
       KeSetKernelStackSwapEnable API).

   ■

       default for a normal thread in the “real-time” process priority class).

                                                                                                               -

on, but as we pointed out earlier, for an alert-by-ID wait, there is no object involved, so this represents
the Hint
waiting on the object, it can also point to the queue of an I/O completion port, in the case where a wait
completion packet was associated with the object as part of an asynchronous wait.

                                                          wait type and the wait block state, and,
depending on the type, a wait key can also be present. The wait type is very important during wait

wait any, the kernel does not care about the state of any other object because at least one of them (the
current one!) is now signaled. On the other hand, for a wait all, the kernel can only wake the thread if
all the other objects are also in a signaled state at the same time, which requires iterating over the wait
blocks and their associated objects.

   Alternatively, a wait dequeue is a specialized case for situations where the dispatcher object is
actually a queue (I/O completion port), and there is a thread waiting on it to have completion pack-
ets available (by calling KeRemoveQueue(Ex) or (Nt)IoRemoveIoCompletion). Wait blocks attached to

is signaled, this allows the correct actions to be taken (keep in mind that a thread could be waiting
on multiple objects, so it could have other wait blocks, in a wait any or wait all state, that must still be
handled regularly).

          wait notification, the kernel knows that no thread is associated with the object at all and that
this is an asynchronous wait with an associated I/O completion port whose queue will be signaled.
(Because a queue is itself a dispatcher object, this causes a second order wait satisfaction for the queue
and any threads potentially waiting on it.)

                  wait DPC, which is the newest wait type introduced, lets the kernel know that there is no
      thread nor I/O completion port associated with this wait, but a DPC object instead. In this case, the

      immediate execution once the dispatcher lock is dropped.

         The wait block also contains a volatile wait block state (KWAIT_BLOCK_STATE                          -
      rent state of this wait block in the transactional wait operation it is currently engaged in. The different
      states, their meaning, and their effects in the wait logic code are explained in Table 8-28.

      TABLE 8-28 Wait block states

      State                                 Meaning                                    Effect

      WaitBlockActive (4)                   This wait block is actively linked to an   During wait satisfaction, this wait
                                            object as part of a thread that is in a    block will be unlinked from the wait
                                            wait state.                                block list.

      WaitBlockInactive (5)                 The thread wait associated with this       During wait satisfaction, this wait
                                                                                       block will not be unlinked from the
                                            timeout has already expired while          wait block list because the wait satis-
                                            setting it up).                            faction must have already unlinked it
                                                                                       during its active state.

      WaitBlockSuspended (6)                The thread associated with this wait       Essentially treated the same as
                                            block is undergoing a lightweight sus-     WaitBlockActive but only ever used
                                            pend operation.                            when resuming a thread. Ignored dur-
                                                                                       ing regular wait satisfaction (should
                                                                                       never be seen, as suspended threads

      WaitBlockBypassStart (0)              A signal is being delivered to the         During wait satisfaction (which would
                                            thread while the wait has not yet been     be immediate, before the thread
                                            committed.                                 enters the true wait state), the wait-
                                                                                       ing thread must synchronize with the
                                                                                       signaler because there is a risk that the
                                                                                       wait object might be on the stack—
                                                                                       marking the wait block as inactive
                                                                                       would cause the waiter to unwind the
                                                                                       stack while the signaler might still be
                                                                                       accessing it.

      WaitBlockBypassComplete (1)           The thread wait associated with this       The wait block is now essentially
                                            wait block has now been properly           treated the same as an inactive wait
                                            synchronized (the wait satisfaction has    block (ignored).
                                            completed), and the bypass scenario is
                                            now completed.

      WaitBlockSuspendBypassStart (2)       A signal is being delivered to the         The wait block is treated essentially
                                            thread while the lightweight suspend       the same as a WaitBlockBypassStart.
                                            has not yet been committed.

      WaitBlockSuspendBypassComplete (3)    The lightweight suspend associated         The wait block now behaves like a
                                            with this wait block has now been          WaitBlockSuspended.
                                            properly synchronized.

      dispatcher lock in Windows 7, the overall state of the thread (or any of the objects it is being required

      any global state synchronization, there is nothing to stop another thread—executing on a different
      logical processor—from signaling one of the objects being waited, or alerting the thread, or even
      sending it an APC. As such, the kernel dispatcher keeps track of a couple of additional data points for

                                                                            KWAIT_STATE, not to
be confused with the wait block state) and any pending state changes that could modify the result
of an ongoing wait operation. These two pieces of data are what make up the wait status register
(KWAIT_STATUS_REGISTER).

    When a thread is instructed to wait for a given object (such as due to a WaitForSingleObject
attempts to enter the in-progress wait state (WaitInProgress) by beginning the wait. This operation suc-
ceeds if there are no pending alerts to the thread at the moment (based on the alertability of the wait and
the current processor mode of the wait, which determine whether the alert can preempt the wait). If there
is an alert, the wait is not entered at all, and the caller receives the appropriate status code; otherwise, the
thread now enters the WaitInProgress state, at which point the main thread state is set to Waiting, and the

   Once the wait is in progress, the thread can initialize the wait blocks as needed (and mark them
as WaitBlockActive in the process) and then proceed to lock all the objects that are part of this wait.
Because each object has its own lock, it is important that the kernel be able to maintain a consistent
locking ordering scheme when multiple processors might be analyzing a wait chain consisting of many
objects (caused by a WaitForMultipleObjects call). The kernel uses a technique known as address order-
ing to achieve this: because each object has a distinct and static kernel-mode address, the objects can
be ordered in monotonically increasing address order, guaranteeing that locks are always acquired
and released in the same order by all callers. This means that the caller-supplied array of objects will be
duplicated and sorted accordingly.

   The next step is to check for immediate satisfaction of the wait, such as when a thread is being told to
wait on a mutex that has already been released or an event that is already signaled. In such cases, the wait

blocks have yet been inserted) and performing a wait exit (processing any pending scheduler operations
marked in the wait status register). If this shortcut fails, the kernel next attempts to check whether the

“timed out,” which results in slightly faster processing of the exit code, albeit with the same result.

the thread now attempts to commit its wait. (Meanwhile, the object lock or locks have been released,
allowing other processors to modify the state of any of the objects that the thread is now supposed to
attempt waiting on.) Assuming a noncontended scenario, where other processors are not interested in
this thread or its wait objects, the wait switches into the committed state as long as there are no pend-
ing changes marked by the wait status register. The commit operation links the waiting thread in the
PRCB list, activates an extra wait queue thread if needed, and inserts the timer associated with the wait
timeout, if any. Because potentially quite a lot of cycles have elapsed by this point, it is again possible
that the timeout has already elapsed. In this scenario, inserting the timer causes immediate signaling of
the thread and thus a wait satisfaction on the timer and the overall timeout of the wait. Otherwise, in
the much more common scenario, the CPU now context-switches away to the next thread that is ready
for execution. (See Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more information on scheduling.)

   In highly contended code paths on multiprocessor machines, it is possible and likely that the
thread attempting to commit its wait has experienced a change while its wait was still in progress. One

      possible scenario is that one of the objects it was waiting on has just been signaled. As touched upon
      earlier, this causes the associated wait block to enter the WaitBlockBypassStart
      wait status register now shows the WaitAborted wait state. Another possible scenario is for an alert or
      APC to have been issued to the waiting thread, which does not set the WaitAborted state but enables
      one of the corresponding bits in the wait status register. Because APCs can break waits (depending on
      the type of APC, wait mode, and alertability), the APC is delivered, and the wait is aborted. Other op-

      as with the previous cases mentioned.

      versions of Windows implemented a lightweight suspend mechanism when SuspendThread and
      ResumeThread are used, which no longer always queues an APC that then acquires the suspend event
      embedded in the thread object. Instead, if the following conditions are true, an existing wait is instead
      converted into a suspend state:

         ■   KiDisableLightWeightSuspend is 0 (administrators can use the DisableLightWeightSuspend value

             optimization).

         ■   The thread state is Waiting—that is, the thread is already in a wait state.

         ■   The wait status register is set to WaitCommitted
             engaged.

         ■   The thread is not an UMS primary or scheduled thread (see Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more infor-
             mation on User Mode Scheduling) because these require additional logic implemented in the

         ■   The thread issued a wait while at IRQL 0 (passive level) because waits at APC_LEVEL require
             special handling that only the suspend APC can provide.

         ■   The thread does not have APCs currently disabled, nor is there an APC in progress, because

             suspend APC can achieve.

         ■   The thread is not currently attached to a different process due to a call to KeStackAttachProcess
             because this requires special handling just like the preceding bullet.

         ■                                                                      WaitBlockInactive block
             state, its wait type must be WaitAll
             WaitAny block.

         As the preceding list of criteria is hinting, this conversion happens by taking any currently active wait
      blocks and converting them to a WaitBlockSuspended state instead. If the wait block is currently point-

      no longer wake up this thread). If the thread had a timer associated with it, it is canceled and removed

  Because it no longer uses a true wait object, this mechanism required the introduction the three
additional wait block states shown in Table 8-28 as well as four new wait states: WaitSuspendInProgress,
WaitSuspended, WaitResumeInProgress, and WaitResumeAborted. These new states behave in a similar
manner to their regular counterparts but address the same possible race conditions described earlier
during a lightweight suspend operation.

suspend state and essentially undoes the operation, setting the wait register to WaitResumeInProgress.
Each wait block is then enumerated, and for any block in the WaitBlockSuspended state, it is placed in
WaitBlockActive
became signaled in the meantime, in which case it is made WaitBlockInactive instead, just like in a regu-

                                                                                                         -
sumes the threads are eligible for stack swapping). In this example, CPU 0 has two waiting (committed)
threads: Thread 1 is waiting for object B, and thread 2 is waiting for objects A and B. If object A is sig-

for execution. On the other hand, if object B is signaled, the kernel can ready thread 1 for execution

other objects but its wait type was a WaitAny, the kernel could still wake it up.)

                             Thread object

             Thread 1                          Thread 2                  PRCB 0

           Wait block list                   Wait block list          Wait list head
             List entry                        List entry

       Dispatcher objects
           Size     Type
               State                         Wait blocks

Object A   Wait list head                      List entry

           Object-type-                         Thread
           specific data                        Object
                                              Key   Type
                                               Next link

           Size     Type
               State                    Thread 2 wait block

Object B   Wait list head                      List entry           List entry

           Object-type-                         Thread               Thread
           specific data                        Object               Object
                                              Key   Type           Key   Type
                                               Next link            Next link
                                        Thread 1 wait block    Thread 2 wait block

FIGURE 8-39 Wait data structures.

      EXPERIMENT: Looking at wait queues
                                                                                !thread command.
                                                              !process command shows that the
      thread is waiting for an event object:
      lkd> !process 0 4 explorer.exe

          THREAD ffff898f2b345080 Cid 27bc.137c Teb: 00000000006ba000
          Win32Thread: 0000000000000000 WAIT: (UserRequest) UserMode Non-Alertable
                  ffff898f2b64ba60 SynchronizationEvent

         You can use the dx command to interpret the dispatcher header of the object like this:
      lkd> dx (nt!_DISPATCHER_HEADER*)0xffff898f2b64ba60
      (nt!_DISPATCHER_HEADER*)0xffff898f2b64ba60: 0xffff898f2b64ba60 [Type: _DISPATCHER_HEADER*]
          [+0x000] Lock              : 393217 [Type: long]
          [+0x000] LockNV            : 393217 [Type: long]
          [+0x000] Type              : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001] Signalling        : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002] Size              : 0x6 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003] Reserved1         : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x000] TimerType         : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001] TimerControlFlags : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 0: 0)] Absolute          : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 1: 1)] Wake              : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 7: 2)] EncodedTolerableDelay : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002] Hand              : 0x6 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003] TimerMiscFlags    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003 ( 5: 0)] Index             : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003 ( 6: 6)] Inserted          : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003 ( 7: 7)] Expired           : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x000] Timer2Type        : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001] Timer2Flags       : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 0: 0)] Timer2Inserted    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 1: 1)] Timer2Expiring    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 2: 2)] Timer2CancelPending : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 3: 3)] Timer2SetPending : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 4: 4)] Timer2Running     : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 5: 5)] Timer2Disabled    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 7: 6)] Timer2ReservedFlags : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002] Timer2ComponentId : 0x6 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003] Timer2RelativeId : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x000] QueueType         : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001] QueueControlFlags : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 0: 0)] Abandoned         : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 1: 1)] DisableIncrement : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001 ( 7: 2)] QueueReservedControlFlags : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002] QueueSize         : 0x6 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x003] QueueReserved     : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x000] ThreadType        : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x001] ThreadReserved    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002] ThreadControlFlags : 0x6 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 0: 0)] CycleProfiling    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
          [+0x002 ( 1: 1)] CounterProfiling : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]

       [+0x002 ( 2: 2)] GroupScheduling : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002 ( 3: 3)] AffinitySet       : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002 ( 4: 4)] Tagged            : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002 ( 5: 5)] EnergyProfiling : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002 ( 6: 6)] SchedulerAssist : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002 ( 7: 7)] ThreadReservedControlFlags : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003] DebugActive       : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 0: 0)] ActiveDR7         : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 1: 1)] Instrumented      : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 2: 2)] Minimal           : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 5: 3)] Reserved4         : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 6: 6)] UmsScheduled      : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003 ( 7: 7)] UmsPrimary        : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x000] MutantType        : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x001] MutantSize        : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x002] DpcActive         : 0x6 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x003] MutantReserved    : 0x0 [Type: unsigned char]
       [+0x004] SignalState       : 0 [Type: long]
       [+0x008] WaitListHead      [Type: _LIST_ENTRY]
           [+0x000] Flink             : 0xffff898f2b3451c0 [Type: _LIST_ENTRY *]
           [+0x008] Blink             : 0xffff898f2b3451c0 [Type: _LIST_ENTRY *]

   Because this structure is a union, you should ignore any values that do not correspond to the
given object type because they are not relevant to it. Unfortunately, it is not easy to tell which

the objects to which they apply.

TABLE 8-29

Flag                     Applies To               Meaning

Type                     All dispatcher objects
                                                  type of dispatcher object that this is.

Lock                     All objects              Used for locking an object during wait operations that need
                                                  to modify its state or linkage; actually corresponds to bit 7
                                                  (0x80) of the Type

Signaling                Gates                    A priority boost should be applied to the woken thread when
                                                  the gate is signaled.

Size                     Events, Semaphores,
                         Gates, Processes

Timer2Type               Idle Resilient Timers    Mapping of the Type

Timer2Inserted           Idle Resilient Timers    Set if the timer was inserted into the timer handle table.

Timer2Expiring           Idle Resilient Timers    Set if the timer is undergoing expiration.

Timer2CancelPending      Idle Resilient Timers    Set if the timer is being canceled.

Timer2SetPending         Idle Resilient Timers    Set if the timer is being registered.

Timer2Running            Idle Resilient Timers

Timer2Disabled           Idle Resilient Timers    Set if the timer has been disabled.

      Flag                      Applies To              Meaning

      Timer2ComponentId         Idle Resilient Timers
                                                        timer.

      Timer2RelativeId          Idle Resilient Timers
                                                        its timers this is.

      TimerType                 Timers

      Absolute                  Timers                  The expiration time is absolute, not relative.

      Wake                      Timers                  This is a wakeable timer, meaning it should exit a standby
                                                        state when signaled.

      EncodedTolerableDelay     Timers                  The maximum amount of tolerance (shifted as a power of
                                                        two) that the timer can support when running outside of its
                                                        expected periodicity.

      Hand                      Timers                  Index into the timer handle table.

      Index                     Timers                  Index into the timer expiration table.

      Inserted                  Timers                  Set if the timer was inserted into the timer handle table.

      Expired                   Timers                  Set if the timer has already expired.

      ThreadType                Threads                 Mapping of the Type

      ThreadReserved            Threads                 Unused.

      CycleProfiling            Threads

      CounterProfiling          Threads
                                                        has been enabled for this thread.

      GroupScheduling           Threads                 Scheduling groups have been enabled for this thread, such

                                                                                                                     -
                                                        tling.

      AffinitySet               Threads                 The thread has a CPU Set associated with it.

      Tagged                    Threads                 The thread has been assigned a property tag.

      EnergyProfiling           Threads                 Energy estimation is enabled for the process that this thread
                                                        belongs to.

      SchedulerAssist           Threads                 The Hyper-V XTS (eXTended Scheduler) is enabled, and this
                                                        thread belongs to a virtual processor (VP) thread inside of a
                                                        VM minimal process.

      Instrumented              Threads
                                                        instrumentation callback.

      ActiveDR7                 Threads                 Hardware breakpoints are being used, so DR7 is active and

                                                        also sometimes called DebugActive.

      Minimal                   Threads                 This thread belongs to a minimal process.

      AltSyscall                Threads                 An alternate system call handler has been registered for the
                                                        process that owns this thread, such as a Pico Provider or a
                                                        Windows CE PAL.

Flag                    Applies To            Meaning

UmsScheduled            Threads               This thread is a UMS Worker (scheduled) thread.

UmsPrimary              Threads               This thread is a UMS Scheduler (primary) thread.

MutantType              Mutants               Mapping of the Type

MutantSize              Mutants               Unused.

DpcActive               Mutants               The mutant was acquired during a DPC.

MutantReserved          Mutants               Unused.

QueueType               Queues                Mapping of the Type

Abandoned               Queues                The queue no longer has any threads that are waiting on it.

DisableIncrement        Queues                No priority boost should be given to a thread waking up to
                                              handle a packet on the queue.

                                               SignalState
and the WaitListHead
pointers are identical, this can either mean that there are no threads waiting or that one thread
is waiting on this object. You can tell the difference if the identical pointer happens to be the ad-

lkd> dx (nt!_KWAIT_BLOCK*)0xffff898f2b3451c0
(nt!_KWAIT_BLOCK*)0xffff898f2b3451c0         : 0xffff898f2b3451c0 [Type: _KWAIT_BLOCK *]
    [+0x000] WaitListEntry    [Type: _LIST_ENTRY]
    [+0x010] WaitType         : 0x1 [Type: unsigned char]
    [+0x011] BlockState       : 0x4 [Type: unsigned char]
    [+0x012] WaitKey          : 0x0 [Type: unsigned short]
    [+0x014] SpareLong        : 6066 [Type: long]
    [+0x018] Thread           : 0xffff898f2b345080 [Type: _KTHREAD *]
    [+0x018] NotificationQueue : 0xffff898f2b345080 [Type: _KQUEUE *]
    [+0x020] Object           : 0xffff898f2b64ba60 [Type: void *]
    [+0x028] SparePtr         : 0x0 [Type: void *]

   In this case, the wait type indicates a WaitAny
                                           WaitAny, so we know that there is a thread blocking on
the event, whose pointer we are given. We also see that the wait block is active. Next, we can

lkd> dt nt!_KTHREAD 0xffff898f2b345080 WaitRegister.State WaitIrql WaitMode WaitBlockCount
     WaitReason WaitTime
   +0x070 WaitRegister       :
   +0x000 State              : 0y001
   +0x186 WaitIrql           : 0 ''
   +0x187 WaitMode           : 1 ''
   +0x1b4 WaitTime           : 0x39b38f8
   +0x24b WaitBlockCount     : 0x1 ''
   +0x283 WaitReason         : 0x6 ''

            The data shows that this is a committed wait that was performed at IRQL 0 (Passive Level)
         with a wait mode of UserMode, at the time shown in 15 ms clock ticks since boot, with the reason
         indicating a user-mode application request. We can also see that this is the only wait block this
         thread has, meaning that it is not waiting for any other object.

         the second pointer value in the WaitListEntry
         !thread on the thread pointer in the wait block) to traverse the list and see what other threads

         look at their WaitBlockCount to see how many other wait blocks were present, and simply keep
         incrementing the pointer by sizeof(KWAIT_BLOCK).

             Another possibility is that the wait type would have been WaitNotification
                                                                                   KQUEUE) structure, which is
         itself a dispatcher object. Potentially, it would also have had its own nonempty wait block list, which
         would have revealed the wait block associated with the worker thread that will be asynchronously

         eventually execute, you would have to dump user-mode thread pool data structures.

      Keyed events
      A synchronization object called a keyed event bears special mention because of the role it played in
      user-mode-exclusive synchronization primitives and the development of the alert-by-ID primitive,
                                                               futex in the Linux operating system (a well-

      with low-memory situations when using critical sections, which are user-mode synchronization objects

      a “key” for which it waits, where the thread wakes when another thread of the same process signals
      the event with the same key. As we pointed out, if this sounds familiar to the alerting mechanism, it is
      because keyed events were its precursor.

          If there was contention, EnterCriticalSection would dynamically allocate an event object, and the
      thread wanting to acquire the critical section would wait for the thread that owns the critical section to
      signal it in LeaveCriticalSection. Clearly, this introduces a problem during low-memory conditions: criti-
      cal section acquisition could fail because the system was unable to allocate the event object required.
      In a pathological case, the low-memory condition itself might have been caused by the application try-

      the only scenario that could cause this to fail—a less likely scenario was handle exhaustion. If the pro-
      cess reached its handle limit, the new handle for the event object could fail.

         It might seem that preallocating a global standard event object, similar to the reserve objects we
                                                                                                                   -
      tions, each of which can have its own locking state, this would require an unknown number of preal-
                                                                                  keyed events, however, was

that a single event could be reused among different threads, as long as each one provided a different
key to distinguish itself. By providing the virtual address of the critical section itself as the key, this ef-
fectively allows multiple critical sections (and thus, waiters) to use the same keyed event handle, which
can be preallocated at process startup time.

key
critical section). When the owner thread releases the keyed event by signaling it, only a single thread
waiting on the key is woken up (the same behavior as synchronization events, in contrast to notifica-
tion events). Going back to our use case of critical sections using their address as a key, this would im-
ply that each process still needs its own keyed event because virtual addresses are obviously unique
to a single process address space. However, it turns out that the kernel can wake only the waiters in
the current process so that the key is even isolated across processes, meaning that there can be only
a single keyed event object for the entire system.

   As such, when EnterCriticalSection called NtWaitForKeyedEvent to perform a wait on the keyed
event, it gave a NULL handle as parameter for the keyed event, telling the kernel that it was unable
to create a keyed event. The kernel recognizes this behavior and uses a global keyed event named
ExpCritSecOutOfMemoryEvent
a named keyed event anymore because the kernel keeps track of the object and its references.

    However, keyed events were more than just a fallback object for low-memory conditions. When
multiple waiters are waiting on the same key and need to be woken up, the key is signaled multiple
times, which requires the object to keep a list of all the waiters so that it can perform a “wake” opera-
tion on each of them. (Recall that the result of signaling a keyed event is the same as that of signaling a
synchronization event.) However, a thread can signal a keyed event without any threads on the waiter
list. In this scenario, the signaling thread instead waits on the event itself.

   Without this fallback, a signaling thread could signal the keyed event during the time that the user-
mode code saw the keyed event as unsignaled and attempt a wait. The wait might have come after
the signaling thread signaled the keyed event, resulting in a missed pulse, so the waiting thread would
deadlock. By forcing the signaling thread to wait in this scenario, it actually signals the keyed event only
when someone is looking (waiting). This behavior made them similar, but not identical, to the Linux
futex
Slim Read Writer (SRW) Locks.

   Note When the keyed-event wait code needs to perform a wait, it uses a built-in sema-
   phore located in the kernel-mode thread object (ETHREAD) called KeyedWaitSemaphore.
   (This semaphore shares its location with the ALPC wait semaphore.) See Chapter 4 of Part 1
   for more information on thread objects.

                                                                                                    -
tion. The initial reason, during the Windows XP timeframe, was that keyed events did not offer scalable
performance in heavy-usage scenarios. Recall that all the algorithms described were meant to be used

                                                                                                                 -
      ed to handle. The primary performance bottleneck was that keyed events maintained the list of waiters
      described in a doubly linked list. This kind of list has poor traversal speed, meaning the time required
      to loop through the list. In this case, this time depended on the number of waiter threads. Because the
      object is global, dozens of threads could be on the list, requiring long traversal times every single time
      a key was set or waited on.

         Note The head of the list is kept in the keyed event object, whereas the threads are linked
         through the KeyedWaitChain
         LARGE_INTEGER, the same size as a doubly linked list) in the kernel-mode thread object
         (ETHREAD). See Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more information on this object.

         Windows Vista improved keyed-event performance by using a hash table instead of a linked list
      to hold the waiter threads. This optimization is what ultimately allowed Windows to include the three
      new lightweight user-mode synchronization primitives (to be discussed shortly) that all depended on
      the keyed event. Critical sections, however, continued to use event objects, primarily for application
      compatibility and debugging, because the event object and internals are well known and documented,
      whereas keyed events are opaque and not exposed to the Win32 API.

          With the introduction of the new alerting by Thread ID capabilities in Windows 8, however, this all
      changed again, removing the usage of keyed events across the system (save for one situation in init
      once
      structure eventually dropped its usage of a regular event object and moved toward using this new ca-
      pability as well (with an application compatibility shim that can revert to using the original event object
      if needed).

      Fast mutexes and guarded mutexes

      objects because, although they are still built on a dispatcher object—an event—they perform a wait
      only if the fast mutex is contended. Unlike a standard mutex, which always attempts the acquisition
      through the dispatcher, this gives the fast mutex especially good performance in contended environ-

                                                                                              all kernel-mode
      APC (described earlier in this chapter) delivery can be disabled, unlike regular mutex objects that block
      only normal
      ExAcquireFastMutex and ExAcquireFastMutexUnsafe. The former function blocks all APC delivery by
      raising the IRQL of the processor to APC level. The latter, “unsafe” function, expects to be called with
      all kernel-mode APC delivery already disabled, which can be done by raising the IRQL to APC level.
      ExTryToAcquireFastMutex

      recursively, unlike mutex objects.

   In Windows 8 and later, guarded mutexes are identical to fast mutexes but are acquired
with KeAcquireGuardedMutex and KeAcquireGuardedMutexUnsafe. Like fast mutexes, a
KeTryToAcquireGuardedMutex method also exists.

    Prior to Windows 8, these functions did not disable APCs by raising the IRQL to APC level, but by
                                                                                                       -
able APC delivery until the region was exited, as we saw earlier. On older systems with a PIC (which we
also talked about earlier in this chapter), this was faster than touching the IRQL. Additionally, guarded
mutexes used a gate dispatcher object, which was slightly faster than an event—another difference that
is no longer true.

   Another problem related to the guarded mutex was the kernel function KeAreApcsDisabled. Prior to
Windows Server 2003, this function indicated whether normal APCs were disabled by checking whether
the code was running inside a critical section. In Windows Server 2003, this function was changed to
indicate whether the code was in a critical or guarded region, changing the functionality to also return
TRUE if special kernel APCs are also disabled.

   Because there are certain operations that drivers should not perform when special kernel APCs
are disabled, it made sense to call KeGetCurrentIrql to check whether the IRQL is APC level or not,
which was the only way special kernel APCs could have been disabled. However, with the intro-
duction of guarded regions and guarded mutexes, which were heavily used even by the memory
manager, this check failed because guarded mutexes did not raise IRQL. Drivers then had to call
KeAreAllApcsDisabled for this purpose, which also checked whether special kernel APCs were disabled

false positives, ultimately all led to the decision to simply make guarded mutexes revert to just being
fast mutexes.

Executive resources
Executive resources are a synchronization mechanism that supports shared and exclusive access; like
fast mutexes, they require that all kernel-mode APC delivery be disabled before they are acquired.
They are also built on dispatcher objects that are used only when there is contention. Executive re-

have long-lasting wait periods in which I/O should still be allowed to some extent (such as reads).

   Threads waiting to acquire an executive resource for shared access wait for a semaphore associated
with the resource, and threads waiting to acquire an executive resource for exclusive access wait for an
event. A semaphore with unlimited count is used for shared waiters because they can all be woken and
granted access to the resource when an exclusive holder releases the resource simply by signaling the
semaphore. When a thread waits for exclusive access of a resource that is currently owned, it waits on
a synchronization event object because only one of the waiters will wake when the event is signaled. In
the earlier section on synchronization events, it was mentioned that some event unwait operations can
actually cause a priority boost. This scenario occurs when executive resources are used, which is one
reason why they also track ownership like mutexes do. (See Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more information on
the executive resource priority boost.)

      acquiring resources: ExAcquireResourceSharedLite, ExAcquireResourceExclusiveLite, ExAcquireShared
      StarveExclusive, and ExAcquireShareWaitForExclusive

         Recent versions of Windows also added fast executive resources that use identical API names but
      add the word “fast,” such as ExAcquireFastResourceExclusive, ExReleaseFastResource, and so on. These
      are meant to be faster replacements due to different handling of lock ownership, but no component

         EXPERIMENT: Listing acquired executive resources
         The kernel debugger !locks
         dumps their state. By default, the command lists only executive resources that are currently
         owned, but the –d option is documented as listing all executive resources—unfortunately, this
         is no longer the case. However, you can still use the -v
         resources instead. Here is partial output of the command:
         lkd> !locks -v
         **** DUMP OF ALL RESOURCE OBJECTS ****

         Resource @ nt!ExpFirmwareTableResource (0xfffff8047ee34440)     Available
         Resource @ nt!PsLoadedModuleResource (0xfffff8047ee48120)     Available
             Contention Count = 2
         Resource @ nt!SepRmDbLock (0xfffff8047ef06350)    Available
             Contention Count = 93
         Resource @ nt!SepRmDbLock (0xfffff8047ef063b8)    Available
         Resource @ nt!SepRmDbLock (0xfffff8047ef06420)    Available
         Resource @ nt!SepRmDbLock (0xfffff8047ef06488)    Available
         Resource @ nt!SepRmGlobalSaclLock (0xfffff8047ef062b0)    Available
         Resource @ nt!SepLsaAuditQueueInfo (0xfffff8047ee6e010)     Available
         Resource @ nt!SepLsaDeletedLogonQueueInfo (0xfffff8047ee6ded0)     Available
         Resource @ 0xffff898f032a8550    Available
         Resource @ nt!PnpRegistryDeviceResource (0xfffff8047ee62b00)     Available
             Contention Count = 27385
         Resource @ nt!PopPolicyLock (0xfffff8047ee458c0)    Available
             Contention Count = 14
         Resource @ 0xffff898f032a8950    Available
         Resource @ 0xffff898f032a82d0    Available

            Note that the contention count, which is extracted from the resource structure, records
         the number of times threads have tried to acquire the resource and had to wait because it was
         already owned. On a live system where you break in with the debugger, you might be lucky
         enough to catch a few held resources, as shown in the following output:
         2: kd> !locks
         **** DUMP OF ALL RESOURCE OBJECTS ****
         KD: Scanning for held locks.....

         Resource @ 0xffffde07a33d6a28    Shared 1 owning threads
             Contention Count = 28
              Threads: ffffde07a9374080-01<*>

KD: Scanning for held locks....

Resource @ 0xffffde07a2bfb350    Shared 1 owning threads
    Contention Count = 2
     Threads: ffffde07a9374080-01<*>
KD: Scanning for held locks...........................................................

Resource @ 0xffffde07a8070c00    Shared 1 owning threads
     Threads: ffffde07aa3f1083-01<*> *** Actual Thread ffffde07aa3f1080
KD: Scanning for held locks...........................................................

Resource @ 0xffffde07a8995900    Exclusively owned
     Threads: ffffde07a9374080-01<*>
KD: Scanning for held locks...........................................................
    9706 total locks, 4 locks currently held

resource and any threads that are waiting for the resource, by specifying the –v switch and the

2: kd> !locks -v 0xffffde07a33d6a28

Resource @ 0xffffde07a33d6a28    Shared 1 owning threads
    Contention Count = 28
     Threads: ffffde07a9374080-01<*>

     THREAD ffffde07a9374080 Cid 0544.1494 Teb: 000000ed8de12000
     Win32Thread: 0000000000000000 WAIT: (Executive) KernelMode Non-Alertable
         ffff8287943a87b8 NotificationEvent
     IRP List:
         ffffde07a936da20: (0006,0478) Flags: 00020043 Mdl: ffffde07a8a75950
         ffffde07a894fa20: (0006,0478) Flags: 00000884 Mdl: 00000000
     Not impersonating
     DeviceMap                 ffff8786fce35840
     Owning Process            ffffde07a7f990c0        Image:        svchost.exe
     Attached Process          N/A            Image:          N/A
     Wait Start TickCount      3649           Ticks: 0
     Context Switch Count      31             IdealProcessor: 1
     UserTime                  00:00:00.015
     KernelTime                00:00:00.000
     Win32 Start Address 0x00007ff926812390
     Stack Init ffff8287943aa650 Current ffff8287943a8030
     Base ffff8287943ab000 Limit ffff8287943a4000 Call 0000000000000000
     Priority 7 BasePriority 6 PriorityDecrement 0 IoPriority 0 PagePriority 1
     Child-SP          RetAddr           Call Site
     ffff8287`943a8070 fffff801`104a423a nt!KiSwapContext+0x76
     ffff8287`943a81b0 fffff801`104a5d53 nt!KiSwapThread+0x5ba
     ffff8287`943a8270 fffff801`104a6579 nt!KiCommitThreadWait+0x153
     ffff8287`943a8310 fffff801`1263e962 nt!KeWaitForSingleObject+0x239
     ffff8287`943a8400 fffff801`1263d682 Ntfs!NtfsNonCachedIo+0xa52
     ffff8287`943a86b0 fffff801`1263b756 Ntfs!NtfsCommonRead+0x1d52
     ffff8287`943a8850 fffff801`1049a725 Ntfs!NtfsFsdRead+0x396
     ffff8287`943a8920 fffff801`11826591 nt!IofCallDriver+0x55

      Pushlocks
      Pushlocks are another optimized synchronization mechanism built on event objects; like fast and
                                                                                                             -
      tages over them, however, in that they can also be acquired in shared or exclusive mode, just like an
      executive resource. Unlike the latter, however, they provide an additional advantage due to their size:
      a resource object is 104 bytes, but a pushlock is pointer sized. Because of this, pushlocks do not require
      allocation nor initialization and are guaranteed to work in low-memory conditions. Many components
      inside of the kernel moved away from executive resources to pushlocks, and modern third-party driv-
      ers all use pushlocks as well.

           There are four types of pushlocks: normal, cache-aware, auto-expand, and address-based. Normal
      pushlocks require only the size of a pointer in storage (4 bytes on 32-bit systems, and 8 bytes on 64-bit
      systems). When a thread acquires a normal pushlock, the pushlock code marks the pushlock as owned
      if it is not currently owned. If the pushlock is owned exclusively or the thread wants to acquire the
      thread exclusively and the pushlock is owned on a shared basis, the thread allocates a wait block on

      associated with the pushlock. When a thread releases a pushlock, the thread wakes a waiter, if any are

          Because a pushlock is only pointer-sized, it actually contains a variety of bits to describe its state.
      The meaning of those bits changes as the pushlock changes from being contended to noncontended.
      In its initial state, the pushlock contains the following structure:

         ■   One lock bit, set to 1 if the lock is acquired

         ■   One waiting bit, set to 1 if the lock is contended and someone is waiting on it

         ■

             optimized

         ■   One multiple shared bit, set to 1 if the pushlock is shared and currently acquired by more than
             one thread

         ■   28 (on 32-bit Windows) or 60 (on 64-bit Windows) share count bits, containing the number of
             threads that have acquired the pushlock

          As discussed previously, when a thread acquires a pushlock exclusively while the pushlock is already
      acquired by either multiple readers or a writer, the kernel allocates a pushlock wait block. The structure
      of the pushlock value itself changes. The share count bits now become the pointer to the wait block.
                                                                                                                 -
      tive to force it to be 16-byte aligned, the bottom 4 bits of any pushlock wait-block structure will be all
      zeros. Therefore, those bits are ignored for the purposes of pointer dereferencing; instead, the 4 bits
      shown earlier are combined with the pointer value. Because this alignment removes the share count
      bits, the share count is now stored in the wait block instead.

         A cache-aware pushlock adds layers to the normal (basic) pushlock by allocating a pushlock for each
      processor in the system and associating it with the cache-aware pushlock. When a thread wants to

acquire a cache-aware pushlock for shared access, it simply acquires the pushlock allocated for its cur-
rent processor in shared mode; to acquire a cache-aware pushlock exclusively, the thread acquires the
pushlock for each processor in exclusive mode.

   As you can imagine, however, with Windows now supporting systems of up to 2560 processors, the
number of potential cache-padded slots in the cache-aware pushlock would require immense fixed al-
locations, even on systems with few processors. Support for dynamic hot-add of processors makes the
problem even harder because it would technically require the preallocation of all 2560 slots ahead of
time, creating multi-KB lock structures. To solve this, modern versions of Windows also implement the
auto-expand push lock. As the name suggests, this type of cache-aware pushlock can dynamically grow
the number of cache slots as needed, both based on contention and processor count, while guarantee-
ing forward progress, leveraging the executive’s slot allocator, which pre-reserves paged or nonpaged
pool (depending on flags that were passed in when allocating the auto-expand pushlock).

    Unfortunately for third-party developers, cache-aware (and their newer cousins, auto-expand)
pushlocks are not officially documented for use, although certain data structures, such as FCB Headers in
Windows 10 21H1 and later, do opaquely use them (more information about the FCB structure is available
in Chapter 11.) Internal parts of the kernel in which auto-expand pushlocks are used include the memory
manager, where they are used to protect Address Windowing Extension (AWE) data structures.

    Finally, another kind of nondocumented, but exported, push-lock is the address-based pushlock,
which rounds out the implementation with a mechanism similar to the address-based wait we’ll shortly
see in user mode. Other than being a different “kind” of pushlock, the address-based pushlock refers
more to the interface behind its usage. On one end, a caller uses ExBlockOnAddressPushLock, passing
in a pushlock, the virtual address of some variable of interest, the size of the variable (up to 8 bytes),
and a comparison address containing the expected, or desired, value of the variable. If the variable
does not currently have the expected value, a wait is initialized with ExTimedWaitForUnblockPushLock.
This behaves similarly to contended pushlock acquisition, with the difference that a timeout value can
be specified. On the other end, a caller uses ExUnblockOnAddressPushLockEx after making a change
to an address that is being monitored to signal a waiter that the value has changed. This technique
is especially useful when dealing with changes to data protected by a lock or interlocked operation,
so that racing readers can wait for the writer’s notification that their change is complete, outside of a
lock. Other than a much smaller memory footprint, one of the large advantages that pushlocks have
over executive resources is that in the noncontended case they do not require lengthy accounting and
integer operations to perform acquisition or release. By being as small as a pointer, the kernel can use
atomic CPU instructions to perform these tasks. (For example, on x86 and x64 processors, lock cmpxchg
is used, which atomically compares and exchanges the old lock with a new lock.) If the atomic compare
and exchange fails, the lock contains values the caller did not expect (callers usually expect the lock to
be unused or acquired as shared), and a call is then made to the more complex contended version.

    To improve performance even further, the kernel exposes the pushlock functionality as inline
functions, meaning that no function calls are ever generated during noncontended acquisition—the
assembly code is directly inserted in each function. This increases code size slightly, but it avoids the
slowness of a function call. Finally, pushlocks use several algorithmic tricks to avoid lock convoys (a
situation that can occur when multiple threads of the same priority are all waiting on a lock and little

      actual work gets done), and they are also self-optimizing: the list of threads waiting on a pushlock will
      be periodically rearranged to provide fairer behavior when the pushlock is released.

         One more performance optimization that is applicable to pushlock acquisition (including for address-
      based pushlocks) is the opportunistic spinlock-like behavior during contention, before performing the
      dispatcher object wait on the pushlock wait block’s event. If the system has at least one other unparked
      processor (see Chapter 4 of Part 1 for more information on core parking), the kernel enters a tight spin-
      based loop for ExpSpinCycleCount cycles just like a spinlock would, but without raising the IRQL, issuing
      a yield instruction (such as a pause on x86/x64) for each iteration. If during any of the iterations, the push-
      lock now appears to be released, an interlocked operation to acquire the pushlock is performed.

         If the spin cycle times out, or the interlocked operation failed (due to a race), or if the system does
      not have at least one additional unparked processor, then KeWaitForSingleObject is used on the event
      object in the pushlock wait block. ExpSpinCycleCount is set to 10240 cycles on any machine with more
      than one logical processor and is not configurable. For systems with an AMD processor that imple-
      ments the MWAITT (MWAIT Timer) specification, the monitorx and mwaitx instructions are used
      instead of a spin loop. This hardware-based feature enables waiting, at the CPU level, for the value at an
      address to change without having to enter a loop, but they allow providing a timeout value so that the
      wait is not indefinite (which the kernel supplies based on ExpSpinCycleCount).

         On a final note, with the introduction of the AutoBoost feature (explained in Chapter 4 of Part 1),
      pushlocks also leverage its capabilities by default, unless callers use the newer ExXxxPushLockXxxEx,
      functions, which allow passing in the EX_PUSH_LOCK_FLAG_DISABLE_AUTOBOOST flag that disables
      the functionality (which is not officially documented). By default, the non-Ex functions now call the
      newer Ex functions, but without supplying the flag.

      Address-based waits
      Based on the lessons learned with keyed events, the key synchronization primitive that the Windows
      kernel now exposes to user mode is the alert-by-ID system call (and its counterpart to wait-on-alert-by-
      ID). With these two simple system calls, which require no memory allocations or handles, any number
      of process-local synchronizations can be built, which will include the addressed-based waiting mecha-
      nism we’re about to see, on top of which other primitives, such as critical sections and SRW locks, are
      based upon.

          Address-based waiting is based on three documented Win32 API calls: WaitOnAddress, WakeBy
      AddressSingle, and WakeByAddressAll. These functions in KernelBase.dll are nothing more than for-
      warders into Ntdll.dll, where the real implementations are present under similar names beginning with
      Rtl, standing for Run Time Library. The Wait API takes in an address pointing to a value of interest, the
      size of the value (up to 8 bytes), and the address of the undesired value, plus a timeout. The Wake APIs
      take in the address only.

         First, RtlWaitOnAddress builds a local address wait block tracking the thread ID and address and
      inserts it into a per-process hash table located in the Process Environment Block (PEB). This mir-
      rors the work done by ExBlockOnAddressPushLock as we saw earlier, except that a hash table wasn’t
      needed because the caller had to store a push lock pointer somewhere. Next, just like the kernel API,
      RtlWaitOnAddress checks whether the target address already has a value different than the undesirable

one and, if so, removes the address wait block, returning FALSE. Otherwise, it will call an internal func-
tion to block.

   If there is more than one unparked processor available, the blocking function will first attempt to
avoid entering the kernel by spinning in user mode on the value of the address wait block bit indicating
availability, based on the value of RtlpWaitOnAddressSpinCount, which is hardcoded to 1024 as long as
the system has more than one processor. If the wait block still indicates contention, a system call is now
made to the kernel using NtWaitForAlertByThreadId, passing in the address as the hint parameter, as
well as the timeout.

   If the function returns due to a timeout, a flag is set in the address wait block to indicate this, and
the block is removed, with the function returning STATUS_TIMEOUT. However, there is a subtle race
condition where the caller may have called the Wake function just a few cycles after the wait has timed
out. Because the wait block flag is modified with a compare-exchange instruction, the code can detect
this and actually calls NtWaitForAlertByThreadId a second time, this time without a timeout. This is
guaranteed to return because the code knows that a wake is in progress. Note that in nontimeout
cases, there’s no need to remove the wait block, because the waker has already done so.

    On the writer’s side, both RtlWakeOnAddressSingle and RtlWakeOnAddressAll leverage the same
helper function, which hashes the input address and looks it up in the PEB’s hash table introduced
earlier in this section. Carefully synchronizing with compare-exchange instructions, it removes the
address wait block from the hash table, and, if committed to wake up any waiters, it iterates over all
matching wait blocks for the same address, calling NtAlertThreadByThreadId for each of them, in the
All usage of the API, or only the first one, in the Single version of the API.

    With this implementation, we essentially now have a user-mode implementation of keyed events
that does not rely on any kernel object or handle, not even a single global one, completely removing
any failures in low-resource conditions. The only thing the kernel is responsible for is putting the thread
in a wait state or waking up the thread from that wait state.

   The next few sections cover various primitives that leverage this functionality to provide synchroni-
zation during contention.

Critical sections
Critical sections are one of the main synchronization primitives that Windows provides to user-mode
application developers on top of the kernel-based synchronization primitives. Critical sections and the
other user-mode primitives you’ll see later have one major advantage over their kernel counterparts,
which is saving a round trip to kernel mode in cases in which the lock is noncontended (which is typi-
cally 99 percent of the time or more). Contended cases still require calling the kernel, however, because
it is the only piece of the system that can perform the complex waking and dispatching logic required
to make these objects work.

   Critical sections can remain in user mode by using a local bit to provide the main exclusive locking
logic, much like a pushlock. If the bit is 0, the critical section can be acquired, and the owner sets the bit
to 1. This operation doesn’t require calling the kernel but uses the interlocked CPU operations dis-
cussed earlier. Releasing the critical section behaves similarly, with bit state changing from 1 to 0 with

      an interlocked operation. On the other hand, as you can probably guess, when the bit is already 1 and
      another caller attempts to acquire the critical section, the kernel must be called to put the thread in a
      wait state.

          Akin to pushlocks and address-based waits, critical sections implement a further optimiza-
      tion to avoid entering the kernel: spinning, much like a spinlock (albeit at IRQL 0—Passive Level)
      on the lock bit, hoping it clears up quickly enough to avoid the blocking wait. By default, this
      is set to 2000 cycles, but it can be configured differently by using the InitializeCriticalSectionEx
      or InitializeCriticalSectionAndSpinCount API at creation time, or later, by calling
      SetCriticalSectionSpinCount.

         Note As we discussed, because WaitForAddressSingle already implements a busy spin wait
         as an optimization, with a default 1024 cycles, technically there are 3024 cycles spent spin-
         ning by default—first on the critical sections’ lock bit and then on the wait address block’s
         lock bit, before actually entering the kernel.

          When they do need to enter the true contention path, critical sections will, the first time they’re
      called, attempt to initialize their LockSemaphore field. On modern versions of Windows, this is only done
      if RtlpForceCSToUseEvents is set, which is the case if the KACF_ALLOCDEBUGINFOFORCRITSECTIONS
      (0x400000) flag is set through the Application Compatibility Database on the current process. If the flag
      is set, however, the underlying dispatcher event object will be created (even if the field refers to sema-
      phore, the object is an event). Then, assuming that the event was created, a call to WaitForSingleObject is
      performed to block on the critical section (typically with a per-process configurable timeout value, to aid
      in the debugging of deadlocks, after which the wait is reattempted).

         In cases where the application compatibility shim was not requested, or in extreme low-memory
      conditions where the shim was requested but the event could not be created, critical sections no
      longer use the event (nor any of the keyed event functionality described earlier). Instead, they directly
      leverage the address-based wait mechanism described earlier (also with the same deadlock detection
      timeout mechanism from the previous paragraph). The address of the local bit is supplied to the call
      to WaitOnAddress, and as soon as the critical section is released by LeaveCriticalSection, it either calls
      SetEvent on the event object or WakeAddressSingle on the local bit.

         Note Even though we’ve been referring to APIs by their Win32 name, in reality, critical
         sections are implemented by Ntdll.dll, and KernelBase.dll merely forwards the functions
         to identical functions starting with Rtl instead, as they are part of the Run Time Library.
         Therefore, RtlLeaveCriticalSection calls NtSetEvent. RtlWakeAddressSingle, and so on.

          Finally, because critical sections are not kernel objects, they have certain limitations. The primary
      one is that you cannot obtain a kernel handle to a critical section; as such, no security, naming, or other
      Object Manager functionality can be applied to a critical section. Two processes cannot use the same
      critical section to coordinate their operations, nor can duplication or inheritance be used.

User-mode resources
User-mode resources also provide more fine-grained locking mechanisms than kernel primitives. A
resource can be acquired for shared mode or for exclusive mode, allowing it to function as a multiple-
reader (shared), single-writer (exclusive) lock for data structures such as databases. When a resource is
acquired in shared mode and other threads attempt to acquire the same resource, no trip to the kernel
is required because none of the threads will be waiting. Only when a thread attempts to acquire the
resource for exclusive access, or the resource is already locked by an exclusive owner, is this required.

    To make use of the same dispatching and synchronization mechanism you saw in the kernel, resources
make use of existing kernel primitives. A resource data structure (RTL_RESOURCE) contains handles
to two kernel semaphore objects. When the resource is acquired exclusively by more than one thread,
the resource releases the exclusive semaphore with a single release count because it permits only one
owner. When the resource is acquired in shared mode by more than one thread, the resource releases
the shared semaphore with as many release counts as the number of shared owners. This level of detail
is typically hidden from the programmer, and these internal objects should never be used directly.

    Resources were originally implemented to support the SAM (or Security Account Manager, which is
discussed in Chapter 7 of Part 1) and not exposed through the Windows API for standard applications.
Slim Reader-Writer Locks (SRW Locks), described shortly, were later implemented to expose a similar
but highly optimized locking primitive through a documented API, although some system components
still use the resource mechanism.

Condition variables
Condition variables provide a Windows native implementation for synchronizing a set of threads that
are waiting on a specific result to a conditional test. Although this operation was possible with other
user-mode synchronization methods, there was no atomic mechanism to check the result of the condi-
tional test and to begin waiting on a change in the result. This required that additional synchronization
be used around such pieces of code.

    A user-mode thread initializes a condition variable by calling InitializeConditionVariable to set up the
initial state. When it wants to initiate a wait on the variable, it can call SleepConditionVariableCS, which
uses a critical section (that the thread must have initialized) to wait for changes to the variable, or, even
better, SleepConditionVariableSRW, which instead uses a Slim Reader/Writer (SRW) lock, which we de-
scribe next, giving the caller the advantage to do a shared (reader) of exclusive (writer) acquisition.

     Meanwhile, the setting thread must use WakeConditionVariable (or WakeAllConditionVariable) after
it has modified the variable. This call releases the critical section or SRW lock of either one or all waiting
threads, depending on which function was used. If this sounds like address-based waiting, it’s because
it is—with the additional guarantee of the atomic compare-and-wait operation. Additionally, condition
variables were implemented before address-based waiting (and thus, before alert-by-ID) and had to
rely on keyed events instead, which were only a close approximation of the desired behavior.

   Before condition variables, it was common to use either a notification event or a synchronization
event (recall that these are referred to as auto-reset or manual-reset in the Windows API) to signal the

      change to a variable, such as the state of a worker queue. Waiting for a change required a critical section
      to be acquired and then released, followed by a wait on an event. After the wait, the critical section
      had to be reacquired. During this series of acquisitions and releases, the thread might have switched
      contexts, causing problems if one of the threads called PulseEvent (a similar problem to the one that
      keyed events solve by forcing a wait for the signaling thread if there is no waiter). With condition
      variables, acquisition of the critical section or SRW lock can be maintained by the application while
      SleepConditionVariableCS/SRW is called and can be released only after the actual work is done. This
      makes writing work-queue code (and similar implementations) much simpler and predictable.

         With both SRW locks and critical sections moving to the address-based wait primitives, however,
      conditional variables can now directly leverage NtWaitForAlertByThreadId and directly signal the
      thread, while building a conditional variable wait block that’s structurally similar to the address wait
      block we described earlier. The need for keyed events is thus completely elided, and they remain only
      for backward compatibility.

      Slim Reader/Writer (SRW) locks
      Although condition variables are a synchronization mechanism, they are not fully primitive locks
      because they do implicit value comparisons around their locking behavior and rely on higher-
      level abstractions to be provided (namely, a lock!). Meanwhile, address-based waiting is a primitive
      operation, but it provides only the basic synchronization primitive, not true locking. In between these
      two worlds, Windows has a true locking primitive, which is nearly identical to a pushlock: the Slim
      Reader/Writer lock (SRW lock).

      Like their kernel counterparts, SRW locks are also pointer sized, use atomic operations for acquisition
      and release, rearrange their waiter lists, protect against lock convoys, and can be acquired both in
      shared and exclusive mode. Just like pushlocks, SRW locks can be upgraded, or converted, from shared
      to exclusive and vice versa, and they have the same restrictions around recursive acquisition. The only
      real difference is that SRW locks are exclusive to user-mode code, whereas pushlocks are exclusive to
      kernel-mode code, and the two cannot be shared or exposed from one layer to the other. Because
      SRW locks also use the NtWaitForAlertByThreadId primitive, they require no memory allocation and are
      guaranteed never to fail (other than through incorrect usage).

          Not only can SRW locks entirely replace critical sections in application code, which reduces the need to
      allocate the large CRITICAL_SECTION structure (and which previously required the creation of an event
      object), but they also offer multiple-reader, single-writer functionality. SRW locks must first be initialized
      with InitializeSRWLock or can be statically initialized with a sentinel value, after which they can be ac-
      quired or released in either exclusive or shared mode with the appropriate APIs: AcquireSRWLockExclusive,
      ReleaseSRWLockExclusive, AcquireSRWLockShared, and ReleaseSRWLockShared. APIs also exist for op-
      portunistically trying to acquire the lock, guaranteeing that no blocking operation will occur, as well as
      converting the lock from one mode to another.

   Note Unlike most other Windows APIs, the SRW locking functions do not return with a
   value—instead, they generate exceptions if the lock could not be acquired. This makes
   it obvious that an acquisition has failed so that code that assumes success will terminate
   instead of potentially proceeding to corrupt user data. Since SRW locks do not fail due to
   resource exhaustion, the only such exception possible is STATUS_RESOURCE_NOT_OWNED
   in the case that a nonshared SRW lock is incorrectly being released in shared mode.

    The Windows SRW locks do not prefer readers or writers, meaning that the performance for either
case should be the same. This makes them great replacements for critical sections, which are writer-
only or exclusive synchronization mechanisms, and they provide an optimized alternative to resources.
If SRW locks were optimized for readers, they would be poor exclusive-only locks, but this isn’t the
case. This is why we earlier mentioned that conditional variables can also use SRW locks through the
SleepConditionVariableSRW API. That being said, since keyed events are no longer used in one mecha-
nism (SRW) but are still used in the other (CS), address-based waiting has muted most benefits other
than code size—and the ability to have shared versus exclusive locking. Nevertheless, code targeting
older versions of Windows should use SRW locks to guarantee the increased benefits are there on
kernels that still used keyed events.

Run once initialization
The ability to guarantee the atomic execution of a piece of code responsible for performing some sort
of initialization task—such as allocating memory, initializing certain variables, or even creating objects
on demand—is a typical problem in multithreaded programming. In a piece of code that can be called
simultaneously by multiple threads (a good example is the DllMain routine, which initializes a DLL), there
are several ways of attempting to ensure the correct, atomic, and unique execution of initialization tasks.

    For this scenario, Windows implements init once, or one-time initialization (also called run once ini-
tialization internally). The API exists both as a Win32 variant, which calls into Ntdll.dll’s Run Time Library
(Rtl) as all the other previously seen mechanisms do, as well as the documented Rtl set of APIs, which
are exposed to kernel programmers in Ntoskrnl.exe instead (obviously, user-mode developers could
bypass Win32 and use the Rtl functions in Ntdll.dll too, but that is never recommended). The only dif-
ference between the two implementations is that the kernel ends up using an event object for synchro-
nization, whereas user mode uses a keyed event instead (in fact, it passes in a NULL handle to use the
low-memory keyed event that was previously used by critical sections).

   Note Since recent versions of Windows now implement an address-based pushlock in
   kernel mode, as well as the address-based wait primitive in user mode, the Rtl library could
   probably be updated to use RtlWakeAddressSingle and ExBlockOnAddressPushLock, and in
   fact a future version of Windows could always do that—the keyed event merely provided a
   more similar interface to a dispatcher event object in older Windows versions. As always, do
   not rely on the internal details presented in this book, as they are subject to change.

          The init once mechanism allows for both synchronous (meaning that the other threads must wait for
      initialization to complete) execution of a certain piece of code, as well as asynchronous (meaning that
      the other threads can attempt to do their own initialization and race) execution. We look at the logic
      behind asynchronous execution after explaining the synchronous mechanism.

          In the synchronous case, the developer writes the piece of code that would normally execute after
      double-checking the global variable in a dedicated function. Any information that this routine needs
      can be passed through the parameter variable that the init once routine accepts. Any output infor-
      mation is returned through the context variable. (The status of the initialization itself is returned as
      a Boolean.) All the developer has to do to ensure proper execution is call InitOnceExecuteOnce with
      the parameter, context, and run-once function pointer after initializing an INIT_ONCE object with
      InitOnceInitialize API. The system takes care of the rest.

          For applications that want to use the asynchronous model instead, the threads call
      InitOnceBeginInitialize and receive a BOOLEAN pending status and the context described earlier. If the
      pending status is FALSE, initialization has already taken place, and the thread uses the context value
      for the result. (It’s also possible for the function to return FALSE, meaning that initialization failed.)
      However, if the pending status comes back as TRUE, the thread should race to be the first to create the
      object. The code that follows performs whatever initialization tasks are required, such as creating ob-
      jects or allocating memory. When this work is done, the thread calls InitOnceComplete with the result of
      the work as the context and receives a BOOLEAN status. If the status is TRUE, the thread won the race,
      and the object that it created or allocated is the one that will be the global object. The thread can now
      save this object or return it to a caller, depending on the usage.

          In the more complex scenario when the status is FALSE, this means that the thread lost the race.
      The thread must undo all the work it did, such as deleting objects or freeing memory, and then call
      InitOnceBeginInitialize again. However, instead of requesting to start a race as it did initially, it uses the
      INIT_ONCE_CHECK_ONLY flag, knowing that it has lost, and requests the winner’s context instead (for
      example, the objects or memory that were created or allocated by the winner). This returns another
      status, which can be TRUE, meaning that the context is valid and should be used or returned to the
      caller, or FALSE, meaning that initialization failed and nobody has been able to perform the work (such
      as in the case of a low-memory condition, perhaps).

         In both cases, the mechanism for run-once initialization is similar to the mechanism for condition
      variables and SRW locks. The init once structure is pointer-size, and inline assembly versions of the SRW
      acquisition/release code are used for the noncontended case, whereas keyed events are used when
      contention has occurred (which happens when the mechanism is used in synchronous mode) and the
      other threads must wait for initialization. In the asynchronous case, the locks are used in shared mode,
      so multiple threads can perform initialization at the same time. Although not as highly efficient as the
      alert-by-ID primitive, the usage of a keyed event still guarantees that the init once mechanism will func-
      tion even in most cases of memory exhaustion.

Advanced local procedure call
   All modern operating systems require a mechanism for securely and efficiently transferring data
   between one or more processes in user mode, as well as between a service in the kernel and clients in
   user mode. Typically, UNIX mechanisms such as mailslots, files, named pipes, and sockets are used for
   portability, whereas in other cases, developers can use OS-specific functionality, such as the ubiquitous
   window messages used in Win32 graphical applications. In addition, Windows also implements an
   internal IPC mechanism called Advanced (or Asynchronous) Local Procedure Call, or ALPC, which is a
   high-speed, scalable, and secured facility for message passing arbitrary-size messages.

      Note ALPC is the replacement for an older IPC mechanism initially shipped with the very
      first kernel design of Windows NT, called LPC, which is why certain variables, fields, and
      functions might still refer to “LPC” today. Keep in mind that LPC is now emulated on top of
      ALPC for compatibility and has been removed from the kernel (legacy system calls still exist,
      which get wrapped into ALPC calls).

     Although it is internal, and thus not available for third-party developers, ALPC is widely used in vari-
   ous parts of Windows:

      ■   Windows applications that use remote procedure call (RPC), a documented API, indirectly use
          ALPC when they specify local-RPC over the ncalrpc transport, a form of RPC used to communi-
          cate between processes on the same system. This is now the default transport for almost all RPC
          clients. In addition, when Windows drivers leverage kernel-mode RPC, this implicitly uses ALPC
          as well as the only transport permitted.

      ■   Whenever a Windows process and/or thread starts, as well as during any Windows subsystem
          operation, ALPC is used to communicate with the subsystem process (CSRSS). All subsystems
          communicate with the session manager (SMSS) over ALPC.

      ■   When a Windows process raises an exception, the kernel’s exception dispatcher communicates
          with the Windows Error Reporting (WER) Service by using ALPC. Processes also can communi-
          cate with WER on their own, such as from the unhandled exception handler. (WER is discussed
          later in Chapter 10.)

      ■   Winlogon uses ALPC to communicate with the local security authentication process, LSASS.

      ■   The security reference monitor (an executive component explained in Chapter 7 of Part 1) uses
          ALPC to communicate with the LSASS process.

      ■   The user-mode power manager and power monitor communicate with the kernel-mode power
          manager over ALPC, such as whenever the LCD brightness is changed.

      ■   The User-Mode Driver Framework (UMDF) enables user-mode drivers to communicate with the
          kernel-mode reflector driver by using ALPC.

         ■   The new Core Messaging mechanism used by CoreUI and modern UWP UI components use
             ALPC to both register with the Core Messaging Registrar, as well as to send serialized message
             objects, which replace the legacy Win32 window message model.

         ■   The Isolated LSASS process, when Credential Guard is enabled, communicates with LSASS by
             using ALPC. Similarly, the Secure Kernel transmits trustlet crash dump information through
             ALPC to WER.

         ■   As you can see from these examples, ALPC communication crosses all possible types of secu-
             rity boundaries—from unprivileged applications to the kernel, from VTL 1 trustlets to VTL 0
             services, and everything in between. Therefore, security and performance were critical require-
             ments in its design.

      Connection model
      Typically, ALPC messages are used between a server process and one or more client processes of that
      server. An ALPC connection can be established between two or more user-mode processes or between
      a kernel-mode component and one or more user-mode processes, or even between two kernel-mode
      components (albeit this would not be the most efficient way of communicating). ALPC exposes a single
      executive object called the port object to maintain the state needed for communication. Although this
      is just one object, there are several kinds of ALPC ports that it can represent:

         ■   Server connection port A named port that is a server connection request point. Clients can
             connect to the server by connecting to this port.

         ■   Server communication port An unnamed port a server uses to communicate with one of its
             clients. The server has one such port per active client.

         ■   Client communication port An unnamed port each client uses to communicate with its server.

         ■   Unconnected communication port An unnamed port a client can use to communicate
             locally with itself. This model was abolished in the move from LPC to ALPC but is emulated for
             Legacy LPC for compatibility reasons.

         ALPC follows a connection and communication model that’s somewhat reminiscent of BSD socket
      programming. A server first creates a server connection port (NtAlpcCreatePort), whereas a cli-
      ent attempts to connect to it (NtAlpcConnectPort). If the server was in a listening state (by using
      NtAlpcSendWaitReceivePort), it receives a connection request message and can choose to accept it
      (NtAlpcAcceptConnectPort). In doing so, both the client and server communication ports are created,
      and each respective endpoint process receives a handle to its communication port. Messages are
      then sent across this handle (still by using NtAlpcSendWaitReceivePort), which the server continues to
      receive by using the same API. Therefore, in the simplest scenario, a single server thread sits in a loop
      calling NtAlpcSendWaitReceivePort and receives with connection requests, which it accepts, or mes-
      sages, which it handles and potentially responds to. The server can differentiate between messages by
      reading the PORT_HEADER structure, which sits on top of every message and contains a message type.
      The various message types are shown in Table 8-30.

TABLE 8-30 ALPC message types

   pe                         Meaning

LPC_REQUEST                   A normal ALPC message, with a potential synchronous reply

LPC_REPLY                     An ALPC message datagram, sent as an asynchronous reply to a previous datagram

LPC_DATAGRAM                  An ALPC message datagram, which is immediately released and cannot be synchro-
                              nously replied to

LPC_LOST_REPLY                Deprecated, used by Legacy LPC Reply API

LPC_PORT_CLOSED               Sent whenever the last handle of an ALPC port is closed, notifying clients and servers
                              that the other side is gone

LPC_CLIENT_DIED               Sent by the process manager (PspExitThread) using Legacy LPC to the registered termi-
                              nation port(s) of the thread and the registered exception port of the process

LPC_EXCEPTION                 Sent by the User-Mode Debugging Framework (DbgkForwardException) to the excep-
                              tion port through Legacy LPC

LPC_DEBUG_EVENT               Deprecated, used by the legacy user-mode debugging services when these were part
                              of the Windows subsystem

LPC_ERROR_EVENT               Sent whenever a hard error is generated from user-mode (NtRaiseHardError) and sent
                              using Legacy LPC to exception port of the target thread, if any, otherwise to the error
                              port, typically owned by CSRSS

LPC_CONNECTION_REQUEST        An ALPC message that represents an attempt by a client to connect to the server’s con-
                              nection port

LPC_CONNECTION_REPLY          The internal message that is sent by a server when it calls NtAlpcAcceptConnectPort to
                              accept a client’s connection request

LPC_CANCELED                  The received reply by a client or server that was waiting for a message that has now
                              been canceled

LPC_UNREGISTER_PROCESS        Sent by the process manager when the exception port for the current process is
                              swapped to a different one, allowing the owner (typically CSRSS) to unregister its data
                              structures for the thread switching its port to a different one

    The server can also deny the connection, either for security reasons or simply due to protocol or
versioning issues. Because clients can send a custom payload with a connection request, this is usu-
ally used by various services to ensure that the correct client, or only one client, is talking to the server.
If any anomalies are found, the server can reject the connection and, optionally, return a payload
containing information on why the client was rejected (allowing the client to take corrective action, if
possible, or for debugging purposes).

   Once a connection is made, a connection information structure (actually, a blob, as we describe
shortly) stores the linkage between all the different ports, as shown in Figure 8-40.

        Client address                     Kernel address space                Server address
            space                                                                  space

                                 Connection port

                                    Message
                                     queue

        Client process                                                         Server process

             Handle                                                               Handle

                                    Client                      Server            Handle
                                 communication               communication
                                     port                        port
         Client view                                                            Server view
         of section                                                              of section

                                                   Shared
                                                   section

      FIGURE 8-40 Use of ALPC ports.

      Message model
      Using ALPC, a client and thread using blocking messages each take turns performing a loop around the
      NtAlpcSendWaitReceivePort system call, in which one side sends a request and waits for a reply while
      the other side does the opposite. However, because ALPC supports asynchronous messages, it’s pos-
      sible for either side not to block and choose instead to perform some other runtime task and check for
      messages later (some of these methods will be described shortly). ALPC supports the following three
      methods of exchanging payloads sent with a message:

         ■     A message can be sent to another process through the standard double-buffering mecha-
               nism, in which the kernel maintains a copy of the message (copying it from the source process),
               switches to the target process, and copies the data from the kernel’s buffer. For compatibility, if
               legacy LPC is being used, only messages of up to 256 bytes can be sent this way, whereas ALPC
               can allocate an extension buffer for messages up to 64 KB.

         ■     A message can be stored in an ALPC section object from which the client and server processes
               map views. (See Chapter 5 in Part 1 for more information on section mappings.)

         An important side effect of the ability to send asynchronous messages is that a message can be can-
      celed—for example, when a request takes too long or if the user has indicated that they want to cancel
      the operation it implements. ALPC supports this with the NtAlpcCancelMessage system call.

   An ALPC message can be on one of five different queues implemented by the ALPC port object:

   ■   Main queue      A message has been sent, and the client is processing it.

   ■   Pending queue A message has been sent and the caller is waiting for a reply, but the reply
       has not yet been sent.

   ■   Large message queue A message has been sent, but the caller’s buffer was too small to
       receive it. The caller gets another chance to allocate a larger buffer and request the message
       payload again.

   ■   Canceled queue       A message that was sent to the port but has since been canceled.

   ■   Direct queue     A message that was sent with a direct event attached.

   Note that a sixth queue, called the wait queue, does not link messages together; instead, it links all
the threads waiting on a message.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing subsystem ALPC port objects
   You can see named ALPC port objects with the WinObj tool from Sysinternals or WinObjEx64
   from GitHub. Run one of the two tools elevated as Administrator and select the root directory. A
   gear icon identifies the port objects in WinObj, and a power plug in WinObjEx64, as shown here
   (you can also click on the Type field to easily sort all the objects by their type):

            You should see the ALPC ports used by the power manager, the security manager, and
         other internal Windows services. If you want to see the ALPC port objects used by RPC, you can
         select the \RPC Control directory. One of the primary users of ALPC, outside of Local RPC, is the
         Windows subsystem, which uses ALPC to communicate with the Windows subsystem DLLs that
         are present in all Windows processes. Because CSRSS loads once for each session, you will find its
         ALPC port objects under the appropriate \Sessions\X\Windows directory, as shown here:

      Asynchronous operation
      The synchronous model of ALPC is tied to the original LPC architecture in the early NT design and is
      similar to other blocking IPC mechanisms, such as Mach ports. Although it is simple to design, a block-
      ing IPC algorithm includes many possibilities for deadlock, and working around those scenarios creates
      complex code that requires support for a more flexible asynchronous (nonblocking) model. As such,
      ALPC was primarily designed to support asynchronous operation as well, which is a requirement for
      scalable RPC and other uses, such as support for pending I/O in user-mode drivers. A basic feature of
      ALPC, which wasn’t originally present in LPC, is that blocking calls can have a timeout parameter. This
      allows legacy applications to avoid certain deadlock scenarios.

         However, ALPC is optimized for asynchronous messages and provides three different models for
      asynchronous notifications. The first doesn’t actually notify the client or server but simply copies the
      data payload. Under this model, it’s up to the implementor to choose a reliable synchronization meth-
      od. For example, the client and the server can share a notification event object, or the client can poll for
      data arrival. The data structure used by this model is the ALPC completion list (not to be confused with

the Windows I/O completion port). The ALPC completion list is an efficient, nonblocking data struc-
ture that enables atomic passing of data between clients, and its internals are described further in the
upcoming “Performance” section.

    The next notification model is a waiting model that uses the Windows completion-port mechanism
(on top of the ALPC completion list). This enables a thread to retrieve multiple payloads at once, control
the maximum number of concurrent requests, and take advantage of native completion-port function-
ality. The user-mode thread pool implementation provides internal APIs that processes use to manage
ALPC messages within the same infrastructure as worker threads, which are implemented using this
model. The RPC system in Windows, when using Local RPC (over ncalrpc), also makes use of this func-
tionality to provide efficient message delivery by taking advantage of this kernel support, as does the
kernel mode RPC runtime in Msrpc.sys.

    Finally, because drivers can run in arbitrary context and typically do not like creating dedicated
system threads for their operation, ALPC also provides a mechanism for a more basic, kernel-based
notification using executive callback objects. A driver can register its own callback and context with
NtSetInformationAlpcPort, after which it will get called whenever a message is received. The Power
Dependency Coordinator (Pdc.sys) in the kernel employs this mechanism for communicating with its
clients, for example. It’s worth noting that using an executive callback object has potential advantag-
es—but also security risks—in terms of performance. Because the callbacks are executed in a blocking
fashion (once signaled), and inline with the signaling code, they will always run in the context of an
ALPC message sender (that is, inline with a user-mode thread calling NtAlpcSendWaitReceivePort). This
means that the kernel component can have the chance to examine the state of its client without the
cost of a context switch and can potentially consume the payload in the context of the sender.

    The reason these are not absolute guarantees, however (and this becomes a risk if the implementor
is unaware), is that multiple clients can send a message to the port at the same time and existing mes-
sages can be sent by a client before the server registers its executive callback object. It’s also possible
for another client to send yet another message while the server is still processing the first message from
a different client. In all these cases, the server will run in the context of one of the clients that sent a
message but may be analyzing a message sent by a different client. The server should distinguish this
situation (since the Client ID of the sender is encoded in the PORT_HEADER of the message) and attach/
analyze the state of the correct sender (which now has a potential context switch cost).

Views, regions, and sections
Instead of sending message buffers between their two respective processes, a server and client
can choose a more efficient data-passing mechanism that is at the core of the memory manager in
Windows: the section object. (More information is available in Chapter 5 in Part 1.) This allows a piece of
memory to be allocated as shared and for both client and server to have a consistent, and equal, view
of this memory. In this scenario, as much data as can fit can be transferred, and data is merely copied
into one address range and immediately available in the other. Unfortunately, shared-memory com-
munication, such as LPC traditionally provided, has its share of drawbacks, especially when considering
security ramifications. For one, because both client and server must have access to the shared memory,
an unprivileged client can use this to corrupt the server’s shared memory and even build executable

      payloads for potential exploits. Additionally, because the client knows the location of the server’s data,
      it can use this information to bypass ASLR protections. (See Chapter 5 in Part 1 for more information.)

         ALPC provides its own security on top of what’s provided by section objects. With ALPC, a specific
      ALPC section object must be created with the appropriate NtAlpcCreatePortSection API, which creates
      the correct references to the port, as well as allows for automatic section garbage collection. (A manual
      API also exists for deletion.) As the owner of the ALPC section object begins using the section, the al-
      located chunks are created as ALPC regions, which represent a range of used addresses within the sec-
      tion and add an extra reference to the message. Finally, within a range of shared memory, the clients
      obtain views to this memory, which represents the local mapping within their address space.

          Regions also support a couple of security options. First, regions can be mapped either using
      a secure mode or an unsecure mode. In the secure mode, only two views (mappings) are allowed
      to the region. This is typically used when a server wants to share data privately with a single cli-
      ent process. Additionally, only one region for a given range of shared memory can be opened from
      within the context of a given port. Finally, regions can also be marked with write-access protec-
      tion, which enables only one process context (the server) to have write access to the view (by using
      MmSecureVirtualMemoryAgainstWrites). Other clients, meanwhile, will have read-only access only.
      These settings mitigate many privilege-escalation attacks that could happen due to attacks on shared
      memory, and they make ALPC more resilient than typical IPC mechanisms.

      Attributes
      ALPC provides more than simple message passing; it also enables specific contextual information to
      be added to each message and have the kernel track the validity, lifetime, and implementation of
      that information. Users of ALPC can assign their own custom context information as well. Whether it’s
      system-managed or user-managed, ALPC calls this data attributes. There are seven attributes that the
      kernel manages:

         ■   The security attribute, which holds key information to allow impersonation of clients, as well as
             advanced ALPC security functionality (which is described later).

         ■   The data view attribute, responsible for managing the different views associated with the
             regions of an ALPC section. It is also used to set flags such as the auto-release flag, and when
             replying, to unmap a view manually.

         ■   The context attribute, which allows user-managed context pointers to be placed on a port, as
             well as on a specific message sent across the port. In addition, a sequence number, message ID,
             and callback ID are stored here and managed by the kernel, which allows uniqueness, message-
             based hashing, and sequencing to be implemented by users of ALPC.

         ■   The handle attribute, which contains information about which handles to associate with the
             message (which is described in more detail later in the “Handle passing” section).

         ■   The token attribute, which can be used to get the Token ID, Authentication ID, and Modified ID
             of the message sender, without using a full-blown security attribute (but which does not, on its
             own, allow impersonation to occur).

   ■   The direct attribute, which is used when sending direct messages that have a synchronization
       object associated with them (described later in the “Direct event” section).

   ■   The work-on-behalf-of attribute, which is used to encode a work ticket used for better power
       management and resource management decisions (see the “Power management” section later).

     Some of these attributes are initially passed in by the server or client when the message is sent and
converted into the kernel’s own internal ALPC representation. If the ALPC user requests this data back,
it is exposed back securely. In a few cases, a server or client can always request an attribute, because it
is ALPC that internally associates it with a message and always makes it available (such as the context
or token attributes). By implementing this kind of model and combining it with its own internal handle
table, described next, ALPC can keep critical data opaque between clients and servers while still main-
taining the true pointers in kernel mode.

   To define attributes correctly, a variety of APIs are available for internal ALPC consumers, such as
AlpcInitializeMessageAttribute and AlpcGetMessageAttribute.

Blobs, handles, and resources
Although the ALPC subsystem exposes only one Object Manager object type (the port), it internally
must manage a number of data structures that allow it to perform the tasks required by its mecha-
nisms. For example, ALPC needs to allocate and track the messages associated with each port, as well
as the message attributes, which it must track for the duration of their lifetime. Instead of using the
Object Manager’s routines for data management, ALPC implements its own lightweight objects called
blobs. Just like objects, blobs can automatically be allocated and garbage collected, reference tracked,
and locked through synchronization. Additionally, blobs can have custom allocation and deallocation
callbacks, which let their owners control extra information that might need to be tracked for each blob.
Finally, ALPC also uses the executive’s handle table implementation (used for objects and PIDs/TIDs) to
have an ALPC-specific handle table, which allows ALPC to generate private handles for blobs, instead of
using pointers.

  In the ALPC model, messages are blobs, for example, and their constructor generates a message ID,
which is itself a handle into ALPC’s handle table. Other ALPC blobs include the following:

   ■   The connection blob, which stores the client and server communication ports, as well as the
       server connection port and ALPC handle table.

   ■   The security blob, which stores the security data necessary to allow impersonation of a client.
       It stores the security attribute.

   ■   The section, region, and view blobs, which describe ALPC’s shared-memory model. The view
       blob is ultimately responsible for storing the data view attribute.

   ■   The reserve blob, which implements support for ALPC Reserve Objects. (See the “Reserve
       objects” section earlier in this chapter.)

   ■   The handle data blob, which contains the information that enables ALPC’s handle attribute support.

          Because blobs are allocated from pageable memory, they must carefully be tracked to ensure their
      deletion at the appropriate time. For certain kinds of blobs, this is easy: for example, when an ALPC
      message is freed, the blob used to contain it is also deleted. However, certain blobs can represent
      numerous attributes attached to a single ALPC message, and the kernel must manage their lifetime
      appropriately. For example, because a message can have multiple views associated with it (when many
      clients have access to the same shared memory), the views must be tracked with the messages that
      reference them. ALPC implements this functionality by using a concept of resources. Each message
      is associated with a resource list, and whenever a blob associated with a message (that isn’t a simple
      pointer) is allocated, it is also added as a resource of the message. In turn, the ALPC library provides
      functionality for looking up, flushing, and deleting associated resources. Security blobs, reserve blobs,
      and view blobs are all stored as resources.

      Handle passing
      A key feature of Unix Domain Sockets and Mach ports, which are the most complex and most used
      IPC mechanisms on Linux and macOS, respectively, is the ability to send a message that encodes a file
      descriptor which will then be duplicated in the receiving process, granting it access to a UNIX-style file
      (such as a pipe, socket, or actual file system location). With ALPC, Windows can now also benefit from
      this model, with the handle attribute exposed by ALPC. This attribute allows a sender to encode an
      object type, some information about how to duplicate the handle, and the handle index in the table of
      the sender. If the handle index matches the type of object the sender is claiming to send, a duplicated
      handle is created, for the moment, in the system (kernel) handle table. This first part guarantees that
      the sender truly is sending what it is claiming, and that at this point, any operation the sender might
      undertake does not invalidate the handle or the object beneath it.

          Next, the receiver requests exposing the handle attribute, specifying the type of object they expect.
      If there is a match, the kernel handle is duplicated once more, this time as a user-mode handle in the
      table of the receiver (and the kernel copy is now closed). The handle passing has been completed, and
      the receiver is guaranteed to have a handle to the exact same object the sender was referencing and of
      the type the receiver expects. Furthermore, because the duplication is done by the kernel, it means a
      privileged server can send a message to an unprivileged client without requiring the latter to have any
      type of access to the sending process.

          This handle-passing mechanism, when first implemented, was primarily used by the Windows
      subsystem (CSRSS), which needs to be made aware of any child processes created by existing Windows
      processes, so that they can successfully connect to CSRSS when it is their turn to execute, with CSRSS
      already knowing about their creation from the parent. It had several issues, however, such as the inabil-
      ity to send more than a single handle (and certainly not more than one type of object). It also forced
      receivers to always receive any handle associated with a message on the port without knowing ahead
      of time if the message should have a handle associated with it to begin with.

         To rectify these issues, Windows 8 and later now implement the indirect handle passing mechanism,
      which allows sending multiple handles of different types and allows receivers to manually retrieve han-
      dles on a per-message basis. If a port accepts and enables such indirect handles (non-RPC-based ALPC
      servers typically do not use indirect handles), handles will no longer be automatically duplicated based

on the handle attribute passed in when receiving a new message with NtAlpcSendWaitReceivePort—
instead, ALPC clients and servers will have to manually query how many handles a given message con-
tains, allocate sufficient data structures to receive the handle values and their types, and then request
the duplication of all the handles, parsing the ones that match the expected types (while closing/drop-
ping unexpected ones) by using NtAlpcQueryInformationMessage and passing in the received message.

   This new behavior also introduces a security benefit—instead of handles being automatically dupli-
cated as soon as the caller specifies a handle attribute with a matching type, they are only duplicated
when requested on a per-message basis. Because a server might expect a handle for message A, but
not necessarily for all other messages, nonindirect handles can be problematic if the server doesn’t
think of closing any possible handle even while parsing message B or C. With indirect handles, the
server would never call NtAlpcQueryInformationMessage for such messages, and the handles would
never be duplicated (or necessitate closing them).

   Due to these improvements, the ALPC handle-passing mechanism is now exposed beyond just the
limited use-cases described and is integrated with the RPC runtime and IDL compiler. It is now possible
to use the system_handle(sh_type) syntax to indicate more than 20 different handle types that the RPC
runtime can marshal from a client to a server (or vice-versa). Furthermore, although ALPC provides
the type checking from the kernel’s perspective, as described earlier, the RPC runtime itself also does
additional type checking—for example, while both named pipes, sockets, and actual files are all “File
Objects” (and thus handles of type “File”), the RPC runtime can do marshalling and unmarshalling
checks to specifically detect whether a Socket handle is being passed when the IDL file indicates sys-
tem_handle(sh_pipe), for example (this is done by calling APIs such as GetFileAttribute, GetDeviceType,
and so on).

   This new capability is heavily leveraged by the AppContainer infrastructure and is the key way
through which the WinRT API transfers handles that are opened by the various brokers (after do-
ing capability checks) and duplicated back into the sandboxed application for direct use. Other
RPC services that leverage this functionality include the DNS Client, which uses it to populate the
ai_resolutionhandle field in the GetAddrInfoEx API.

Security
ALPC implements several security mechanisms, full security boundaries, and mitigations to prevent at-
tacks in case of generic IPC parsing bugs. At a base level, ALPC port objects are managed by the same
Object Manager interfaces that manage object security, preventing nonprivileged applications from
obtaining handles to server ports with ACL. On top of that, ALPC provides a SID-based trust model,
inherited from the original LPC design. This model enables clients to validate the server they are con-
necting to by relying on more than just the port name. With a secured port, the client process submits
to the kernel the SID of the server process it expects on the side of the endpoint. At connection time,
the kernel validates that the client is indeed connecting to the expected server, mitigating namespace
squatting attacks where an untrusted server creates a port to spoof a server.

   ALPC also allows both clients and servers to atomically and uniquely identify the thread and process
responsible for each message. It also supports the full Windows impersonation model through the

      NtAlpcImpersonateClientThread API. Other APIs give an ALPC server the ability to query the SIDs asso-
      ciated with all connected clients and to query the LUID (locally unique identifier) of the client’s security
      token (which is further described in Chapter 7 of Part 1).

      ALPC port ownership
      The concept of port ownership is important to ALPC because it provides a variety of security guaran-
      tees to interested clients and servers. First and foremost, only the owner of an ALPC connection port
      can accept connections on the port. This ensures that if a port handle were to be somehow duplicated
      or inherited into another process, it would not be able to illegitimately accept incoming connections.
      Additionally, when handle attributes are used (direct or indirect), they are always duplicated in the con-
      text of the port owner process, regardless of who may be currently parsing the message.

         These checks are highly relevant when a kernel component might be communicating with a client
      using ALPC—the kernel component may currently be attached to a completely different process (or
      even be operating as part of the System process with a system thread consuming the ALPC port mes-
      sages), and knowledge of the port owner means ALPC does not incorrectly rely on the current process.

          Conversely, however, it may be beneficial for a kernel component to arbitrarily accept incoming
      connections on a port regardless of the current process. One poignant example of this issue is when an
      executive callback object is used for message delivery. In this scenario, because the callback is synchro-
      nously called in the context of one or more sender processes, whereas the kernel connection port was
      likely created while executing in the System context (such as in DriverEntry), there would be a mismatch
      between the current process and the port owner process during the acceptance of the connection.
      ALPC provides a special port attribute flag—which only kernel callers can use—that marks a connec-
      tion port as a system port; in such a case, the port owner checks are ignored.

          Another important use case of port ownership is when performing server SID validation checks if
      a client has requested it, as was described in the “Security” section. This validation is always done by
      checking against the token of the owner of the connection port, regardless of who may be listening for
      messages on the port at this time.

      Performance
      ALPC uses several strategies to enhance performance, primarily through its support of completion lists,
      which were briefly described earlier. At the kernel level, a completion list is essentially a user Memory
      Descriptor List (MDL) that’s been probed and locked and then mapped to an address. (For more informa-
      tion on MDLs, see Chapter 5 in Part 1.) Because it’s associated with an MDL (which tracks physical pages),
      when a client sends a message to a server, the payload copy can happen directly at the physical level
      instead of requiring the kernel to double-buffer the message, as is common in other IPC mechanisms.

          The completion list itself is implemented as a 64-bit queue of completed entries, and both user-
      mode and kernel-mode consumers can use an interlocked compare-exchange operation to insert and
      remove entries from the queue. Furthermore, to simplify allocations, once an MDL has been initialized,
      a bitmap is used to identify available areas of memory that can be used to hold new messages that are
      still being queued. The bitmap algorithm also uses native lock instructions on the processor to provide

atomic allocation and deallocation of areas of physical memory that can be used by completion lists.
Completion lists can be set up with NtAlpcSetInformationPort.

   A final optimization worth mentioning is that instead of copying data as soon as it is sent, the kernel
sets up the payload for a delayed copy, capturing only the needed information, but without any copy-
ing. The message data is copied only when the receiver requests the message. Obviously, if shared
memory is being used, there’s no advantage to this method, but in asynchronous, kernel-buffer mes-
sage passing, this can be used to optimize cancellations and high-traffic scenarios.

Power management
As we’ve seen previously, when used in constrained power environments, such as mobile platforms,
Windows uses a number of techniques to better manage power consumption and processor availabil-
ity, such as by doing heterogenous processing on architectures that support it (such as ARM64’s big.
LITTLE) and by implementing Connected Standby as a way to further reduce power on user systems
when under light use.

    To play nice with these mechanisms, ALPC implements two additional features: the ability for ALPC
clients to push wake references onto their ALPC server’s wake channel and the introduction of the Work
On Behalf Of Attribute. The latter is an attribute that a sender can choose to associate with a message
when it wants to associate the request with the current work ticket that it is associated with, or to create
a new work ticket that describes the sending thread.

   Such work tickets are used, for example, when the sender is currently part of a Job Object (either
due to being in a Silo/Windows Container or by being part of a heterogenous scheduling system and/
or Connected Standby system) and their association with a thread will cause various parts of the system
to attribute CPU cycles, I/O request packets, disk/network bandwidth attribution, and energy estima-
tion to be associated to the “behalf of” thread and not the acting thread.

   Additionally, foreground priority donation and other scheduling steps are taken to avoid big.LITTLE
priority inversion issues, where an RPC thread is stuck on the small core simply by virtue of being a
background service. With a work ticket, the thread is forcibly scheduled on the big core and receives a
foreground boost as a donation.

   Finally, wake references are used to avoid deadlock situations when the system enters a connected
standby (also called Modern Standby) state, as was described in Chapter 6 of Part 1, or when a UWP
application is targeted for suspension. These references allow the lifetime of the process owning the
ALPC port to be pinned, preventing the force suspend/deep freeze operations that the Process Lifetime
Manager (PLM) would attempt (or the Power Manager, even for Win32 applications). Once the mes-
sage has been delivered and processed, the wake reference can be dropped, allowing the process to
be suspended if needed. (Recall that termination is not a problem because sending a message to a
terminated process/closed port immediately wakes up the sender with a special PORT_CLOSED reply,
instead of blocking on a response that will never come.)

      ALPC direct event attribute
      Recall that ALPC provides two mechanisms for clients and servers to communicate: requests, which are
      bidirectional, requiring a response, and datagrams, which are unidirectional and can never be synchro-
      nously replied to. A middle ground would be beneficial—a datagram-type message that cannot be
      replied to but whose receipt could be acknowledged in such a way that the sending party would know
      that the message was acted upon, without the complexity of having to implement response process-
      ing. In fact, this is what the direct event attribute provides.

          By allowing a sender to associate a handle to a kernel event object (through CreateEvent) with the
      ALPC message, the direct event attribute captures the underlying KEVENT and adds a reference to it,
      tacking it onto the KALPC_MESSAGE structure. Then, when the receiving process gets the message,
      it can expose this direct event attribute and cause it to be signaled. A client could either have a Wait
      Completion Packet associated with an I/O completion port, or it could be in a synchronous wait call
      such as with WaitForSingleObject on the event handle and would now receive a notification and/or wait
      satisfaction, informing it of the message’s successful delivery.

          This functionality was previously manually provided by the RPC runtime, which allows clients call-
      ing RpcAsyncInitializeHandle to pass in RpcNotificationTypeEvent and associate a HANDLE to an event
      object with an asynchronous RPC message. Instead of forcing the RPC runtime on the other side to
      respond to a request message, such that the RPC runtime on the sender’s side would then signal the
      event locally to signal completion, ALPC now captures it into a Direct Event attribute, and the message
      is placed on a Direct Message Queue instead of the regular Message Queue. The ALPC subsystem will
      signal the message upon delivery, efficiently in kernel mode, avoiding an extra hop and context-switch.

      Debugging and tracing
      On checked builds of the kernel, ALPC messages can be logged. All ALPC attributes, blobs, message
      zones, and dispatch transactions can be individually logged, and undocumented !alpc commands
      in WinDbg can dump the logs. On retail systems, IT administrators and troubleshooters can enable
      the ALPC events of the NT kernel logger to monitor ALPC messages, (Event Tracing for Windows, also
      known as ETW, is discussed in Chapter 10.) ETW events do not include payload data, but they do con-
      tain connection, disconnection, and send/receive and wait/unblock information. Finally, even on retail
      systems, certain !alpc commands obtain information on ALPC ports and messages.

EXPERIMENT: Dumping a connection port
In this experiment, you use the CSRSS API port for Windows processes running in Session 1, which
is the typical interactive session for the console user. Whenever a Windows application launches,
it connects to CSRSS’s API port in the appropriate session.

    1.   Start by obtaining a pointer to the connection port with the !object command:
         lkd> !object \Sessions\1\Windows\ApiPort
         Object: ffff898f172b2df0 Type: (ffff898f032f9da0) ALPC Port
             ObjectHeader: ffff898f172b2dc0 (new version)
             HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 7898
             Directory Object: ffffc704b10d9ce0 Name: ApiPort

    2.   Dump information on the port object itself with !alpc /p. This will confirm, for example,
         that CSRSS is the owner:
         lkd> !alpc /P ffff898f172b2df0
         Port ffff898f172b2df0
           Type                      : ALPC_CONNECTION_PORT
           CommunicationInfo         : ffffc704adf5d410
             ConnectionPort          : ffff898f172b2df0 (ApiPort), Connections
             ClientCommunicationPort : 0000000000000000
             ServerCommunicationPort : 0000000000000000
           OwnerProcess              : ffff898f17481140 (csrss.exe), Connections
           SequenceNo                : 0x0023BE45 (2342469)
           CompletionPort            : 0000000000000000
           CompletionList            : 0000000000000000
           ConnectionPending         : No
           ConnectionRefused         : No
           Disconnected              : No
           Closed                    : No
           FlushOnClose              : Yes
           ReturnExtendedInfo        : No
           Waitable                  : No
           Security                  : Static
           Wow64CompletionList       : No

           5 thread(s) are waiting on the port:

             THREAD ffff898f3353b080 Cid 0288.2538       Teb: 00000090bce88000
             Win32Thread: ffff898f340cde60 WAIT
             THREAD ffff898f313aa080 Cid 0288.19ac       Teb: 00000090bcf0e000
             Win32Thread: ffff898f35584e40 WAIT
             THREAD ffff898f191c3080 Cid 0288.060c       Teb: 00000090bcff1000
             Win32Thread: ffff898f17c5f570 WAIT
             THREAD ffff898f174130c0 Cid 0288.0298       Teb: 00000090bcfd7000
             Win32Thread: ffff898f173f6ef0 WAIT
             THREAD ffff898f1b5e2080 Cid 0288.0590       Teb: 00000090bcfe9000
             Win32Thread: ffff898f173f82a0 WAIT
             THREAD ffff898f3353b080 Cid 0288.2538       Teb: 00000090bce88000
             Win32Thread: ffff898f340cde60 WAIT

                     Main queue is empty.

                     Direct message queue is empty.

                     Large message queue is empty.

                     Pending queue is empty.

                     Canceled queue is empty.

              3.   You can see what clients are connected to the port, which includes all Windows pro-
                   cesses running in the session, with the undocumented !alpc /lpc command, or, with a
                   newer version of WinDbg, you can simply click the Connections link next to the ApiPort
                   name. You will also see the server and client communication ports associated with each
                   connection and any pending messages on any of the queues:
                   lkd> !alpc /lpc ffff898f082cbdf0

                   ffff898f082cbdf0('ApiPort') 0, 131 connections
                            ffff898f0b971940 0 ->ffff898F0868a680 0 ffff898f17479080('wininit.exe')
                            ffff898f1741fdd0 0 ->ffff898f1742add0 0 ffff898f174ec240('services.exe')
                            ffff898f1740cdd0 0 ->ffff898f17417dd0 0 ffff898f174da200('lsass.exe')
                            ffff898f08272900 0 ->ffff898f08272dc0 0 ffff898f1753b400('svchost.exe')
                            ffff898f08a702d0 0 ->ffff898f084d5980 0 ffff898f1753e3c0('svchost.exe')
                            ffff898f081a3dc0 0 ->ffff898f08a70070 0 ffff898f175402c0('fontdrvhost.ex')
                            ffff898F086dcde0 0 ->ffff898f17502de0 0 ffff898f17588440('svchost.exe')
                            ffff898f1757abe0 0 ->ffff898f1757b980 0 ffff898f17c1a400('svchost.exe')

              4.   Note that if you have other sessions, you can repeat this experiment on those sessions
                   also (as well as with session 0, the system session). You will eventually get a list of all the
                   Windows processes on your machine.

  indows            otification acilit
      The Windows Notification Facility, or WNF, is the core underpinning of a modern registrationless pub-
      lisher/subscriber mechanism that was added in Windows 8 as a response to a number of architectural
      deficiencies when it came to notifying interested parties about the existence of some action, event, or
      state, and supplying a data payload associated with this state change.

         To illustrate this, consider the following scenario: Service A wants to notify potential clients B, C, and
      D that the disk has been scanned and is safe for write access, as well as the number of bad sectors (if
      any) that were detected during the scan. There is no guarantee that B, C, D start after A—in fact, there’s
      a good chance they might start earlier. In this case, it is unsafe for them to continue their execution, and
      they should wait for A to execute and report the disk is safe for write access. But if A isn’t even running
      yet, how does one wait for it in the first place?

    A typical solution would be for B to create an event “CAN_I_WAIT_FOR_A_YET” and then have A look
for this event once started, create the “A_SAYS_DISK_IS_SAFE” event and then signal “CAN_I_WAIT_
FOR_A_YET,” allowing B to know it’s now safe to wait for “A_SAYS_DISK_IS_SAFE”. In a single client sce-
nario, this is feasible, but things become even more complex once we think about C and D, which might
all be going through this same logic and could race the creation of the “CAN_I_WAIT_FOR_A_YET” event,
at which point they would open the existing event (in our example, created by B) and wait on it to be
signaled. Although this can be done, what guarantees that this event is truly created by B? Issues around
malicious “squatting” of the name and denial of service attacks around the name now arise. Ultimately, a
safe protocol can be designed, but this requires a lot of complexity for the developer(s) of A, B, C, and D—
and we haven’t even discussed how to get the number of bad sectors.

WNF features
The scenario described in the preceding section is a common one in operating system design—and the
correct pattern for solving it clearly shouldn’t be left to individual developers. Part of a job of an operat-
ing system is to provide simple, scalable, and performant solutions to common architectural challenges
such as these, and this is what WNF aims to provide on modern Windows platforms, by providing:

   ■    The ability to define a state name that can be subscribed to, or published to by arbitrary pro-
        cesses, secured by a standard Windows security descriptor (with a DACL and SACL)

   ■    The ability to associate such a state name with a payload of up to 4 KB, which can be retrieved
        along with the subscription to a change in the state (and published with the change)

   ■    The ability to have well-known state names that are provisioned with the operating system and
        do not need to be created by a publisher while potentially racing with consumers—thus con-
        sumers will block on the state change notification even if a publisher hasn’t started yet

   ■    The ability to persist state data even between reboots, such that consumers may be able to see
        previously published data, even if they were not yet running

   ■    The ability to assign state change timestamps to each state name, such that consumers can
        know, even across reboots, if new data was published at some point without the consumer be-
        ing active (and whether to bother acting on previously published data)

   ■    The ability to assign scope to a given state name, such that multiple instances of the same state
        name can exist either within an interactive session ID, a server silo (container), a given user
        token/SID, or even within an individual process.

   ■    Finally, the ability to do all of the publishing and consuming of WNF state names while crossing
        the kernel/user boundary, such that components can interact with each other on either side.

      WNF users
      As the reader can tell, providing all these semantics allows for a rich set of services and kernel compo-
      nents to leverage WNF to provide notifications and other state change signals to hundreds of clients
      (which could be as fine-grained as individual APIs in various system libraries to large scale processes). In
      fact, several key system components and infrastructure now use WNF, such as

           ■   The Power Manager and various related components use WNF to signal actions such as clos-
               ing and opening the lid, battery charging state, turning the monitor off and on, user presence
               detection, and more.

           ■   The Shell and its components use WNF to track application launches, user activity, lock screen
               behavior, taskbar behavior, Cortana usage, and Start menu behavior.

           ■   The System Events Broker (SEB) is an entire infrastructure that is leveraged by UWP applications
               and brokers to receive notifications about system events such as the audio input and output.

           ■   The Process Manager uses per-process temporary WNF state names to implement the wake
               channel that is used by the Process Lifetime Manager (PLM) to implement part of the mechanism
               that allows certain events to force-wake processes that are marked for suspension (deep freeze).

         Enumerating all users of WNF would take up this entire book because more than 6000 different
      well-known state names are used, in addition to the various temporary names that are created (such as
      the per-process wake channels). However, a later experiment showcases the use of the wnfdump utility
      part of the book tools, which allows the reader to enumerate and interact with all of their system’s WNF
      events and their data. The Windows Debugging Tools also provide a !wnf extension that is shown in a
      future experiment and can also be used for this purpose. Meanwhile, the Table 8-31 explains some of
      the key WNF state name prefixes and their uses. You will encounter many Windows components and
      codenames across a vast variety of Windows SKUs, from Windows Phone to XBOX, exposing the rich-
      ness of the WNF mechanism and its pervasiveness.

      TABLE 8-31   WNF state name prefixes

      Prefi          # of Names    Usage

      9P             2             Plan 9 Redirector

      A2A            1             App-to-App

      AAD            2             Azure Active Directory

      AA             3             Assigned Access

      ACC            1             Accessibility

      ACHK           1             Boot Disk Integrity Check (Autochk)

      ACT            1             Activity

      AFD            1             Ancillary Function Driver (Winsock)

      AI             9             Application Install

      AOW            1             Android-on-Windows (Deprecated)

      ATP            1             Microsoft Defender ATP

Prefi   # of Names   Usage

AUDC    15           Audio Capture

AVA     1            Voice Activation

AVLC    3            Volume Limit Change

BCST    1            App Broadcast Service

BI      16           Broker Infrastructure

BLTH    14           Bluetooth

BMP     2            Background Media Player

BOOT    3            Boot Loader

BRI     1            Brightness

BSC     1            Browser Configuration (Legacy IE, Deprecated)

CAM     66           Capability Access Manager

CAPS    1            Central Access Policies

CCTL    1            Call Control Broker

CDP     17           Connected Devices Platform (Project “Rome”/Application Handoff)

CELL    78           Cellular Services

CERT    2            Certificate Cache

CFCL    3            Flight Configuration Client Changes

CI      4            Code Integrity

CLIP    6            Clipboard

CMFC    1            Configuration Management Feature Configuration

CMPT    1            Compatibility

CNET    10           Cellular Networking (Data)

CONT    1            Containers

CSC     1            Client Side Caching

CSHL    1            Composable Shell

CSH     1            Custom Shell Host

CXH     6            Cloud Experience Host

DBA     1            Device Broker Access

DCSP    1            Diagnostic Log CSP

DEP     2            Deployment (Windows Setup)

DEVM    3            Device Management

DICT    1            Dictionary

DISK    1            Disk

DISP    2            Display

DMF     4            Data Migration Framework

      Prefi        # of Names    Usage

      DNS          1             DNS

      DO           2             Delivery Optimization

      DSM          2             Device State Manager

      DUMP         2             Crash Dump

      DUSM         2             Data Usage Subscription Management

      DWM          9             Desktop Window Manager

      DXGK         2             DirectX Kernel

      DX           24            DirectX

      EAP          1             Extensible Authentication Protocol

      EDGE         4             Edge Browser

      EDP          15            Enterprise Data Protection

      EDU          1             Education

      EFS          2             Encrypted File Service

      EMS          1             Emergency Management Services

      ENTR         86            Enterprise Group Policies

      EOA          8             Ease of Access

      ETW          1             Event Tracing for Windows

      EXEC         6             Execution Components (Thermal Monitoring)

      FCON         1             Feature Configuration

      FDBK         1             Feedback

      FLTN         1             Flighting Notifications

      FLT          2             Filter Manager

      FLYT         1             Flight ID

      FOD          1             Features on Demand

      FSRL         2             File System Runtime (FsRtl)

      FVE          15            Full Volume Encryption

      GC           9             Game Core

      GIP          1             Graphics

      GLOB         3             Globalization

      GPOL         2             Group Policy

      HAM          1             Host Activity Manager

      HAS          1             Host Attestation Service

      HOLO         32            Holographic Services

      HPM          1             Human Presence Manager

      HVL          1             Hypervisor Library (Hvl)

Prefi   # of Names   Usage

HYPV    2            Hyper-V

IME     4            Input Method Editor

IMSN    7            Immersive Shell Notifications

IMS     1            Entitlements

INPUT   5            Input

IOT     2            Internet of Things

ISM     4            Input State Manager

IUIS    1            Immersive UI Scale

KSR     2            Kernel Soft Reboot

KSV     5            Kernel Streaming

LANG    2            Language Features

LED     1            LED Alert

LFS     12           Location Framework Service

LIC     9            Licensing

LM      7            License Manager

LOC     3            Geolocation

LOGN    8            Logon

MAPS    3            Maps

MBAE    1            MBAE

MM      3            Memory Manager

MON     1            Monitor Devices

MRT     5            Microsoft Resource Manager

MSA     7            Microsoft Account

MSHL    1            Minimal Shell

MUR     2            Media UI Request

MU      1            Unknown

NASV    5            Natural Authentication Service

NCB     1            Network Connection Broker

NDIS    2            Kernel NDIS

NFC     1            Near Field Communication (NFC) Services

NGC     12           Next Generation Crypto

NLA     2            Network Location Awareness

NLM     6            Network Location Manager

NLS     4            Nationalization Language Services

      Prefi        # of Names     Usage

      NPSM         1              Now Playing Session Manager

      NSI          1              Network Store Interface Service

      OLIC         4              OS Licensing

      OOBE         4              Out-Of-Box-Experience

      OSWN         8              OS Storage

      OS           2              Base OS

      OVRD         1              Window Override

      PAY          1              Payment Broker

      PDM          2              Print Device Manager

      PFG          2              Pen First Gesture

      PHNL         1              Phone Line

      PHNP         3              Phone Private

      PHN          2              Phone

      PMEM         1              Persistent Memory

      PNPA-D       13             Plug-and-Play Manager

      PO           54             Power Manager

      PROV         6              Runtime Provisioning

      PS           1              Kernel Process Manager

      PTI          1              Push to Install Service

      RDR          1              Kernel SMB Redirector

      RM           3              Game Mode Resource Manager

      RPCF         1              RPC Firewall Manager

      RTDS         2              Runtime Trigger Data Store

      RTSC         2              Recommended Troubleshooting Client

      SBS          1              Secure Boot State

      SCH          3              Secure Channel (SChannel)

      SCM          1              Service Control Manager

      SDO          1              Simple Device Orientation Change

      SEB          61             System Events Broker

      SFA          1              Secondary Factor Authentication

      SHEL         138            Shell

      SHR          3              Internet Connection Sharing (ICS)

      SIDX         1              Search Indexer

      SIO          2              Sign-In Options

Prefi   # of Names   Usage

SYKD    2            SkyDrive (Microsoft OneDrive)

SMSR    3            SMS Router

SMSS    1            Session Manager

SMS     1            SMS Messages

SPAC    2            Storage Spaces

SPCH    4            Speech

SPI     1            System Parameter Information

SPLT    4            Servicing

SRC     1            System Radio Change

SRP     1            System Replication

SRT     1            System Restore (Windows Recovery Environment)

SRUM    1            Sleep Study

SRV     2            Server Message Block (SMB/CIFS)

STOR    3            Storage

SUPP    1            Support

SYNC    1            Phone Synchronization

SYS     1            System

TB      1            Time Broker

TEAM    4            TeamOS Platform

TEL     5            Microsoft Defender ATP Telemetry

TETH    2            Tethering

THME    1            Themes

TKBN    24           Touch Keyboard Broker

TKBR    3            Token Broker

TMCN    1            Tablet Mode Control Notification

TOPE    1            Touch Event

TPM     9            Trusted Platform Module (TPM)

TZ      6            Time Zone

UBPM    4            User Mode Power Manager

UDA     1            User Data Access

UDM     1            User Device Manager

UMDF    2            User Mode Driver Framework

UMGR    9            User Manager

USB     8            Universal Serial Bus (USB) Stack

      Prefi      # of Names     Usage

      USO        16             Update Orchestrator

      UTS        2              User Trusted Signals

      UUS        1              Unknown

      UWF        4              Unified Write Filter

      VAN        1              Virtual Area Networks

      VPN        1              Virtual Private Networks

      VTSV       2              Vault Service

      WAAS       2              Windows-as-a-Service

      WBIO       1              Windows Biometrics

      WCDS       1              Wireless LAN

      WCM        6              Windows Connection Manager

      WDAG       2              Windows Defender Application Guard

      WDSC       1              Windows Defender Security Settings

      WEBA       2              Web Authentication

      WER        3              Windows Error Reporting

      WFAS       1              Windows Firewall Application Service

      WFDN       3              WiFi Display Connect (MiraCast)

      WFS        5              Windows Family Safety

      WHTP       2              Windows HTTP Library

      WIFI       15             Windows Wireless Network (WiFi) Stack

      WIL        20             Windows Instrumentation Library

      WNS        1              Windows Notification Service

      WOF        1              Windows Overlay Filter

      WOSC       9              Windows One Setting Configuration

      WPN        5              Windows Push Notifications

      WSC        1              Windows Security Center

      WSL        1              Windows Subsystem for Linux

      WSQM       1              Windows Software Quality Metrics (SQM)

      WUA        6              Windows Update

      WWAN       5              Wireless Wire Area Network (WWAN) Service

      XBOX       116            XBOX Services

WNF state names and storage
WNF state names are represented as random-looking 64-bit identifiers such as 0xAC41491908517835 and
then defined to a friendly name using C preprocessor macros such as WNF_AUDC_CAPTURE_ACTIVE. In
reality, however, these numbers are used to encode a version number (1), a lifetime (persistent versus
temporary), a scope (process-instanced, container-instanced, user-instanced, session-instanced, or
machine-instanced), a permanent data flag, and, for well-known state names, a prefix identifying the
owner of the state name followed by a unique sequence number. Figure 8-41 below shows this format.

                                    Permanent      Data       Name
    Owner Tag     Sequence Number                                        Version
                                       Data       Scope      Lifetime

     32 bits           21 bits        1 bit       4 bits      2 bits      4 bits

FIGURE 8-41 Format of a WNF state name.

   As mentioned earlier, state names can be well-known, which means that they are preprovisioned
for arbitrary out-of-order use. WNF achieves this by using the registry as a backing store, which will
encode the security descriptor, maximum data size, and type ID (if any) under the HKLM\SYSTEM\
CurrentControlSet\Control\Notifications registry key. For each state name, the information is stored
under a value matching the 64-bit encoded WNF state name identifier.

   Additionally, WNF state names can also be registered as persistent, meaning that they will remain
registered for the duration of the system’s uptime, regardless of the registrar’s process lifetime. This
mimics permanent objects that were shown in the “Object Manager” section of this chapter, and
similarly, the SeCreatePermanentPrivilege privilege is required to register such state names. These
WNF state names also live in the registry, but under the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\
CurrentVersion\VolatileNotifications key, and take advantage of the registry’s volatile flag to simply
disappear once the machine is rebooted. You might be confused to see “volatile” registry keys being
used for “persistent” WNF data—keep in mind that, as we just indicated, the persistence here is within
a boot session (versus attached to process lifetime, which is what WNF calls temporary, and which
we’ll see later).

    Furthermore, a WNF state name can be registered as permanent, which endows it with the abil-
ity to persist even across reboots. This is the type of “persistence” you may have been expecting
earlier. This is done by using yet another registry key, this time without the volatile flag set, pres-
ent at HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Notifications. Suffice it to say, the
SeCreatePermanentPrivilege is needed for this level of persistence as well. For these types of WNF
states, there is an additional registry key found below the hierarchy, called Data, which contains, for
each 64-bit encoded WNF state name identifier, the last change stamp, and the binary data. Note that
if the WNF state name was never written to on your machine, the latter information might be missing.

      Experiment: View WNF state names and data in the registry
      In this experiment, you use the Registry Editor to take a look at the well-known WNF names as
      well as some examples of permanent and persistent names. By looking at the raw binary registry
      data, you will be able to see the data and security descriptor information.

        Open Registry Editor and navigate to the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\
      CurrentControlSet\Control\Notifications key.

         Take a look at the values you see, which should look like the screenshot below.

        Double-click the value called 41950C3EA3BC0875 (WNF_SBS_UPDATE_AVAILABLE), which
      opens the raw registry data binary editor.

         Note how in the following figure, you can see the security descriptor (the highlighted binary
      data, which includes the SID S-1-5-18), as well as the maximum data size (0 bytes).

      Be careful not to change any of the values you see because this could make your system inop-
   erable or open it up to attack.

       Finally, if you want to see some examples of permanent WNF state, use the Registry Editor to go
   to the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Notifications\
   Data key, and look at the value 418B1D29A3BC0C75 (WNF_DSM_DSMAPPINSTALLED). An example
   is shown in the following figure, in which you can see the last application that was installed on this
   system (MicrosoftWindows.UndockedDevKit).

    Finally, a completely arbitrary state name can be registered as a temporary name. Such names have
a few distinctions from what was shown so far. First, because their names are not known in advance,
they do require the consumers and producers to have some way of passing the identifier between
each other. Normally, whoever either attempts to consume the state data first or to produce state data
instead ends up internally creating and/or using the matching registry key to store the data. However,
with temporary WNF state names, this isn’t possible because the name is based on a monotonically
increasing sequence number.

         Second, and related to this fact, no registry keys are used to encode temporary state names—they
      are tied to the process that registered a given instance of a state name, and all the data is stored in
      kernel pool only. These types of names, for example, are used to implement the per-process wake
      channels described earlier. Other uses include power manager notifications, and direct service triggers
      used by the SCM.

      WNF publishing and subscription model
      When publishers leverage WNF, they do so by following a standard pattern of registering the state
      name (in the case of non-well-known state names) and publishing some data that they want to expose.
      They can also choose not to publish any data but simply provide a 0-byte buffer, which serves as a way
      to “light up” the state and signals the subscribers anyway, even though no data was stored.

         Consumers, on the other hand, use WNF’s registration capabilities to associate a callback with a
      given WNF state name. Whenever a change is published, this callback is activated, and, for kernel
      mode, the caller is expected to call the appropriate WNF API to retrieve the data associated with the
      state name. (The buffer size is provided, allowing the caller to allocate some pool, if needed, or perhaps
      choose to use the stack.) For user mode, on the other hand, the underlying WNF notification mecha-
      nism inside of Ntdll.dll takes care of allocating a heap-backed buffer and providing a pointer to this
      data directly to the callback registered by the subscriber.

         In both cases, the callback also provides the change stamp, which acts as a unique monotonic se-
      quence number that can be used to detect missed published data (if a subscriber was inactive, for some
      reason, and the publisher continued to produce changes). Additionally, a custom context can be associ-
      ated with the callback, which is useful in C++ situations to tie the static function pointer to its class.

         Note WNF provides an API for querying whether a given WNF state name has been reg-
         istered yet (allowing a consumer to implement special logic if it detects the producer must
         not yet be active), as well as an API for querying whether there are any subscriptions cur-
         rently active for a given state name (allowing a publisher to implement special logic such as
         perhaps delaying additional data publication, which would override the previous state data).

         WNF manages what might be thousands of subscriptions by associating a data structure with each
      kernel and/or user-mode subscription and tying all the subscriptions for a given WNF state name
      together. This way, when a state name is published to, the list of subscriptions is parsed, and, for user
      mode, a delivery payload is added to a linked list followed by the signaling of a per-process notification
      event—this instructs the WNF delivery code in Ntdll.dll to call the API to consume the payload (and any
      other additional delivery payloads that were added to the list in the meantime). For kernel mode, the
      mechanism is simpler—the callback is synchronously executed in the context of the publisher.

          Note that it’s also possible to subscribe to notifications in two modes: data-notification mode, and
      meta-notification mode. The former does what one might expect—executing the callback when new
      data has been associated with a WNF state name. The latter is more interesting because it sends noti-
      fications when a new consumer has become active or inactive, as well as when a publisher has termi-
      nated (in the case of a volatile state name, where such a concept exists).

   Finally, it’s worth pointing out that user-mode subscriptions have an additional wrinkle: Because
Ntdll.dll manages the WNF notifications for the entire process, it’s possible for multiple components
(such as dynamic libraries/DLLs) to have requested their own callback for the same WNF state name
(but for different reasons and with different contexts). In this situation, the Ntdll.dll library needs to
associate registration contexts with each module, so that the per-process delivery payload can be
translated into the appropriate callback and only delivered if the requested delivery mode matches the
notification type of the subscriber.

   Experiment: Using the WnfDump utility to dump WNF state names
   In this experiment, you use one of the book tools (WnfDump) to register a WNF subscription to
   the WNF_SHEL_DESKTOP_APPLICATION_STARTED state name and the WNF_AUDC_RENDER
   state name.

      Execute wnfdump on the command line with the following flags:
            -i WNF_SHEL_DESKTOP_APPLICATION_STARTED -v

       The tool displays information about the state name and reads its data, such as shown in the
   following output:
   C:\>wnfdump.exe -i WNF_SHEL_DESKTOP_APPLICATION_STARTED -v
   WNF State Name                                    | S | L | P | AC | N | CurSize | MaxSize
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   WNF_SHEL_DESKTOP_APPLICATION_STARTED              | S | W | N | RW | I |      28 |     512
   65 00 3A 00 6E 00 6F 00-74 00 65 00 70 00 61 00 e.:.n.o.t.e.p.a.
   64 00 2E 00 65 00 78 00-65 00 00 00              d...e.x.e...

      Because this event is associated with Explorer (the shell) starting desktop applications, you will
   see one of the last applications you double-clicked, used the Start menu or Run menu for, or, in
   general, anything that the ShellExecute API was used on. The change stamp is also shown, which
   will end up a counter of how many desktop applications have been started this way since booting
   this instance of Windows (as this is a persistent
                                          persistent, but not permanent
                                                              permanent, event).

     Launch a new desktop application such as Paint by using the Start menu and try the wnfdump
   command again. You should see the change stamp incremented and new binary data shown.

WNF event aggregation
Although WNF on its own provides a powerful way for clients and services to exchange state informa-
tion and be notified of each other’s statuses, there may be situations where a given client/subscriber is
interested in more than a single WNF state name.

    For example, there may be a WNF state name that is published whenever the screen backlight
is off, another when the wireless card is powered off, and yet another when the user is no longer
physically present. A subscriber may want to be notified when all of these WNF state names have

      been published—yet another may require a notification when either the first two or the latter
      has been published.

         Unfortunately, the WNF system calls and infrastructure provided by Ntdll.dll to user-mode cli-
      ents (and equally, the API surface provided by the kernel) only operate on single WNF state names.
      Therefore, the kinds of examples given would require manual handling through a state machine that
      each subscriber would need to implement.

          To facilitate this common requirement, a component exists both in user mode as well as in kernel
      mode that handles the complexity of such a state machine and exposes a simple API: the Common
      Event Aggregator (CEA) implemented in CEA.SYS for kernel-mode callers and EventAggregation.dll
      for user-mode callers. These libraries export a set of APIs (such as EaCreateAggregatedEvent and
      EaSignalAggregatedEvent), which allow an interrupt-type behavior (a start callback while a WNF state
      is true, and a stop callback once the WNF state if false) as well as the combination of conditions with
      operators such as AND, OR, and NOT.

          Users of CEA include the USB Stack as well as the Windows Driver Foundation (WDF), which exposes
      a framework callback for WNF state name changes. Further, the Power Delivery Coordinator (Pdc.sys)
      uses CEA to build power state machines like the example at the beginning of this subsection. The
      Unified Background Process Manager (UBPM) described in Chapter 9 also relies on CEA to implement
      capabilities such as starting and stopping services based on low power and/or idle conditions.

         Finally, WNF is also integral to a service called the System Event Broker (SEB), implemented in
      SystemEventsBroker.dll and whose client library lives in SystemEventsBrokerClient.dll. The latter exports
      APIs such as SebRegisterPrivateEvent, SebQueryEventData, and SebSignalEvent, which are then passed
      through an RPC interface to the service. In user mode, SEB is a cornerstone of the Universal Windows
      Platform (UWP) and the various APIs that interrogate system state, and services that trigger themselves
      based on certain state changes that WNF exposes. Especially on OneCore-derived systems such as
      Windows Phone and XBOX (which, as was shown earlier, make up more than a few hundred of the well-
      known WNF state names), SEB is a central powerhouse of system notification capabilities, replacing
      the legacy role that the Window Manager provided through messages such as WM_DEVICEARRIVAL,
      WM_SESSIONENDCHANGE, WM_POWER, and others.

          SEB pipes into the Broker Infrastructure (BI) used by UWP applications and allows applications, even
      when running under an AppContainer, to access WNF events that map to systemwide state. In turn, for
      WinRT applications, the Windows.ApplicationModel.Background namespace exposes a SystemTrigger
      class, which implements IBackgroundTrigger, that pipes into the SEB’s RPC services and C++ API, for
      certain well-known system events, which ultimately transforms to WNF_SEB_XXX event state names.
      It serves as a perfect example of how something highly undocumented and internal, such as WNF, can
      ultimately be at the heart of a high-level documented API for Modern UWP application development.
      SEB is only one of the many brokers that UWP exposes, and at the end of the chapter, we cover back-
      ground tasks and the Broker Infrastructure in full detail.

User-mode debugging
  Support for user-mode debugging is split into three different modules. The first one is located in the
  executive itself and has the prefix Dbgk, which stands for Debugging Framework. It provides the neces-
  sary internal functions for registering and listening for debug events, managing the debug object, and
  packaging the information for consumption by its user-mode counterpart. The user-mode component
  that talks directly to Dbgk is located in the native system library, Ntdll.dll, under a set of APIs that begin
  with the prefix DbgUi. These APIs are responsible for wrapping the underlying debug object implemen-
  tation (which is opaque), and they allow all subsystem applications to use debugging by wrapping their
  own APIs around the DbgUi implementation. Finally, the third component in user-mode debugging
  belongs to the subsystem DLLs. It is the exposed, documented API (located in KernelBase.dll for the
  Windows subsystem) that each subsystem supports for performing debugging of other applications.

  Kernel support
  The kernel supports user-mode debugging through an object mentioned earlier: the debug object. It
  provides a series of system calls, most of which map directly to the Windows debugging API, typically
  accessed through the DbgUi layer first. The debug object itself is a simple construct, composed of a
  series of flags that determine state, an event to notify any waiters that debugger events are present,
  a doubly linked list of debug events waiting to be processed, and a fast mutex used for locking the
  object. This is all the information that the kernel requires for successfully receiving and sending debug-
  ger events, and each debugged process has a debug port member in its executive process structure
  pointing to this debug object.

     Once a process has an associated debug port, the events described in Table 8-32 can cause a debug
  event to be inserted into the list of events.

     Apart from the causes mentioned in the table, there are a couple of special triggering cases outside
  the regular scenarios that occur at the time a debugger object first becomes associated with a pro-
  cess. The first create process and create thread messages will be manually sent when the debugger is
  attached, first for the process itself and its main thread and followed by create thread messages for all
  the other threads in the process. Finally, load dll events for the executable being debugged, starting
  with Ntdll.dll and then all the current DLLs loaded in the debugged process will be sent. Similarly, if a
  debugger is already attached, but a cloned process (fork) is created, the same events will also be sent
  for the first thread in the clone (as instead of just Ntdll.dll, all other DLLs are also present in the cloned
  address space).

     There also exists a special flag that can be set on a thread, either during creation or dynamically,
  called hide from debugger. When this flag is turned on, which results in the HideFromDebugger flag in
  the TEB to be set, all operations done by the current thread, even if the debug port has a debug port,
  will not result in a debugger message.

      TABLE 8-32 Kernel-mode debugging events

      Event dentifier          Meaning                            riggered

      DbgKmExceptionApi        An exception has occurred.        KiDispatchException during an exception that occurred in
                                                                 user mode.

      DbgKmCreateThreadApi     A new thread has been created.    Startup of a user-mode thread.

      DbgKmCreateProcessApi    A new process has been created.   Startup of a user-mode thread that is the first thread in
                                                                 the process, if the CreateReported flag is not already set
                                                                 in EPROCESS.

      DbgKmExitThreadApi       A thread has exited.              Death of a user-mode thread, if the ThreadInserted flag is
                                                                 set in ETHREAD.

      DbgKmExitProcessApi      A process has exited.             Death of a user-mode thread that was the last thread in
                                                                 the process, if the ThreadInserted flag is set in ETHREAD.

      DbgKmLoadDllApi          A DLL was loaded.                 NtMapViewOfSection when the section is an image file
                                                                 (could be an EXE as well), if the SuppressDebugMsg flag is
                                                                 not set in the TEB.

      DbgKmUnloadDllApi        A DLL was unloaded.               NtUnmapViewOfSection when the section is an image file
                                                                 (could be an EXE as well), if the SuppressDebugMsg flag is
                                                                 not set in the TEB.

      DbgKmErrorReportApi      A user-mode exception must be     This special case message is sent over ALPC, not the de-
                               forwarded to WER.                 bug object, if the DbgKmExceptionApi message returned
                                                                 DBG_EXCEPTION_NOT_HANDLED, so that WER can now
                                                                 take over exception processing.

         Once a debugger object has been associated with a process, the process enters the deep freeze state
      that is also used for UWP applications. As a reminder, this suspends all threads and prevents any new
      remote thread creation. At this point, it is the debugger’s responsibility to start requesting that debug
      events be sent through. Debuggers usually request that debug events be sent back to user mode by
      performing a wait on the debug object. This call loops the list of debug events. As each request is re-
      moved from the list, its contents are converted from the internal DBGK structure to the native structure
      that the next layer up understands. As you’ll see, this structure is different from the Win32 structure as
      well, and another layer of conversion has to occur. Even after all pending debug messages have been
      processed by the debugger, the kernel does not automatically resume the process. It is the debugger’s
      responsibility to call the ContinueDebugEvent function to resume execution.

          Apart from some more complex handling of certain multithreading issues, the basic model for
      the framework is a simple matter of producers—code in the kernel that generates the debug events
      in the previous table—and consumers—the debugger waiting on these events and acknowledging
      their receipt.

      Native support
      Although the basic protocol for user-mode debugging is quite simple, it’s not directly usable by
      Windows applications—instead, it’s wrapped by the DbgUi functions in Ntdll.dll. This abstraction is
      required to allow native applications, as well as different subsystems, to use these routines (because
      code inside Ntdll.dll has no dependencies). The functions that this component provides are mostly
      analogous to the Windows API functions and related system calls. Internally, the code also provides
      the functionality required to create a debug object associated with the thread. The handle to a debug

object that is created is never exposed. It is saved instead in the thread environment block (TEB) of the
debugger thread that performs the attachment. (For more information on the TEB, see Chapter 4 of
Part 1.) This value is saved in the DbgSsReserved[1] field.

   When a debugger attaches to a process, it expects the process to be broken into—that is, an int 3
(breakpoint) operation should have happened, generated by a thread injected into the process. If this
didn’t happen, the debugger would never actually be able to take control of the process and would
merely see debug events flying by. Ntdll.dll is responsible for creating and injecting that thread into the
target process. Note that this thread is created with a special flag, which the kernel sets on the TEB, which
results in the SkipThreadAttach flag to be set, avoiding DLL_THREAD_ATTACH notifications and TLS slot
usage, which could cause unwanted side effects each time a debugger would break into the process.

   Finally, Ntdll.dll also provides APIs to convert the native structure for debug events into the struc-
ture that the Windows API understands. This is done by following the conversions in Table 8-33.

TABLE 8-33 Native to Win32 conversions

Native State Change            Win32 State Change               Details

DbgCreateThreadStateChange     CREATE_THREAD_DEBUG_EVENT

DbgCreateProcessStateChange    CREATE_PROCESS_DEBUG_EVENT       lpImageName is always NULL, and fUnicode is
                                                                always TRUE.

DbgExitThreadStateChange       EXIT_THREAD_DEBUG_EVENT

DbgExitProcessStateChange      EXIT_PROCESS_DEBUG_EVENT

DbgExceptionStateChange        OUTPUT_DEBUG_STRING_EVENT,       Determination is based on the Exception Code
DbgBreakpointStateChange       RIP_EVENT, or                    (which can be DBG_PRINTEXCEPTION_C /
DbgSingleStepStateChange       EXCEPTION_DEBUG_EVENT            DBG_PRINTEXCEPTION_WIDE_C,
                                                                DBG_RIPEXCEPTION, or something else).

DbgLoadDllStateChange          LOAD_DLL_DEBUG_EVENT             fUnicode is always TRUE

DbgUnloadDllStateChange        UNLOAD_DLL_DEBUG_EVENT

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing debugger objects
   Although you’ve been using WinDbg to do kernel-mode debugging, you can also use it to de-
   bug user-mode programs. Go ahead and try starting Notepad.exe with the debugger attached
   using these steps:

        1.   Run WinDbg, and then click File, Open Executable.

        2.   Navigate to the \Windows\System32\ directory and choose Notepad.exe.

        3.   You’re not going to do any debugging, so simply ignore whatever might come up.
             You can type g in the command window to instruct WinDbg to continue executing
             Notepad.

     Now run Process Explorer and be sure the lower pane is enabled and configured to show
   open handles. (Select View, Lower Pane View, and then Handles.) You also want to look at un-
   named handles, so select View, Show Unnamed Handles And Mappings.

            Next, click the Windbg.exe (or EngHost.exe, if you’re using the WinDbg Preview) process
         and look at its handle table. You should see an open, unnamed handle to a debug object. (You
         can organize the table by Type to find this entry more readily.) You should see something like
         the following:

             You can try right-clicking the handle and closing it. Notepad should disappear, and the
         following message should appear in WinDbg:
         ERROR: WaitForEvent failed, NTSTATUS 0xC0000354
         This usually indicates that the debuggee has been
         killed out from underneath the debugger.
         You can use .tlist to see if the debuggee still exists.

            In fact, if you look at the description for the NTSTATUS code given, you will find the text: “An
         attempt to do an operation on a debug port failed because the port is in the process of being
         deleted,” which is exactly what you’ve done by closing the handle.

         As you can see, the native DbgUi interface doesn’t do much work to support the framework except
      for this abstraction. The most complicated task it does is the conversion between native and Win32
      debugger structures. This involves several additional changes to the structures.

      Windows subsystem support
      The final component responsible for allowing debuggers such as Microsoft Visual Studio or WinDbg to
      debug user-mode applications is in KernelBase.dll. It provides the documented Windows APIs. Apart
      from this trivial conversion of one function name to another, there is one important management
      job that this side of the debugging infrastructure is responsible for: managing the duplicated file and
      thread handles.

         Recall that each time a load DLL event is sent, a handle to the image file is duplicated by the kernel
      and handed off in the event structure, as is the case with the handle to the process executable dur-
      ing the create process event. During each wait call, KernelBase.dll checks whether this is an event that

   results in a new duplicated process and/or thread handles from the kernel (the two create events). If so,
   it allocates a structure in which it stores the process ID, thread ID, and the thread and/or process handle
   associated with the event. This structure is linked into the first DbgSsReserved array index in the TEB,
   where we mentioned the debug object handle is stored. Likewise, KernelBase.dll also checks for exit
   events. When it detects such an event, it “marks” the handles in the data structure.

      Once the debugger is finished using the handles and performs the continue call, KernelBase.dll
   parses these structures, looks for any handles whose threads have exited, and closes the handles for
   the debugger. Otherwise, those threads and processes would never exit because there would always be
   open handles to them if the debugger were running.

Packaged applications
   Starting with Windows 8, there was a need for some APIs that run on different kind of devices, from a
   mobile phone, up to an Xbox and to a fully-fledged personal computer. Windows was indeed starting
   to be designed even for new device types, which use different platforms and CPU architectures (ARM
   is a good example). A new platform-agnostic application architecture, Windows Runtime (also known
   as “WinRT”) was first introduced in Windows 8. WinRT supported development in C++, JavaScript, and
   managed languages (C#, VB.Net, and so on), was based on COM, and supported natively both x86,
   AMD64, and ARM processors. Universal Windows Platform (UWP) is the evolution of WinRT. It has
   been designed to overcome some limitations of WinRT and it is built on the top of it. UWP applications
   no longer need to indicate which OS version has been developed for in their manifest, but instead they
   target one or more device families.

       UWP provides Universal Device Family APIs, which are guaranteed to be present in all device fami-
   lies, and Extension APIs, which are device specific. A developer can target one device type, adding the
   extension SDK in its manifest; furthermore, she can conditionally test the presence of an API at runtime
   and adapt the app’s behavior accordingly. In this way, a UWP app running on a smartphone may start
   behaving the way it would if it were running on a PC when the phone is connected to a desktop com-
   puter or a suitable docking station.

      UWP provides multiple services to its apps:

      ■   Adaptive controls and input—the graphical elements respond to the size and DPI of the screen
          by adjusting their layout and scale. Furthermore, the input handling is abstracted to the under-
          lying app. This means that a UWP app works well on different screens and with different kinds
          of input devices, like touch, a pen, a mouse, keyboard, or an Xbox controller

      ■   One centralized store for every UWP app, which provides a seamless install, uninstall, and
          upgrade experience

      ■   A unified design system, called Fluent (integrated in Visual Studio)

      ■   A sandbox environment, which is called AppContainer

         AppContainers were originally designed for WinRT and are still used for UWP applications. We
      already covered the security aspects of AppContainers in Chapter 7 of Part 1.

          To properly execute and manage UWP applications, a new application model has been built in
      Windows, which is internally called AppModel and stands for “Modern Application Model.” The
      Modern Application Model has evolved and has been changed multiple times during each release of
      the OS. In this book, we analyze the Windows 10 Modern Application Model. Multiple components are
      part of the new model and cooperate to correctly manage the states of the packaged application and
      its background activities in an energy-efficient manner.

         ■      ost Activit     anager A         The Host activity manager is a new component, introduced
             in Windows 10, which replaces and integrates many of the old components that control the
             life (and the states) of a UWP application (Process Lifetime Manager, Foreground Manager,
             Resource Policy, and Resource Manager). The Host Activity Manager lives in the Background
             Task Infrastructure service (BrokerInfrastructure), not to be confused with the Background
             Broker Infrastructure component, and works deeply tied to the Process State Manager. It is
             implemented in two different libraries, which represent the client (Rmclient.dll) and server
             (PsmServiceExtHost.dll) interface.

         ■   Process State Manager (PSM) PSM has been partly replaced by HAM and is considered
             part of the latter (actually PSM became a HAM client). It maintains and stores the state of
             each host of the packaged application. It is implemented in the same service of the HAM
             (BrokerInfrastructure), but in a different DLL: Psmsrv.dll.

         ■   Application Activation Manager (AAM) AAM is the component responsible in the dif-
             ferent kinds and types of activation of a packaged application. It is implemented in the
             ActivationManager.dll library, which lives in the User Manager service. Application Activation
             Manager is a HAM client.

         ■   View Manager (VM) VM detects and manages UWP user interface events and activities
             and talks with HAM to keep the UI application in the foreground and in a nonsuspended state.
             Furthermore, VM helps HAM in detecting when a UWP application goes into background
             state. View Manager is implemented in the CoreUiComponents.dll .Net managed library, which
             depends on the Modern Execution Manager client interface (ExecModelClient.dll) to properly
             register with HAM. Both libraries live in the User Manager service, which runs in a Sihost process
             (the service needs to proper manage UI events)

         ■   Background Broker Infrastructure (BI) BI manages the applications background tasks, their
             execution policies, and events. The core server is implemented mainly in the bisrv.dll library,
             manages the events that the brokers generate, and evaluates the policies used to decide whether
             to run a background task. The Background Broker Infrastructure lives in the BrokerInfrastructure
             service and, at the time of this writing, is not used for Centennial applications.

        There are some other minor components that compose the new application model that we have not
      mentioned here and are beyond the scope of this book.

   With the goal of being able to run even standard Win32 applications on secure devices like
Windows 10 S, and to enable the conversion of old application to the new model, Microsoft has de-
signed the Desktop Bridge (internally called Centennial). The bridge is available to developers through
Visual Studio or the Desktop App Converter. Running a Win32 application in an AppContainer, even if
possible, is not recommended, simply because the standard Win32 applications are designed to access
a wider system API surface, which is much reduced in AppContainers.

UWP applications
We already covered an introduction of UWP applications and described the security environment in
which they run in Chapter 7 of Part 1. To better understand the concepts expressed in this chapter, it is
useful to define some basic properties of the modern UWP applications. Windows 8 introduced signifi-
cant new properties for processes:

   ■   Package identity

   ■   Application identity

   ■   AppContainer

   ■   Modern UI

    We have already extensively analyzed the AppContainer (see Chapter 7 in Part 1). When the user
downloads a modern UWP application, the application usually came encapsulated in an AppX package.
A package can contain different applications that are published by the same author and are linked to-
gether. A package identity is a logical construct that uniquely defines a package. It is composed of five
parts: name, version, architecture, resource id, and publisher. The package identity can be represented
in two ways: by using a Package Full Name (formerly known as Package Moniker), which is a string
composed of all the single parts of the package identity, concatenated by an underscore character; or
by using a Package Family name, which is another string containing the package name and publisher.
The publisher is represented in both cases by using a Base32-encoded string of the full publisher name.
In the UWP world, the terms “Package ID” and “Package full name” are equivalent. For example, the
Adobe Photoshop package is distributed with the following full name:

  AdobeSystemsIncorporated.AdobePhotoshopExpress_2.6.235.0_neutral_split.scale-125_
ynb6jyjzte8ga, where

   ■   AdobeSystemsIncorporated.AdobePhotoshopExpress is the name of the package.

   ■   2.6.235.0 is the version.

   ■   neutral is the targeting architecture.

   ■   split_scale is the resource id.

   ■   ynb6jyjzte8ga is the base32 encoding (Crockford’s variant, which excludes the letters i, l, u, and
       o to avoid confusion with digits) of the publisher.

         Its package family name is the simpler “AdobeSystemsIncorporated.AdobePhotoshopExpress
      _ynb6jyjzte8ga” string.

         Every application that composes the package is represented by an application identity. An applica-
      tion identity uniquely identifies the collection of windows, processes, shortcuts, icons, and functionality
      that form a single user-facing program, regardless of its actual implementation (so this means that in
      the UWP world, a single application can be composed of different processes that are still part of the
      same application identity). The application identity is represented by a simple string (in the UWP world,
      called Package Relative Application ID, often abbreviated as PRAID). The latter is always combined with
      the package family name to compose the Application User Model ID (often abbreviated as AUMID). For
      example, the Windows modern Start menu application has the following AUMID: Microsoft.Windows.
      ShellExperienceHost_cw5n1h2txyewy!App, where the App part is the PRAID.

         Both the package full name and the application identity are located in the WIN://SYSAPPID Security
      attribute of the token that describes the modern application security context. For an extensive descrip-
      tion of the security environment in which the UWP applications run, refer to Chapter 7 in Part 1.

      Centennial applications
      Starting from Windows 10, the new application model became compatible with standard Win32 applica-
      tions. The only procedure that the developer needs to do is to run the application installer program with
      a special Microsoft tool called Desktop App Converter. The Desktop App Converter launches the installer
      under a sandboxed server Silo (internally called Argon Container) and intercepts all the file system and
      registry I/O that is needed to create the application package, storing all its files in VFS (virtualized file
      system) private folders. Entirely describing the Desktop App Converter application is outside the scope of
      this book. You can find more details of Windows Containers and Silos in Chapter 3 of Part 1.

         The Centennial runtime, unlike UWP applications, does not create a sandbox where Centennial
      processes are run, but only applies a thin virtualization layer on the top of them. As result, compared
      to standard Win32 programs, Centennial applications don’t have lower security capabilities, nor do
      they run with a lower integrity-level token. A Centennial application can even be launched under
      an administrative account. This kind of application runs in application silos (internally called Helium
      Container), which, with the goal of providing State separation while maintaining compatibility, provides
      two forms of “jails”: Registry Redirection and Virtual File System (VFS). Figure 8-42 shows an example of
      a Centennial application: Kali Linux.

         At package activation, the system applies registry redirection to the application and merges the
      main system hives with the Centennial Application registry hives. Each Centennial application can
      include three different registry hives when installed in the user workstation: registry.dat, user.dat,
      and (optionally) userclasses.dat. The registry files generated by the Desktop Convert represent “im-
      mutable” hives, which are written at installation time and should not change. At application startup,
      the Centennial runtime merges the immutable hives with the real system registry hives (actually, the
      Centennial runtime executes a “detokenizing” procedure because each value stored in the hive con-
      tains relative values).

FIGURE 8-42 Kali Linux distributed on the Windows Store is a typical example of Centennial application.

    The registry merging and virtualization services are provided by the Virtual Registry Namespace
Filter driver (WscVReg), which is integrated in the NT kernel (Configuration Manager). At package
activation time, the user mode AppInfo service communicates with the VRegDriver device with the
goal of merging and redirecting the registry activity of the Centennial applications. In this model, if the
app tries to read a registry value that is present in the virtualized hives, the I/O is actually redirected to
the package hives. A write operation to this kind of value is not permitted. If the value does not already
exist in the virtualized hive, it is created in the real hive without any kind of redirection at all. A different
kind of redirection is instead applied to the entire HKEY_CURRENT_USER root key. In this key, each new
subkey or value is stored only in the package hive that is stored in the following path: C:\ProgramData\
Packages\<PackageName>\<UserSid>\SystemAppData\Helium\Cache. Table 8-34 shows a summary of
the Registry virtualization applied to Centennial applications:

TABLE 8-34 Registry virtualization applied to Centennial applications

 Operation                             Result

 Read or enumeration of HKEY_          The operation returns a dynamic merge of the package hives with the local
 LOCAL_MACHINE\Software                system counterpart. Registry keys and values that exist in the package hives
                                       always have precedence with respect to keys and values that already exist in
                                       the local system.

 All writes to HKEY_CURRENT_USER       Redirected to the Centennial package virtualized hive.

 All writes inside the package         Writes to HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software are not allowed if a registry value
                                       exists in one of the package hives.

 All writes outside the package        Writes to HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software are allowed as long as the value
                                       does not already exist in one of the package hives.

         When the Centennial runtime sets up the Silo application container, it walks all the file and direc-
      tories located into the VFS folder of the package. This procedure is part of the Centennial Virtual File
      System configuration that the package activation provides. The Centennial runtime includes a list of
      mapping for each folder located in the VFS directory, as shown in Table 8-35.

      TABLE 8-35 List of system folders that are virtualized for Centennial apps

      Folder Name                 Redirection Target                    Architecture

      SystemX86                   C:\Windows\SysWOW64                   32-bit/64-bit

      System                      C:\Windows\System32                   32-bit/64-bit

      SystemX64                   C:\Windows\System32                   64-bit only

      ProgramFilesX86             C:\Program Files (x86)                32-bit/64-bit

      ProgramFilesX64             C:\Program Files                      64-bit only

      ProgramFilesCommonX86       C:\Program Files (x86)\Common Files   32-bit/64-bit

      ProgramFilesCommonX64       C:\Program Files\Common Files         64-bit only

      Windows                     C:\Windows                            Neutral

      CommonAppData               C:\ProgramData                        Neutral

         The File System Virtualization is provided by three different drivers, which are heavily used for
      Argon containers:

         ■        indows ind inifilter driver ind lt Manages the redirection of the Centennial ap-
               plication’s files. This means that if the Centennial app wants to read or write to one of its existing
               virtualized files, the I/O is redirected to the file’s original position. When the application creates
               instead a file on one of the virtualized folders (for example, in C:\Windows), and the file does
               not already exist, the operation is allowed (assuming that the user has the needed permissions)
               and the redirection is not applied.

         ■       indows Container solation inifilter driver             ci s Responsible for merging the
               content of different virtualized folders (called layers) and creating a unique view. Centennial
               applications use this driver to merge the content of the local user’s application data folder
               (usually C:\Users\<UserName>\AppData) with the app’s application cache folder, located in C:\
               User\<UserName>\Appdata\Local\Packages\<Package Full Name\LocalCache. The driver is
               even able to manage the merge of multiple packages, meaning that each package can operate
               on its own private view of the merged folders. To support this feature, the driver stores a Layer
               ID of each package in the Reparse point of the target folder. In this way, it can construct a layer
               map in memory and is able to operate on different private areas (internally called Scratch areas).
               This advanced feature, at the time of this writing, is configured only for related set, a feature
               described later in the chapter.

         ■       indows Container a e irtuali ation inifilter driver                   cn s While Wcifs driver
               merges multiple folders, Wcnfs is used by Centennial to set up the name redirection of the local
               user application data folder. Unlike from the previous case, when the app creates a new file or
               folder in the virtualized application data folder, the file is stored in the application cache folder,
               and not in the real one, regardless of whether the file already exists.

   One important concept to keep in mind is that the BindFlt filter operates on single files, whereas Wcnfs
and Wcifs drivers operate on folders. Centennial uses minifilters’ communication ports to correctly set up
the virtualized file system infrastructure. The setup process is completed using a message-based commu-
nication system (where the Centennial runtime sends a message to the minifilter and waits for its re-
sponse). Table 8-36 shows a summary of the file system virtualization applied to Centennial applications.

TABLE 8-36 File system virtualization applied to Centennial applications

Operation                               Result

Read or enumeration of a well-known     The operation returns a dynamic merge of the corresponding VFS folder with
Windows folder                          the local system counterpart. File that exists in the VFS folder always had pre-
                                        cedence with respect to files that already exist in the local system one.

Writes on the application data folder   All the writes on the application data folder are redirected to the local
                                        Centennial application cache.

All writes inside the package folder    Forbidden, read-only.

All writes outside the package folder   Allowed if the user has permission.

The Host Activity Manager
Windows 10 has unified various components that were interacting with the state of a packaged ap-
plication in a noncoordinated way. As a result, a brand-new component, called Host Activity Manager
(HAM) became the central component and the only one that manages the state of a packaged applica-
tion and exposes a unified API set to all its clients.

    Unlike its predecessors, the Host Activity Manager exposes activity-based interfaces to its clients.
A host is the object that represents the smallest unit of isolation recognized by the Application model.
Resources, suspend/resume and freeze states, and priorities are managed as a single unit, which usu-
ally corresponds to a Windows Job object representing the packaged application. The job object may
contain only a single process for simple applications, but it could contain even different processes for
applications that have multiple background tasks (such as multimedia players, for example).

   In the new Modern Application Model, there are three job types:

   ■   Mixed A mix of foreground and background activities but typically associated with the fore-
       ground part of the application. Applications that include background tasks (like music playing
       or printing) use this kind of job type.

   ■   Pure     A host that is used for purely background work.

   ■     ste    A host that executes Windows code on behalf of the application (for example, back-
       ground downloads).

   An activity always belongs to a host and represents the generic interface for client-specific concepts
such as windows, background tasks, task completions, and so on. A host is considered “Active” if its
job is unfrozen and it has at least one running activity. The HAM clients are components that interact
and control the lifetime of activities. Multiple components are HAM clients: View Manager, Broker
Infrastructure, various Shell components (like the Shell Experience Host), AudioSrv, Task completions,
and even the Windows Service Control Manager.

        The Modern application’s lifecycle consists of four states: running, suspending, suspend-complete,
      and suspended (states and their interactions are shown in Figure 8-43.)

         ■    Running The state where an application is executing part of its code, other than when it's
              suspending. An application could be in “running” state not only when it is in a foreground state
              but even when it is running background tasks, playing music, printing, or any number of other
              background scenarios.

         ■    Suspending This state represents a time-limited transition state that happens where HAM
              asks the application to suspend. HAM can do this for different reasons, like when the applica-
              tion loses the foreground focus, when the system has limited resources or is entering a battery-
              safe mode, or simply because an app is waiting for some UI event. When this happens, an
              app has a limited amount of time to go to the suspended state (usually 5 seconds maximum);
              otherwise, it will be terminated.

         ■    SuspendComplete This state represents an application that has finished suspending and
              notifies the system that it is done. Therefore, its suspend procedure is considered completed.

         ■    Suspended Once an app completes suspension and notifies the system, the system freez-
              es the application’s job object using the NtSetInformationJobObject API call (through the
              JobObjectFreezeInformation information class) and, as a result, none of the app code can run.

                     Suspending                         SuspendComplete

         Running                                                          Suspended
         (Active)                                                          (Halted)

      FIGURE 8-43 Scheme of the lifecycle of a packaged application.

          With the goal of preserving system efficiency and saving system resources, the Host Activity
      Manager by default will always require an application to suspend. HAM clients need to require keep-
      ing an application alive to HAM. For foreground applications, the component responsible in keeping
      the app alive is the View Manager. The same applies for background tasks: Broker Infrastructure is the
      component responsible for determining which process hosting the background activity should remain
      alive (and will request to HAM to keep the application alive).

         Packaged applications do not have a Terminated state. This means that an application does not
      have a real notion of an Exit or Terminate state and should not try to terminate itself. The actual model
      for terminating a Packaged application is that first it gets suspended, and then HAM, if required, calls
      NtTerminateJobObject API on the application's job object. HAM automatically manages the app life-
      time and destroys the process only as needed. HAM does not decide itself to terminate the application;
      instead, its clients are required to do so (the View Manager or the Application Activation Manager are
      good examples). A packaged application can’t distinguish whether it has been suspended or termi-
      nated. This allows Windows to automatically restore the previous state of the application even if it has
      been terminated or if the system has been rebooted. As a result, the packaged application model is
      completely different from the standard Win32 application model.

   To properly suspend and resume a Packaged application, the Host Activity manager uses the new
PsFreezeProcess and PsThawProcess kernel APIs. The process Freeze and Thaw operations are similar to
suspend and resume, with the following two major differences:

   ■   A new thread that is injected or created in a context of a deep-frozen process will not
       run even in case the CREATE_SUSPENDED flag is not used at creation time or in case the
       NtResumeProcess API is called to start the thread.

   ■   A new Freeze counter is implemented in the EPROCESS data structures. This means that a pro-
       cess could be frozen multiple times. To allow a process to be thawed, the total number of thaw
       requests must be equal to the number of freeze requests. Only in this case are all the nonsus-
       pended threads allowed to run.

The State Repository
The Modern Application Model introduces a new way for storing packaged applications’ settings,
package dependencies, and general application data. The State Repository is the new central store
that contains all this kind of data and has an important central rule in the management of all modern
applications: Every time an application is downloaded from the store, installed, activated, or removed,
new data is read or written to the repository. The classical usage example of the State Repository is
represented by the user clicking on a tile in the Start menu. The Start menu resolves the full path of
the application’s activation file (which could be an EXE or a DLL, as already seen in Chapter 7 of Part 1),
reading from the repository. (This is actually simplified, because the ShellExecutionHost process enu-
merates all the modern applications at initialization time.)

    The State Repository is implemented mainly in two libraries: Windows.StateRepository.dll and
Windows.StateRepositoryCore.dll. Although the State Repository Service runs the server part of the
repository, UWP applications talk with the repository using the Windows.StateRepositoryClient.dll
library. (All the repository APIs are full trust, so WinRT clients need a Proxy to correctly communicate
with the server. This is the rule of another DLL, named Windows.StateRepositoryPs.dll.) The root loca-
tion of the State Repository is stored in the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\
Appx\ PackageRepositoryRoot registry value, which usually points to the C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\
Windows\ AppRepository path.

   The State Repository is implemented across multiple databases, called partitions. Tables in the data-
base are called entities. Partitions have different access and lifetime constraints:

   ■   Machine This database includes package definitions, an application’s data and identities, and
       primary and secondary tiles (used in the Start menu), and it is the master registry that defines
       who can access which package. This data is read extensively by different components (like
       the TileDataRepository library, which is used by Explorer and the Start menu to manage the
       different tiles), but it’s written primarily by the AppX deployment (rarely by some other minor
       components). The Machine partition is usually stored in a file called StateRepository-Machine.
       srd located into the state repository root folder.

   ■     eplo ent Stores machine-wide data mostly used only by the deployment service
       (AppxSvc) when a new package is registered or removed from the system. It includes the

             applications file list and a copy of each modern application’s manifest file. The Deployment
             partition is usually stored in a file called StateRepository-Deployment.srd.

         All partitions are stored as SQLite databases. Windows compiles its own version of SQLite into the
      StateRepository.Core.dll library. This library exposes the State Repository Data Access Layer (also known
      as DAL) APIs that are mainly wrappers to the internal database engine and are called by the State
      Repository service.

         Sometimes various components need to know when some data in the State Repository is written
      or modified. In Windows 10 Anniversary update, the State Repository has been updated to support
      changes and events tracking. It can manage different scenarios:

         ■   A component wants to subscribe for data changes for a certain entity. The component receives
             a callback when the data is changed and implemented using a SQL transaction. Multiple SQL
             transactions are part of a Deployment operation. At the end of each database transaction,
             the State Repository determines if a Deployment operation is completed, and, if so, calls each
             registered listener.

         ■   A process is started or wakes from Suspend and needs to discover what data has changed since
             it was last notified or looked at. State Repository could satisfy this request using the ChangeId
             field, which, in the tables that supports this feature, represents a unique temporal identifier
             of a record.

         ■   A process retrieves data from the State Repository and needs to know if the data has changed
             since it was last examined. Data changes are always recorded in compatible entities via a new
             table called Changelog. The latter always records the time, the change ID of the event that cre-
             ated the data, and, if applicable, the change ID of the event that deleted the data.

          The modern Start menu uses the changes and events tracking feature of the State Repository to work
      properly. Every time the ShellExperienceHost process starts, it requests the State Repository to notify
      its controller (NotificationController.dll) every time a tile is modified, created, or removed. When the
      user installs or removes a modern application through the Store, the application deployment server
      executes a DB transaction for inserting or removing the tile. The State Repository, at the end of the
      transaction, signals an event that wakes up the controller. In this way, the Start menu can modify its ap-
      pearance almost in real time.

         Note In a similar way, the modern Start menu is automatically able to add or remove an
         entry for every new standard Win32 application installed. The application setup program
         usually creates one or more shortcuts in one of the classic Start menu folder locations
         (systemwide path: C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\ Windows\Start Menu, or per-user path:
         C:\Users\<UserName>\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu). The modern
         Start menu uses the services provided by the AppResolver library to register file system
         notifications on all the Start menu folders (through the ReadDirectoryChangesW Win32 API).
         In this way, whenever a new shortcut is created in the monitored folders, the library can get
         a callback and signal the Start menu to redraw itself.

EXPERIMENT: Witnessing the state repository
You can open each partition of the state repository fairly easily using your preferred SQLite
browser application. For this experiment, you need to download and install an SQLite browser,
like the open-source DB Browser for SQLite, which you can download from http://sqlitebrowser.
                                                                                          parti--
org/. The State Repository path is not accessible by standard users. Furthermore, each parti
org/
tion’s file could be in use in the exact moment that you will access it. Thus, you need to copy
the database file in another folder before trying to open it with the SQLite browser. Open
an administrative command prompt (by typing cmd in the Cortana search box and select-
ing Run As Administrator after right-clicking the Command Prompt label) and insert the
following commands:
C:\WINDOWS\system32>cd “C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\Windows\AppRepository”
C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\Windows\AppRepository>copy StateRepository-Machine.srd
"%USERPROFILE%\Documents"

   In this way, you have copied the State Repository machine partition into your Documents
folder. The next stage is to open it. Start DB Browser for SQLite using the link created in the
Start menu or the Cortana search box and click the Open Database button. Navigate to the
Documents folder, select All Files (*) in the ile pe combo box (the state repository database
doesn’t use a standard SQLite file extension), and open the copied StateRepository-machine.

      srd file. The main view of DB Browser for SQLite is the database structure. For this experiment
      you need to choose the Browse Data sheet and navigate through the tables like Package,
      Application, PackageLocation, and PrimaryTile.

        The Application Activation Manager and many other components of the Modern Application
      Model use standard SQL queries to extract the needed data from the State Repository. For ex-
      ample, to extract the package location and the executable name of a modern application, a SQL
      query like the following one could be used:
      SELECT p.DisplayName, p.PackageFullName, pl.InstalledLocation, a.Executable, pm.Name
      FROM Package AS p
      INNER JOIN PackageLocation AS pl ON p._PackageID=pl.Package
      INNER JOIN PackageFamily AS pm ON p.PackageFamily=pm._PackageFamilyID
      INNER JOIN Application AS a ON a.Package=p._PackageID
      WHERE pm.PackageFamilyName="<Package Family Name>"

         The DAL (Data Access Layer) uses similar queries to provide services to its clients.

         You can annotate the total number of records in the table and then install a new application
      from the store. If, after the deployment process is completed, you again copy the database file,
      you will find that number of the records change. This happens in multiple tables. Especially if the
      new app installs a new tile, even the PrimaryTile table adds a record for the new tile shown in the
      Start menu.

The Dependency Mini Repository
Opening an SQLite database and extracting the needed information through an SQL query could be
an expensive operation. Furthermore, the current architecture requires some interprocess communica-
tion done through RPC. Those two constraints sometimes are too restrictive to be satisfied. A classic
example is represented by a user launching a new application (maybe an Execution Alias) through the
command-line console. Checking the State Repository every time the system spawns a process intro-
duces a big performance issue. To fix these problems, the Application Model has introduced another
smaller store that contains Modern applications’ information: the Dependency Mini Repository (DMR).

    Unlike from the State Repository, the Dependency Mini Repository does not make use of any
database but stores the data in a Microsoft-proprietary binary format that can be accessed by any file
system in any security context (even a kernel-mode driver could possibly parse the DMR data). The
System Metadata directory, which is represented by a folder named Packages in the State Repository
root path, contains a list of subfolders, one for every installed package. The Dependency Mini Repository
is represented by a .pckgdep file, named as the user’s SID. The DMR file is created by the Deployment
service when a package is registered for a user (for further details, see the “Package registration” sec-
tion later in this chapter).

   The Dependency Mini Repository is heavily used when the system creates a process that belongs to
a packaged application (in the AppX Pre-CreateProcess extension). Thus, it’s entirely implemented in
the Win32 kernelbase.dll (with some stub functions in kernel.appcore.dll). When a DMR file is opened
at process creation time, it is read, parsed, and memory-mapped into the parent process. After the
child process is created, the loader code maps it even in the child process. The DMR file contains vari-
ous information, including

   ■   Package information, like the ID, full name, full path, and publisher

   ■   Application information: application user model ID and relative ID, description, display name,
       and graphical logos

   ■   Security context: AppContainer SID and capabilities

   ■   Target platform and the package dependencies graph (used in case a package depends on one
       or more others)

     The DMR file is designed to contain even additional data in future Windows versions, if required.
Using the Dependency Mini Repository file, the process creation is fast enough and does not require a
query into the State Repository. Noteworthy is that the DMR file is closed after the process creation. So,
it is possible to rewrite the .pckgdep file, adding an optional package even when the Modern applica-
tion is executing. In this way, the user can add a feature to its modern application without restarting
it. Some small parts of the package mini repository (mostly only the package full name and path) are
replicated into different registry keys as cache for a faster access. The cache is often used for common
operations (like understanding if a package exists).

      Background tasks and the Broker Infrastructure
      UWP applications usually need a way to run part of their code in the background. This code doesn’t
      need to interact with the main foreground process. UWP supports background tasks, which provide
      functionality to the application even when the main process is suspended or not running. There are
      multiple reasons why an application may use background tasks: real-time communications, mails, IM,
      multimedia music, video player, and so on. A background task could be associated by triggers and
      conditions. A trigger is a global system asynchronous event that, when it happens, signals the starting
      of a background task. The background task at this point may or may be not started based on its applied
      conditions. For example, a background task used in an IM application could start only when the user
      logs on (a system event trigger) and only if the Internet connection is available (a condition).

         In Windows 10, there are two types of background tasks:

         ■   In-process background task The application code and its background task run in the same
             process. From a developer’s point of view, this kind of background task is easier to implement, but
             it has the big drawback that if a bug hits its code, the entire application crashes. The in-process
             background task doesn’t support all triggers available for the out-of-process background tasks.

         ■   Out-of-process background task The application code and its background task run in dif-
             ferent processes (the process could run in a different job object, too). This type of background
             task is more resilient, runs in the backgroundtaskhost.exe host process, and can use all the trig-
             gers and the conditions. If a bug hits the background task, this will never kill the entire applica-
             tion. The main drawback is originated from the performance of all the RPC code that needs to
             be executed for the interprocess communication between different processes.

         To provide the best user experience for the user, all background tasks have an execution time
      limit of 30 seconds total. After 25 seconds, the Background Broker Infrastructure service calls the
      task’s Cancellation handler (in WinRT, this is called OnCanceled event). When this event happens,
      the background task still has 5 seconds to completely clean up and exit. Otherwise, the process that
      contains the Background Task code (which could be BackgroundTaskHost.exe in case of out-of-pro-
      cess tasks; otherwise, it’s the application process) is terminated. Developers of personal or business
      UWP applications can remove this limit, but such an application could not be published in the official
      Microsoft Store.

          The Background Broker Infrastructure (BI) is the central component that manages all the
      Background tasks. The component is implemented mainly in bisrv.dll (the server side), which lives in
      the Broker Infrastructure service. Two types of clients can use the services provided by the Background
      Broker Infrastructure: Standard Win32 applications and services can import the bi.dll Background Broker
      Infrastructure client library; WinRT applications always link to biwinrt.dll, the library that provides WinRT
      APIs to modern applications. The Background Broker Infrastructure could not exist without the brokers.
      The brokers are the components that generate the events that are consumed by the Background Broker
      Server. There are multiple kinds of brokers. The most important are the following:

         ■     ste Event ro er Provides triggers for system events like network connections’ state
             changes, user logon and logoff, system battery state changes, and so on

         ■   Time Broker      Provides repetitive or one-shot timer support

    ■     Network Connection Broker Provides a way for the UWP applications to get an event when
          a connection is established on certain ports

    ■     Device Services Broker Provides device arrivals triggers (when a user connects or discon-
          nects a device). Works by listening Pnp events originated from the kernel

    ■     Mobile Broad Band Experience Broker                        Provides all the critical triggers for phones and SIMs

   The server part of a broker is implemented as a windows service. The implementation is different
for every broker. Most work by subscribing to WNF states (see the “Windows Notification Facility” sec-
tion earlier in this chapter for more details) that are published by the Windows kernel; others are built
on top of standard Win32 APIs (like the Time Broker). Covering the implementation details of all the
brokers is outside the scope of this book. A broker can simply forward events that are generated some-
where else (like in the Windows kernel) or can generates new events based on some other conditions
and states. Brokers forward events that they managed through WNF: each broker creates a WNF state
name that the background infrastructure subscribes to. In this way, when the broker publishes new
state data, the Broker Infrastructure, which is listening, wakes up and forwards the event to its clients.

   Each broker includes even the client infrastructure: a WinRT and a Win32 library. The Background
Broker Infrastructure and its brokers expose three kinds of APIs to its clients:

    ■     Non-trust APIs Usually used by WinRT components that run under AppContainer or in
          a sandbox environment. Supplementary security checks are made. The callers of this kind
          of API can’t specify a different package name or operate on behalf of another user (that is,
          BiRtCreateEventForApp).

    ■     Partial-trust APIs Used by Win32 components that live in a Medium-IL environment. Callers
          of this kind of API can specify a Modern application’s package full name but can’t operate on
          behalf of another user (that is, BiPtCreateEventForApp).

    ■     Full-trust API Used only by high-privileged system or administrative Win32 services. Callers
          of these APIs can operate on behalf of different users and on different packages (that is,
          BiCreateEventForPackageName).

   Clients of the brokers can decide whether to subscribe directly to an event provided by the
specific broker or subscribe to the Background Broker Infrastructure. WinRT always uses the latter
method. Figure 8-44 shows an example of initialization of a Time trigger for a Modern Application
Background task.

(Imports BiWinRt.dll)  RPC                                      (Imports BrokerLib.dll)
      UWP          Communication                    CreateBrokerEvent Time Broker SetWaitableTimer           Win32
                                   BrokerInfracture
    Application    BiRtCreateEvent                                       Server      +Callback             KernelBase
                       ForApp
                                  Starts the                                  Timer fires, Callback is called:
                               Background Task   Subscribe                    Publish new WNF state data
         Notifies the app
           (if needed)                           WNF state

                                   Background Task                       WNF
                                        Host

FIGURE 8-44 Architecture of the Time Broker.

         Another important service that the Background Broker Infrastructure provides to the Brokers
      and to its clients is the storage capability for background tasks. This means that when the user shuts
      down and then restarts the system, all the registered background tasks are restored and rescheduled
      as before the system was restarted. To achieve this properly, when the system boots and the Service
      Control Manager (for more information about the Service Control Manager, refer to Chapter 10) starts
      the Broker Infrastructure service, the latter, as a part of its initialization, allocates a root storage GUID,
      and, using NtLoadKeyEx native API, loads a private copy of the Background Broker registry hive. The
      service tells NT kernel to load a private copy of the hive using a special flag (REG_APP_HIVE). The
      BI hive resides in the C:\Windows\System32\Config\BBI file. The root key of the hive is mounted as
      \Registry\A\<Root Storage GUID> and is accessible only to the Broker Infrastructure service’s process
      (svchost.exe, in this case; Broker Infrastructure runs in a shared service host). The Broker Infrastructure
      hive contains a list of events and work items, which are ordered and identified using GUIDs:

         ■   An event represents a Background task’s trigger It is associated with a broker ID (which
             represents the broker that provides the event type), the package full name, and the user of the
             UWP application that it is associated with, and some other parameters.

         ■   A work item represents a scheduled Background task It contains a name, a list of condi-
             tions, the task entry point, and the associated trigger event GUID.

         The BI service enumerates each subkey and then restores all the triggers and background tasks. It
      cleans orphaned events (the ones that are not associated with any work items). It then finally publishes
      a WNF ready state name. In this way, all the brokers can wake up and finish their initialization.

        The Background Broker Infrastructure is deeply used by UWP applications. Even regular Win32
      applications and services can make use of BI and brokers, through their Win32 client libraries. Some
      notable examples are provided by the Task Scheduler service, Background Intelligent Transfer service,
      Windows Push Notification service, and AppReadiness.

      Packaged applications setup and startup
      Packaged application lifetime is different than standard Win32 applications. In the Win32 world,
      the setup procedure for an application can vary from just copying and pasting an executable file to
      executing complex installation programs. Even if launching an application is just a matter of running
      an executable file, the Windows loader takes care of all the work. The setup of a Modern application is
      instead a well-defined procedure that passes mainly through the Windows Store. In Developer mode,
      an administrator is even able to install a Modern application from an external .Appx file. The package
      file needs to be digitally signed, though. This package registration procedure is complex and involves
      multiple components.

         Before digging into package registration, it’s important to understand another key concept that
      belongs to Modern applications: package activation. Package activation is the process of launching a
      Modern application, which can or cannot show a GUI to the user. This process is different based on the
      type of Modern application and involves various system components.

Package activation
A user is not able to launch a UWP application by just executing its .exe file (excluding the case of the
new AppExecution aliases, created just for this reason. We describe AppExecution aliases later in this
chapter). To correctly activate a Modern application, the user needs to click a tile in the modern menu,
use a special link file that Explorer is able to parse, or use some other activation points (double-click
an application’s document, invoke a special URL, and so on). The ShellExperienceHost process decides
which activation performs based on the application type.

UWP applications
The main component that manages this kind of activation is the Activation Manager, which is imple-
mented in ActivationManager.dll and runs in a sihost.exe service because it needs to interact with the
user’s desktop. The activation manager strictly cooperates with the View Manager. The modern menu
calls into the Activation Manager through RPC. The latter starts the activation procedure, which is sche-
matized in Figure 8-45:

   ■   Gets the SID of the user that is requiring the activation, the package family ID, and PRAID of the
       package. In this way, it can verify that the package is actually registered in the system (using the
       Dependency Mini Repository and its registry cache).

   ■   If the previous check yields that the package needs to be registered, it calls into the AppX
       Deployment client and starts the package registration. A package might need to be registered
       in case of “on-demand registration,” meaning that the application is downloaded but not
       completely installed (this saves time, especially in enterprise environments) or in case the ap-
       plication needs to be updated. The Activation Manager knows if one of the two cases happens
       thanks to the State Repository.

   ■   It registers the application with HAM and creates the HAM host for the new package and its
       initial activity.

   ■   Activation Manager talks with the View Manager (through RPC), with the goal of initializing the
       GUI activation of the new session (even in case of background activations, the View Manager
       always needs to be informed).

   ■   The activation continues in the DcomLaunch service because the Activation Manager at this
       stage uses a WinRT class to launch the low-level process creation.

   ■   The DcomLaunch service is responsible in launching COM, DCOM, and WinRT servers in re-
       sponse to object activation requests and is implemented in the rpcss.dll library. DcomLaunch
       captures the activation request and prepares to call the CreateProcessAsUser Win32 API. Before
       doing this, it needs to set the proper process attributes (like the package full name), ensure
       that the user has the proper license for launching the application, duplicate the user token, set
       the low integrity level to the new one, and stamp it with the needed security attributes. (Note
       that the DcomLaunch service runs under a System account, which has TCB privilege. This kind
       of token manipulation requires TCB privilege. See Chapter 7 of Part 1 for further details.) At this
       point, DcomLaunch calls CreateProcessAsUser, passing the package full name through one of
       the process attributes. This creates a suspended process.

         ■    The rest of the activation process continues in Kernelbase.dll. The token produced by
              DcomLaunch is still not an AppContainer but contains the UWP Security attributes. A Special
              code in the CreateProcessInternal function uses the registry cache of the Dependency Mini
              Repository to gather the following information about the packaged application: Root Folder,
              Package State, AppContainer package SID, and list of application’s capabilities. It then verifies
              that the license has not been tampered with (a feature used extensively by games). At this point,
              the Dependency Mini Repository file is mapped into the parent process, and the UWP applica-
              tion DLL alternate load path is resolved.

         ■    The AppContainer token, its object namespace, and symbolic links are created with the
              BasepCreateLowBox function, which performs the majority of the work in user mode, except for
              the actual AppContainer token creation, which is performed using the NtCreateLowBoxToken
              kernel function. We have already covered AppContainer tokens in Chapter 7 of Part 1.

         ■    The kernel process object is created as usual by using NtCreateUserProcess kernel API.

         ■    After the CSRSS subsystem has been informed, the BasepPostSuccessAppXExtension function
              maps the Dependency Mini Repository in the PEB of the child process and unmaps it from the
              parent process. The new process can then be finally started by resuming its main thread.

                                                                                                    Host Activity
                                                                                          and      Manager (HAM)
                                                                                     host
                                                                                 AM
                                                                           te s H tivity
                                                                     C rea       A c

          Modern Start Menu                         Activation           Initializes the GUI           View
       (ShellExperienceHost.exe                     Manager                                           Manager
                                                                         Ch
                                                                            eck
                                                                                s
                                                                          exi if pa
                                                                             s         c
                                      WinRT Activation                   reg ts and kage
                                                                            iste     i s
                                                                                 red

                                                  DComLaunch
                                                                                           n

                                                                                                State Repository
                                                                                  ine atio

                                 Sets process attributes                                        Dependency Mini Repository
                                                                                       ata
                                                                               nta form
                                                                                     rd

                                         Checks license
                                                                          pp ge in

                       Duplicates and stamps the token
                             Calls CreateProcessAsUser
                                                                              a
                                                                            Co
                                                                   an pack
                                                                     dA
                                                                       ad
                                                                    Re

                                                  KernelBase.dll

                                 Process Creation
                  AppContainer Environment setup

                  AppContainer token creation       NT Kernel

      FIGURE 8-45 Scheme of the activation of a modern UWP application.

Centennial applications
The Centennial applications activation process is similar to the UWP activation but is implemented
in a totally different way. The modern menu, ShellExperienceHost, always calls into Explorer.exe for
this kind of activation. Multiple libraries are involved in the Centennial activation type and mapped in
Explorer, like Daxexec.dll, Twinui.dll, and Windows.Storage.dll. When Explorer receives the activation
request, it gets the package full name and application id, and, through RPC, grabs the main application
executable path and the package properties from the State Repository. It then executes the same steps
(2 through 4) as for UWP activations. The main difference is that, instead of using the DcomLaunch
service, Centennial activation, at this stage, it launches the process using the ShellExecute API of the
Shell32 library. ShellExecute code has been updated to recognize Centennial applications and to use
a special activation procedure located in Windows.Storage.dll (through COM). The latter library uses
RPC to call the RAiLaunchProcessWithIdentity function located in the AppInfo service. AppInfo uses the
State Repository to verify the license of the application, the integrity of all its files, and the calling pro-
cess’s token. It then stamps the token with the needed security attributes and finally creates the process
in a suspended state. AppInfo passes the package full name to the CreateProcessAsUser API using the
PROC_THREAD_ATTRIBUTE_PACKAGE_FULL_NAME process attribute.

   Unlike the UWP activation, no AppContainer is created at all, AppInfo calls the PostCreateProcess
DesktopAppXActivation function of DaxExec.dll, with the goal of initializing the virtualization layer of
Centennial applications (registry and file system). Refer to the “Centennial application” section earlier in
this chapter for further information.

   EXPERIMENT: Activate Modern apps through the command line
   In this experiment, you will understand better the differences between UWP and Centennial, and
   you will discover the motivation behind the choice to activate Centennial applications using the
   ShellExecute API. For this experiment, you need to install at least one Centennial application. At
   the time of this writing, a simple method to recognize this kind of application exists by using the
   Windows Store. In the store, after selecting the target application, scroll down to the “Additional
   Information” section. If you see “This app can: Uses all system resources,” which is usually located
   before the “Supported languages” part, it means that the application is Centennial type.

      In this experiment, you will use Notepad++. Search and install the “(unofficial) Notepad++”
   application from the Windows Store. Then open the Camera application and Notepad++. Open
   an administrative command prompt (you can do this by typing cmd in the Cortana search box
   and selecting Run As Administrator after right-clicking the Command Prompt label). You need to
   find the full path of the two running packaged applications using the following commands:
             wmic process where "name='WindowsCamera.exe'" get ExecutablePath
             wmic process where "name='notepad++.exe’" get ExecutablePath

         Now you can create two links to the application’s executables using the commands:
      mklink "%USERPROFILE%\Desktop\notepad.exe" "<Notepad++ executable Full Path>"
      mklink "%USERPROFILE%\Desktop\camera.exe" "<WindowsCamera executable full path>

         replacing the content between the < and > symbols with the real executable path discovered
      by the first two commands.

         You can now close the command prompt and the two applications. You should have created
      two new links in your desktop. Unlike with the Notepad.exe link, if you try to launch the Camera
      application from your desktop, the activation fails, and Windows returns an error dialog box like
      the following:

          This happens because Windows Explorer uses the Shell32 library to activate executable links.
      In the case of UWP, the Shell32 library has no idea that the executable it will launch is a UWP
      application, so it calls the CreateProcessAsUser API without specifying any package identity.
      In a different way, Shell32 can identify Centennial apps; thus, in this case, the entire activation
      process is executed, and the application correctly launched. If you try to launch the two links
      using the command prompt, none of them will correctly start the application. This is explained
      by the fact that the command prompt doesn’t make use of Shell32 at all. Instead, it invokes the
      CreateProcess API directly from its own code. This demonstrates the different activations of each
      type of packaged application.

      Note Starting with Windows 10 Creators Update (RS2), the Modern Application Model
      supports the concept of Optional packages (internally called RelatedSet). Optional packages
      are heavily used in games, where the main game supports even DLC (or expansions), and in
      packages that represent suites: Microsoft Office is a good example. A user can download
      and install Word and implicitly the framework package that contains all the Office common
      code. When the user wants to install even Excel, the deployment operation could skip the
      download of the main Framework package because Word is an optional package of its main
      Office framework.
      Optional packages have relationship with their main packages through their manifest files.
      In the manifest file, there is the declaration of the dependency to the main package (using
      AMUID). Deeply describing Optional packages architecture is beyond the scope of this book.

AppExecution aliases
As we have previously described, packaged applications could not be activated directly through their
executable file. This represents a big limitation, especially for the new modern Console applications.
With the goal of enabling the launch of Modern apps (Centennial and UWP) through the command
line, starting from Windows 10 Fall Creators Update (build 1709), the Modern Application Model has
introduced the concept of AppExecution aliases. With this new feature, the user can launch Edge or
any other modern applications through the console command line. An AppExecution alias is basi-
cally a 0-bytes length executable file located in C:\Users\<UserName>\AppData\Local\Microsoft\
WindowsApps (as shown in Figure 8-46.). The location is added in the system executable search path
list (through the PATH environment variable); as a result, to execute a modern application, the user
could specify any executable file name located in this folder without the complete path (like in the Run
dialog box or in the console command line).

FIGURE 8-46 The AppExecution aliases main folder.

   How can the system execute a 0-byte file? The answer lies in a little-known feature of the file system:
reparse points. Reparse points are usually employed for symbolic links creation, but they can store any
data, not only symbolic link information. The Modern Application Model uses this feature to store the
packaged application’s activation data (package family name, Application user model ID, and applica-
tion path) directly into the reparse point.

         When the user launches an AppExecution alias executable, the CreateProcess API is used as usual.
      The NtCreateUserProcess system call, used to orchestrate the kernel-mode process creation (see the
      “Flow of CreateProcess” section of Chapter 3 in Part 1, for details) fails because the content of the file is
      empty. The file system, as part of normal process creation, opens the target file (through IoCreateFileEx
      API), encounters the reparse point data (while parsing the last node of the path) and returns a STATUS_
      REPARSE code to the caller. NtCreateUserProcess translates this code to the STATUS_IO_REPARSE_TAG_
      NOT_HANDLED error and exits. The CreateProcess API now knows that the process creation has failed
      due to an invalid reparse point, so it loads and calls into the ApiSetHost.AppExecutionAlias.dll library,
      which contains code that parses modern applications’ reparse points.

          The library’s code parses the reparse point, grabs the packaged application activation data, and
      calls into the AppInfo service with the goal of correctly stamping the token with the needed security at-
      tributes. AppInfo verifies that the user has the correct license for running the packaged application and
      checks the integrity of its files (through the State Repository). The actual process creation is done by the
      calling process. The CreateProcess API detects the reparse error and restarts its execution starting with
      the correct package executable path (usually located in C:\Program Files\WindowsApps\). This time, it
      correctly creates the process and the AppContainer token or, in case of Centennial, initializes the virtu-
      alization layer (actually, in this case, another RPC into AppInfo is used again). Furthermore, it creates the
      HAM host and its activity, which are needed for the application. The activation at this point is complete.

         EXPERIMENT: Reading the AppExecution alias data
         In this experiment, you extract AppExecution alias data from the 0-bytes executable file. You
         can use the FsReparser utility (found in this book’s downloadable resources) to parse both the
         reparse points or the extended attributes of the NTFS file system. Just run the tool in a command
         prompt window and specify the READ command-line parameter:
         C:\Users\Andrea\AppData\Local\Microsoft\WindowsApps>fsreparser read MicrosoftEdge.exe

         File System Reparse Point / Extended Attributes Parser 0.1
         Copyright 2018 by Andrea Allievi (AaLl86)

         Reading UWP attributes...
         Source file: MicrosoftEdge.exe.

         The source file does not contain any Extended Attributes.

         The file contains a valid UWP Reparse point (version 3).
         Package family name: Microsoft.MicrosoftEdge_8wekyb3d8bbwe
         Application User Model Id: Microsoft.MicrosoftEdge_8wekyb3d8bbwe!MicrosoftEdge
         UWP App Target full path: C:\Windows\System32\SystemUWPLauncher.exe
         Alias Type: UWP Single Instance

            As you can see from the output of the tool, the CreateProcess API can extract all the informa-
         tion that it needs to properly execute a modern application’s activation. This explains why you
         can launch Edge from the command line.

Package registration
When a user wants to install a modern application, usually she opens the AppStore, looks for the ap-
plication, and clicks the Get button. This action starts the download of an archive that contains a bunch
of files: the package manifest file, the application digital signature, and the block map, which represent
the chain of trust of the certificates included in the digital signature. The archive is initially stored in the
C:\Windows\SoftwareDistribution\Download folder. The AppStore process (WinStore.App.exe) com-
municates with the Windows Update service (wuaueng.dll), which manages the download requests.

    The downloaded files are manifests that contain the list of all the modern application’s files, the
application dependencies, the license data, and the steps needed to correctly register the package.
The Windows Update service recognizes that the download request is for a modern application, veri-
fies the calling process token (which should be an AppContainer), and, using services provided by the
AppXDeploymentClient.dll library, verifies that the package is not already installed in the system. It
then creates an AppX Deployment request and, through RPC, sends it to the AppX Deployment Server.
The latter runs as a PPL service in a shared service host process (which hosts even the Client License
Service, running as the same protected level). The Deployment Request is placed into a queue, which
is managed asynchronously. When the AppX Deployment Server sees the request, it dequeues it and
spawns a thread that starts the actual modern application deployment process.

   Note Starting with Windows 8.1, the UWP deployment stack supports the concept of
   bundles. Bundles are packages that contain multiple resources, like different languages
   or features that have been designed only for certain regions. The deployment stack
   implements an applicability logic that can download only the needed part of the
   compressed bundle after checking the user profile and system settings.

   A modern application deployment process involves a complex sequence of events. We summarize
here the entire deployment process in three main phases.

Phase 1: Package staging
After Windows Update has downloaded the application manifest, the AppX Deployment Server verifies
that all the package dependencies are satisfied, checks the application prerequisites, like the target
supported device family (Phone, Desktop, Xbox, and so on) and checks whether the file system of
the target volume is supported. All the prerequisites that the application needs are expressed in the
manifest file with each dependency. If all the checks pass, the staging procedure creates the pack-
age root directory (usually in C:\Program Files\WindowsApps\<PackageFullName>) and its subfold-
ers. Furthermore, it protects the package folders, applying proper ACLs on all of them. If the modern
application is a Centennial type, it loads the daxexec.dll library and creates VFS reparse points needed
by the Windows Container Isolation minifilter driver (see the “Centennial applications” section earlier
in this chapter) with the goal of virtualizing the application data folder properly. It finally saves the
package root path into the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Classes\LocalSettings\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
CurrentVersion\AppModel\PackageRepository\Packages\<PackageFullName> registry key, in the Path
registry value.

         The staging procedure then preallocates the application’s files on disk, calculates the final down-
      load size, and extracts the server URL that contains all the package files (compressed in an AppX file). It
      finally downloads the final AppX from the remote servers, again using the Windows Update service.

      Phase 2: User data staging
      This phase is executed only if the user is updating the application. This phase simply restores the user
      data of the previous package and stores them in the new application path.

      Phase 3: Package registration
      The most important phase of the deployment is the package registration. This complex phase uses
      services provided by AppXDeploymentExtensions.onecore.dll library (and AppXDeploymentExtensions
      .desktop.dll for desktop-specific deployment parts). We refer to it as Package Core Installation. At this
      stage, the AppX Deployment Server needs mainly to update the State Repository. It creates new entries
      for the package, for the one or more applications that compose the package, the new tiles, package ca-
      pabilities, application license, and so on. To do this, the AppX Deployment server uses database trans-
      actions, which it finally commits only if no previous errors occurred (otherwise, they will be discarded).
      When all the database transactions that compose a State Repository deployment operation are com-
      mitted, the State Repository can call the registered listeners, with the goal of notifying each client that
      has requested a notification. (See the “State Repository” section in this chapter for more information
      about the change and event tracking feature of the State Repository.)

         The last steps for the package registration include creating the Dependency Mini Repository file and
      updating the machine registry to reflect the new data stored in the State Repository. This terminates
      the deployment process. The new application is now ready to be activated and run.

         Note For readability reasons, the deployment process has been significantly simplified.
         For example, in the described staging phase, we have omitted some initial subphases, like
         the Indexing phase, which parses the AppX manifest file; the Dependency Manager phase,
         used to create a work plan and analyze the package dependencies; and the Package In Use
         phase, which has the goal of communicating with PLM to verify that the package is not
         already installed and in use.
         Furthermore, if an operation fails, the deployment stack must be able to revert all the
         changes. The other revert phases have not been described in the previous section.

Conclusion
      In this chapter, we have examined the key base system mechanisms on which the Windows executive
      is built. In the next chapter, we introduce the virtualization technologies that Windows supports with
      the goal of improving the overall system security, providing a fast execution environment for virtual
      machines, isolated containers, and secure enclaves.

