CHAPTER 9

Virtualization technologies

  O      ne of the most important technologies used for running multiple operating systems on the same
         physical machine is virtualization. At the time of this writing, there are multiple types of virtualiza-
   tion technologies available from different hardware manufacturers, which have evolved over the years.
   Virtualization technologies are not only used for running multiple operating systems on a physical
   machine, but they have also become the basics for important security features like the Virtual Secure
   Mode (VSM) and Hypervisor-Enforced Code Integrity (HVCI), which can’t be run without a hypervisor.

       In this chapter, we give an overview of the Windows virtualization solution, called Hyper-V. Hyper-V
   is composed of the hypervisor, which is the component that manages the platform-dependent virtu-
   alization hardware, and the virtualization stack. We describe the internal architecture of Hyper-V and
   provide a brief description of its components (memory manager, virtual processors, intercepts, sched-
   uler, and so on). The virtualization stack is built on the top of the hypervisor and provides different ser-
   vices to the root and guest partitions. We describe all the components of the virtualization stack (VM
   Worker process, virtual machine management service, VID driver, VMBus, and so on) and the different
   hardware emulation that is supported.

     In the last part of the chapter, we describe some technologies based on the virtualization, such as
   VSM and HVCI. We present all the secure services that those technologies provide to the system.

The Windows hypervisor
   The Hyper-V hypervisor (also known as Windows hypervisor) is a type-1 (native or bare-metal) hyper-
   visor: a mini operating system that runs directly on the host’s hardware to manage a single root and
   one or more guest operating systems. Unlike type-2 (or hosted) hypervisors, which run on the base of a
   conventional OS like normal applications, the Windows hypervisor abstracts the root OS, which knows
   about the existence of the hypervisor and communicates with it to allow the execution of one or more
   guest virtual machines. Because the hypervisor is part of the operating system, managing the guests
   inside it, as well as interacting with them, is fully integrated in the operating system through standard
   management mechanisms such as WMI and services. In this case, the root OS contains some enlighten-
   ments. Enlightenments are special optimizations in the kernel and possibly device drivers that detect
   that the code is being run virtualized under a hypervisor, so they perform certain tasks differently, or
   more efficiently, considering this environment.

      Figure 9-1 shows the basic architecture of the Windows virtualization stack, which is described in
   detail later in this chapter.

           Root Partition              Enlightened              Enlightened                Unenlightened
                                        Windows                     Linux                  Child Partition
              VMWPs                   Child Partition          Child Partition
           VMMS WMI                  User Applications        User Applications           User Applications

          VSps           VID         VSCs/ICs                   Linux
                                                               VSCs/ICs

          I/O        WinHv           I/O        WinHv          I/O        LinuxHv
         Stack                      Stack                     Stack                            Kernel
          Drivers                    Drivers                   Drivers

                 VMBus                   VMBus                     VMBus

       Hypervisor Hypercalls      MSRs     APIC   Scheduler    Address Management         Partition Manager

                                Processors                                   Memory

      FIGURE 9-1 The Hyper-V architectural stack (hypervisor and virtualization stack).

          At the bottom of the architecture is the hypervisor, which is launched very early during the system
      boot and provides its services for the virtualization stack to use (through the use of the hypercall inter-
      face). The early initialization of the hypervisor is described in Chapter 12, “Startup and shutdown.” The
      hypervisor startup is initiated by the Windows Loader, which determines whether to start the hypervisor
      and the Secure Kernel; if the hypervisor and Secure Kernel are started, the hypervisor uses the services
      of the Hvloader.dll to detect the correct hardware platform and load and start the proper version of
      the hypervisor. Because Intel and AMD (and ARM64) processors have differing implementations of
      hardware-assisted virtualization, there are different hypervisors. The correct one is selected at boot-up
      time after the processor has been queried through CPUID instructions. On Intel systems, the Hvix64.exe
      binary is loaded; on AMD systems, the Hvax64.exe image is used. As of the Windows 10 May 2019
      Update (19H1), the ARM64 version of Windows supports its own hypervisor, which is implemented in
      the Hvaa64.exe image.

          At a high level, the hardware virtualization extension used by the hypervisor is a thin layer that
      resides between the OS kernel and the processor. This layer, which intercepts and emulates in a safe
      manner sensitive operations executed by the OS, is run in a higher privilege level than the OS kernel.
      (Intel calls this mode VMXROOT. Most books and literature define the VMXROOT security domain as
      “Ring -1.”) When an operation executed by the underlying OS is intercepted, the processor stops to run
      the OS code and transfer the execution to the hypervisor at the higher privilege level. This operation is
      commonly referred to as a VMEXIT event. In the same way, when the hypervisor has finished process-
      ing the intercepted operation, it needs a way to allow the physical CPU to restart the execution of the
      OS code. New opcodes have been defined by the hardware virtualization extension, which allow a
      VMENTER event to happen; the CPU restarts the execution of the OS code at its original privilege level.

Partitions, processes, and threads
One of the key architectural components behind the Windows hypervisor is the concept of a partition.
A partition essentially represents the main isolation unit, an instance of an operating system instal-
lation, which can refer either to what’s traditionally called the host or the guest. Under the Windows
hypervisor model, these two terms are not used; instead, we talk of either a root partition or a child
partition, respectively. A partition is composed of some physical memory and one or more virtual
processors (VPs) with their local virtual APICs and timers. (In the global term, a partition also includes
a virtual motherboard and multiple virtual peripherals. These are virtualization stack concepts, which
do not belong to the hypervisor.)

   At a minimum, a Hyper-V system has a root partition—in which the main operating system control-
ling the machine runs—the virtualization stack, and its associated components. Each operating system
running within the virtualized environment represents a child partition, which might contain certain
additional tools that optimize access to the hardware or allow management of the operating system.
Partitions are organized in a hierarchical way. The root partition has control of each child and receives
some notifications (intercepts) for certain kinds of events that happen in the child. The majority of the
physical hardware accesses that happen in the root are passed through by the hypervisor; this means
that the parent partition is able to talk directly to the hardware (with some exceptions). As a counter-
part, child partitions are usually not able to communicate directly with the physical machine’s hardware
(again with some exceptions, which are described later in this chapter in the section “The virtualization
stack”). Each I/O is intercepted by the hypervisor and redirected to the root if needed.

    One of the main goals behind the design of the Windows hypervisor was to have it be as small and
modular as possible, much like a microkernel—no need to support any hypervisor driver or provide a
full, monolithic module. This means that most of the virtualization work is actually done by a separate
virtualization stack (refer to Figure 9-1). The hypervisor uses the existing Windows driver architecture
and talks to actual Windows device drivers. This architecture results in several components that provide
and manage this behavior, which are collectively called the virtualization stack. Although the hypervi-
sor is read from the boot disk and executed by the Windows Loader before the root OS (and the parent
partition) even exists, it is the parent partition that is responsible for providing the entire virtualization
stack. Because these are Microsoft components, only a Windows machine can be a root partition. The
Windows OS in the root partition is responsible for providing the device drivers for the hardware on the
system, as well as for running the virtualization stack. It’s also the management point for all the child
partitions. The main components that the root partition provides are shown in Figure 9-2.

          Virtualization stack

          WMI provider
                               VM worker
          VMM service          processes

        User mode
                                  Kernel mode

          Windows 10          Virtualization
                                 service
                                providers
          Windows
                                  (VSPs)
           kernel
                        Device
                        drivers

      FIGURE 9-2 Components of the root partition.

      Child partitions
      A child partition is an instance of any operating system running parallel to the parent partition.
      (Because you can save or pause the state of any child, it might not necessarily be running.) Unlike the
      parent partition, which has full access to the APIC, I/O ports, and its physical memory (but not access
      to the hypervisor’s and Secure Kernel’s physical memory), child partitions are limited for security and
      management reasons to their own view of address space (the Guest Physical Address, or GPA, space,
      which is managed by the hypervisor) and have no direct access to hardware (even though they may
      have direct access to certain kinds of devices; see the “Virtualization stack” section for further details).
      In terms of hypervisor access, a child partition is also limited mainly to notifications and state changes.
      For example, a child partition doesn’t have control over other partitions (and can’t create new ones).

         Child partitions have many fewer virtualization components than a parent partition because they
      aren’t responsible for running the virtualization stack—only for communicating with it. Also, these
      components can also be considered optional because they enhance performance of the environment but
      aren’t critical to its use. Figure 9-3 shows the components present in a typical Windows child partition.

                Guest applications

        User mode
                                  Kernel mode

          Virtualization         Windows
             service              kernel
              clients
              (VSCs)
                              Enlightenments

      FIGURE 9-3 Components of a child partition.

Processes and threads
The Windows hypervisor represents a virtual machine with a partition data structure. A partition,
as described in the previous section, is composed of some memory (guest physical memory) and one
or more virtual processors (VP). Internally in the hypervisor, each virtual processor is a schedulable
entity, and the hypervisor, like the standard NT kernel, includes a scheduler. The scheduler dispatches
the execution of virtual processors, which belong to different partitions, to each physical CPU. (We
discuss the multiple types of hypervisor schedulers later in this chapter in the “Hyper-V schedulers”
section.) A hypervisor thread (TH_THREAD data structure) is the glue between a virtual processor and
its schedulable unit. Figure 9-4 shows the data structure, which represents the current physical execu-
tion context. It contains the thread execution stack, scheduling data, a pointer to the thread’s virtual
processor, the entry point of the thread dispatch loop (discussed later) and, most important, a pointer
to the hypervisor process that the thread belongs to.

      Scheduling
     Information

  Physical Processor
  Local Storage (PLS)

       VP Stack

   Owning Process

    Dispatch Loop
     Entry Point

FIGURE 9-4 The hypervisor’s thread data structure.

   The hypervisor builds a thread for each virtual processor it creates and associates the newborn
thread with the virtual processor data structure (VM_VP).

    A hypervisor process (TH_PROCESS data structure), shown in Figure 9-5, represents a partition
and is a container for its physical (and virtual) address space. It includes the list of the threads (which
are backed by virtual processors), scheduling data (the physical CPUs affinity in which the process is
allowed to run), and a pointer to the partition basic memory data structures (memory compartment,
reserved pages, page directory root, and so on). A process is usually created when the hypervisor
builds the partition (VM_PARTITION data structure), which will represent the new virtual machine.

      Scheduling
     Information

      Thread List

  Partition’s Memory
    Compartment

FIGURE 9-5 The hypervisor’s process data structure.

      Enlightenments
      Enlightenments are one of the key performance optimizations that Windows virtualization takes ad-
      vantage of. They are direct modifications to the standard Windows kernel code that can detect that the
      operating system is running in a child partition and perform work differently. Usually, these optimiza-
      tions are highly hardware-specific and result in a hypercall to notify the hypervisor.

         An example is notifying the hypervisor of a long busy–wait spin loop. The hypervisor can keep some
      state on the spin wait and decide to schedule another VP on the same physical processor until the wait
      can be satisfied. Entering and exiting an interrupt state and access to the APIC can be coordinated with
      the hypervisor, which can be enlightened to avoid trapping the real access and then virtualizing it.

          Another example has to do with memory management, specifically translation lookaside buffer
      (TLB) flushing. (See Part 1, Chapter 5, “Memory management,” for more information on these con-
      cepts.) Usually, the operating system executes a CPU instruction to flush one or more stale TLB entries,
      which affects only a single processor. In multiprocessor systems, usually a TLB entry must be flushed
      from every active processor’s cache (the system sends an inter-processor interrupt to every active
      processor to achieve this goal). However, because a child partition could be sharing physical CPUs with
      many other child partitions, and some of them could be executing a different VM’s virtual processor
      at the time the TLB flush is initiated, such an operation would also flush this information for those VMs.
      Furthermore, a virtual processor would be rescheduled to execute only the TLB flushing IPI, resulting
      in noticeable performance degradation. If Windows is running under a hypervisor, it instead issues a
      hypercall to have the hypervisor flush only the specific information belonging to the child partition.

      Partition’s privileges, properties, and version features
      When a partition is initially created (usually by the VID driver), no virtual processors (VPs) are associated
      with it. At that time, the VID driver is free to add or remove some partition’s privileges. Indeed, when
      the partition is first created, the hypervisor assigns some default privileges to it, depending on its type.

          A partition’s privilege describes which action—usually expressed through hypercalls or synthetic
      MSRs (model specific registers)—the enlightened OS running inside a partition is allowed to perform
      on behalf of the partition itself. For example, the Access Root Scheduler privilege allows a child parti-
      tion to notify the root partition that an event has been signaled and a guest’s VP can be rescheduled
      (this usually increases the priority of the guest’s VP-backed thread). The Access VSM privilege instead
      allows the partition to enable VTL 1 and access its properties and configuration (usually exposed
      through synthetic registers). Table 9-1 lists all the privileges assigned by default by the hypervisor.

          Partition privileges can only be set before the partition creates and starts any VPs; the hypervisor
      won’t allow requests to set privileges after a single VP in the partition starts to execute. Partition prop-
      erties are similar to privileges but do not have this limitation; they can be set and queried at any time.
      There are different groups of properties that can be queried or set for a partition. Table 9-2 lists the
      properties groups.

          When a partition is created, the VID infrastructure provides a compatibility level (which is specified
      in the virtual machine’s configuration file) to the hypervisor. Based on that compatibility level, the hy-
      pervisor enables or disables specific virtual hardware features that could be exposed by a VP to the un-
      derlying OS. There are multiple features that tune how the VP behaves based on the VM’s compatibility

level. A good example would be the hardware Page Attribute Table (PAT), which is a configurable cach-
ing type for virtual memory. Prior to Windows 10 Anniversary Update (RS1), guest VMs weren’t able
to use PAT in guest VMs, so regardless of whether the compatibility level of a VM specifies Windows
10 RS1, the hypervisor will not expose the PAT registers to the underlying guest OS. Otherwise, in case
the compatibility level is higher than Windows 10 RS1, the hypervisor exposes the PAT support to the
underlying OS running in the guest VM. When the root partition is initially created at boot time, the
hypervisor enables the highest compatibility level for it. In that way the root OS can use all the features
supported by the physical hardware.

TABLE 9-1 Partition’s privileges

 PARTITION TYPE             DEFAULT PRIVILEGES

 Root and child partition   Read/write a VP’s runtime counter
                            Read the current partition reference time
                            Access SynIC timers and registers
                            Query/set the VP's virtual APIC assist page
                            Read/write hypercall MSRs
                            Request VP IDLE entry
                            Read VP’s index
                            Map or unmap the hypercall’s code area
                            Read a VP’s emulated TSC (time-stamp counter) and its frequency
                            Control the partition TSC and re-enlightenment emulation
                            Read/write VSM synthetic registers
                            Read/write VP’s per-VTL registers
                            Starts an AP virtual processor
                            Enables partition’s fast hypercall support

 Root partition only        Create child partition
                            Look up and reference a partition by ID
                            Deposit/withdraw memory from the partition compartment
                            Post messages to a connection port
                            Signal an event in a connection port’s partition
                            Create/delete and get properties of a partition's connection port
                            Connect/disconnect to a partition's connection port
                            Map/unmap the hypervisor statistics page (which describe a VP, LP, partition, or hypervisor)
                            Enable the hypervisor debugger for the partition
                            Schedule child partition’s VPs and access SynIC synthetic MSRs
                            Trigger an enlightened system reset
                            Read the hypervisor debugger options for a partition

 Child partition only       Generate an extended hypercall intercept in the root partition
                            Notify a root scheduler’s VP-backed thread of an event being signaled

 EXO partition              None

TABLE 9-2 Partition’s properties

 PROPERTY GROUP             DESCRIPTION

 Scheduling properties      Set/query properties related to the classic and core scheduler, like Cap, Weight, and Reserve

 Time properties            Allow the partition to be suspended/resumed

 Debugging properties       Change the hypervisor debugger runtime configuration

 Resource properties        Queries virtual hardware platform-specific properties of the partition (like TLB size, SGX
                            support, and so on)

 Compatibility properties   Queries virtual hardware platform-specific properties that are tied to the initial compatibil-
                            ity features

      The hypervisor startup
      In Chapter 12, we analyze the modality in which a UEFI-based workstation boots up, and all the compo-
      nents engaged in loading and starting the correct version of the hypervisor binary. In this section, we
      briefly discuss what happens in the machine after the HvLoader module has transferred the execution
      to the hypervisor, which takes control for the first time.

          The HvLoader loads the correct version of the hypervisor binary image (depending on the CPU
      manufacturer) and creates the hypervisor loader block. It captures a minimal processor context, which
      the hypervisor needs to start the first virtual processor. The HvLoader then switches to a new, just-
      created, address space and transfers the execution to the hypervisor image by calling the hypervisor
      image entry point, KiSystemStartup, which prepares the processor for running the hypervisor and ini-
      tializes the CPU_PLS data structure. The CPU_PLS represents a physical processor and acts as the PRCB
      data structure of the NT kernel; the hypervisor is able to quickly address it (using the GS segment).
      Differently from the NT kernel, KiSystemStartup is called only for the boot processor (the application
      processors startup sequence is covered in the “Application Processors (APs) Startup” section later in this
      chapter), thus it defers the real initialization to another function, BmpInitBootProcessor.

          BmpInitBootProcessor starts a complex initialization sequence. The function examines the system
      and queries all the CPU’s supported virtualization features (such as the EPT and VPID; the queried
      features are platform-specific and vary between the Intel, AMD, or ARM version of the hypervisor). It
      then determines the hypervisor scheduler, which will manage how the hypervisor will schedule virtual
      processors. For Intel and AMD server systems, the default scheduler is the core scheduler, whereas the
      root scheduler is the default for all client systems (including ARM64). The scheduler type can be manu-
      ally overridden through the hypervisorschedulertype BCD option (more information about the different
      hypervisor schedulers is available later in this chapter).

         The nested enlightenments are initialized. Nested enlightenments allow the hypervisor to be ex-
      ecuted in nested configurations, where a root hypervisor (called L0 hypervisor), manages the real hard-
      ware, and another hypervisor (called L1 hypervisor) is executed in a virtual machine. After this stage, the
      BmpInitBootProcessor routine performs the initialization of the following components:

         ■   Memory manager (initializes the PFN database and the root compartment).

         ■   The hypervisor’s hardware abstraction layer (HAL).

         ■   The hypervisor’s process and thread subsystem (which depends on the chosen scheduler type).
             The system process and its initial thread are created. This process is special; it isn’t tied to any
             partition and hosts threads that execute the hypervisor code.

         ■   The VMX virtualization abstraction layer (VAL). The VAL’s purpose is to abstract differences be-
             tween all the supported hardware virtualization extensions (Intel, AMD, and ARM64). It includes
             code that operates on platform-specific features of the machine’s virtualization technology in
             use by the hypervisor (for example, on the Intel platform the VAL layer manages the “unrestrict-
             ed guest” support, the EPT, SGX, MBEC, and so on).

         ■   The Synthetic Interrupt Controller (SynIC) and I/O Memory Management Unit (IOMMU).

   ■   The Address Manager (AM), which is the component responsible for managing the physical
       memory assigned to a partition (called guest physical memory, or GPA) and its translation to
       real physical memory (called system physical memory). Although the first implementation of
       Hyper-V supported shadow page tables (a software technique for address translation), since
       Windows 8.1, the Address manager uses platform-dependent code for configuring the hyper-
       visor address translation mechanism offered by the hardware (extended page tables for Intel,
       nested page tables for AMD). In hypervisor terms, the physical address space of a partition is
       called address domain. The platform-independent physical address space translation is com-
       monly called Second Layer Address Translation (SLAT). The term refers to the Intel’s EPT, AMD’s
       NPT or ARM 2-stage address translation mechanism.

   The hypervisor can now finish constructing the CPU_PLS data structure associated with the boot
processor by allocating the initial hardware-dependent virtual machine control structures (VMCS for
Intel, VMCB for AMD) and by enabling virtualization through the first VMXON operation. Finally, the
per-processor interrupt mapping data structures are initialized.

   EXPERIMENT: Connecting the hypervisor debugger
   In this experiment, you will connect the hypervisor debugger for analyzing the startup sequence
   of the hypervisor, as discussed in the previous section. The hypervisor debugger is supported
   only via serial or network transports. Only physical machines can be used to debug the hypervi-
   sor, or virtual machines in which the “nested virtualization” feature is enabled (see the “Nested
   virtualization” section later in this chapter). In the latter case, only serial debugging can be en-
   abled for the L1 virtualized hypervisor.

       For this experiment, you need a separate physical machine that supports virtualization exten-
   sions and has the Hyper-V role installed and enabled. You will use this machine as the debugged
   system, attached to your host system (which acts as the debugger) where you are running the
   debugging tools. As an alternative, you can set up a nested VM, as shown in the “Enabling nested
   virtualization on Hyper-V” experiment later in this chapter (in that case you don’t need another
   physical machine).

       As a first step, you need to download and install the “Debugging Tools for Windows” in the
   host system, which are available as part of the Windows SDK (or WDK), downloadable from
   https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/windows-10-sdk. As an alternative,
   for this experiment you also can use the WinDbgX, which, at the time of this writing, is available
   in the Windows Store by searching “WinDbg Preview.”

      The debugged system for this experiment must have Secure Boot disabled. The hypervi-
   sor debugging is not compatible with Secure Boot. Refer to your workstation user manual for
   understanding how to disable Secure Boot (usually the Secure Boot settings are located in the
   UEFI Bios). For enabling the hypervisor debugger in the debugged system, you should first open
   an administrative command prompt (by typing cmd in the Cortana search box and selecting Run
   as administrator).

          In case you want to debug the hypervisor through your network card, you should type the
      following commands, replacing the terms <HostIp> with the IP address of the host system;
      <HostPort>” with a valid port in the host (from 49152); and <NetCardBusParams> with the
      bus parameters of the network card of the debugged system, specified in the XX.YY.ZZ format
      (where XX is the bus number, YY is the device number, and ZZ is the function number). You
      can discover the bus parameters of your network card through the Device Manager applet or
      through the KDNET.exe tool available in the Windows SDK:
      bcdedit /hypervisorsettings net hostip:<HostIp> port:<HostPort>
      bcdedit /set {hypervisorsettings} hypervisordebugpages 1000
      bcdedit /set {hypervisorsettings} hypervisorbusparams <NetCardBusParams>
      bcdedit /set hypervisordebug on

         The following figure shows a sample system in which the network interface used for debug-
      ging the hypervisor is located in the 0.25.0 bus parameters, and the debugger is targeting a host
      system configured with the IP address 192.168.0.56 on the port 58010.

         Take note of the returned debugging key. After you reboot the debugged system, you should
      run Windbg in the host, with the following command:
      windbg.exe -d -k net:port=<HostPort>,key=<DebuggingKey>

        You should be able to debug the hypervisor, and follow its startup sequence, even though
      Microsoft may not release the symbols for the main hypervisor module:

      In a VM with nested virtualization enabled, you can enable the L1 hypervisor debugger only
   through the serial port by using the following command in the debugged system:
   bcdedit /hypervisorsettings SERIAL DEBUGPORT:1 BAUDRATE:115200

The creation of the root partition and the boot virtual processor
The first steps that a fully initialized hypervisor needs to execute are the creation of the root partition
and the first virtual processor used for starting the system (called BSP VP). Creating the root partition
follows almost the same rules as for child partitions; multiple layers of the partition are initialized one
after the other. In particular:

   1.   The VM-layer initializes the maximum allowed number of VTL levels and sets up the partition
        privileges based on the partition’s type (see the previous section for more details). Furthermore,
        the VM layer determines the partition’s allowable features based on the specified partition’s
        compatibility level. The root partition supports the maximum allowable features.

   2.   The VP layer initializes the virtualized CPUID data, which all the virtual processors of the parti-
        tion use when a CPUID is requested from the guest operating system. The VP layer creates the
        hypervisor process, which backs the partition.

   3.   The Address Manager (AM) constructs the partition’s initial physical address space by using
        machine platform-dependent code (which builds the EPT for Intel, NPT for AMD). The con-
        structed physical address space depends on the partition type. The root partition uses identity
        mapping, which means that all the guest physical memory corresponds to the system physical
        memory (more information is provided later in this chapter in the “Partitions’ physical address
        space” section).

         Finally, after the SynIC, IOMMU, and the intercepts’ shared pages are correctly configured for the
      partition, the hypervisor creates and starts the BSP virtual processor for the root partition, which is the
      unique one used to restart the boot process.

         A hypervisor virtual processor (VP) is represented by a big data structure (VM_VP), shown in
Figure 9-6. A VM_VP data structure maintains all the data used to track the state of the virtual proces-
      sor: its platform-dependent registers state (like general purposes, debug, XSAVE area, and stack) and
      data, the VP’s private address space, and an array of VM_VPLC data structures, which are used to track
      the state of each Virtual Trust Level (VTL) of the virtual processor. The VM_VP also includes a pointer to
      the VP’s backing thread and a pointer to the physical processor that is currently executing the VP.

         Intercept Packet

         Backing Thread

         Virtual Registers
               State                         Physical CPU
          Pointer to the
         Physical CPU_PLS
                                               VTL 1
         VM_VPLC Array
                                                   VTL 0

       VP’s Private Address
         Space and Zone

              SynIC Data

      FIGURE 9-6 The VM_VP data structure representing a virtual processor.

          As for the partitions, creating the BSP virtual processor is similar to the process of creating normal
      virtual processors. VmAllocateVp is the function responsible in allocating and initializing the needed
      memory from the partition’s compartment, used for storing the VM_VP data structure, its platform-
      dependent part, and the VM_VPLC array (one for each supported VTL). The hypervisor copies the initial
      processor context, specified by the HvLoader at boot time, into the VM_VP structure and then cre-
      ates the VP’s private address space and attaches to it (only in case address space isolation is enabled).
      Finally, it creates the VP’s backing thread. This is an important step: the construction of the virtual
      processor continues in the context of its own backing thread. The hypervisor’s main system thread at
      this stage waits until the new BSP VP is completely initialized. The wait brings the hypervisor scheduler
      to select the newly created thread, which executes a routine, ObConstructVp, that constructs the VP in
      the context of the new backed thread.

         ObConstructVp, in a similar way as for partitions, constructs and initializes each layer of the virtual
      processor—in particular, the following:

         1.    The Virtualization Manager (VM) layer attaches the physical processor data structure (CPU_PLS)
               to the VP and sets VTL 0 as active.

   2.   The VAL layer initializes the platform-dependent portions of the VP, like its registers, XSAVE
        area, stack, and debug data. Furthermore, for each supported VTL, it allocates and initializes
        the VMCS data structure (VMCB for AMD systems), which is used by the hardware for keeping
        track of the state of the virtual machine, and the VTL’s SLAT page tables. The latter allows each
        VTL to be isolated from each other (more details about VTLs are provided later in the “Virtual
        Trust Levels (VTLs) and Virtual Secure Mode (VSM)” section) . Finally, the VAL layer enables
        and sets VTL 0 as active. The platform-specific VMCS (or VMCB for AMD systems) is entirely
        compiled, the SLAT table of VTL 0 is set as active, and the real-mode emulator is initialized. The
        Host-state part of the VMCS is set to target the hypervisor VAL dispatch loop. This routine is
        the most important part of the hypervisor because it manages all the VMEXIT events generated
        by each guest.

   3.   The VP layer allocates the VP’s hypercall page, and, for each VTL, the assist and intercept mes-
        sage pages. These pages are used by the hypervisor for sharing code or data with the guest
        operating system.

    When ObConstructVp finishes its work, the VP’s dispatch thread activates the virtual processor and
its synthetic interrupt controller (SynIC). If the VP is the first one of the root partition, the dispatch
thread restores the initial VP’s context stored in the VM_VP data structure by writing each captured
register in the platform-dependent VMCS (or VMCB) processor area (the context has been specified
by the HvLoader earlier in the boot process). The dispatch thread finally signals the completion of the
VP initialization (as a result, the main system thread enters the idle loop) and enters the platform-
dependent VAL dispatch loop. The VAL dispatch loop detects that the VP is new, prepares it for the first
execution, and starts the new virtual machine by executing a VMLAUNCH instruction. The new VM
restarts exactly at the point at which the HvLoader has transferred the execution to the hypervisor. The
boot process continues normally but in the context of the new hypervisor partition.

The hypervisor memory manager
The hypervisor memory manager is relatively simple compared to the memory manager for NT or the
Secure Kernel. The entity that manages a set of physical memory pages is the hypervisor’s memory
compartment. Before the hypervisor startup takes palace, the hypervisor loader (Hvloader.dll) allocates
the hypervisor loader block and pre-calculates the maximum number of physical pages that will be
used by the hypervisor for correctly starting up and creating the root partition. The number depends
on the pages used to initialize the IOMMU to store the memory range structures, the system PFN data-
base, SLAT page tables, and HAL VA space. The hypervisor loader preallocates the calculated number
of physical pages, marks them as reserved, and attaches the page list array in the loader block. Later,
when the hypervisor starts, it creates the root compartment by using the page list that was allocated
by the hypervisor loader.

    Figure 9-7 shows the layout of the memory compartment data structure. The data structure keeps
track of the total number of physical pages “deposited” in the compartment, which can be allocated
somewhere or freed. A compartment stores its physical pages in different lists ordered by the NUMA
node. Only the head of each list is stored in the compartment. The state of each physical page and
its link in the NUMA list is maintained thanks to the entries in the PFN database. A compartment also

      tracks its relationship with the root. A new compartment can be created using the physical pages that
      belongs to the parent (the root). Similarly, when the compartment is deleted, all its remaining physical
      pages are returned to the parent.

                   Global Zone

                                                                                 PFN 5A

                                                                                          PFN 5B
                                                              PFN 24

                                                                        PFN 25
                                                     Node 0
                     Parent
                  Compartment

                Physical Pages Lists

                                                                                 PFN A4
                                                              PFN CB

                                                                        PFN 7A

                                                                                          PFN B6
                                                     Node N

               # of Deposited Pages

                  # of Free Pages
                                                                       PFN Database

      FIGURE 9-7 The hypervisor’s memory compartment. Virtual address space for the global zone is reserved from
      the end of the compartment data structure

          When the hypervisor needs some physical memory for any kind of work, it allocates from the ac-
      tive compartment (depending on the partition). This means that the allocation can fail. Two possible
      scenarios can arise in case of failure:

         ■   If the allocation has been requested for a service internal to the hypervisor (usually on behalf
             of the root partition), the failure should not happen, and the system is crashed. (This explains
             why the initial calculation of the total number of pages to be assigned to the root compartment
             needs to be accurate.)

         ■   If the allocation has been requested on behalf of a child partition (usually through a hypercall),
             the hypervisor will fail the request with the status INSUFFICIENT_MEMORY. The root partition
             detects the error and performs the allocation of some physical page (more details are discussed
             later in the “Virtualization stack” section), which will be deposited in the child compartment
             through the HvDepositMemory hypercall. The operation can be finally reinitiated (and usually
             will succeed).

          The physical pages allocated from the compartment are usually mapped in the hypervisor using a
      virtual address. When a compartment is created, a virtual address range (sized 4 or 8 GB, depending on
      whether the compartment is a root or a child) is allocated with the goal of mapping the new compart-
      ment, its PDE bitmap, and its global zone.

         A hypervisor’s zone encapsulates a private VA range, which is not shared with the entire hypervisor
      address space (see the “Isolated address space” section later in this chapter). The hypervisor executes
      with a single root page table (differently from the NT kernel, which uses KVA shadowing). Two entries in
      the root page table page are reserved with the goal of dynamically switching between each zone and
      the virtual processors’ address spaces.

Partitions’ physical address space
As discussed in the previous section, when a partition is initially created, the hypervisor allocates a
physical address space for it. A physical address space contains all the data structures needed by the
hardware to translate the partition’s guest physical addresses (GPAs) to system physical addresses
(SPAs). The hardware feature that enables the translation is generally referred to as second level ad-
dress translation (SLAT). The term SLAT is platform-agnostic: hardware vendors use different names:
Intel calls it EPT for extended page tables; AMD uses the term NPT for nested page tables; and ARM
simply calls it Stage 2 Address Translation.

   The SLAT is usually implemented in a way that’s similar to the implementation of the x64 page
tables, which uses four levels of translation (the x64 virtual address translation has already been dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter 5 of Part 1). The OS running inside the partition uses the same virtual address
translation as if it were running by bare-metal hardware. However, in the former case, the physical
processor actually executes two levels of translation: one for virtual addresses and one for translating
physical addresses. Figure 9-8 shows the SLAT set up for a guest partition. In a guest partition, a GPA is
usually translated to a different SPA. This is not true for the root partition.

                                                                    Host Physical Memory
                        Guest A
 Process A
                    Page Tables A                               EPT A
    CR 3
                                                1           1     560
                                                2          2      564
                                                3          3      568            560
                                                4          4      570            564
                                         Guide Physical                          568
                                           Memory                                570

FIGURE 9-8 Address translation for a guest partition.

    When the hypervisor creates the root partition, it builds its initial physical address space by using
identity mapping. In this model, each GPA corresponds to the same SPA (for example, guest frame
0x1000 in the root partition is mapped to the bare-metal physical frame 0x1000). The hypervisor preal-
locates the memory needed for mapping the entire physical address space of the machine (which has
been discovered by the Windows Loader using UEFI services; see Chapter 12 for details) into all the
allowed root partition’s virtual trust levels (VTLs). (The root partition usually supports two VTLs.) The
SLAT page tables of each VTL belonging to the partition include the same GPA and SPA entries but usu-
ally with a different protection level set. The protection level applied to each partition’s physical frame
allows the creation of different security domains (VTL), which can be isolated one from each other. VTLs
are explained in detail in the section “The Secure Kernel” later in this chapter. The hypervisor pages
are marked as hardware-reserved and are not mapped in the partition’s SLAT table (actually they are
mapped using an invalid entry pointing to a dummy PFN).

                     Note For performance reasons, the hypervisor, while building the physical
                     memory mapping, is able to detect large chunks of contiguous physical mem-
                     ory, and, in a similar way as for virtual memory, is able to map those chunks by
                     using large pages. If for some reason the OS running in the partition decides to
                     apply a more granular protection to the physical page, the hypervisor would
                     use the reserved memory for breaking the large page in the SLAT table.

                     Earlier versions of the hypervisor also supported another technique for map-
                     ping a partition’s physical address space: shadow paging. Shadow paging was
                     used for those machines without the SLAT support. This technique had a very
                     high-performance overhead; as a result, it’s not supported anymore. (The ma-
                     chine must support SLAT; otherwise, the hypervisor would refuse to start.)

          The SLAT table of the root is built at partition-creation time, but for a guest partition, the situation is
      slightly different. When a child partition is created, the hypervisor creates its initial physical address space
      but allocates only the root page table (PML4) for each partition’s VTL. Before starting the new VM, the
      VID driver (part of the virtualization stack) reserves the physical pages needed for the VM (the exact
      number depends on the VM memory size) by allocating them from the root partition. (Remember, we
      are talking about physical memory; only a driver can allocate physical pages.) The VID driver maintains
      a list of physical pages, which is analyzed and split in large pages and then is sent to the hypervisor
      through the HvMapGpaPages Rep hypercall.

          Before sending the map request, the VID driver calls into the hypervisor for creating the needed
      SLAT page tables and internal physical memory space data structures. Each SLAT page table hierarchy
      is allocated for each available VTL in the partition (this operation is called pre-commit). The operation
      can fail, such as when the new partition’s compartment could not contain enough physical pages. In
      this case, as discussed in the previous section, the VID driver allocates more memory from the root par-
      tition and deposits it in the child’s partition compartment. At this stage, the VID driver can freely map
      all the child’s partition physical pages. The hypervisor builds and compiles all the needed SLAT page
      tables, assigning different protection based on the VTL level. (Large pages require one less indirection
      level.) This step concludes the child partition’s physical address space creation.

      Address space isolation
      Speculative execution vulnerabilities discovered in modern CPUs (also known as Meltdown, Spectre,
      and Foreshadow) allowed an attacker to read secret data located in a more privileged execution
      context by speculatively reading the stale data located in the CPU cache. This means that software
      executed in a guest VM could potentially be able to speculatively read private memory that belongs to
      the hypervisor or to the more privileged root partition. The internal details of the Spectre, Meltdown,
      and all the side-channel vulnerabilities and how they are mitigated by Windows have been covered in
      detail in Chapter 8.

   The hypervisor has been able to mitigate most of these kinds of attacks by implementing the
HyperClear mitigation. The HyperClear mitigation relies on three key components to ensure strong
Inter-VM isolation: core scheduler, Virtual-Processor Address Space Isolation, and sensitive data scrub-
bing. In modern multicore CPUs, often different SMT threads share the same CPU cache. (Details about
the core scheduler and symmetric multithreading are provided in the “Hyper-V schedulers” section.) In
the virtualization environment, SMT threads on a core can independently enter and exit the hypervisor
context based on their activity. For example, events like interrupts can cause an SMT thread to switch
out of running the guest virtual processor context and begin executing the hypervisor context. This can
happen independently for each SMT thread, so one SMT thread may be executing in the hypervisor
context while its sibling SMT thread is still running a VM’s guest virtual processor context. An attacker
running code in a less trusted guest VM’s virtual processor context on one SMT thread can then use a
side channel vulnerability to potentially observe sensitive data from the hypervisor context running on
the sibling SMT thread.

    The hypervisor provides strong data isolation to protect against a malicious guest VM by maintain-
ing separate virtual address ranges for each guest SMT thread (which back a virtual processor). When
the hypervisor context is entered on a specific SMT thread, no secret data is addressable. The only data
that can be brought into the CPU cache is associated with that current guest virtual processor or rep-
resent shared hypervisor data. As shown in Figure 9-9, when a VP running on an SMT thread enters the
hypervisor, it is enforced (by the root scheduler) that the sibling LP is running another VP that belongs
to the same VM. Furthermore, no shared secrets are mapped in the hypervisor. In case the hypervisor
needs to access secret data, it assures that no other VP is scheduled in the other sibling SMT thread.

                Core 0                               Core 1

        LP 0             LP 1                LP 0             LP 1
        HV                HV                 HV

       VM A              VM A               VM B
       (VP 0)            (VP 1)             (VP 0)

          L1 Data Cache                        L1 Data Cache

FIGURE 9-9 The Hyperclear mitigation.

   Unlike the NT kernel, the hypervisor always runs with a single page table root, which creates a single
global virtual address space. The hypervisor defines the concept of private address space, which has
a misleading name. Indeed, the hypervisor reserves two global root page table entries (PML4 entries,
which generate a 1-TB virtual address range) for mapping or unmapping a private address space. When
the hypervisor initially constructs the VP, it allocates two private page table root entries. Those will be
used to map the VP’s secret data, like its stack and data structures that contain private data. Switching
the address space means writing the two entries in the global page table root (which explains why the
term private address space has a misleading name—actually it is private address range). The hypervisor
switches private address spaces only in two cases: when a new virtual processor is created and during

      thread switches. (Remember, threads are backed by VPs. The core scheduler assures that no sibling SMT
      threads execute VPs from different partitions.) During runtime, a hypervisor thread has mapped only
      its own VP’s private data; no other secret data is accessible by that thread.

         Mapping secret data in the private address space is achieved by using the memory zone, represent-
      ed by an MM_ZONE data structure. A memory zone encapsulates a private VA subrange of the private
      address space, where the hypervisor usually stores per-VP’s secrets.

         The memory zone works similarly to the private address space. Instead of mapping root page table
      entries in the global page table root, a memory zone maps private page directories in the two root
      entries used by the private address space. A memory zone maintains an array of page directories, which
      will be mapped and unmapped into the private address space, and a bitmap that keeps track of the
      used page tables. Figure 9-10 shows the relationship between a private address space and a memory
      zone. Memory zones can be mapped and unmapped on demand (in the private address space) but are
      usually switched only at VP creation time. Indeed, the hypervisor does not need to switch them during
      thread switches; the private address space encapsulates the VA range exposed by the memory zone.

                                                                                                 Zone's Page
                                                                                                    Table
                                                                             Zone PDE #128
                                                                             Zone PDE #256
                      0                               Zone PDPTE #256

                                                                                                 Zone's Page
                                                      Zone PDPTE #257

                                                                                                    Table
         0x100'00000000
                           PML4 Entry #2              Zone PDPTE #258

         0x200'00000000    PML4 Entry #3                                        Invalid
                                  •
                                  •

                                                                                                 Zone's Page
                                  •
                                  •

                                                                                                    Table
                               Invalid
                           PMLA Entry #192                                      Invalid
         0x7FFF'FFFFFFFF                                                     Zone PDE #384
       0xFFFF8000'000000
                                                                                                 Shared Page
                                  •
                                  •
                                                                                                    Table
                                  •
                                  •

                           PMLA Entry #320
                                                         Hypervisor's
                                  •                      Shared PDPT
                                                                                Shared Page

                                  •
                                  •
                                                                                 Directory

                                                                                                 Shared Page

                               Invalid
                                                                                                    Table

                                  •
                                  •
                                  •
                                  •
       0xFFFFF80'000000                           Hypervisor's
                           PMLA Entry #480        Shared PDPT
      0xFFFFFFFF'FFFFFFF
                                                                                Shared Page
                                                                                 Directory

                                                                                                 Shared Page
                                                                                                    Table

                                                         Hypervisor's
                                                         Shared PDPT
                                                                                    •                •
                                                                                    •                •
                                                                                    •                •
                                                                                    •                •

                    Hypervisor’s Page           Private Address Space       Private Zones     Private Zones
                       Table Root                  and Shared Page         and Shared Page      and Share
                   (Maps the Entire HV)        Directory Pointers Tables     Directories       Page Tables

      FIGURE 9-10 The hypervisor’s private address spaces and private memory zones.

   In Figure 9-10, the page table's structures related to the private address space are filled with a pat-
tern, the ones related to the memory zone are shown in gray, and the shared ones belonging to the hy-
pervisor are drawn with a dashed line. Switching private address spaces is a relatively cheap operation
that requires the modification of two PML4 entries in the hypervisor’s page table root. Attaching or
detaching a memory zone from the private address space requires only the modification of the zone’s
PDPTE (a zone VA size is variable; the PDTPE are always allocated contiguously).

Dynamic memory
Virtual machines can use a different percentage of their allocated physical memory. For example,
some virtual machines use only a small amount of their assigned guest physical memory, keeping a lot
of it freed or zeroed. The performance of other virtual machines can instead suffer for high-memory
pressure scenarios, where the page file is used too often because the allocated guest physical memory
is not enough. With the goal to prevent the described scenario, the hypervisor and the virtualization
stack supports the concept of dynamic memory. Dynamic memory is the ability to dynamically assign
and remove physical memory to a virtual machine. The feature is provided by multiple components:

   ■   The NT kernel’s memory manager, which supports hot add and hot removal of physical memory
       (on bare-metal system too)

   ■   The hypervisor, through the SLAT (managed by the address manager)

   ■   The VM Worker process, which uses the dynamic memory controller module, Vmdynmem.dll,
       to establish a connection to the VMBus Dynamic Memory VSC driver (Dmvsc.sys), which runs in
       the child partition

    To properly describe dynamic memory, we should quickly introduce how the page frame number
(PFN) database is created by the NT kernel. The PFN database is used by Windows to keep track of
physical memory. It was discussed in detail in Chapter 5 of Part 1. For creating the PFN database, the
NT kernel first calculates the hypothetical size needed to map the highest possible physical address
(256 TB on standard 64-bit systems) and then marks the VA space needed to map it entirely as reserved
(storing the base address to the MmPfnDatabase global variable). Note that the reserved VA space still
has no page tables allocated. The NT kernel cycles between each physical memory descriptor discov-
ered by the boot manager (using UEFI services), coalesces them in the longest ranges possible and,
for each range, maps the underlying PFN database entries using large pages. This has an important
implication; as shown in Figure 9-11, the PFN database has space for the highest possible amount of
physical memory but only a small subset of it is mapped to real physical pages (this technique is called
sparse memory).

      MmPfnDatabase                      Physical Memory

                                            Page 0x500

         Pfn 0x500                              ...

                                            Page 0x5FF
          Pfn 0x5FF

       Memory Hole*

         Pfn 0x800
                                            Page 0x800
          Pfn 0x8FF
        Hot Removed
                                                ...
           Memory
         (set as Bad)
                                            Page 0x8FF
              No
             Map

      FIGURE 9-11 An example of a PFN database where some physical memory has been removed.

         Hot add and removal of physical memory works thanks to this principle. When new physical
      memory is added to the system, the Plug and Play memory driver (Pnpmem.sys) detects it and calls
      the MmAddPhysicalMemory routine, which is exported by the NT kernel. The latter starts a complex
      procedure that calculates the exact number of pages in the new range and the Numa node to which
      they belong, and then it maps the new PFN entries in the database by creating the necessary page
      tables in the reserved VA space. The new physical pages are added to the free list (see Chapter 5 in
      Part 1 for more details).

          When some physical memory is hot removed, the system performs an inverse procedure. It checks
      that the pages belong to the correct physical page list, updates the internal memory counters (like the
      total number of physical pages), and finally frees the corresponding PFN entries, meaning that they
      all will be marked as “bad.” The memory manager will never use the physical pages described by them
      anymore. No actual virtual space is unmapped from the PFN database. The physical memory that was
      described by the freed PFNs can always be re-added in the future.

         When an enlightened VM starts, the dynamic memory driver (Dmvsc.sys) detects whether the child
      VM supports the hot add feature; if so, it creates a worker thread that negotiates the protocol and
      connects to the VMBus channel of the VSP. (See the “Virtualization stack” section later in this chapter
      for details about VSC and VSP.) The VMBus connection channel connects the dynamic memory driver
      running in the child partition to the dynamic memory controller module (Vmdynmem.dll), which is
      mapped in the VM Worker process in the root partition. A message exchange protocol is started. Every
      one second, the child partition acquires a memory pressure report by querying different performance
      counters exposed by the memory manager (global page-file usage; number of available, committed,

and dirty pages; number of page faults per seconds; number of pages in the free and zeroed page list).
The report is then sent to the root partition.

    The VM Worker process in the root partition uses the services exposed by the VMMS balancer, a
component of the VmCompute service, for performing the calculation needed for determining the
possibility to perform a hot add operation. If the memory status of the root partition allowed a hot add
operation, the VMMS balancer calculates the proper number of pages to deposit in the child partition
and calls back (through COM) the VM Worker process, which starts the hot add operation with the as-
sistance of the VID driver:

   1.   Reserves the proper amount of physical memory in the root partition

   2.   Calls the hypervisor with the goal to map the system physical pages reserved by the root parti-
        tion to some guest physical pages mapped in the child VM, with the proper protection

   3.   Sends a message to the dynamic memory driver for starting a hot add operation on some guest
        physical pages previously mapped by the hypervisor

   The dynamic memory driver in the child partition uses the MmAddPhysicalMemory API exposed by
the NT kernel to perform the hot add operation. The latter maps the PFNs describing the new guest
physical memory in the PFN database, adding new backing pages to the database if needed.

   In a similar way, when the VMMS balancer detects that the child VM has plenty of physical pages
available, it may require the child partition (still through the VM Worker process) to hot remove some
physical pages. The dynamic memory driver uses the MmRemovePhysicalMemory API to perform the
hot remove operation. The NT kernel verifies that each page in the range specified by the balancer is
either on the zeroed or free list, or it belongs to a stack that can be safely paged out. If all the condi-
tions apply, the dynamic memory driver sends back the “hot removal” page range to the VM Worker
process, which will use services provided by the VID driver to unmap the physical pages from the child
partition and release them back to the NT kernel.

   Note Dynamic memory is not supported when nested virtualization is enabled.

Hyper-V schedulers
The hypervisor is a kind of micro operating system that runs below the root partition’s OS (Windows).
As such, it should be able to decide which thread (backing a virtual processor) is being executed by
which physical processor. This is especially true when the system runs multiple virtual machines com-
posed in total by more virtual processors than the physical processors installed in the workstation. The
hypervisor scheduler role is to select the next thread that a physical CPU is executing after the allocated
time slice of the current one ends. Hyper-V can use three different schedulers. To properly manage all
the different schedulers, the hypervisor exposes the scheduler APIs, a set of routines that are the only
entries into the hypervisor scheduler. Their sole purpose is to redirect API calls to the particular sched-
uler implementation.

      EXPERIMENT: Controlling the hypervisor’s scheduler type
      Whereas client editions of Windows start by default with the root scheduler, Windows Server 2019
      runs by default with the core scheduler. In this experiment, you figure out the hypervisor scheduler
      enabled on your system and find out how to switch to another kind of hypervisor scheduler on the
      next system reboot.

         The Windows hypervisor logs a system event after it has determined which scheduler to en-
      able. You can search the logged event by using the Event Viewer tool, which you can run by typ-
      ing eventvwr in the Cortana search box. After the applet is started, expand the Windows Logs
      key and click the System log. You should search for events with ID 2 and the Event sources set to
      Hyper-V-Hypervisor. You can do that by clicking the Filter Current Log button located on the
      right of the window or by clicking the Event ID column, which will order the events in ascending
      order by their ID (keep in mind that the operation can take a while). If you double-click a found
      event, you should see a window like the following:

         The launch event ID 2 denotes indeed the hypervisor scheduler type, where

         1 = Classic scheduler, SMT disabled

         2 = Classic scheduler

         3 = Core scheduler

         4 = Root scheduler

     The sample figure was taken from a Windows Server system, which runs by default with the
   Core Scheduler. To change the scheduler type to the classic one (or root), you should open an ad-
   ministrative command prompt window (by typing cmd in the Cortana search box and selecting
   Run As Administrator) and type the following command:
   bcdedit /set hypervisorschedulertype <Type>

      where <Type> is Classic for the classic scheduler, Core for the core scheduler, or Root for the
   root scheduler. You should restart the system and check again the newly generated Hyper-V-
   Hypervisor event ID 2. You can also check the current enabled hypervisor scheduler by using an
   administrative PowerShell window with the following command:
   Get-WinEvent -FilterHashTable @{ProviderName="Microsoft-Windows-Hyper-V-Hypervisor"; ID=2}
   -MaxEvents 1

      The command extracts the last Event ID 2 from the System event log.

The classic scheduler
The classic scheduler has been the default scheduler used on all versions of Hyper-V since its initial
release. The classic scheduler in its default configuration implements a simple, round-robin policy in
which any virtual processor in the current execution state (the execution state depends on the total
number of VMs running in the system) is equally likely to be dispatched. The classic scheduler supports
also setting a virtual processor’s affinity and performs scheduling decisions considering the physical
processor’s NUMA node. The classic scheduler doesn’t know what a guest VP is currently executing.
The only exception is defined by the spin-lock enlightenment. When the Windows kernel, which is run-
ning in a partition, is going to perform an active wait on a spin-lock, it emits a hypercall with the goal
to inform the hypervisor (high IRQL synchronization mechanisms are described in Chapter 8, “System
mechanisms”). The classic scheduler can preempt the current executing virtual processor (which
hasn’t expired its allocated time slice yet) and can schedule another one. In this way it saves the active
CPU spin cycles.

   The default configuration of the classic scheduler assigns an equal time slice to each VP. This means
that in high-workload oversubscribed systems, where multiple virtual processors attempt to execute,
and the physical processors are sufficiently busy, performance can quickly degrade. To overcome

      the problem, the classic scheduler supports different fine-tuning options (see Figure 9-12), which can
      modify its internal scheduling decision:

         ■    VP reservations A user can reserve the CPU capacity in advance on behalf of a guest ma-
              chine. The reservation is specified as the percentage of the capacity of a physical processor to
              be made available to the guest machine whenever it is scheduled to run. As a result, Hyper-V
              schedules the VP to run only if that minimum amount of CPU capacity is available (meaning that
              the allocated time slice is guaranteed).

         ■    VP limits Similar to VP reservations, a user can limit the percentage of physical CPU usage for
              a VP. This means reducing the available time slice allocated to a VP in a high workload scenario.

         ■    VP weight This controls the probability that a VP is scheduled when the reservations have
              already been met. In default configurations, each VP has an equal probability of being executed.
              When the user configures weight on the VPs that belong to a virtual machine, scheduling deci-
              sions become based on the relative weighting factor the user has chosen. For example, let’s
              assume that a system with four CPUs runs three virtual machines at the same time. The first VM
              has set a weighting factor of 100, the second 200, and the third 300. Assuming that all the system’s
              physical processors are allocated to a uniform number of VPs, the probability of a VP in the first
              VM to be dispatched is 17%, of a VP in the second VM is 33%, and of a VP in the third one is 50%.

      FIGURE 9-12 The classic scheduler fine-tuning settings property page, which is available
      only when the classic scheduler is enabled.

The core scheduler
Normally, a classic CPU’s core has a single execution pipeline in which streams of instructions are
executed one after each other. An instruction enters the pipe, proceeds through several stages of
execution (load data, compute, store data, for example), and is retired from the pipe. Different types
of instructions use different parts of the CPU core. A modern CPU’s core is often able to execute in an
out-of-order way multiple sequential instructions in the stream (in respect to the order in which they
entered the pipeline). Modern CPUs, which support out-of-order execution, often implement what is
called symmetric multithreading (SMT): a CPU’s core has two execution pipelines and presents more
than one logical processor to the system; thus, two different instruction streams can be executed side
by side by a single shared execution engine. (The resources of the core, like its caches, are shared.) The
two execution pipelines are exposed to the software as single independent processors (CPUs). From
now on, with the term logical processor (or simply LP), we will refer to an execution pipeline of an SMT
core exposed to Windows as an independent CPU. (SMT is discussed in Chapters 2 and 4 of Part 1.)

   This hardware implementation has led to many security problems: one instruction executed
by a shared logical CPU can interfere and affect the instruction executed by the other sibling LP.
Furthermore, the physical core’s cache memory is shared; an LP can alter the content of the cache. The
other sibling CPU can potentially probe the data located in the cache by measuring the time employed
by the processor to access the memory addressed by the same cache line, thus revealing “secret data”
accessed by the other logical processor (as described in the “Hardware side-channel vulnerabilities”
section of Chapter 8). The classic scheduler can normally select two threads belonging to different VMs
to be executed by two LPs in the same processor core. This is clearly not acceptable because in this
context, the first virtual machine could potentially read data belonging to the other one.

   To overcome this problem, and to be able to run SMT-enabled VMs with predictable performance,
Windows Server 2016 has introduced the core scheduler. The core scheduler leverages the properties
of SMT to provide isolation and a strong security boundary for guest VPs. When the core scheduler is
enabled, Hyper-V schedules virtual cores onto physical cores. Furthermore, it ensures that VPs belong-
ing to different VMs are never scheduled on sibling SMT threads of a physical core. The core scheduler
enables the virtual machine for making use of SMT. The VPs exposed to a VM can be part of an SMT
set. The OS and applications running in the guest virtual machine can use SMT behavior and program-
ming interfaces (APIs) to control and distribute work across SMT threads, just as they would when
run nonvirtualized.

   Figure 9-13 shows an example of an SMT system with four logical processors distributed in two CPU
cores. In the figure, three VMs are running. The first and second VMs have four VPs in two groups of two,
whereas the third one has only one assigned VP. The groups of VPs in the VMs are labelled A through E.
Individual VPs in a group that are idle (have no code to execute) are filled with a darker color.

        VM # 1

             VP      VP      A

             VP      VP      B

                                                                         Run List
                                                       CPU Core #1
                                                                              VP    VP    A
                                                          LP    LP

        VM # 2
                                                Deferred List                 VP    VP    C

             VP      VP      C

             VP      VP      D                                           Run List
                                                       CPU Core #2
                                                                              VP    VP    B
                                                          LP    LP

                                                Deferred List

                                                          VP    VP   E
        VM # 3

             VP      E

      FIGURE 9-13 A sample SMT system with two processors’ cores and three VMs running.

         Each core has a run list containing groups of VPs that are ready to execute, and a deferred list of
      groups of VPs that are ready to run but have not been added to the core’s run list yet. The groups of
      VPs execute on the physical cores. If all VPs in a group become idle, then the VP group is descheduled
      and does not appear on any run list. (In Figure 9-13, this is the situation for VP group D.) The only VP of
      the group E has recently left the idle state. The VP has been assigned to the CPU core 2. In the figure,
      a dummy sibling VP is shown. This is because the LP of core 2 never schedules any other VP while its
      sibling LP of its core is executing a VP belonging to the VM 3. In the same way, no other VPs are sched-
      uled on a physical core if one VP in the LP group became idle but the other is still executing (such as for
      group A, for example). Each core executes the VP group that is at the head of its run list. If there are no
      VP groups to execute, the core becomes idle and waits for a VP group to be deposited onto its deferred
      run list. When this occurs, the core wakes up from idle and empties its deferred run list, placing the
      contents onto its run list.

    The core scheduler is implemented by different components (see Figure 9-14) that provide strict
layering between each other. The heart of the core scheduler is the scheduling unit, which represents a
virtual core or group of SMT VPs. (For non-SMT VMs, it represents a single VP.) Depending on the VM’s
type, the scheduling unit has either one or two threads bound to it. The hypervisor’s process owns a list
of scheduling units, which own threads backing up to VPs belonging to the VM. The scheduling unit is
the single unit of scheduling for the core scheduler to which scheduling settings—such as reservation,
weight, and cap—are applied during runtime. A scheduling unit stays active for the duration of a time
slice, can be blocked and unblocked, and can migrate between different physical processor cores. An
important concept is that the scheduling unit is analogous to a thread in the classic scheduler, but it
doesn’t have a stack or VP context in which to run. It’s one of the threads bound to a scheduling unit
that runs on a physical processor core. The thread gang scheduler is the arbiter for each scheduling unit.
It’s the entity that decides which thread from the active scheduling unit gets run by which LP from the
physical processor core. It enforces thread affinities, applies thread scheduling policies, and updates
the related counters for each thread.

      Scheduler Service

                                              TH_PROCESS

                                                                   Scheduling Unit
     Scheduler Manager
                                      Scheduling Unit

       Unit Scheduler                                         Scheduling Unit

                                                           Thread Gang Scheduler
       Core Dispatcher

 Logical Processor Dispatcher                                  TH_THREAD

          CPU_PLS

FIGURE 9-14 The components of the core scheduler.

          Each LP of the physical processor’s core has an instance of a logical processor dispatcher associated
      with it. The logical processor dispatcher is responsible for switching threads, maintaining timers, and
      flushing the VMCS (or VMCB, depending on the architecture) for the current thread. Logical proces-
      sor dispatchers are owned by the core dispatcher, which represents a physical single processor core
      and owns exactly two SMT LPs. The core dispatcher manages the current (active) scheduling unit. The
      unit scheduler, which is bound to its own core dispatcher, decides which scheduling unit needs to run
      next on the physical processor core the unit scheduler belongs to. The last important component of
      the core scheduler is the scheduler manager, which owns all the unit schedulers in the system and has
      a global view of all their states. It provides load balancing and ideal core assignment services to the
      unit scheduler.

      The root scheduler
      The root scheduler (also known as integrated scheduler) was introduced in Windows 10 April 2018
      Update (RS4) with the goal to allow the root partition to schedule virtual processors (VPs) belonging
      to guest partitions. The root scheduler was designed with the goal to support lightweight containers
      used by Windows Defender Application Guard. Those types of containers (internally called Barcelona
      or Krypton containers) must be managed by the root partition and should consume a small amount of
      memory and hard-disk space. (Deeply describing Krypton containers is outside the scope of this book.
      You can find an introduction of server containers in Part 1, Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs”). In addition,
      the root OS scheduler can readily gather metrics about workload CPU utilization inside the container
      and use this data as input to the same scheduling policy applicable to all other workloads in the system.

         The NT scheduler in the root partition’s OS instance manages all aspects of scheduling work to
      system LPs. To achieve that, the integrated scheduler’s root component inside the VID driver creates
      a VP-dispatch thread inside of the root partition (in the context of the new VMMEM process) for each
      guest VP. (VA-backed VMs are discussed later in this chapter.) The NT scheduler in the root partition
      schedules VP-dispatch threads as regular threads subject to additional VM/VP-specific scheduling poli-
      cies and enlightenments. Each VP-dispatch thread runs a VP-dispatch loop until the VID driver termi-
      nates the corresponding VP.

          The VP-dispatch thread is created by the VID driver after the VM Worker Process (VMWP), which is
      covered in the “Virtualization stack” section later in this chapter, has requested the partition and VPs
      creation through the SETUP_PARTITION IOCTL. The VID driver communicates with the WinHvr driver,
      which in turn initializes the hypervisor’s guest partition creation (through the HvCreatePartition hyper-
      call). In case the created partition represents a VA-backed VM, or in case the system has the root sched-
      uler active, the VID driver calls into the NT kernel (through a kernel extension) with the goal to create
      the VMMEM minimal process associated with the new guest partition. The VID driver also creates a VP-
      dispatch thread for each VP belonging to the partition. The VP-dispatch thread executes in the context
      of the VMMEM process in kernel mode (no user mode code exists in VMMEM) and is implemented in
      the VID driver (and WinHvr). As shown in Figure 9-15, each VP-dispatch thread runs a VP-dispatch loop
      until the VID terminates the corresponding VP or an intercept is generated from the guest partition.

             VmWp Worker                                    VP-Dispatch     *Run by the VID Driver in the
               Thread                                         Thread        VMMEM Process Context

                         Calls into VID to Get
                         a Message
                                                            Waits for the
                                                            ThreadWork
                VidVpRun                                       Event

                                                              Run Root
                                                               Schedule
               Signals the                                  Dispatch Loop
              ThreadWork
                  Event
                               Wakes Up the VP-
                               dispatch Thread                   Send
                                                             HvDispatchVp *Using the WinHvr Driver
               Waits for the                               to the Hypervisor
              DispatchDone
                  Event

                                                             Process the
                                                              Intercept
                Intercept
              Requires User-
        NO   Mode Processing
                      YES                                     Intercept
                                                             Completed?
              Complete the                        YES
               IOCTL and
              Exit to VmWp                                           NO

                                                             Signals the
                                                           DispatchDone
                                                                Event
                                       Wakes Up the VmWp
                                         Worker Thread

FIGURE 9-15 The root scheduler’s VP-dispatch thread and the associated VMWP worker thread
that processes the hypervisor’s messages.

   While in the VP-dispatch loop, the VP-dispatch thread is responsible for the following:

   1.    Call the hypervisor’s new HvDispatchVp hypercall interface to dispatch the VP on the current
         processor. On each HvDispatchVp hypercall, the hypervisor tries to switch context from the cur-
         rent root VP to the specified guest VP and let it run the guest code. One of the most important
         characteristics of this hypercall is that the code that emits it should run at PASSIVE_LEVEL IRQL.
         The hypervisor lets the guest VP run until either the VP blocks voluntarily, the VP generates an
         intercept for the root, or there is an interrupt targeting the root VP. Clock interrupts are still
         processed by the root partitions. When the guest VP exhausts its allocated time slice, the VP-
         backing thread is preempted by the NT scheduler. On any of the three events, the hypervisor
         switches back to the root VP and completes the HvDispatchVp hypercall. It then returns to the
         root partition.

         2.   Block on the VP-dispatch event if the corresponding VP in the hypervisor is blocked. Anytime
              the guest VP is blocked voluntarily, the VP-dispatch thread blocks itself on a VP-dispatch event
              until the hypervisor unblocks the corresponding guest VP and notifies the VID driver. The VID
              driver signals the VP-dispatch event, and the NT scheduler unblocks the VP-dispatch thread
              that can make another HvDispatchVp hypercall.

         3.   Process all intercepts reported by the hypervisor on return from the dispatch hypercall. If the
              guest VP generates an intercept for the root, the VP-dispatch thread processes the intercept
              request on return from the HvDispatchVp hypercall and makes another HvDispatchVp request
              after the VID completes processing of the intercept. Each intercept is managed differently. If
              the intercept requires processing from the user mode VMWP process, the WinHvr driver exits
              the loop and returns to the VID, which signals an event for the backed VMWP thread and waits
              for the intercept message to be processed by the VMWP process before restarting the loop.

          To properly deliver signals to VP-dispatch threads from the hypervisor to the root, the integrated
      scheduler provides a scheduler message exchange mechanism. The hypervisor sends scheduler mes-
      sages to the root partition via a shared page. When a new message is ready for delivery, the hypervisor
      injects a SINT interrupt into the root, and the root delivers it to the corresponding ISR handler in the
      WinHvr driver, which routes the message to the VID intercept callback (VidInterceptIsrCallback). The
      intercept callback tries to handle the intercept message directly from the VID driver. In case the direct
      handling is not possible, a synchronization event is signaled, which allows the dispatch loop to exit and
      allows one of the VmWp worker threads to dispatch the intercept in user mode.

         Context switches when the root scheduler is enabled are more expensive compared to other hyper-
      visor scheduler implementations. When the system switches between two guest VPs, for example, it
      always needs to generate two exits to the root partitions. The integrated scheduler treats hypervisor’s
      root VP threads and guest VP threads very differently (they are internally represented by the same
      TH_THREAD data structure, though):

         ■    Only the root VP thread can enqueue a guest VP thread to its physical processor. The root VP
              thread has priority over any guest VP that is running or being dispatched. If the root VP is not
              blocked, the integrated scheduler tries its best to switch the context to the root VP thread as
              soon as possible.

         ■    A guest VP thread has two sets of states: thread internal states and thread root states. The thread
              root states reflect the states of the VP-dispatch thread that the hypervisor communicates to
              the root partition. The integrated scheduler maintains those states for each guest VP thread to
              know when to send a wake-up signal for the corresponding VP-dispatch thread to the root.

          Only the root VP can initiate a dispatch of a guest VP for its processor. It can do that either because
      of HvDispatchVp hypercalls (in this situation, we say that the hypervisor is processing “external work”),
      or because of any other hypercall that requires sending a synchronous request to the target guest VP
      (this is what is defined as “internal work”). If the guest VP last ran on the current physical processor, the

scheduler can dispatch the guest VP thread right away. Otherwise, the scheduler needs to send a flush
request to the processor on which the guest VP last ran and wait for the remote processor to flush the
VP context. The latter case is defined as “migration” and is a situation that the hypervisor needs to track
(through the thread internal states and root states, which are not described here).

   EXPERIMENT: Playing with the root scheduler
   The NT scheduler decides when to select and run a virtual processor belonging to a VM and for
   how long. This experiment demonstrates what we have discussed previously: All the VP dis-
   patch threads execute in the context of the VMMEM process, created by the VID driver. For the
   experiment, you need a workstation with at least Windows 10 April 2018 update (RS4) installed,
   along with the Hyper-V role enabled and a VM with any operating system installed ready for use.
   The procedure for creating a VM is explained in detail here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
   virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/quick-start/quick-create-virtual-machine.

      First, you should verify that the root scheduler is enabled. Details on the procedure are avail-
   able in the “Controlling the hypervisor’s scheduler type” experiment earlier in this chapter. The
   VM used for testing should be powered down.

      Open the Task Manager by right-clicking on the task bar and selecting Task Manager
                                                                                  Manager, click the
   Details sheet, and verify how many VMMEM processes are currently active. In case no VMs are
   running, there should be none of them; in case the Windows Defender Application Guard (WDAG)
   role is installed, there could be an existing VMMEM process instance, which hosts the preloaded
   WDAG container. (This kind of VM is described later in the “VA-backed virtual machines” section.) In
   case a VMMEM process instance exists, you should take note of its process ID (PID).

       Open the Hyper-V Manager by typing Hyper-V Manager in the Cortana search box and start
   your virtual machine. After the VM has been started and the guest operating system has success-
   fully booted, switch back to the Task Manager and search for a new VMMEM process. If you click
   the new VMMEM process and expand the User Name column, you can see that the process has
   been associated with a token owned by a user named as the VM’s GUID. You can obtain your VM’s
   GUID by executing the following command in an administrative PowerShell window (replace the
   term “<VmName>” with the name of your VM):
   Get-VM -VmName "<VmName>" | ft VMName, VmId

         The VM ID and the VMMEM process’s user name should be the same, as shown in the follow-
      ing figure.

         Install Process Explorer (by downloading it from https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysin-
      ternals/downloads/process-explorer),
      ternals/downloads/process-explorer and run it as administrator. Search the PID of the correct
      VMMEM process identified in the previous step (27312 in the example), right-click it, and select
      Suspend”. The CPU tab of the VMMEM process should now show “Suspended” instead of the
      correct CPU time.

         If you switch back to the VM, you will find that it is unresponsive and completely stuck. This is
      because you have suspended the process hosting the dispatch threads of all the virtual proces-
      sors belonging to the VM. This prevented the NT kernel from scheduling those threads, which
      won’t allow the WinHvr driver to emit the needed HvDispatchVp hypercall used to resume the
      VP execution.

        If you right-click the suspended VMMEM and select Resume, your VM resumes its execution
      and continues to run correctly.

Hypercalls and the hypervisor TLFS
Hypercalls provide a mechanism to the operating system running in the root or the in the child parti-
tion to request services from the hypervisor. Hypercalls have a well-defined set of input and output
parameters. The hypervisor Top Level Functional Specification (TLFS) is available online (https://docs
.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/reference/tlfs); it defines the different call-
ing conventions used while specifying those parameters. Furthermore, it lists all the publicly available
hypervisor features, partition’s properties, hypervisor, and VSM interfaces.

   Hypercalls are available because of a platform-dependent opcode (VMCALL for Intel systems,
VMMCALL for AMD, HVC for ARM64) which, when invoked, always cause a VM_EXIT into the hypervi-
sor. VM_EXITs are events that cause the hypervisor to restart to execute its own code in the hypervisor
privilege level, which is higher than any other software running in the system (except for firmware’s
SMM context), while the VP is suspended. VM_EXIT events can be generated from various reasons. In
the platform-specific VMCS (or VMCB) opaque data structure the hardware maintains an index that
specifies the exit reason for the VM_EXIT. The hypervisor gets the index, and, in case of an exit caused
by a hypercall, reads the hypercall input value specified by the caller (generally from a CPU’s general-
purpose register—RCX in the case of 64-bit Intel and AMD systems). The hypercall input value (see
Figure 9-16) is a 64-bit value that specifies the hypercall code, its properties, and the calling convention
used for the hypercall. Three kinds of calling conventions are available:

    ■       Standard hypercalls Store the input and output parameters on 8-byte aligned guest physical
            addresses (GPAs). The OS passes the two addresses via general-purposes registers (RDX and R8
            on Intel and AMD 64-bit systems).

    ■       Fast hypercalls Usually don’t allow output parameters and employ the two general-purpose
            registers used in standard hypercalls to pass only input parameters to the hypervisor (up to
            16 bytes in size).

    ■       Extended fast hypercalls (or XMM fast hypercalls) Similar to fast hypercalls, but these use an
            additional six floating-point registers to allow the caller to pass input parameters up to 112 bytes
            in size.

 63:60        59:48             47:44      43:32       31:27      26:17         16         15:0
 RsvdZ        Rep start index   RsvdZ      Rep count   RsvdZ      Variable      Fast       Call Code
 (4 bits)     (12 bits)         (4 bits)   (12 bits)   (5 bits)   header size   (1 bit)    (16 bits)
                                                                  (9 bits)

FIGURE 9-16 The hypercall input value (from the hypervisor TLFS).

   There are two classes of hypercalls: simple and rep (which stands for “repeat”). A simple hypercall
performs a single operation and has a fixed-size set of input and output parameters. A rep hypercall
acts like a series of simple hypercalls. When a caller initially invokes a rep hypercall, it specifies a rep
count that indicates the number of elements in the input or output parameter list. Callers also specify
a rep start index that indicates the next input or output element that should be consumed.

         All hypercalls return another 64-bit value called hypercall result value (see Figure 9-17). Generally,
      the result value describes the operation’s outcome, and, for rep hypercalls, the total number of com-
      pleted repetition.

       63:40                      43:32           31:16                15:0
       Rsvd                       Rep             Rsvd                 Result
       (20 bits)                  complete        (16 bits)            (16 bits)
                                  (12 bits)

      FIGURE 9-17 The hypercall result value (from the hypervisor TLFS).

          Hypercalls could take some time to be completed. Keeping a physical CPU that doesn‘t receive
      interrupts can be dangerous for the host OS. For example, Windows has a mechanism that detects
      whether a CPU has not received its clock tick interrupt for a period of time longer than 16 milliseconds.
      If this condition is detected, the system is suddenly stopped with a BSOD. The hypervisor therefore
      relies on a hypercall continuation mechanism for some hypercalls, including all rep hypercall forms. If
      a hypercall isn’t able to complete within the prescribed time limit (usually 50 microseconds), control is
      returned back to the caller (through an operation called VM_ENTRY), but the instruction pointer is not
      advanced past the instruction that invoked the hypercall. This allows pending interrupts to be handled
      and other virtual processors to be scheduled. When the original calling thread resumes execution, it
      will re-execute the hypercall instruction and make forward progress toward completing the operation.

         A driver usually never emits a hypercall directly through the platform-dependent opcode.
      Instead, it uses services exposed by the Windows hypervisor interface driver, which is available in
      two different versions:

         ■     WinHvr.sys Loaded at system startup if the OS is running in the root partition and exposes
               hypercalls available in both the root and child partition.

         ■     WinHv.sys Loaded only when the OS is running in a child partition. It exposes hypercalls
               available in the child partition only.

         Routines and data structures exported by the Windows hypervisor interface driver are extensively
      used by the virtualization stack, especially by the VID driver, which, as we have already introduced,
      covers a key role in the functionality of the entire Hyper-V platform.

      Intercepts
      The root partition should be able to create a virtual environment that allows an unmodified guest OS,
      which was written to execute on physical hardware, to run in a hypervisor’s guest partition. Such legacy
      guests may attempt to access physical devices that do not exist in a hypervisor partition (for example,
      by accessing certain I/O ports or by writing to specific MSRs). For these cases, the hypervisor provides
      the host intercepts facility; when a VP of a guest VM executes certain instructions or generates certain
      exceptions, the authorized root partition can intercept the event and alter the effect of the intercepted
      instruction such that, to the child, it mirrors the expected behavior in physical hardware.

    When an intercept event occurs in a child partition, its VP is suspended, and an intercept message
is sent to the root partition by the Synthetic Interrupt Controller (SynIC; see the following section
for more details) from the hypervisor. The message is received thanks to the hypervisor’s Synthetic
ISR (Interrupt Service Routine), which the NT kernel installs during phase 0 of its startup only in case
the system is enlightened and running under the hypervisor (see Chapter 12 for more details). The
hypervisor synthetic ISR (KiHvInterrupt), usually installed on vector 0x30, transfers its execution
to an external callback, which the VID driver has registered when it started (through the exposed
HvlRegisterInterruptCallback NT kernel API).

    The VID driver is an intercept driver, meaning that it is able to register host intercepts with the
hypervisor and thus receives all the intercept events that occur on child partitions. After the partition
is initialized, the WM Worker process registers intercepts for various components of the virtualization
stack. (For example, the virtual motherboard registers I/O intercepts for each virtual COM ports of the
VM.) It sends an IOCTL to the VID driver, which uses the HvInstallIntercept hypercall to install the inter-
cept on the child partition. When the child partition raises an intercept, the hypervisor suspends the VP
and injects a synthetic interrupt in the root partition, which is managed by the KiHvInterrupt ISR. The
latter routine transfers the execution to the registered VID Intercept callback, which manages the event
and restarts the VP by clearing the intercept suspend synthetic register of the suspended VP.

   The hypervisor supports the interception of the following events in the child partition:

   ■   Access to I/O ports (read or write)

   ■   Access to VP’s MSR (read or write)

   ■   Execution of CPUID instruction

   ■   Exceptions

   ■   Accesses to general purposes registers

   ■   Hypercalls

The synthetic interrupt controller (SynIC)
The hypervisor virtualizes interrupts and exceptions for both the root and guest partitions through
the synthetic interrupt controller (SynIC), which is an extension of a virtualized local APIC (see the Intel
or AMD software developer manual for more details about the APIC). The SynIC is responsible for
dispatching virtual interrupts to virtual processors (VPs). Interrupts delivered to a partition fall into two
categories: external and synthetic (also known as internal or simply virtual interrupts). External inter-
rupts originate from other partitions or devices; synthetic interrupts are originated from the hypervisor
itself and are targeted to a partition’s VP.

  When a VP in a partition is created, the hypervisor creates and initializes a SynIC for each supported
VTL. It then starts the VTL 0’s SynIC, which means that it enables the virtualization of a physical CPU’s

      APIC in the VMCS (or VMCB) hardware data structure. The hypervisor supports three kinds of APIC
      virtualization while dealing with external hardware interrupts:

         ■    In standard configuration, the APIC is virtualized through the event injection hardware support.
              This means that every time a partition accesses the VP’s local APIC registers, I/O ports, or MSRs
              (in the case of x2APIC), it produces a VMEXIT, causing hypervisor codes to dispatch the inter-
              rupt through the SynIC, which eventually “injects” an event to the correct guest VP by manipu-
              lating VMCS/VMCB opaque fields (after it goes through the logic similar to a physical APIC,
              which determines whether the interrupt can be delivered).

         ■    The APIC emulation mode works similar to the standard configuration. Every physical inter-
              rupt sent by the hardware (usually through the IOAPIC) still causes a VMEXIT, but the hypervi-
              sor does not have to inject any event. Instead, it manipulates a virtual-APIC page used by the
              processor to virtualize certain access to the APIC registers. When the hypervisor wants to inject
              an event, it simply manipulates some virtual registers mapped in the virtual-APIC page. The
              event is delivered by the hardware when a VMENTRY happens. At the same time, if a guest VP
              manipulates certain parts of its local APIC, it does not produce any VMEXIT, but the modifica-
              tion will be stored in the virtual-APIC page.

         ■    Posted interrupts allow certain kinds of external interrupts to be delivered directly in the guest
              partition without producing any VMEXIT. This allows direct access devices to be mapped directly
              in the child partition without incurring any performance penalties caused by the VMEXITs. The
              physical processor processes the virtual interrupts by directly recording them as pending on the
              virtual-APIC page. (For more details, consult the Intel or AMD software developer manual.)

         When the hypervisor starts a processor, it usually initializes the synthetic interrupt controller module
      for the physical processor (represented by a CPU_PLS data structure). The SynIC module of the physical
      processor is an array of an interrupt’s descriptors, which make the connection between a physical inter-
      rupt and a virtual interrupt. A hypervisor interrupt descriptor (IDT entry), as shown in Figure 9-18, contains
      the data needed for the SynIC to correctly dispatch the interrupt, in particular the entity the interrupt is
      delivered to (a partition, the hypervisor, a spurious interrupt), the target VP (root, a child, multiple VPs, or
      a synthetic interrupt), the interrupt vector, the target VTL, and some other interrupt characteristics.

          Dispatch Type

         Target VP & VTL

          Virtual Vector

            Interrupt
          Characteristics

             Hypervisor
              Reserved

      FIGURE 9-18 The hypervisor physical interrupt descriptor.

   In default configurations, all the interrupts are delivered to the root partition in VTL 0 or to the
hypervisor itself (in the second case, the interrupt entry is Hypervisor Reserved). External interrupts
can be delivered to a guest partition only when a direct access device is mapped into a child partition;
NVMe devices are a good example.

   Every time the thread backing a VP is selected for being executed, the hypervisor checks whether
one (or more) synthetic interrupt needs to be delivered. As discussed previously, synthetic interrupts
aren’t generated by any hardware; they’re usually generated from the hypervisor itself (under certain
conditions), and they are still managed by the SynIC, which is able to inject the virtual interrupt to the
correct VP. Even though they’re extensively used by the NT kernel (the enlightened clock timer is a
good example), synthetic interrupts are fundamental for the Virtual Secure Mode (VSM). We discuss
them in in the section “The Secure Kernel” later in this chapter.

  The root partition can send a customized virtual interrupt to a child by using the HvAssertVirtualInterrupt
hypercall (documented in the TLFS).

Inter-partition communication
The synthetic interrupt controller also has the important role of providing inter-partition communica-
tion facilities to the virtual machines. The hypervisor provides two principal mechanisms for one parti-
tion to communicate with another: messages and events. In both cases, the notifications are sent to the
target VP using synthetic interrupts. Messages and events are sent from a source partition to a target
partition through a preallocated connection, which is associated with a destination port.

    One of the most important components that uses the inter-partition communication services pro-
vided by the SynIC is VMBus. (VMBus architecture is discussed in the “Virtualization stack” section later
in this chapter.) The VMBus root driver (Vmbusr.sys) in the root allocates a port ID (ports are identified
by a 32-bit ID) and creates a port in the child partition by emitting the HvCreatePort hypercall through
the services provided by the WinHv driver.

    A port is allocated in the hypervisor from the receiver’s memory pool. When a port is created, the
hypervisor allocates sixteen message buffers from the port memory. The message buffers are main-
tained in a queue associated with a SINT (synthetic interrupt source) in the virtual processor’s SynIC.
The hypervisor exposes sixteen interrupt sources, which can allow the VMBus root driver to manage a
maximum of 16 message queues. A synthetic message has the fixed size of 256 bytes and can transfer
only 240 bytes (16 bytes are used as header). The caller of the HvCreatePort hypercall specifies which
virtual processor and SINT to target.

   To correctly receive messages, the WinHv driver allocates a synthetic interrupt message page
(SIMP), which is then shared with the hypervisor. When a message is enqueued for a target partition,
the hypervisor copies the message from its internal queue to the SIMP slot corresponding to the cor-
rect SINT. The VMBus root driver then creates a connection, which associates the port opened in the
child VM to the parent, through the HvConnectPort hypercall. After the child has enabled the recep-
tion of synthetic interrupts in the correct SINT slot, the communication can start; the sender can post
a message to the client by specifying a target Port ID and emitting the HvPostMessage hypercall. The
hypervisor injects a synthetic interrupt to the target VP, which can read from the message page (SIMP)
the content of the message.

         The hypervisor supports ports and connections of three types:

         ■   Message ports Transmit 240-byte messages from and to a partition. A message port is as-
             sociated with a single SINT in the parent and child partition. Messages will be delivered in order
             through a single port message queue. This characteristic makes messages ideal for VMBus
             channel setup and teardown (further details are provided in the “Virtualization stack” section
             later in this chapter).

         ■   Event ports Receive simple interrupts associated with a set of flags, set by the hypervisor
             when the opposite endpoint makes a HvSignalEvent hypercall. This kind of port is normally
             used as a synchronization mechanism. VMBus, for example, uses an event port to notify that a
             message has been posted on the ring buffer described by a particular channel. When the event
             interrupt is delivered to the target partition, the receiver knows exactly to which channel the
             interrupt is targeted thanks to the flag associated with the event.

         ■   Monitor ports An optimization to the Event port. Causing a VMEXIT and a VM context switch
             for every single HvSignalEvent hypercall is an expensive operation. Monitor ports are set up by
             allocating a shared page (between the hypervisor and the partition) that contains a data struc-
             ture indicating which event port is associated with a particular monitored notification flag (a bit
             in the page). In that way, when the source partition wants to send a synchronization interrupt, it
             can just set the corresponding flag in the shared page. Sooner or later the hypervisor will notice
             the bit set in the shared page and will trigger an interrupt to the event port.

      The Windows hypervisor platform API and EXO partitions
      Windows increasingly uses Hyper-V’s hypervisor for providing functionality not only related to running
      traditional VMs. In particular, as we will discuss discuss in the second part of this chapter, VSM, an im-
      portant security component of modern Windows versions, leverages the hypervisor to enforce a higher
      level of isolation for features that provide critical system services or handle secrets such as passwords.
      Enabling these features requires that the hypervisor is running by default on a machine.

          External virtualization products, like VMware, Qemu, VirtualBox, Android Emulator, and many oth-
      ers use the virtualization extensions provided by the hardware to build their own hypervisors, which is
      needed for allowing them to correctly run. This is clearly not compatible with Hyper-V, which launches
      its hypervisor before the Windows kernel starts up in the root partition (the Windows hypervisor is a
      native, or bare-metal hypervisor).

          As for Hyper-V, external virtualization solutions are also composed of a hypervisor, which provides
      generic low-level abstractions for the processor’s execution and memory management of the VM, and a
      virtualization stack, which refers to the components of the virtualization solution that provide the emu-
      lated environment for the VM (like its motherboard, firmware, storage controllers, devices, and so on).

         The Windows Hypervisor Platform API, which is documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us
      /virtualization/api/, has the main goal to enable running third-party virtualization solutions on the
      Windows hypervisor. Specifically, a third-party virtualization product should be able to create, delete,
      start, and stop VMs with characteristics (firmware, emulated devices, storage controllers) defined by its

own virtualization stack. The third-party virtualization stack, with its management interfaces, continues
to run on Windows in the root partition, which allows for an unchanged use of its VMs by their client.

  As shown in Figure 9-19, all the Windows hypervisor platform’s APIs run in user mode and are
implemented on the top of the VID and WinHvr driver in two libraries: WinHvPlatform.dll and
WinHvEmulation.dll (the latter implements the instruction emulator for MMIO).

 Root Partition                                                                              Guest Partition
  Virtualization Stack Process

    CreateThread      VirtualAlloc              MapViewOfFile

    Hypervisor Instruction       Windows Hypervisor
    Emulator                     Platform API

   WHvRun VirtualProcessor           WHvMapGpaRange             User
                                                            Kernel

                   VID driver
                                                      MicroVm
   WinHv         Intercept           WinHvMap
DispatchVp        Routine            GpaPages                          Guest VPs                  GPA Space

        WinHvr

   Hypervisor

FIGURE 9-19 The Windows hypervisor platform API architecture.

   A user mode application that wants to create a VM and its relative virtual processors usually should
do the following:

   1.     Create the partition in the VID library (Vid.dll) with the WHvCreatePartition API.

   2.     Configure various internal partition’s properties—like its virtual processor count, the APIC emula-
          tion mode, the kind of requested VMEXITs, and so on—using the WHvSetPartitionProperty API.

   3.     Create the partition in the VID driver and the hypervisor using the WHvSetupPartition API. (This
          kind of partition in the hypervisor is called an EXO partition, as described shortly.) The API also
          creates the partition’s virtual processors, which are created in a suspended state.

   4.     Create the corresponding virtual processor(s) in the VID library through the WHvCreateVirtual-
          Processor API. This step is important because the API sets up and maps a message buffer into
          the user mode application, which is used for asynchronous communication with the hypervisor
          and the thread running the virtual CPUs.

   5.     Allocate the address space of the partition by reserving a big range of virtual memory with the
          classic VirtualAlloc function (read more details in Chapter 5 of Part 1) and map it in the hy-
          pervisor through the WHvMapGpaRange API. A fine-grained protection of the guest physical
          memory can be specified when allocating guest physical memory in the guest virtual address
          space by committing different ranges of the reserved virtual memory.

         6.   Create the page-tables and copy the initial firmware code in the committed memory.

         7.   Set the initial VP’s registers content using the WHvSetVirtualProcessorRegisters API.

         8.   Run the virtual processor by calling the WHvRunVirtualProcessor blocking API. The function
              returns only when the guest code executes an operation that requires handling in the virtual-
              ization stack (a VMEXIT in the hypervisor has been explicitly required to be managed by the
              third-party virtualization stack) or because of an external request (like the destroying of the
              virtual processor, for example).

         The Windows hypervisor platform APIs are usually able to call services in the hypervisor by sending
      different IOCTLs to the \Device\VidExo device object, which is created by the VID driver at initialization
      time, only if the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\Vid\Parameters\ExoDeviceEnabled registry
      value is set to 1. Otherwise, the system does not enable any support for the hypervisor APIs.

          Some performance-sensitive hypervisor platform APIs (a good example is provided by WHvRun
      VirtualProcessor) can instead call directly into the hypervisor from user mode thanks to the Doorbell
      page, which is a special invalid guest physical page, that, when accessed, always causes a VMEXIT. The
      Windows hypervisor platform API obtains the address of the doorbell page from the VID driver. It
      writes to the doorbell page every time it emits a hypercall from user mode. The fault is identified and
      treated differently by the hypervisor thanks to the doorbell page’s physical address, which is marked
      as “special” in the SLAT page table. The hypervisor reads the hypercall’s code and parameters from the
      VP’s registers as per normal hypercalls, and ultimately transfers the execution to the hypercall’s handler
      routine. When the latter finishes its execution, the hypervisor finally performs a VMENTRY, landing on
      the instruction following the faulty one. This saves a lot of clock cycles to the thread backing the guest
      VP, which no longer has a need to enter the kernel for emitting a hypercall. Furthermore, the VMCALL
      and similar opcodes always require kernel privileges to be executed.

         The virtual processors of the new third-party VM are dispatched using the root scheduler. In case
      the root scheduler is disabled, any function of the hypervisor platform API can’t run. The created parti-
      tion in the hypervisor is an EXO partition. EXO partitions are minimal partitions that don’t include any
      synthetic functionality and have certain characteristics ideal for creating third-party VMs:

         ■    They are always VA-backed types. (More details about VA-backed or micro VMs are provided
              later in the “Virtualization stack” section.) The partition’s memory-hosting process is the user
              mode application, which created the VM, and not a new instance of the VMMEM process.

         ■    They do not have any partition’s privilege or support any VTL (virtual trust level) other than 0.
              All of a classical partition’s privileges refer to synthetic functionality, which is usually exposed
              by the hypervisor to the Hyper-V virtualization stack. EXO partitions are used for third-party
              virtualization stacks. They do not need the functionality brought by any of the classical parti-
              tion’s privilege.

         ■    They manually manage timing. The hypervisor does not provide any virtual clock interrupt
              source for EXO partition. The third-party virtualization stack must take over the responsibil-
              ity of providing this. This means that every attempt to read the virtual processor’s time-stamp
              counter will cause a VMEXIT in the hypervisor, which will route the intercept to the user mode
              thread that runs the VP.

   Note EXO partitions include other minor differences compared to classical hypervisor parti-
   tions. For the sake of the discussion, however, those minor differences are irrelevant, so they
   are not mentioned in this book.

Nested virtualization
Large servers and cloud providers sometimes need to be able to run containers or additional virtual
machines inside a guest partition. Figure 9-20 describes this scenario: The hypervisor that runs on
the top of the bare-metal hardware, identified as the L0 hypervisor (L0 stands for Level 0), uses the
virtualization extensions provided by the hardware to create a guest VM. Furthermore, the L0 hypervi-
sor emulates the processor’s virtualization extensions and exposes them to the guest VM (the ability to
expose virtualization extensions is called nested virtualization). The guest VM can decide to run another
instance of the hypervisor (which, in this case, is identified as L1 hypervisor, where L1 stands for Level 1),
by using the emulated virtualization extensions exposed by the L0 hypervisor. The L1 hypervisor creates
the nested root partition and starts the L2 root operating system in it. In the same way, the L2 root can
orchestrate with the L1 hypervisor to launch a nested guest VM. The final guest VM in this configuration
takes the name of L2 guest.

                                                                      Guest OS         Level 2
                                      Windows Root OS

             Windows Root OS
Level 1                                                                 vCPU
                                                   Hyper-V Hypervisor

                                                               VT-x Extensions

                                      Hyper-V Hypervisor

                                                   VT-x Extensions
                                              CPU
Level 0                      Hardware Layer: Intel Processor w/VT-x

FIGURE 9-20 Nested virtualization scheme.

   Nested virtualization is a software construction: the hypervisor must be able to emulate and
manage virtualization extensions. Each virtualization instruction, while executed by the L1 guest VM,
causes a VMEXIT to the L0 hypervisor, which, through its emulator, can reconstruct the instruction and
perform the needed work to emulate it. At the time of this writing, only Intel and AMD hardware is
supported. The nested virtualization capability should be explicitly enabled for the L1 virtual machine;

      otherwise, the L0 hypervisor injects a general protection exception in the VM in case a virtualization
      instruction is executed by the guest operating system.

           On Intel hardware, Hyper-V allows nested virtualization to work thanks to two main concepts:

           ■   Emulation of the VT-x virtualization extensions

           ■   Nested address translation

          As discussed previously in this section, for Intel hardware, the basic data structure that describes
      a virtual machine is the virtual machine control structure (VMCS). Other than the standard physical
      VMCS representing the L1 VM, when the L0 hypervisor creates a VP belonging to a partition that sup-
      ports nested virtualization, it allocates some nested VMCS data structures (not to be confused with a
      virtual VMCS, which is a different concept). The nested VMCS is a software descriptor that contains all
      the information needed by the L0 hypervisor to start and run a nested VP for a L2 partition. As briefly
      introduced in the “Hypervisor startup” section, when the L1 hypervisor boots, it detects whether it’s
      running in a virtualized environment and, if so, enables various nested enlightenments, like the enlight-
      ened VMCS or the direct virtual flush (discussed later in this section).

         As shown in Figure 9-21, for each nested VMCS, the L0 hypervisor also allocates a Virtual VMCS and a
      hardware physical VMCS, two similar data structures representing a VP running the L2 virtual machine.
      The virtual VMCS is important because it has the key role in maintaining the nested virtualized data. The
      physical VMCS instead is loaded by the L0 hypervisor when the L2 virtual machine is started; this happens
      when the L0 hypervisor intercepts a VMLAUNCH instruction executed by the L1 hypervisor.

                                                                                                                            Nested VMCS Cache
                                        VMCS*

                                                                            VMCS*

                                                                                                          VMCS*
                                        Virtual

                                                                            Virtual

                                                                                                          Virtual
                   Nested VMCS

                                                              Nested VMCS

                                                                                           Nested VMCS

      L1
                                        Physical

                                                                            Physical

                                                                                                          Physical
                                        VMCS*

                                                                            VMCS*

                                                                                                          VMCS*

                       L1 VP 0                                    L1 VP 1                       L1 VP 2                 …

                                                                                       *-Represents a VP in the L2 VM
                                                   Physical
                                                   VMCS

      L0
                                                                                        -Represents a VP in the L1 Hypervisor

                                 VP 2

      FIGURE 9-21 A L0 hypervisor running a L2 VM by virtual processor 2.

          In the sample picture, the L0 hypervisor has scheduled the VP 2 for running a L2 VM managed by
      the L1 hypervisor (through the nested virtual processor 1). The L1 hypervisor can operate only on virtu-
      alization data replicated in the virtual VMCS.

Emulation of the VT-x virtualization extensions
On Intel hardware, the L0 hypervisor supports both enlightened and nonenlightened L1 hypervisors.
The only official supported configuration is Hyper-V running on the top of Hyper-V, though.

    In a nonenlightened hypervisor, all the VT-x instructions executed in the L1 guest causes a VMEXIT.
After the L1 hypervisor has allocated the guest physical VMCS for describing the new L2 VM, it usually
marks it as active (through the VMPTRLD instruction on Intel hardware). The L0 hypervisor intercepts
the operation and associates an allocated nested VMCS with the guest physical VMCS specified by the
L1 hypervisor. Furthermore, it fills the initial values for the virtual VMCS and sets the nested VMCS as
active for the current VP. (It does not switch the physical VMCS though; the execution context should
remain the L1 hypervisor.) Each subsequent read or write to the physical VMCS performed by the L1
hypervisor is always intercepted by the L0 hypervisor and redirected to the virtual VMCS (refer to
Figure 9-21).

    When the L1 hypervisor launches the VM (performing an operation called VMENTRY), it executes a
specific hardware instruction (VMLAUNCH on Intel hardware), which is intercepted by the L0 hypervi-
sor. For nonenlightened scenarios, the L0 hypervisor copies all the guest fields of the virtual VMCS to
another physical VMCS representing the L2 VM, writes the host fields by pointing them to L0 hypervi-
sor’s entry points, and sets it as active (by using the hardware VMPTRLD instruction on Intel platforms).
In case the L1 hypervisor uses the second level address translation (EPT for Intel hardware), the L0
hypervisor then shadows the currently active L1 extended page tables (see the following section for
more details). Finally, it performs the actual VMENTRY by executing the specific hardware instruction.
As a result, the hardware executes the L2 VM’s code.

    While executing the L2 VM, each operation that causes a VMEXIT switches the execution con-
text back to the L0 hypervisor (instead of the L1). As a response, the L0 hypervisor performs another
VMENTRY on the original physical VMCS representing the L1 hypervisor context, injecting a synthetic
VMEXIT event. The L1 hypervisor restarts the execution and handles the intercepted event as for regu-
lar non-nested VMEXITs. When the L1 completes the internal handling of the synthetic VMEXIT event, it
executes a VMRESUME operation, which will be intercepted again by the L0 hypervisor and managed in
a similar way of the initial VMENTRY operation described earlier.

   Producing a VMEXIT each time the L1 hypervisor executes a virtualization instruction is an expensive
operation, which could definitively contribute in the general slowdown of the L2 VM. For overcoming
this problem, the Hyper-V hypervisor supports the enlightened VMCS, an optimization that, when en-
abled, allows the L1 hypervisor to load, read, and write virtualization data from a memory page shared
between the L1 and L0 hypervisor (instead of a physical VMCS). The shared page is called enlightened
VMCS. When the L1 hypervisor manipulates the virtualization data belonging to a L2 VM, instead of
using hardware instructions, which cause a VMEXIT into the L0 hypervisor, it directly reads and writes
from the enlightened VMCS. This significantly improves the performance of the L2 VM.

    In enlightened scenarios, the L0 hypervisor intercepts only VMENTRY and VMEXIT operations (and
some others that are not relevant for this discussion). The L0 hypervisor manages VMENTRY in a similar
way to the nonenlightened scenario, but, before doing anything described previously, it copies the
virtualization data located in the shared enlightened VMCS memory page to the virtual VMCS repre-
senting the L2 VM.

         Note It is worth mentioning that for nonenlightened scenarios, the L0 hypervisor supports
         another technique for preventing VMEXITs while managing nested virtualization data, called
         shadow VMCS. Shadow VMCS is a hardware optimization very similar to the enlightened VMCS.

      Nested address translation
      As previously discussed in the “Partitions’ physical address space” section, the hypervisor uses the SLAT
      for providing an isolated guest physical address space to a VM and to translate GPAs to real SPAs. Nested
      virtual machines would require another hardware layer of translation on top of the two already existing.
      For supporting nested virtualization, the new layer should have been able to translate L2 GPAs to L1 GPAs.
      Due to the increased complexity in the electronics needed to build a processor’s MMU that manages
      three layers of translations, the Hyper-V hypervisor adopted another strategy for providing the additional
      layer of address translation, called shadow nested page tables. Shadow nested page tables use a tech-
      nique similar to the shadow paging (see the previous section) for directly translating L2 GPAs to SPAs.

         When a partition that supports nested virtualization is created, the L0 hypervisor allocates and initial-
      izes a nested page table shadowing domain. The data structure is used for storing a list of shadow nested
      page tables associated with the different L2 VMs created in the partition. Furthermore, it stores the parti-
      tion’s active domain generation number (discussed later in this section) and nested memory statistics.

           When the L0 hypervisor performs the initial VMENTRY for starting a L2 VM, it allocates the shadow
      nested page table associated with the VM and initializes it with empty values (the resulting physical
      address space is empty). When the L2 VM begins code execution, it immediately produces a VMEXIT
      to the L0 hypervisor due to a nested page fault (EPT violation in Intel hardware). The L0 hypervisor,
      instead of injecting the fault in the L1, walks the guest’s nested page tables built by the L1 hypervisor. If
      it finds a valid entry for the specified L2 GPA, it reads the corresponding L1 GPA, translates it to an SPA,
      and creates the needed shadow nested page table hierarchy to map it in the L2 VM. It then fills the leaf
      table entry with the valid SPA (the hypervisor uses large pages for mapping shadow nested pages) and
      resumes the execution directly to the L2 VM by setting the nested VMCS that describes it as active.

          For the nested address translation to work correctly, the L0 hypervisor should be aware of any modi-
      fications that happen to the L1 nested page tables; otherwise, the L2 VM could run with stale entries.
      This implementation is platform specific; usually hypervisors protect the L2 nested page table for read-
      only access. In that way they can be informed when the L1 hypervisor modifies it. The Hyper-V hypervi-
      sor adopts another smart strategy, though. It guarantees that the shadow nested page table describing
      the L2 VM is always updated because of the following two premises:

         ■   When the L1 hypervisor adds new entries in the L2 nested page table, it does not perform any
             other action for the nested VM (no intercepts are generated in the L0 hypervisor). An entry in
             the shadow nested page table is added only when a nested page fault causes a VMEXIT in the
             L0 hypervisor (the scenario described previously).

         ■   As for non-nested VM, when an entry in the nested page table is modified or deleted, the
             hypervisor should always emit a TLB flush for correctly invalidating the hardware TLB. In case

       of nested virtualization, when the L1 hypervisor emits a TLB flush, the L0 intercepts the request
       and completely invalidates the shadow nested page table. The L0 hypervisor maintains a virtual
       TLB concept thanks to the generation IDs stored in both the shadow VMCS and the nested
       page table shadowing domain. (Describing the virtual TLB architecture is outside the scope
       of the book.)

    Completely invalidating the shadow nested page table for a single address changed seems to be
redundant, but it’s dictated by the hardware support. (The INVEPT instruction on Intel hardware does
not allow specifying which single GPA to remove from the TLB.) In classical VMs, this is not a problem
because modifications on the physical address space don’t happen very often. When a classical VM is
started, all its memory is already allocated. (The “Virtualization stack” section will provide more de-
tails.) This is not true for VA-backed VMs and VSM, though.

    For improving performance in nonclassical nested VMs and VSM scenarios (see the next section
for details), the hypervisor supports the “direct virtual flush” enlightenment, which provides to the L1
hypervisor two hypercalls to directly invalidate the TLB. In particular, the HvFlushGuestPhysicalAddress
List hypercall (documented in the TLFS) allows the L1 hypervisor to invalidate a single entry in the
shadow nested page table, removing the performance penalties associated with the flushing of the
entire shadow nested page table and the multiple VMEXIT needed to reconstruct it.

   EXPERIMENT: Enabling nested virtualization on Hyper-V
   As explained in this section, for running a virtual machine into a L1 Hyper-V VM, you should first
   enable the nested virtualization feature in the host system. For this experiment, you need a work-
   station with an Intel or AMD CPU and Windows 10 or Windows Server 2019 installed (Anniversary
   Update RS1 minimum version). You should create a Type-2 VM using the Hyper-V Manager or
   Windows PowerShell with at least 4 GB of memory. In the experiment, you’re creating a nested L2
   VM into the created VM, so enough memory needs to be assigned.

       After the first startup of the VM and the initial configuration, you should shut down the VM
   and open an administrative PowerShell window (type Windows PowerShell in the Cortana
   search box. Then right-click the PowerShell icon and select Run As Administrator). You should
   then type the following command, where the term “<VmName>” must be replaced by your
   virtual machine name:
   Set-VMProcessor -VMName "<VmName>" -ExposeVirtualizationExtension $true

      To properly verify that the nested virtualization feature is correctly enabled, the command
   $(Get-VMProcessor -VMName "<VmName>").ExposeVirtualizationExtensions

      should return True.

       After the nested virtualization feature has been enabled, you can restart your VM. Before
   being able to run the L1 hypervisor in the virtual machine, you should add the necessary com-
   ponent through the Control panel. In the VM, search Control Panel in the Cortana box, open it,
   click Programs, and the select Turn Windows Features On Or Off. You should check the entire
   Hyper-V tree, as shown in the next figure.

          Click OK. After the procedure finishes, click Restart to reboot the virtual machine (this step
      is needed). After the VM restarts, you can verify the presence of the L1 hypervisor through
      the System Information application (type msinfo32 in the Cortana search box. Refer to the
      “Detecting VBS and its provided services” experiment later in this chapter for further details).
      If the hypervisor has not been started for some reason, you can force it to start by opening an
      administrative command prompt in the VM (type cmd in the Cortana search box and select Run
      As Administrator) and insert the following command:
      bcdedit /set {current} hypervisorlaunchtype Auto

        At this stage, you can use the Hyper-V Manager or Windows PowerShell to create a L2 guest
      VM directly in your virtual machine. The result can be something similar to the following figure.

      From the L2 root partition, you can also enable the L1 hypervisor debugger, in a similar way
   as explained in the “Connecting the hypervisor debugger” experiment previously in this chapter.
   The only limitation at the time of this writing is that you can’t use the network debugging in nest-
   ed configurations; the only supported configuration for debugging the L1 hypervisor is through
   serial port. This means that in the host system, you should enable two virtual serial ports in the
   L1 VM (one for the hypervisor and the other one for the L2 root partition) and attach them to
   named pipes. For type-2 virtual machines, you should use the following PowerShell commands
   to set the two serial ports in the L1 VM (as with the previous commands, you should replace the
   term “<VMName>” with the name of your virtual machine):
   Set-VMComPort -VMName "<VMName>" -Number 1 -Path \\.\pipe\HV_dbg
   Set-VMComPort -VMName "<VMName>" -Number 2 -Path \\.\pipe\NT_dbg

     After that, you should configure the hypervisor debugger to be attached to the COM1 serial
   port, while the NT kernel debugger should be attached to the COM2 (see the previous experi-
   ment for more details).

The Windows hypervisor on ARM64
Unlike the x86 and AMD64 architectures, where the hardware virtualization support was added long
after their original design, the ARM64 architecture has been designed with hardware virtualization
support. In particular, as shown in Figure 9-22, the ARM64 execution environment has been split in
three different security domains (called Exception Levels). The EL determines the level of privilege; the
higher the EL, the more privilege the executing code has. Although all the user mode applications run
in EL0, the NT kernel (and kernel mode drivers) usually runs in EL1. In general, a piece of software runs
only in a single exception level. EL2 is the privilege level designed for running the hypervisor (which,
in ARM64 is also called “Virtual machine manager”) and is an exception to this rule. The hypervisor pro-
vides virtualization services and can run in Nonsecure World both in EL2 and EL1. (EL2 does not exist in
the Secure World. ARM TrustZone will be discussed later in this section.)

           Non-Secure World                  Secure World

 EL0    Application                            Trusted Application

 EL1    Kernel                                      Secure Kernel

 EL2    Hypervisor

 EL3                                                        Monitor

FIGURE 9-22 The ARM64 execution environment.

         Unlike from the AMD64 architecture, where the CPU enters the root mode (the execution domain
      in which the hypervisor runs) only from the kernel context and under certain assumptions, when a
      standard ARM64 device boots, the UEFI firmware and the boot manager begin their execution in EL2.
      On those devices, the hypervisor loader (or Secure Launcher, depending on the boot flow) is able to
      start the hypervisor directly and, at later time, drop the exception level to EL1 (by emitting an exception
      return instruction, also known as ERET).

         On the top of the exception levels, TrustZone technology enables the system to be partitioned be-
      tween two execution security states: secure and non-secure. Secure software can generally access both
      secure and non-secure memory and resources, whereas normal software can only access non-secure
      memory and resources. The non-secure state is also referred to as the Normal World. This enables an
      OS to run in parallel with a trusted OS on the same hardware and provides protection against certain
      software attacks and hardware attacks. The secure state, also referred as Secure World, usually runs se-
      cure devices (their firmware and IOMMU ranges) and, in general, everything that requires the proces-
      sor to be in the secure state.

         To correctly communicate with the Secure World, the non-secure OS emits secure method calls
      (SMC), which provide a mechanism similar to standard OS syscalls. SMC are managed by the TrustZone.
      TrustZone usually provides separation between the Normal and the Secure Worlds through a thin
      memory protection layer, which is provided by well-defined hardware memory protection units
      (Qualcomm calls these XPUs). The XPUs are configured by the firmware to allow only specific execu-
      tion environments to access specific memory locations. (Secure World memory can’t be accessed by
      Normal World software.)

         In ARM64 server machines, Windows is able to directly start the hypervisor. Client machines often
      do not have XPUs, even though TrustZone is enabled. (The majority of the ARM64 client devices in
      which Windows can run are provided by Qualcomm.) In those client devices, the separation between
      the Secure and Normal Worlds is provided by a proprietary hypervisor, named QHEE, which provides
      memory isolation using stage-2 memory translation (this layer is the same as the SLAT layer used by the
      Windows hypervisor). QHEE intercepts each SMC emitted by the running OS: it can forward the SMC
      directly to TrustZone (after having verified the necessary access rights) or do some work on its behalf. In
      these devices, TrustZone also has the important responsibility to load and verify the authenticity of the
      machine firmware and coordinates with QHEE for correctly executing the Secure Launch boot method.

         Although in Windows the Secure World is generally not used (a distinction between Secure/Non
      secure world is already provided by the hypervisor through VTL levels), the Hyper-V hypervisor still
      runs in EL2. This is not compatible with the QHEE hypervisor, which runs in EL2, too. To solve the prob-
      lem correctly, Windows adopts a particular boot strategy; the Secure launch process is orchestrated
      with the aid of QHEE. When the Secure Launch terminates, the QHEE hypervisor unloads and gives up
      execution to the Windows hypervisor, which has been loaded as part of the Secure Launch. In later
      boot stages, after the Secure Kernel has been launched and the SMSS is creating the first user mode
      session, a new special trustlet is created (Qualcomm named it as “QcExt”). The trustlet acts as the origi-
      nal ARM64 hypervisor; it intercepts all the SMC requests, verifies the integrity of them, provides the
      needed memory isolations (through the services exposed by the Secure Kernel) and is able to send and
      receive commands from the Secure Monitor in EL3.

      The SMC interception architecture is implemented in both the NT kernel and the ARM64 trustlet
   and is outside the scope of this book. The introduction of the new trustlet has allowed the majority of
   the client ARM64 machines to boot with Secure Launch and Virtual Secure Mode enabled by default.
   (VSM is discussed later in this chapter.)

The virtualization stack
   Although the hypervisor provides isolation and the low-level services that manage the virtualization
   hardware, all the high-level implementation of virtual machines is provided by the virtualization stack.
   The virtualization stack manages the states of the VMs, provides memory to them, and virtualizes the
   hardware by providing a virtual motherboard, the system firmware, and multiple kind of virtual devices
   (emulated, synthetic, and direct access). The virtualization stack also includes VMBus, an important
   component that provides a high-speed communication channel between a guest VM and the root
   partition and can be accessed through the kernel mode client library (KMCL) abstraction layer.

       In this section, we discuss some important services provided by the virtualization stack and analyze
   its components. Figure 9-23 shows the main components of the virtualization stack.

           Root Partition / Host OS                              Child Partition
         VmCompute          VMMS

                     VMWP                                          Guest OS

                          VDEVs

                               VSPs                                            VSCs
                                        Physical                                         Virtual
           VID.sys          VMBus       Device                              VMBus        Device
                                        Drivers                                          Drivers
                  WinHvr.sys                                       WinHv.sys

                                               Hypervisor

                                               Hardware

   FIGURE 9-23 Components of the virtualization stack.

   Virtual machine manager service and worker processes
   The virtual machine manager service (Vmms.exe) is responsible for providing the Windows
   Management Instrumentation (WMI) interface to the root partition, which allows managing the
   child partitions through a Microsoft Management Console (MMC) plug-in or through PowerShell.
   The VMMS service manages the requests received through the WMI interface on behalf of a VM
   (identified internally through a GUID), like start, power off, shutdown, pause, resume, reboot, and so
   on. It controls settings such as which devices are visible to child partitions and how the memory and

      processor allocation for each partition is defined. The VMMS manages the addition and removal of
      devices. When a virtual machine is started, the VMM Service also has the crucial role of creating a
      corresponding Virtual Machine Worker Process (VMWP.exe). The VMMS manages the VM snapshots
      by redirecting the snapshot requests to the VMWP process in case the VM is running or by taking the
      snapshot itself in the opposite case.

         The VMWP performs various virtualization work that a typical monolithic hypervisor would per-
      form (similar to the work of a software-based virtualization solution). This means managing the state
      machine for a given child partition (to allow support for features such as snapshots and state transi-
      tions), responding to various notifications coming in from the hypervisor, performing the emulation
      of certain devices exposed to child partitions (called emulated devices), and collaborating with the VM
      service and configuration component. The Worker process has the important role to start the virtual
      motherboard and to maintain the state of each virtual device that belongs to the VM. It also includes
      components responsible for remote management of the virtualization stack, as well as an RDP compo-
      nent that allows using the remote desktop client to connect to any child partition and remotely view its
      user interface and interact with it. The VM Worker process exposes the COM objects that provide the
      interface used by the Vmms (and the VmCompute service) to communicate with the VMWP instance
      that represents a particular virtual machine.

         The VM host compute service (implemented in the Vmcompute.exe and Vmcompute.dll binaries) is
      another important component that hosts most of the computation-intensive operations that are not
      implemented in the VM Manager Service. Operation like the analysis of a VM’s memory report (for
      dynamic memory), management of VHD and VHDX files, and creation of the base layers for containers
      are implemented in the VM host compute service. The Worker Process and Vmms can communicate
      with the host compute service thanks the COM objects that it exposes.

         The Virtual Machine Manager Service, the Worker Process, and the VM compute service are able to
      open and parse multiple configuration files that expose a list of all the virtual machines created in the
      system, and the configuration of each of them. In particular:

         ■   The configuration repository stores the list of virtual machines installed in the system, their
             names, configuration file and GUID in the data.vmcx file located in C:\ProgramData\Microsoft
             \Windows Hyper-V.

         ■   The VM Data Store repository (part of the VM host compute service) is able to open, read, and
             write the configuration file (usually with “.vmcx” extension) of a VM, which contains the list of
             virtual devices and the virtual hardware’s configuration.

          The VM data store repository is also used to read and write the VM Save State file. The VM State file
      is generated while pausing a VM and contains the save state of the running VM that can be restored
      at a later time (state of the partition, content of the VM’s memory, state of each virtual device). The
      configuration files are formatted using an XML representation of key/value pairs. The plain XML data
      is stored compressed using a proprietary binary format, which adds a write-journal logic to make it
      resilient against power failures. Documenting the binary format is outside the scope of this book.

The VID driver and the virtualization stack memory manager
The Virtual Infrastructure Driver (VID.sys) is probably one of the most important components of the
virtualization stack. It provides partition, memory, and processor management services for the virtual
machines running in the child partition, exposing them to the VM Worker process, which lives in the
root. The VM Worker process and the VMMS services use the VID driver to communicate with the
hypervisor, thanks to the interfaces implemented in the Windows hypervisor interface driver (WinHv.
sys and WinHvr.sys), which the VID driver imports. These interfaces include all the code to support the
hypervisor’s hypercall management and allow the operating system (or generic kernel mode drivers) to
access the hypervisor using standard Windows API calls instead of hypercalls.

   The VID driver also includes the virtualization stack memory manager. In the previous section, we
described the hypervisor memory manager, which manages the physical and virtual memory of the
hypervisor itself. The guest physical memory of a VM is allocated and managed by the virtualization
stack’s memory manager. When a VM is started, the spawned VM Worker process (VMWP.exe) invokes
the services of the memory manager (defined in the IMemoryManager COM interface) for constructing
the guest VM’s RAM. Allocating memory for a VM is a two-step process:

   1.   The VM Worker process obtains a report of the global system’s memory state (by using services
        from the Memory Balancer in the VMMS process), and, based on the available system memory,
        determines the size of the physical memory blocks to request to the VID driver (through the
        VID_RESERVE IOCTL. Sizes of the block vary from 64 MB up to 4 GB). The blocks are allocated by
        the VID driver using MDL management functions (MmAllocatePartitionNodePagesForMdlEx in
        particular). For performance reasons, and to avoid memory fragmentation, the VID driver imple-
        ments a best-effort algorithm to allocate huge and large physical pages (1 GB and 2 MB) before
        relying on standard small pages. After the memory blocks are allocated, their pages are depos-
        ited to an internal “reserve” bucket maintained by the VID driver. The bucket contains page lists
        ordered in an array based on their quality of service (QOS). The QOS is determined based on the
        page type (huge, large, and small) and the NUMA node they belong to. This process in the VID
        nomenclature is called “reserving physical memory” (not to be confused with the term “reserving
        virtual memory,” a concept of the NT memory manager).

   2.   From the virtualization stack perspective, physical memory commitment is the process of
        emptying the reserved pages in the bucket and moving them in a VID memory block (VSMM_
        MEMORY_BLOCK data structure), which is created and owned by the VM Worker process
        using the VID driver’s services. In the process of creating a memory block, the VID driver
        first deposits additional physical pages in the hypervisor (through the Winhvr driver and the
        HvDepositMemory hypercall). The additional pages are needed for creating the SLAT table
        page hierarchy of the VM. The VID driver then requests to the hypervisor to map the physical
        pages describing the entire guest partition’s RAM. The hypervisor inserts valid entries in the
        SLAT table and sets their proper permissions. The guest physical address space of the partition
        is created. The GPA range is inserted in a list belonging to the VID partition. The VID memory
        block is owned by the VM Worker process. It’s also used for tracking guest memory and in DAX
        file-backed memory blocks. (See Chapter 11, “Caching and file system support,” for more details
        about DAX volumes and PMEM.) The VM Worker process can later use the memory block for
        multiple purposes—for example, to access some pages while managing emulated devices.

      The birth of a Virtual Machine (VM)
      The process of starting up a virtual machine is managed primarily by the VMMS and VMWP pro-
      cess. When a request to start a VM (internally identified by a GUID) is delivered to the VMMS service
      (through PowerShell or the Hyper-V Manager GUI application), the VMMS service begins the starting
      process by reading the VM’s configuration from the data store repository, which includes the VM’s
      GUID and the list of all the virtual devices (VDEVs) comprising its virtual hardware. It then verifies that
      the path containing the VHD (or VHDX) representing the VM’s virtual hard disk has the correct ac-
      cess control list (ACL, more details provided later). In case the ACL is not correct, if specified by the VM
      configuration, the VMMS service (which runs under a SYSTEM account) rewrites a new one, which is
      compatible with the new VMWP process instance. The VMMS uses COM services to communicate with
      the Host Compute Service to spawn a new VMWP process instance.

         The Host Compute Service gets the path of the VM Worker process by querying its COM registra-
      tion data located in the Windows registry (HKCU\CLSID\{f33463e0-7d59-11d9-9916-0008744f51f3}
      key). It then creates the new process using a well-defined access token, which is built using the virtual
      machine SID as the owner. Indeed, the NT Authority of the Windows Security model defines a well-
      known subauthority value (83) to identify VMs (more information on system security components
      are available in Part 1, Chapter 7, “Security”). The Host Compute Service waits for the VMWP process
      to complete its initialization (in this way the exposed COM interfaces become ready). The execution
      returns to the VMMS service, which can finally request the starting of the VM to the VMWP process
      (through the exposed IVirtualMachine COM interface).

          As shown in Figure 9-24, the VM Worker process performs a “cold start” state transition for the
      VM. In the VM Worker process, the entire VM is managed through services exposed by the “Virtual
      Motherboard.” The Virtual Motherboard emulates an Intel i440BX motherboard on Generation 1
      VMs, whereas on Generation 2, it emulates a proprietary motherboard. It manages and maintains the
      list of virtual devices and performs the state transitions for each of them. As covered in the next sec-
      tion, each virtual device is implemented as a COM object (exposing the IVirtualDevice interface) in a
      DLL. The Virtual Motherboard enumerates each virtual device from the VM’s configuration and loads
      the relative COM object representing the device.

          The VM Worker process begins the startup procedure by reserving the resources needed by each
      virtual device. It then constructs the VM guest physical address space (virtual RAM) by allocating physi-
      cal memory from the root partition through the VID driver. At this stage, it can power up the virtual
      motherboard, which will cycle between each VDEV and power it up. The power-up procedure is differ-
      ent for each device: for example, synthetic devices usually communicate with their own Virtualization
      Service Provider (VSP) for the initial setup.

          One virtual device that deserves a deeper discussion is the virtual BIOS (implemented in the
      Vmchipset.dll library). Its power-up method allows the VM to include the initial firmware executed
      when the bootstrap VP is started. The BIOS VDEV extracts the correct firmware for the VM (legacy BIOS
      in the case of Generation 1 VMs; UEFI otherwise) from the resource section of its own backing library,
      builds the volatile configuration part of the firmware (like the ACPI and the SRAT table), and injects it
      in the proper guest physical memory by using services provided by the VID driver. The VID driver is
      indeed able to map memory ranges described by the VID memory block in user mode memory, acces-
      sible by the VM Worker process (this procedure is internally called “memory aperture creation”).

                    Root Partition / Host OS
                           Host Compute
                              Service

                    IVirtualMachine COM Interface

                             Cold Start

                           VirtualMachine

        Partition       Memory         Virtual         …
        Manager         Manager      Motherboard

    VMWP
                                                            User
                                                           Kernel
                                            VSPs

                VID                            VMBus
                               WinHV

                             Hypervisor

FIGURE 9-24 The VM Worker process and its interface for performing a “cold start” of a VM.

  After all the virtual devices have been successfully powered up, the VM Worker process can start the
bootstrap virtual processor of the VM by sending a proper IOCTL to the VID driver, which will start the VP
and its message pump (used for exchanging messages between the VID driver and the VM Worker process).

   EXPERIMENT: Understanding the security of the VM Worker process and
   the irtual hard disk files
   In the previous section, we discussed how the VM Worker process is launched by the Host
   Compute service (Vmcompute.exe) when a request to start a VM is delivered to the VMMS pro-
   cess (through WMI). Before communicating with the Host Compute Service, the VMMS gener-
   ates a security token for the new Worker process instance.

     Three new entities have been added to the Windows security model to properly support virtual
   machines (the Windows Security model has been extensively discussed in Chapter 7 of Part 1):

    ■    A “virtual machines” security group, identified with the S-1-5-83-0 security identifier.

    ■    A virtual machine security identifier (SID), based on the VM’s unique identifier (GUID). The
         VM SID becomes the owner of the security token generated for the VM Worker process.

    ■    A VM Worker process security capability used to give applications running in
         AppContainers access to Hyper-V services required by the VM Worker process.

         In this experiment, you will create a new virtual machine through the Hyper-V manager in a
      location that’s accessible only to the current user and to the administrators group, and you will
      check how the security of the VM files and the VM Worker process change accordingly.

         First, open an administrative command prompt and create a folder in one of the workstation’s
      volumes (in the example we used C:\TestVm), using the following command:
      md c:\TestVm

         Then you need to strip off all the inherited ACEs (Access control entries; see Chapter 7 of Part 1
      for further details) and add full access ACEs for the administrators group and the current logged-
      on user. The following commands perform the described actions (you need to replace C:\TestVm
      with the path of your directory and <UserName> with your currently logged-on user name):
      icacls c:\TestVm /inheritance:r
      icacls c:\TestVm /grant Administrators:(CI)(OI)F
      icacls c:\TestVm /grant <UserName>:(CI)(OI)F

         To verify that the folder has the correct ACL, you should open File Explorer (by pressing Win+E
      on your keyboard), right-click the folder, select Properties, and finally click the Security tab. You
      should see a window like the following one:

         Open the Hyper-V Manager, create a VM (and its relative virtual disk), and store it in the newly
      created folder (procedure available at the following page: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us
      /virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/quick-start/create-virtual-machine). For this experiment, you
      don’t really need to install an OS on the VM. After the New Virtual Machine Wizard ends, you
      should start your VM (in the example, the VM is VM1).

  Open a Process Explorer as administrator and locate the vmwp.exe process. Right-click it
and select Properties. As expected, you can see that the parent process is vmcompute.exe (Host
Compute Service). If you click the Security tab, you should see that the VM SID is set as the
owner of the process, and the token belongs to the Virtual Machines group:

   The SID is composed by reflecting the VM GUID. In the example, the VM’s GUID is {F156B42C-
4AE6-4291-8AD6-EDFE0960A1CE}. (You can verify it also by using PowerShell, as explained in
the “Playing with the Root scheduler” experiment earlier in this chapter). A GUID is a sequence of
16-bytes, organized as one 32-bit (4 bytes) integer, two 16-bit (2 bytes) integers, and 8 final bytes.
The GUID in the example is organized as:

 ■   0xF156B42C as the first 32-bit integer, which, in decimal, is 4048991276.

 ■   0x4AE6 and 0x4291 as the two 16-bit integers, which, combined as one 32-bit value, is
     0x42914AE6, or 1116818150 in decimal (remember that the system is little endian, so the less
     significant byte is located at the lower address).

 ■   The final byte sequence is 0x8A, 0xD6, 0xED, 0xFE, 0x09, 0x60, 0xA1 and 0xCE (the third
     part of the shown human readable GUID, 8AD6, is a byte sequence, and not a 16-bit value),
     which, combined as two 32-bit values is 0xFEEDD68A and 0xCEA16009, or 4276999818 and
     3466682377 in decimal.

         If you combine all the calculated decimal numbers with a general SID identifier emitted by the
      NT authority (S-1-5) and the VM base RID (83), you should obtain the same SID shown in Process
      Explorer (in the example, S-1-5-83-4048991276-1116818150-4276999818-3466682377).

          As you can see from Process Explorer, the VMWP process’s security token does not include the
      Administrators group, and it hasn’t been created on behalf of the logged-on user. So how is it pos-
      sible that the VM Worker process can access the virtual hard disk and the VM configuration files?

          The answer resides in the VMMS process, which, at VM creation time, scans each component
      of the VM’s path and modifies the DACL of the needed folders and files. In particular, the root
      folder of the VM (the root folder has the same name of the VM, so you should find a subfolder in
      the created directory with the same name of your VM) is accessible thanks to the added virtual
      machines security group ACE. The virtual hard disk file is instead accessible thanks to an access-
      allowed ACE targeting the virtual machine’s SID.

          You can verify this by using File Explorer: Open the VM’s virtual hard disk folder (called Virtual
      Hard Disks and located in the VM root folder), right-click the VHDX (or VHD) file, select Properties,
      and then click the Security page. You should see two new ACEs other than the one set initially. (One
      is the virtual machine ACE; the other one is the VmWorker process Capability for AppContainers.)

         If you stop the VM and you try to delete the virtual machine ACE from the file, you will
      see that the VM is not able to start anymore. For restoring the correct ACL for the virtual
      hard disk, you can run a PowerShell script available at https://gallery.technet.microsoft.com/
      Hyper-V-Restore-ACL-e64dee58.

VMBus
VMBus is the mechanism exposed by the Hyper-V virtualization stack to provide interpartition commu-
nication between VMs. It is a virtual bus device that sets up channels between the guest and the host.
These channels provide the capability to share data between partitions and set up paravirtualized (also
known as synthetic) devices.

   The root partition hosts Virtualization Service Providers (VSPs) that communicate over VMBus
to handle device requests from child partitions. On the other end, child partitions (or guests) use
Virtualization Service Consumers (VSCs) to redirect device requests to the VSP over VMBus. Child parti-
tions require VMBus and VSC drivers to use the paravirtualized device stacks (more details on virtual
hardware support are provided later in this chapter in the ”Virtual hardware support” section). VMBus
channels allow VSCs and VSPs to transfer data primarily through two ring buffers: upstream and down-
stream. These ring buffers are mapped into both partitions thanks to the hypervisor, which, as dis-
cussed in the previous section, also provides interpartition communication services through the SynIC.

    One of the first virtual devices (VDEV) that the Worker process starts while powering up a VM is the
VMBus VDEV (implemented in Vmbusvdev.dll). Its power-on routine connects the VM Worker process
to the VMBus root driver (Vmbusr.sys) by sending VMBUS_VDEV_SETUP IOCTL to the VMBus root
device (named \Device\RootVmBus). The VMBus root driver orchestrates the parent endpoint of the
bidirectional communication to the child VM. Its initial setup routine, which is invoked at the time the
target VM isn’t still powered on, has the important role to create an XPartition data structure, which is
used to represent the VMBus instance of the child VM and to connect the needed SynIC synthetic inter-
rupt sources (also known as SINT, see the “Synthetic Interrupt Controller” section earlier in this chapter
for more details). In the root partition, VMBus uses two synthetic interrupt sources: one for the initial
message handshaking (which happens before the channel is created) and another one for the synthetic
events signaled by the ring buffers. Child partitions use only one SINT, though. The setup routine al-
locates the main message port in the child VM and the corresponding connection in the root, and, for
each virtual processor belonging to the VM, allocates an event port and its connection (used for receiv-
ing synthetic events from the child VM).

   The two synthetic interrupt sources are mapped using two ISR routines, named KiVmbusInterrupt0
and KiVmbusInterrupt1. Thanks to these two routines, the root partition is ready to receive synthetic
interrupts and messages from the child VM. When a message (or event) is received, the ISR queues a
deferred procedure call (DPC), which checks whether the message is valid; if so, it queues a work item,
which will be processed later by the system running at passive IRQL level (which has further implica-
tions on the message queue).

    Once VMBus in the root partition is ready, each VSP driver in the root can use the services exposed
by the VMBus kernel mode client library to allocate and offer a VMBus channel to the child VM. The
VMBus kernel mode client library (abbreviated as KMCL) represents a VMBus channel through an
opaque KMODE_CLIENT_CONTEXT data structure, which is allocated and initialized at channel creation
time (when a VSP calls the VmbChannelAllocate API). The root VSP then normally offers the channel
to the child VM by calling the VmbChannelEnabled API (this function in the child establishes the actual
connection to the root by opening the channel). KMCL is implemented in two drivers: one running in
the root partition (Vmbkmclr.sys) and one loaded in child partitions (Vmbkmcl.sys).

         Offering a channel in the root is a relatively complex operation that involves the following steps:

         1.   The KMCL driver communicates with the VMBus root driver through the file object initialized in
              the VDEV power-up routine. The VMBus driver obtains the XPartition data structure represent-
              ing the child partition and starts the channel offering process.

         2.   Lower-level services provided by the VMBus driver allocate and initialize a LOCAL_OFFER data
              structure representing a single “channel offer” and preallocate some SynIC predefined messages.
              VMBus then creates the synthetic event port in the root, from which the child can connect to
              signal events after writing data to the ring buffer. The LOCAL_OFFER data structure represent-
              ing the offered channel is added to an internal server channels list.

         3.   After VMBus has created the channel, it tries to send the OfferChannel message to the child
              with the goal to inform it of the new channel. However, at this stage, VMBus fails because the
              other end (the child VM) is not ready yet and has not started the initial message handshake.

         After all the VSPs have completed the channel offering, and all the VDEV have been powered up
      (see the previous section for details), the VM Worker process starts the VM. For channels to be com-
      pletely initialized, and their relative connections to be started, the guest partition should load and start
      the VMBus child driver (Vmbus.sys).

      Initial VMBus message handshaking
      In Windows, the VMBus child driver is a WDF bus driver enumerated and started by the Pnp manager
      and located in the ACPI root enumerator. (Another version of the VMBus child driver is also available
      for Linux. VMBus for Linux is not covered in this book, though.) When the NT kernel starts in the child
      VM, the VMBus driver begins its execution by initializing its own internal state (which means allocat-
      ing the needed data structure and work items) and by creating the \Device\VmBus root functional
      device object (FDO). The Pnp manager then calls the VMBus’s resource assignment handler routine.
      The latter configures the correct SINT source (by emitting a HvSetVpRegisters hypercall on one of the
      HvRegisterSint registers, with the help of the WinHv driver) and connects it to the KiVmbusInterrupt2
      ISR. Furthermore, it obtains the SIMP page, used for sending and receiving synthetic messages to and
      from the root partition (see the “Synthetic Interrupt Controller” section earlier in this chapter for more
      details), and creates the XPartition data structure representing the parent (root) partition.

         When the request of starting the VMBus’ FDO comes from the Pnp manager, the VMBus driver starts
      the initial message handshaking. At this stage, each message is sent by emitting the HvPostMessage
      hypercall (with the help of the WinHv driver), which allows the hypervisor to inject a synthetic interrupt
      to a target partition (in this case, the target is the partition). The receiver acquires the message by sim-
      ply reading from the SIMP page; the receiver signals that the message has been read from the queue
      by setting the new message type to MessageTypeNone. (See the hypervisor TLFS for more details.) The
      reader can think of the initial message handshake, which is represented in Figure 9-25, as a process
      divided in two phases.

        VM

  CHILD VM                                           ROOT PARTITION

                         Initiate Contact
                        Version Response
                         Request Offers
                                                                  First Phase:
                Offer Channel (Multiple Messages)                 All Channels Enumerated and
                                                                  Offers Delivered to the
                                                                  Child VM
 Time

                       All Offers Delivered

                         GPADL Header
                          GPDAL Body
                         GPDAL Created
                                                                 Channel Opening
                                                                 and Ring Buffer Creation
                         Open Channel
                      Open Channel Result

FIGURE 9-25 VMBus initial message handshake.

    The first phase is represented by the Initiate Contact message, which is delivered once in the lifetime
of the VM. This message is sent from the child VM to the root with the goal to negotiate the VMBus
protocol version supported by both sides. At the time of this writing, there are five main VMBus pro-
tocol versions, with some additional slight variations. The root partition parses the message, asks the
hypervisor to map the monitor pages allocated by the client (if supported by the protocol), and replies
by accepting the proposed protocol version. Note that if this is not the case (which happens when the
Windows version running in the root partition is lower than the one running in the child VM), the child
VM restarts the process by downgrading the VMBus protocol version until a compatible version is es-
tablished. At this point, the child is ready to send the Request Offers message, which causes the root
partition to send the list of all the channels already offered by the VSPs. This allows the child partition
to open the channels later in the handshaking protocol.

   Figure 9-25 highlights the different synthetic messages delivered through the hypervisor for setting
up the VMBus channel or channels. The root partition walks the list of the offered channels located in
the Server Channels list (LOCAL_OFFER data structure, as discussed previously), and, for each of them,
sends an Offer Channel message to the child VM. The message is the same as the one sent at the final
stage of the channel offering protocol, which we discussed previously in the “VMBus” section. So, while

      the first phase of the initial message handshake happens only once per lifetime of the VM, the second
      phase can start any time when a channel is offered. The Offer Channel message includes important
      data used to uniquely identify the channel, like the channel type and instance GUIDs. For VDEV chan-
      nels, these two GUIDs are used by the Pnp Manager to properly identify the associated virtual device.

          The child responds to the message by allocating the client LOCAL_OFFER data structure represent-
      ing the channel and the relative XInterrupt object, and by determining whether the channel requires
      a physical device object (PDO) to be created, which is usually always true for VDEVs’ channels. In this
      case, the VMBus driver creates an instance PDO representing the new channel. The created device is
      protected through a security descriptor that renders it accessible only from system and administra-
      tive accounts. The VMBus standard device interface, which is attached to the new PDO, maintains
      the association between the new VMBus channel (through the LOCAL_OFFER data structure) and
      the device object. After the PDO is created, the Pnp Manager is able to identify and load the correct
      VSC driver through the VDEV type and instance GUIDs included in the Offer Channel message. These
      interfaces become part of the new PDO and are visible through the Device Manager. See the following
      experiment for details. When the VSC driver is then loaded, it usually calls the VmbEnableChannel API
      (exposed by KMCL, as discussed previously) to “open” the channel and create the final ring buffer.

         EXPERIMENT: Listing virtual devices (VDEVs) exposed through VMBus
         Each VMBus channel is identified through a type and instance GUID. For channels belonging to
         VDEVs, the type and instance GUID also identifies the exposed device. When the VMBus child
         driver creates the instance PDOs, it includes the type and instance GUID of the channel in mul-
         tiple devices’ properties, like the instance path, hardware ID, and compatible ID. This experiment
         shows how to enumerate all the VDEVs built on the top of VMBus.

            For this experiment, you should build and start a Windows 10 virtual machine through the
         Hyper-V Manager. When the virtual machine is started and runs, open the Device Manager (by
         typing its name in the Cortana search box, for example). In the Device Manager applet, click the
         View menu, and select Device by Connection. The VMBus bus driver is enumerated and started
         through the ACPI enumerator, so you should expand the ACPI x64-based PC root node and then
         the ACPI Module Device located in the Microsoft ACPI-Compliant System child node, as shown in
         the following figure:

      By opening the ACPI Module Device, you should find another node, called Microsoft Hyper-V
   Virtual Machine Bus, which represents the root VMBus PDO. Under that node, the Device
   Manager shows all the instance devices created by the VMBus FDO after their relative VMBus
   channels have been offered from the root partition.

       Now right-click one of the Hyper-V devices, such as the Microsoft Hyper-V Video device, and
   select Properties. For showing the type and instance GUIDs of the VMBus channel backing the
   virtual device, open the Details tab of the Properties window. Three device properties include
   the channel’s type and instance GUID (exposed in different formats): Device Instance path,
   Hardware ID, and Compatible ID. Although the compatible ID contains only the VMBus channel
   type GUID ({da0a7802-e377-4aac-8e77-0558eb1073f8} in the figure), the hardware ID and device
   instance path contain both the type and instance GUIDs.

Opening a VMBus channel and creating the ring buffer
For correctly starting the interpartition communication and creating the ring buffer, a channel
must be opened. Usually VSCs, after having allocated the client side of the channel (still through
VmbChannel Allocate), call the VmbChannelEnable API exported from the KMCL driver. As intro-
duced in the previous section, this API in the child partitions opens a VMBus channel, which has
already been offered by the root. The KMCL driver communicates with the VMBus driver, obtains
the channel parameters (like the channel’s type, instance GUID, and used MMIO space), and creates

      a work item for the received packets. It then allocates the ring buffer, which is shown in Figure 9-26.
      The size of the ring buffer is usually specified by the VSC through a call to the KMCL exported
      VmbClientChannelInitSetRingBufferPageCount API.

                                                          0xFFFFCA80'3D8C0000
                                              Outgoing
                                                Buffer
                                               Physical
                               0x0                                              0x0              0x10000                   0x20000
                                                Pages
            Outgoing Buffer                               0xFFFFCA80'3D8D0000
             Control Page                     Outgoing
                               0x1000
                                                Buffer
               Ou

                                               Physical
                 tgo

                                                Pages
                     in

                                                                                      Write Request in the Ring Buffer
                   gB

                                                          0xFFFFCA80'3D8E0000
                      uff
                          er

             Incoming Buffer 0x11000
               Control Page 0x12000                       0xFFFFCA80'594A0000         0x0                        0x10000
                                              Incoming
               Inc

                                                Buffer
                  o

                                               Physical
                 min

                                                Pages
                   gB

                                                          0xFFFFCA80'594B0000
                      uff

                               0x22000                                                        Physical Layout
                                              Incoming
                       er

                                                Buffer
                                               Physical
                                                Pages
                                                          0xFFFFCA80'594C0000

      Ring Buffer Virtual Layout          Mapped Ring Buffer                                Writing Example

      FIGURE 9-26 An example of a 16-page ring buffer allocated in the child partition.

         The ring buffer is allocated from the child VM’s non-paged pool and is mapped through a memory
      descriptor list (MDL) using a technique called double mapping. (MDLs are described in Chapter 5 of
      Part 1.) In this technique, the allocated MDL describes a double number of the incoming (or outgoing)
      buffer’s physical pages. The PFN array of the MDL is filled by including the physical pages of the buffer
      twice: one time in the first half of the array and one time in the second half. This creates a “ring buffer.”

          For example, in Figure 9-26, the incoming and outgoing buffers are 16 pages (0x10) large. The
      outgoing buffer is mapped at address 0xFFFFCA803D8C0000. If the sender writes a 1-KB VMBus packet
      to a position close to the end of the buffer, let’s say at offset 0x9FF00, the write succeeds (no access
      violation exception is raised), but the data will be written partially in the end of the buffer and partially
      in the beginning. In Figure 9-26, only 256 (0x100) bytes are written at the end of the buffer, whereas the
      remaining 768 (0x300) bytes are written in the start.

         Both the incoming and outgoing buffers are surrounded by a control page. The page is shared be-
      tween the two endpoints and composes the VM ring control block. This data structure is used to keep
      track of the position of the last packet written in the ring buffer. It furthermore contains some bits to
      control whether to send an interrupt when a packet needs to be delivered.

         After the ring buffer has been created, the KMCL driver sends an IOCTL to VMBus, requesting the
      creation of a GPA descriptor list (GPADL). A GPADL is a data structure very similar to an MDL and is used
      for describing a chunk of physical memory. Differently from an MDL, the GPADL contains an array of
      guest physical addresses (GPAs, which are always expressed as 64-bit numbers, differently from the
      PFNs included in a MDL). The VMBus driver sends different messages to the root partition for transfer-
      ring the entire GPADL describing both the incoming and outcoming ring buffers. (The maximum size
      of a synthetic message is 240 bytes, as discussed earlier.) The root partition reconstructs the entire

GPADL and stores it in an internal list. The GPADL is mapped in the root when the child VM sends the
final Open Channel message. The root VMBus driver parses the received GPADL and maps it in its own
physical address space by using services provided by the VID driver (which maintains the list of memory
block ranges that comprise the VM physical address space).

    At this stage the channel is ready: the child and the root partition can communicate by simply reading
or writing data to the ring buffer. When a sender finishes writing its data, it calls the VmbChannelSend
SynchronousRequest API exposed by the KMCL driver. The API invokes VMBus services to signal an event
in the monitor page of the Xinterrupt object associated with the channel (old versions of the VMBus pro-
tocol used an interrupt page, which contained a bit corresponding to each channel), Alternatively, VMBus
can signal an event directly in the channel’s event port, which depends only on the required latency.

    Other than VSCs, other components use VMBus to implement higher-level interfaces. Good examples
are provided by the VMBus pipes, which are implemented in two kernel mode libraries (Vmbuspipe.dll
and Vmbuspiper.dll) and rely on services exposed by the VMBus driver (through IOCTLs). Hyper-V Sockets
(also known as HvSockets) allow high-speed interpartition communication using standard network
interfaces (sockets). A client connects an AF_HYPERV socket type to a target VM by specifying the target
VM’s GUID and a GUID of the Hyper-V socket’s service registration (to use HvSockets, both endpoints
must be registered in the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\ Virtualization\
GuestCommunicationServices registry key) instead of the target IP address and port. Hyper-V Sockets
are implemented in multiple drivers: HvSocket.sys is the transport driver, which exposes low-level services
used by the socket infrastructure; HvSocketControl.sys is the provider control driver used to load the
HvSocket provider in case the VMBus interface is not present in the system; HvSocket.dll is a library that
exposes supplementary socket interfaces (tied to Hyper-V sockets) callable from user mode applications.
Describing the internal infrastructure of both Hyper-V Sockets and VMBus pipes is outside the scope of
this book, but both are documented in Microsoft Docs.

Virtual hardware support
For properly run virtual machines, the virtualization stack needs to support virtualized devices.
Hyper-V supports different kinds of virtual devices, which are implemented in multiple components
of the virtualization stack. I/O to and from virtual devices is orchestrated mainly in the root OS. I/O
includes storage, networking, keyboard, mouse, serial ports and GPU (graphics processing unit). The
virtualization stack exposes three kinds of devices to the guest VMs:

   ■   Emulated devices, also known—in industry-standard form—as fully virtualized devices

   ■   Synthetic devices, also known as paravirtualized devices

   ■   Hardware-accelerated devices, also known as direct-access devices

   For performing I/O to physical devices, the processor usually reads and writes data from input and
output ports (I/O ports), which belong to a device. The CPU can access I/O ports in two ways:

   ■   Through a separate I/O address space, which is distinct from the physical memory address
       space and, on AMD64 platforms, consists of 64 thousand individually addressable I/O ports.
       This method is old and generally used for legacy devices.

         ■    Through memory mapped I/O. Devices that respond like memory components can be accessed
              through the processor’s physical memory address space. This means that the CPU accesses
              memory through standard instructions: the underlying physical memory is mapped to a device.

        Figure 9-27 shows an example of an emulated device (the virtual IDE controller used in Generation 1
      VMs), which uses memory-mapped I/O for transferring data to and from the virtual processor.

                                                                                          Guest Physical
                                                                                          Address Space
             Root Partition / Host OS                           VM1               96GB
                HCS            VMMS
                                                                                  64GB
                       VMWP
                           IDE VDEV

                           VSPs                               Processes

                                          Physical
                                                            File System/Vol
                VID            VMBus      Device
                                          Drivers             Disk Driver
                       WinHV                              IDE Storage Driver       4GB

                                   Hypervisor

               CPU                     Memory                 I/O Devices             0

                                    Hardware
      FIGURE 9-27 The virtual IDE controller, which uses emulated I/O to perform data transfer.

         In this model, every time the virtual processor reads or writes to the device MMIO space or emits
      instructions to access the I/O ports, it causes a VMEXIT to the hypervisor. The hypervisor calls the
      proper intercept routine, which is dispatched to the VID driver. The VID driver builds a VID message
      and enqueues it in an internal queue. The queue is drained by an internal VMWP’s thread, which waits
      and dispatches the VP’s messages received from the VID driver; this thread is called the message pump
      thread and belongs to an internal thread pool initialized at VMWP creation time. The VM Worker
      process identifies the physical address causing the VMEXIT, which is associated with the proper virtual
      device (VDEV), and calls into one of the VDEV callbacks (usually read or write callback). The VDEV code
      uses the services provided by the instruction emulator to execute the faulting instruction and properly
      emulate the virtual device (an IDE controller in the example).

         NOTE The full instructions emulator located in the VM Worker process is also used for other
         different purposes, such as to speed up cases of intercept-intensive code in a child partition.
         The emulator in this case allows the execution context to stay in the Worker process between
         intercepts, as VMEXITs have serious performance overhead. Older versions of the hardware
         virtualization extensions prohibit executing real-mode code in a virtual machine; for those
         cases, the virtualization stack was using the emulator for executing real-mode code in a VM.

Paravirtualized devices
While emulated devices always produce VMEXITs and are quite slow, Figure 9-28 shows an example
of a synthetic or paravirtualized device: the synthetic storage adapter. Synthetic devices know to run
in a virtualized environment; this reduces the complexity of the virtual device and allows it to achieve
higher performance. Some synthetic virtual devices exist only in virtual form and don’t emulate any
real physical hardware (an example is synthetic RDP).

                Root Partition / Host OS                                       VM1

                    HCS              VMMS

                            VMWP
                             SynthStor VDEV
                                                                             Processes
                           StorVSP
 Physical                                            VMBus                File System/Vol
 Device         vhdmp                VID
                                                                            Disk Driver
 Drivers
              Filesystem                   WinHV                              StorVSC

                                           Hypervisor

                                                         Memory                    CPU

                                            Hardware
FIGURE 9-28 The storage controller paravirtualized device.

   Paravirtualized devices generally require three main components:

   ■    A virtualization service provider (VSP) driver runs in the root partition and exposes virtualiza-
        tion-specific interfaces to the guest thanks to the services provided by VMBus (see the previous
        section for details on VMBus).

   ■    A synthetic VDEV is mapped in the VM Worker process and usually cooperates only in the start-
        up, teardown, save, and restore of the virtual device. It is generally not used during the regular
        work of the device. The synthetic VDEV initializes and allocates device-specific resources (in the
        example, the SynthStor VDEV initializes the virtual storage adapter), but most importantly allows
        the VSP to offer a VMBus communication channel to the guest VSC. The channel will be used for
        communication with the root and for signaling device-specific notifications via the hypervisor.

   ■    A virtualization service consumer (VSC) driver runs in the child partition, understands the vir-
        tualization-specific interfaces exposed by the VSP, and reads/writes messages and notifications
        from the shared memory exposed through VMBus by the VSP. This allows the virtual device to
        run in the child VM faster than an emulated device.

      Hardware-accelerated devices
      On server SKUs, hardware-accelerated devices (also known as direct-access devices) allow physical de-
      vices to be remapped in the guest partition, thanks to the services exposed by the VPCI infrastructure.
      When a physical device supports technologies like single-root input/output virtualization (SR IOV) or
      Discrete Device Assignment (DDA), it can be mapped to a guest partition. The guest partition can di-
      rectly access the MMIO space associated with the device and can perform DMA to and from the guest
      memory directly without any interception by the hypervisor. The IOMMU provides the needed security
      and ensures that the device can initiate DMA transfers only in the physical memory that belong to the
      virtual machine.

         Figure 9-29 shows the components responsible in managing the hardware-accelerated devices:

         ■   The VPci VDEV (Vpcievdev.dll) runs in the VM Worker process. Its rule is to extract the list of
             hardware-accelerated devices from the VM configuration file, set up the VPCI virtual bus, and
             assign a device to the VSP.

         ■   The PCI Proxy driver (Pcip.sys) is responsible for dismounting and mounting a DDA-compatible
             physical device from the root partition. Furthermore, it has the key role in obtaining the list of
             resources used by the device (through the SR-IOV protocol) like the MMIO space and interrupts.
             The proxy driver provides access to the physical configuration space of the device and renders
             an “unmounted” device inaccessible to the host OS.

         ■   The VPCI virtual service provider (Vpcivsp.sys) creates and maintains the virtual bus object,
             which is associated to one or more hardware-accelerated devices (which in the VPCI VSP are
             called virtual devices). The virtual devices are exposed to the guest VM through a VMBus chan-
             nel created by the VSP and offered to the VSC in the guest partition.

         ■   The VPCI virtual service client (Vpci.sys) is a WDF bus driver that runs in the guest VM. It con-
             nects to the VMBus channel exposed by the VSP, receives the list of the direct access devices
             exposed to the VM and their resources, and creates a PDO (physical device object) for each of
             them. The devices driver can then attach to the created PDOs in the same way as they do in
             nonvirtualized environments.

         When a user wants to map a hardware-accelerated device to a VM, it uses some PowerShell com-
      mands (see the following experiment for further details), which start by “unmounting” the device
      from the root partition. This action forces the VMMS service to communicate with the standard PCI
      driver (through its exposed device, called PciControl). The VMMS service sends a PCIDRIVE_ADD
      _VMPROXYPATH IOCTL to the PCI driver by providing the device descriptor (in form of bus, device,
      and function ID). The PCI driver checks the descriptor, and, if the verification succeeded, adds it in the
      HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\PnP\Pci\VmProxy registry value. The VMMS then starts a
      PNP device (re)enumeration by using services exposed by the PNP manager. In the enumeration phase,
      the PCI driver finds the new proxy device and loads the PCI proxy driver (Pcip.sys), which marks the
      device as reserved for the virtualization stack and renders it invisible to the host operating system.

                                                                                  Guest Physical
                                                                                  Address Space
          Root Partition / Host OS                       VM 1
                                                                                96GB
                 HCS           VMMS
                                                                                64GB
                       VMWP
                                                     vPCI VSC
                          VPci VDEV
                                                       Processes
                           vPCI VSP
                                                     File System/Vol
    Pcip           VID          VMBus                  Disk Driver

    Pci                WinHV                          NVME Driver                4GB

                               Hypervisor

                                                                     IOMMU
           CPU                   Memory                                             0

                               Hardware
FIGURE 9-29 Hardware-accelerated devices.

   The second step requires assigning the device to a VM. In this case, the VMMS writes the device
descriptor in the VM configuration file. When the VM is started, the VPCI VDEV (vpcievdev.dll) reads the
direct-access device’s descriptor from the VM configuration, and starts a complex configuration phase
that is orchestrated mainly by the VPCI VSP (Vpcivsp.sys). Indeed, in its “power on” callback, the VPCI
VDEV sends different IOCTLs to the VPCI VSP (which runs in the root partition), with the goal to perform
the creation of the virtual bus and the assignment of hardware-accelerated devices to the guest VM.

    A “virtual bus” is a data structure used by the VPCI infrastructure as a “glue” to maintain the con-
nection between the root partition, the guest VM, and the direct-access devices assigned to it. The
VPCI VSP allocates and starts the VMBus channel offered to the guest VM and encapsulates it in the
virtual bus. Furthermore, the virtual bus includes some pointers to important data structures, like some
allocated VMBus packets used for the bidirectional communication, the guest power state, and so on.
After the virtual bus is created, the VPCI VSP performs the device assignment.

    A hardware-accelerated device is internally identified by a LUID and is represented by a virtual
device object, which is allocated by the VPCI VSP. Based on the device’s LUID, the VPCI VSP locates the
proper proxy driver, which is also known as Mux driver—it’s usually Pcip.sys). The VPCI VSP queries
the SR-IOV or DDA interfaces from the proxy driver and uses them to obtain the Plug and Play informa-
tion (hardware descriptor) of the direct-access device and to collect the resource requirements (MMIO
space, BAR registers, and DMA channels). At this point, the device is ready to be attached to the guest
VM: the VPCI VSP uses the services exposed by the WinHvr driver to emit the HvAttachDevice hypercall
to the hypervisor, which reconfigures the system IOMMU for mapping the device’s address space in the
guest partition.

   The guest VM is aware of the mapped device thanks to the VPCI VSC (Vpci.sys). The VPCI VSC is
a WDF bus driver enumerated and launched by the VMBus bus driver located in the guest VM. It is

      composed of two main components: a FDO (functional device object) created at VM boot time, and
      one or more PDOs (physical device objects) representing the physical direct-access devices remapped
      in the guest VM. When the VPCI VSC bus driver is executed in the guest VM, it creates and starts the cli-
      ent part of the VMBus channel used to exchange messages with the VSP. “Send bus relations” is the first
      message sent by the VPCI VSC thorough the VMBus channel. The VSP in the root partition responds by
      sending the list of hardware IDs describing the hardware-accelerated devices currently attached to the
      VM. When the PNP manager requires the new device relations to the VPCI VSC, the latter creates a new
      PDO for each discovered direct-access device. The VSC driver sends another message to the VSP with
      the goal of requesting the resources used by the PDO.

         After the initial setup is done, the VSC and VSP are rarely involved in the device management. The
      specific hardware-accelerated device’s driver in the guest VM attaches to the relative PDO and man-
      ages the peripheral as if it had been installed on a physical machine.

         EXPERIMENT: Mapping a hardware-accelerated NVMe disk to a VM
         As explained in the previous section, physical devices that support SR-IOV and DDE technologies
         can be directly mapped in a guest VM running in a Windows Server 2019 host. In this experiment,
         we are mapping an NVMe disk, which is connected to the system through the PCI-Ex bus and
         supports DDE, to a Windows 10 VM. (Windows Server 2019 also supports the direct assignment
         of a graphics card, but this is outside the scope of this experiment.)

            As explained at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/community/team-blog/2015
         /20151120-discrete-device-assignment-machines-and-devices, for being able to be reassigned,
         a device should have certain characteristics, such as supporting message-signaled interrupts
         and memory-mapped I/O. Furthermore, the machine in which the hypervisor runs should sup-
         port SR-IOV and have a proper I/O MMU. For this experiment, you should start by verifying that
         the SR-IOV standard is enabled in the system BIOS (not explained here; the procedure varies
         based on the manufacturer of your machine).

             The next step is to download a PowerShell script that verifies whether your NVMe control-
         ler is compatible with Discrete Device Assignment. You should download the survey-dda.ps1
         PowerShell script from https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/Virtualization-Documentation/tree
         /master/hyperv-samples/benarm-powershell/DDA. Open an administrative PowerShell window
         (by typing PowerShell in the Cortana search box and selecting Run As Administrator) and
         check whether the PowerShell script execution policy is set to unrestricted by running the Get-
         ExecutionPolicy command. If the command yields some output different than Unrestricted,
         you should type the following: Set-ExecutionPolicy -Scope LocalMachine -ExecutionPolicy
         Unrestricted, press Enter
                               Enter, and confirm with Y.
                                                       Y

           If you execute the downloaded survey-dda.ps1 script, its output should highlight whether
         your NVMe device can be reassigned to the guest VM. Here is a valid output example:
         Standard NVM Express Controller
         Express Endpoint -- more secure.
             And its interrupts are message-based, assignment can work.
         PCIROOT(0)#PCI(0302)#PCI(0000)

   Take note of the location path (the PCIROOT(0)#PCI(0302)#PCI(0000) string in the example).
Now we will set the automatic stop action for the target VM as turned-off (a required step for
DDA) and dismount the device. In our example, the VM is called “Vibranium.” Write the following
commands in your PowerShell window (by replacing the sample VM name and device location
with your own):
Set-VM -Name "Vibranium" -AutomaticStopAction TurnOff
Dismount-VMHostAssignableDevice -LocationPath "PCIROOT(0)#PCI(0302)#PCI(0000)"

    In case the last command yields an operation failed error, it is likely that you haven’t disabled the
device. Open the Device Manager
                            Manager, locate your NVMe controller (Standard NVMe Express Controller
in this example), right-click it, and select Disable Device. Then you can type the last command again.
It should succeed this time. Then assign the device to your VM by typing the following:
Add-VMAssignableDevice -LocationPath "PCIROOT(0)#PCI(0302)#PCI(0000)" -VMName "Vibranium"

   The last command should have completely removed the NVMe controller from the host. You
should verify this by checking the Device Manager in the host system. Now it’s time to power
up the VM. You can use the Hyper-V Manager tool or PowerShell. If you start the VM and get an
error like the following, your BIOS is not properly configured to expose SR-IOV, or your I/O MMU
doesn’t have the required characteristics (most likely it does not support I/O remapping).

   Otherwise, the VM should simply boot as expected. In this case, you should be able to see
both the NVMe controller and the NVMe disk listed in the Device Manager applet of the child
VM. You can use the disk management tool to create partitions in the child VM in the same way
you do in the host OS. The NVMe disk will run at full speed with no performance penalties (you
can confirm this by using any disk benchmark tool).

   To properly remove the device from the VM and remount it in the host OS, you should first
shut down the VM and then use the following commands (remember to always change the vir-
tual machine name and NVMe controller location):
Remove-VMAssignableDevice -LocationPath "PCIROOT(0)#PCI(0302)#PCI(0000)" -VMName
"Vibranium"
Mount-VMHostAssignableDevice -LocationPath "PCIROOT(0)#PCI(0302)#PCI(0000)"

   After the last command, the NVMe controller should reappear listed in the Device Manager of
the host OS. You just need to reenable it for restarting to use the NVMe disk in the host.

      VA-backed virtual machines
      Virtual machines are being used for multiple purposes. One of them is to properly run traditional
      software in isolated environments, called containers. (Server and application silos, which are two types
      of containers, have been introduced in Part 1, Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs.”) Fully isolated containers
      (internally named Xenon and Krypton) require a fast-startup type, low overhead, and the possibility of
      getting the lowest possible memory footprint. Guest physical memory of this type of VM is generally
      shared between multiple containers. Good examples of containers are provided by Windows Defender
      Application Guard, which uses a container to provide the full isolation of the browser, or by Windows
      Sandbox, which uses containers to provide a fully isolated virtual environment. Usually a container
      shares the same VM’s firmware, operating system, and, often, also some applications running in it (the
      shared components compose the base layer of a container). Running each container in its private guest
      physical memory space would not be feasible and would result in a high waste of physical memory.

          To solve the problem, the virtualization stack provides support for VA-backed virtual machines.
      VA-backed VMs use the host’s operating system’s memory manager to provide to the guest parti-
      tion’s physical memory advanced features like memory deduplication, memory trimming, direct maps,
      memory cloning and, most important, paging (all these concepts have been extensively covered in
      Chapter 5 of Part 1). For traditional VMs, guest memory is assigned by the VID driver by statically allo-
      cating system physical pages from the host and mapping them in the GPA space of the VM before any
      virtual processor has the chance to execute, but for VA-backed VMs, a new layer of indirection is added
      between the GPA space and SPA space. Instead of mapping SPA pages directly into the GPA space, the
      VID creates a GPA space that is initially blank, creates a user mode minimal process (called VMMEM) for
      hosting a VA space, and sets up GPA to VA mappings using MicroVM. MicroVM is a new component of
      the NT kernel tightly integrated with the NT memory manager that is ultimately responsible for man-
      aging the GPA to SPA mapping by composing the GPA to VA mapping (maintained by the VID) with the
      VA to SPA mapping (maintained by the NT memory manager).

         The new layer of indirection allows VA-backed VMs to take advantage of most memory manage-
      ment features that are exposed to Windows processes. As discussed in the previous section, the VM
      Worker process, when it starts the VM, asks the VID driver to create the partition’s memory block. In
      case the VM is VA-backed, it creates the Memory Block Range GPA mapping bitmap, which is used to
      keep track of the allocated virtual pages backing the new VM’s RAM. It then creates the partition’s RAM
      memory, backed by a big range of VA space. The VA space is usually as big as the allocated amount of
      VM’s RAM memory (note that this is not a necessary condition: different VA-ranges can be mapped
      as different GPA ranges) and is reserved in the context of the VMMEM process using the native
      NtAllocateVirtualMemory API.

          If the “deferred commit” optimization is not enabled (see the next section for more details), the VID
      driver performs another call to the NtAllocateVirtualMemory API with the goal of committing the en-
      tire VA range. As discussed in Chapter 5 of Part 1, committing memory charges the system commit limit
      but still doesn’t allocate any physical page (all the PTE entries describing the entire range are invalid
      demand-zero PTEs). The VID driver at this stage uses Winhvr to ask the hypervisor to map the entire
      partition’s GPA space to a special invalid SPA (by using the same HvMapGpaPages hypercall used for
      standard partitions). When the guest partition accesses guest physical memory that is mapped in the

SLAT table by the special invalid SPA, it causes a VMEXIT to the hypervisor, which recognizes the special
value and injects a memory intercept to the root partition.

   The VID driver finally notifies MicroVM of the new VA-backed GPA range by invoking the VmCreate
MemoryRange routine (MicroVM services are exposed by the NT kernel to the VID driver through a
Kernel Extension). MicroVM allocates and initializes a VM_PROCESS_CONTEXT data structure, which
contains two important RB trees: one describing the allocated GPA ranges in the VM and one describ-
ing the corresponding system virtual address (SVA) ranges in the root partition. A pointer to the al-
located data structure is then stored in the EPROCESS of the VMMEM instance.

    When the VM Worker process wants to write into the memory of the VA-backed VM, or when a
memory intercept is generated due to an invalid GPA to SPA translation, the VID driver calls into the
MicroVM page fault handler (VmAccessFault). The handler performs two important operations: first,
it resolves the fault by inserting a valid PTE in the page table describing the faulting virtual page (more
details in Chapter 5 of Part 1) and then updates the SLAT table of the child VM (by calling the WinHvr
driver, which emits another HvMapGpaPages hypercall). Afterward, the VM’s guest physical pages can
be paged out simply because private process memory is normally pageable. This has the important
implication that it requires the majority of the MicroVM’s function to operate at passive IRQL.

   Multiple services of the NT memory manager can be used for VA-backed VMs. In particular, clone
templates allow the memory of two different VA-backed VMs to be quickly cloned; direct map allows
shared executable images or data files to have their section objects mapped into the VMMEM process
and into a GPA range pointing to that VA region. The underlying physical pages can be shared between
different VMs and host processes, leading to improved memory density.

VA-backed VMs optimizations
As introduced in the previous section, the cost of a guest access to dynamically backed memory that
isn’t currently backed, or does not grant the required permissions, can be quite expensive: when a
guest access attempt is made to inaccessible memory, a VMEXIT occurs, which requires the hypervisor
to suspend the guest VP, schedule the root partition’s VP, and inject a memory intercept message to
it. The VID’s intercept callback handler is invoked at high IRQL, but processing the request and call-
ing into MicroVM requires running at PASSIVE_LEVEL. Thus, a DPC is queued. The DPC routine sets an
event that wakes up the appropriate thread in charge of processing the intercept. After the MicroVM
page fault handler has resolved the fault and called the hypervisor to update the SLAT entry (through
another hypercall, which produces another VMEXIT), it resumes the guest’s VP.

   Large numbers of memory intercepts generated at runtime result in big performance penalties.
With the goal to avoid this, multiple optimizations have been implemented in the form of guest
enlightenments (or simple configurations):

   ■   Memory zeroing enlightenments

   ■   Memory access hints

   ■   Enlightened page fault

   ■   Deferred commit and other optimizations

      Memory-zeroing enlightenments
      To avoid information disclosure to a VM of memory artifacts previously in use by the root partition
      or another VM, memory-backing guest RAM is zeroed before being mapped for access by the guest.
      Typically, an operating system zeroes all physical memory during boot because on a physical system
      the contents are nondeterministic. For a VM, this means that memory may be zeroed twice: once by the
      virtualization host and again by the guest operating system. For physically backed VMs, this is at best a
      waste of CPU cycles. For VA-backed VMs, the zeroing by the guest OS generates costly memory inter-
      cepts. To avoid the wasted intercepts, the hypervisor exposes the memory-zeroing enlightenments.

         When the Windows Loader loads the main operating system, it uses services provided by the UEFI
      firmware to get the machine’s physical memory map. When the hypervisor starts a VA-backed VM, it
      exposes the HvGetBootZeroedMemory hypercall, which the Windows Loader can use to query the list
      of physical memory ranges that are actually already zeroed. Before transferring the execution to the
      NT kernel, the Windows Loader merges the obtained zeroed ranges with the list of physical memory
      descriptors obtained through EFI services and stored in the Loader block (further details on startup
      mechanisms are available in Chapter 12). The NT kernel inserts the merged descriptor directly in the
      zeroed pages list by skipping the initial memory zeroing.

         In a similar way, the hypervisor supports the hot-add memory zeroing enlightenment with a simple
      implementation: When the dynamic memory VSC driver (dmvsc.sys) initiates the request to add physi-
      cal memory to the NT kernel, it specifies the MM_ADD_PHYSICAL_MEMORY_ALREADY_ZEROED flag,
      which hints the Memory Manager (MM) to add the new pages directly to the zeroed pages list.

      Memory access hints
      For physically backed VMs, the root partition has very limited information about how guest MM
      intends to use its physical pages. For these VMs, the information is mostly irrelevant because almost
      all memory and GPA mappings are created when the VM is started, and they remain statically mapped.
      For VA-backed VMs, this information can instead be very useful because the host memory manager
      manages the working set of the minimal process that contains the VM’s memory (VMMEM).

        The hot hint allows the guest to indicate that a set of physical pages should be mapped into the
      guest because they will be accessed soon or frequently. This implies that the pages are added to the
      working set of the minimal process. The VID handles the hint by telling MicroVM to fault in the physical
      pages immediately and not to remove them from the VMMEM process’s working set.

          In a similar way, the cold hint allows the guest to indicate that a set of physical pages should be un-
      mapped from the guest because it will not be used soon. The VID driver handles the hint by forwarding
      it to MicroVM, which immediately removes the pages from the working set. Typically, the guest uses
      the cold hint for pages that have been zeroed by the background zero page thread (see Chapter 5 of
      Part 1 for more details).

        The VA-backed guest partition specifies a memory hint for a page by using the HvMemoryHeatHint
      hypercall.

Enlightened page fault (EPF)
Enlightened page fault (EPF) handling is a feature that allows the VA-backed guest partition to resched-
ule threads on a VP that caused a memory intercept for a VA-backed GPA page. Normally, a memory
intercept for such a page is handled by synchronously resolving the access fault in the root partition
and resuming the VP upon access fault completion. When EPF is enabled and a memory intercept oc-
curs for a VA-backed GPA page, the VID driver in the root partition creates a background worker thread
that calls the MicroVM page fault handler and delivers a synchronous exception (not to be confused by
an asynchronous interrupt) to the guest’s VP, with the goal to let it know that the current thread caused
a memory intercept.

   The guest reschedules the thread; meanwhile, the host is handling the access fault. Once the access
fault has been completed, the VID driver will add the original faulting GPA to a completion queue and
deliver an asynchronous interrupt to the guest. The interrupt causes the guest to check the completion
queue and unblock any threads that were waiting on EPF completion.

Deferred commit and other optimizations
Deferred commit is an optimization that, if enabled, forces the VID driver not to commit each backing
page until first access. This potentially allows more VMs to run simultaneously without increasing the
size of the page file, but, since the backing VA space is only reserved, and not committed, the VMs may
crash at runtime due to the commitment limit being reached in the root partition. In this case, there is
no more free memory available.

   Other optimizations are available to set the size of the pages which will be allocated by the MicroVM
page fault handler (small versus large) and to pin the backing pages upon first access. This prevents
aging and trimming, generally resulting in more consistent performance, but consumes more memory
and reduces the memory density.

The VMMEM process
The VMMEM process exists mainly for two main reasons:

   ■   Hosts the VP-dispatch thread loop when the root scheduler is enabled, which represents the
       guest VP schedulable unit

   ■   Hosts the VA space for the VA-backed VMs

    The VMMEM process is created by the VID driver while creating the VM’s partition. As for regular
partitions (see the previous section for details), the VM Worker process initializes the VM setup through
the VID.dll library, which calls into the VID through an IOCTL. If the VID driver detects that the new par-
tition is VA-backed, it calls into the MicroVM (through the VsmmNtSlatMemoryProcessCreate function)
to create the minimal process. MicroVM uses the PsCreateMinimalProcess function, which allocates
the process, creates its address space, and inserts the process into the process list. It then reserves the
bottom 4 GB of address space to ensure that no direct-mapped images end up there (this can reduce
the entropy and security for the guest). The VID driver applies a specific security descriptor to the new
VMMEM process; only the SYSTEM and the VM Worker process can access it. (The VM Worker process
is launched with a specific token; the token’s owner is set to a SID generated from the VM’s unique

      GUID.) This is important because the virtual address space of the VMMEM process could have been
      accessible to anyone otherwise. By reading the process virtual memory, a malicious user could read the
      VM private guest physical memory.

Virtualization-based security (VBS)
      As discussed in the previous section, Hyper-V provides the services needed for managing and running
      virtual machines on Windows systems. The hypervisor guarantees the necessary isolation between
      each partition. In this way, a virtual machine can’t interfere with the execution of another one. In this
      section, we describe another important component of the Windows virtualization infrastructure: the
      Secure Kernel, which provides the basic services for the virtualization-based security.

          First, we list the services provided by the Secure Kernel and its requirements, and then we describe
      its architecture and basic components. Furthermore, we present some of its basic internal data struc-
      tures. Then we discuss the Secure Kernel and Virtual Secure Mode startup method, describing its high
      dependency on the hypervisor. We conclude by analyzing the components that are built on the top
      of Secure Kernel, like the Isolated User Mode, Hypervisor Enforced Code Integrity, the secure software
      enclaves, secure devices, and Windows kernel hot-patching and microcode services.

      Virtual trust levels (VTLs) and Virtual Secure Mode (VSM)
      As discussed in the previous section, the hypervisor uses the SLAT to maintain each partition in its
      own memory space. The operating system that runs in a partition accesses memory using the stan-
      dard way (guest virtual addresses are translated in guest physical addresses by using page tables).
      Under the cover, the hardware translates all the partition GPAs to real SPAs and then performs the
      actual memory access. This last translation layer is maintained by the hypervisor, which uses a sepa-
      rate SLAT table per partition. In a similar way, the hypervisor can use SLAT to create different security
      domains in a single partition. Thanks to this feature, Microsoft designed the Secure Kernel, which is
      the base of the Virtual Secure Mode.

         Traditionally, the operating system has had a single physical address space, and the software run-
      ning at ring 0 (that is, kernel mode) could have access to any physical memory address. Thus, if any
      software running in supervisor mode (kernel, drivers, and so on) becomes compromised, the entire
      system becomes compromised too. Virtual secure mode leverages the hypervisor to provide new trust
      boundaries for systems software. With VSM, security boundaries (described by the hypervisor using
      SLAT) can be put in place that limit the resources supervisor mode code can access. Thus, with VSM,
      even if supervisor mode code is compromised, the entire system is not compromised.

          VSM provides these boundaries through the concept of virtual trust levels (VTLs). At its core, a VTL is
      a set of access protections on physical memory. Each VTL can have a different set of access protections.
      In this way, VTLs can be used to provide memory isolation. A VTL’s memory access protections can be

configured to limit what physical memory a VTL can access. With VSM, a virtual processor is always
running at a particular VTL and can access only physical memory that is marked as accessible through
the hypervisor SLAT. For example, if a processor is running at VTL 0, it can only access memory as
controlled by the memory access protections associated with VTL 0. This memory access enforcement
happens at the guest physical memory translation level and thus cannot be changed by supervisor
mode code in the partition.

   VTLs are organized as a hierarchy. Higher levels are more privileged than lower levels, and higher
levels can adjust the memory access protections for lower levels. Thus, software running at VTL 1 can
adjust the memory access protections of VTL 0 to limit what memory VTL 0 can access. This allows
software at VTL 1 to hide (isolate) memory from VTL 0. This is an important concept that is the basis of
the VSM. Currently the hypervisor supports only two VTLs: VTL 0 represents the Normal OS execution
environment, which the user interacts with; VTL 1 represents the Secure Mode, where the Secure Kernel
and Isolated User Mode (IUM) runs. Because VTL 0 is the environment in which the standard operating
system and applications run, it is often referred to as the normal mode.

   Note The VSM architecture was initially designed to support a maximum of 16 VTLs. At
   the time of this writing, only 2 VTLs are supported by the hypervisor. In the future, it could
   be possible that Microsoft will add one or more new VTLs. For example, latest versions
   of Windows Server running in Azure also support Confidential VMs, which run their Host
   Compatibility Layer (HCL) in VTL 2.

   Each VTL has the following characteristics associated with it:

   ■   Memory access protection As already discussed, each virtual trust level has a set of guest
       physical memory access protections, which defines how the software can access memory.

   ■   Virtual processor state A virtual processor in the hypervisor share some registers with each
       VTL, whereas some other registers are private per each VTL. The private virtual processor state
       for a VTL cannot be accessed by software running at a lower VTL. This allows for isolation of the
       processor state between VTLs.

   ■   Interrupt subsystem Each VTL has a unique interrupt subsystem (managed by the hypervi-
       sor synthetic interrupt controller). A VTL’s interrupt subsystem cannot be accessed by software
       running at a lower VTL. This allows for interrupts to be managed securely at a particular VTL
       without risk of a lower VTL generating unexpected interrupts or masking interrupts.

    Figure 9-30 shows a scheme of the memory protection provided by the hypervisor to the Virtual
Secure Mode. The hypervisor represents each VTL of the virtual processor through a different VMCS
data structure (see the previous section for more details), which includes a specific SLAT table. In this
way, software that runs in a particular VTL can access just the physical memory pages assigned to its
level. The important concept is that the SLAT protection is applied to the physical pages and not to the
virtual pages, which are protected by the standard page tables.

                                                                              System Physical Memory

                                                       Guest Physical to System Physical Memory Map (GPA -> SPA map)

        Normal Mode (VTL 0) Memory Access Protections                                        Secure Mode (VTL 1) Memory Access Protections

                                                        Normal Mode       Secure Mode                      Normal Mode       Secure Mode
                                                           (VTL 0)           (VTL 1)                          (VTL 0)           (VTL 1)
             Normal Mode Device

                                  Secure Mode Device

                                                                       VP 0                                              VP 1
                                                        User                         User                  User                         User
                                                        Kernel                      Kernel                 Kernel                      Kernel

                                                          Local APIC          Local APIC                    Local APIC          Local APIC

                                                                 Shared Registers                                   Shared Registers
                                                                                 Host Partition

                                                            VMCS                VMCS                           VMCS              VMCS
                                                             VP 0      VP 0      VP 0                           VP 1     VP 1     VP 1
                                                            VTL 0               VTL 1                          VTL 0             VTL 1

                    VTL 0 EPT

                    VTL 1 EPT
                                                                                 Hypervisor

      FIGURE 9-30 Scheme of the memory protection architecture provided by the hypervisor to VSM.

      Services provided by the VSM and requirements
      Virtual Secure Mode, which is built on the top of the hypervisor, provides the following services to the
      Windows ecosystem:

         ■               Isolation IUM provides a hardware-based isolated environment for each software that runs
                         in VTL 1. Secure devices managed by the Secure Kernel are isolated from the rest of the system
                         and run in VTL 1 user mode. Software that runs in VTL 1 usually stores secrets that can’t be inter-
                         cepted or revealed in VTL 0. This service is used heavily by Credential Guard. Credential Guard
                         is the feature that stores all the system credentials in the memory address space of the LsaIso
                         trustlet, which runs in VTL 1 user mode.

         ■               Control over VTL 0 The Hypervisor Enforced Code Integrity (HVCI) checks the integrity and
                         the signing of each module that the normal OS loads and runs. The integrity check is done
                         entirely in VTL 1 (which has access to all the VTL 0 physical memory). No VTL 0 software can in-
                         terfere with the signing check. Furthermore, HVCI guarantees that all the normal mode memory
                         pages that contain executable code are marked as not writable (this feature is called W^X. Both
                         HVCI and W^X have been discussed in Chapter 7 of Part 1).

   ■   Secure intercepts VSM provides a mechanism to allow a higher VTL to lock down critical sys-
       tem resources and prevent access to them by lower VTLs. Secure intercepts are used extensively
       by HyperGuard, which provides another protection layer for the VTL 0 kernel by stopping mali-
       cious modifications of critical components of the operating systems.

   ■   VBS-based enclaves A security enclave is an isolated region of memory within the address
       space of a user mode process. The enclave memory region is not accessible even to higher
       privilege levels. The original implementation of this technology was using hardware facilities
       to properly encrypt memory belonging to a process. A VBS-based enclave is a secure enclave
       whose isolation guarantees are provided using VSM.

   ■   Kernel Control Flow Guard VSM, when HVCI is enabled, provides Control Flow Guard
       (CFG) to each kernel module loaded in the normal world (and to the NT kernel itself). Kernel
       mode software running in normal world has read-only access to the bitmap, so an exploit
       can’t potentially modify it. Thanks to this reason, kernel CFG in Windows is also known as
       Secure Kernel CFG (SKCFG).

   Note CFG is the Microsoft implementation of Control Flow Integrity, a technique that pre-
   vents a wide variety of malicious attacks from redirecting the flow of the execution of a pro-
   gram. Both user mode and Kernel mode CFG have been discussed extensively in Chapter 7
   of Part 1.

   ■   Secure devices Secure devices are a new kind of devices that are mapped and managed en-
       tirely by the Secure Kernel in VTL 1. Drivers for these kinds of devices work entirely in VTL 1 user
       mode and use services provided by the Secure Kernel to map the device I/O space.

   To be properly enabled and work correctly, the VSM has some hardware requirements. The host
system must support virtualization extensions (Intel VT-x, AMD SVM, or ARM TrustZone) and the SLAT.
VSM won’t work if one of the previous hardware features is not present in the system processor. Some
other hardware features are not strictly necessary, but in case they are not present, some security
premises of VSM may not be guaranteed:

   ■   An IOMMU is needed to protect against physical device DMA attacks. If the system processors
       don’t have an IOMMU, VSM can still work but is vulnerable to these physical device attacks.

   ■   A UEFI BIOS with Secure Boot enabled is needed for protecting the boot chain that leads to
       the startup of the hypervisor and the Secure Kernel. If Secure Boot is not enabled, the system is
       vulnerable to boot attacks, which can modify the integrity of the hypervisor and Secure Kernel
       before they have the chances to get executed.

   Some other components are optional, but when they’re present they increase the overall security
and responsiveness of the system. The TPM presence is a good example. It is used by the Secure Kernel
to store the Master Encryption key and to perform Secure Launch (also known as DRTM; see Chapter 12
for more details). Another hardware component that can improve VSM responsiveness is the proces-
sor’s Mode-Based Execute Control (MBEC) hardware support: MBEC is used when HVCI is enabled to
protect the execution state of user mode pages in kernel mode. With Hardware MBEC, the hypervisor

      can set the executable state of a physical memory page based on the CPL (kernel or user) domain of
      the specific VTL. In this way, memory that belongs to user mode application can be physically marked
      executable only by user mode code (kernel exploits can no longer execute their own code located in
      the memory of a user mode application). In case hardware MBEC is not present, the hypervisor needs
      to emulate it, by using two different SLAT tables for VTL 0 and switching them when the code execu-
      tion changes the CPL security domain (going from user mode to kernel mode and vice versa produces
      a VMEXIT in this case). More details on HVCI have been already discussed in Chapter 7 of Part 1.

         EXPERIMENT: Detecting VBS and its provided services
         In Chapter 12, we discuss the VSM startup policy and provide the instructions to manually enable
         or disable Virtualization-Based Security. In this experiment, we determine the state of the differ-
         ent features provided by the hypervisor and the Secure Kernel. VBS is a technology that is not
         directly visible to the user. The System Information tool distributed with the base Windows instal-
         lation is able to show the details about the Secure Kernel and its related technologies. You can
         start it by typing msinfo32 in the Cortana search box. Be sure to run it as Administrator; certain
         details require a full-privileged user account.

            In the following figure, VBS is enabled and includes HVCI (specified as Hypervisor Enforced
         Code Integrity), UEFI runtime virtualization (specified as UEFI Readonly), MBEC (specified as
         Mode Based Execution Control). However, the system described in the example does not include
         an enabled Secure Boot and does not have a working IOMMU (specified as DMA Protection in
         the Virtualization-Based Security Available Security Properties line).

           More details about how to enable, disable, and lock the VBS configuration are available in the
         “Understanding the VSM policy” experiment of Chapter 12.

The Secure Kernel
   The Secure Kernel is implemented mainly in the securekernel.exe file and is launched by the Windows
   Loader after the hypervisor has already been successfully started. As shown in Figure 9-31, the Secure
   Kernel is a minimal OS that works strictly with the normal kernel, which resides in VTL 0. As for any
   normal OS, the Secure Kernel runs in CPL 0 (also known as ring 0 or kernel mode) of VTL 1 and provides
   services (the majority of them through system calls) to the Isolated User Mode (IUM), which lives
   in CPL 3 (also known as ring 3 or user mode) of VTL 1. The Secure Kernel has been designed to be
   as small as possible with the goal to reduce the external attack surface. It’s not extensible with exter-
   nal device drivers like the normal kernel. The only kernel modules that extend their functionality are
   loaded by the Windows Loader before VSM is launched and are imported from securekernel.exe:

       ■      Skci.dll      Implements the Hypervisor Enforced Code Integrity part of the Secure Kernel

       ■      Cng.sys       Provides the cryptographic engine to the Secure Kernel

       ■      Vmsvcext.dll Provides support for the attestation of the Secure Kernel components in
              Intel TXT (Trusted Boot) environments (more information about Trusted Boot is available
              in Chapter 12)

      While the Secure Kernel is not extensible, the Isolated User Mode includes specialized processes
   called Trustlets. Trustlets are isolated among each other and have specialized digital signature require-
   ments. They can communicate with the Secure Kernel through syscalls and with the normal world
   through Mailslots and ALPC. Isolated User Mode is discussed later in this chapter.

                            VSM Normal Mode (VTL 0)

                              NTOS (Normal Kernel)

                                                                      VSM Secure Mode (VTL 1)
                Process A       Process B
    User-                                                                       Secure Kernel            User-
    Mode                                                             Isolated        Isolated            Mode
   (Ring 3)                                                         Process C       Process D           (Ring 3)
                 A Kernel       B Kernel    C Kernel   D Kernel     C Secure        D Secure
   Kernel-         Data           Data        Data       Data         Kernel          Kernel            Kernel-
    Mode                                                               Data            Data              Mode
   (Ring 0)                                                                                             (Ring 0)

                                                       Hypervisor

   FIGURE 9-31 Virtual Secure Mode Architecture scheme, built on top of the hypervisor.

   Virtual interrupts
   When the hypervisor configures the underlying virtual partitions, it requires that the physical proces-
   sors produce a VMEXIT every time an external interrupt is raised by the CPU physical APIC (Advanced
   Programmable Interrupt Controller). The hardware’s virtual machine extensions allow the hypervisor
   to inject virtual interrupts to the guest partitions (more details are in the Intel, AMD, and ARM user

      manuals). Thanks to these two facts, the hypervisor implements the concept of a Synthetic Interrupt
      Controller (SynIC). A SynIC can manage two kind of interrupts. Virtual interrupts are interrupts de-
      livered to a guest partition’s virtual APIC. A virtual interrupt can represent and be associated with a
      physical hardware interrupt, which is generated by the real hardware. Otherwise, a virtual interrupt can
      represent a synthetic interrupt, which is generated by the hypervisor itself in response to certain kinds
      of events. The SynIC can map physical interrupts to virtual ones. A VTL has a SynIC associated with each
      virtual processor in which the VTL runs. At the time of this writing, the hypervisor has been designed to
      support 16 different synthetic interrupt vectors (only 2 are actually in use, though).

         When the system starts (phase 1 of the NT kernel’s initialization) the ACPI driver maps each inter-
      rupt to the correct vector using services provided by the HAL. The NT HAL is enlightened and knows
      whether it’s running under VSM. In that case, it calls into the hypervisor for mapping each physical in-
      terrupt to its own VTL. Even the Secure Kernel could do the same. At the time of this writing, though, no
      physical interrupts are associated with the Secure Kernel (this can change in the future; the hypervisor
      already supports this feature). The Secure Kernel instead asks the hypervisor to receive only the follow-
      ing virtual interrupts: Secure Timers, Virtual Interrupt Notification Assist (VINA), and Secure Intercepts.

         Note It’s important to understand that the hypervisor requires the underlying hardware to
         produce a VMEXIT while managing interrupts that are only of external types. Exceptions are
         still managed in the same VTL the processor is executing at (no VMEXIT is generated). If an
         instruction causes an exception, the latter is still managed by the structured exception han-
         dling (SEH) code located in the current VTL.

        To understand the three kinds of virtual interrupts, we must first introduce how interrupts are man-
      aged by the hypervisor.

         In the hypervisor, each VTL has been designed to securely receive interrupts from devices associated
      with its own VTL, to have a secure timer facility which can’t be interfered with by less secure VTLs, and to
      be able to prevent interrupts directed to lower VTLs while executing code at a higher VTL. Furthermore, a
      VTL should be able to send IPI interrupts to other processors. This design produces the following scenarios:

         ■   When running at a particular VTL, reception of interrupts targeted at the current VTL results in
             standard interrupt handling (as determined by the virtual APIC controller of the VP).

         ■   When an interrupt is received that is targeted at a higher VTL, receipt of the interrupt results in
             a switch to the higher VTL to which the interrupt is targeted if the IRQL value for the higher VTL
             would allow the interrupt to be presented. If the IRQL value of the higher VTL does not allow
             the interrupt to be delivered, the interrupt is queued without switching the current VTL. This
             behavior allows a higher VTL to selectively mask interrupts when returning to a lower VTL. This
             could be useful if the higher VTL is running an interrupt service routine and needs to return to a
             lower VTL for assistance in processing the interrupt.

         ■   When an interrupt is received that is targeted at a lower VTL than the current executing VTL
             of a virtual processor, the interrupt is queued for future delivery to the lower VTL. An interrupt
             targeted at a lower VTL will never preempt execution of the current VTL. Instead, the interrupt is
             presented when the virtual processor next transitions to the targeted VTL.

   Preventing interrupts directed to lower VTLs is not always a great solution. In many cases, it could
lead to the slowing down of the normal OS execution (especially in mission-critical or game environ-
ments). To better manage these conditions, the VINA has been introduced. As part of its normal event
dispatch loop, the hypervisor checks whether there are pending interrupts queued to a lower VTL. If so,
the hypervisor injects a VINA interrupt to the current executing VTL. The Secure Kernel has a handler
registered for the VINA vector in its virtual IDT. The handler (ShvlVinaHandler function) executes a nor-
mal call (NORMALKERNEL_VINA) to VTL 0 (Normal and Secure Calls are discussed later in this chapter).
This call forces the hypervisor to switch to the normal kernel (VTL 0). As long as the VTL is switched, all
the queued interrupts will be correctly dispatched. The normal kernel will reenter VTL 1 by emitting a
SECUREKERNEL_RESUMETHREAD Secure Call.

Secure IRQLs
The VINA handler will not always be executed in VTL 1. Similar to the NT kernel, this depends on the
actual IRQL the code is executing into. The current executing code’s IRQL masks all the interrupts that are
associated with an IRQL that’s less than or equal to it. The mapping between an interrupt vector and the
IRQL is maintained by the Task Priority Register (TPR) of the virtual APIC, like in case of real physical APICs
(consult the Intel Architecture Manual for more information). As shown in Figure 9-32, the Secure Kernel
supports different levels of IRQL compared to the normal kernel. Those IRQL are called Secure IRQL.

15             High/Intercept
14                   IPI

                   Unused                       Synthetic Interrupts
                   Vectors                      (Hypervisor Generated)

5                   Timer
4                   VINA
3              Normal Raised
2               DPC/Dispatch                    Software Interrupts
 1                   APC
0                Passive/Low                    Normal Thread Execution

FIGURE 9-32 Secure Kernel interrupts request levels (IRQL).

    The first three secure IRQL are managed by the Secure Kernel in a way similar to the normal world.
Normal APCs and DPCs (targeting VTL 0) still can’t preempt code executing in VTL 1 through the hyper-
visor, but the VINA interrupt is still delivered to the Secure Kernel (the operating system manages the
three software interrupts by writing in the target processor’s APIC Task-Priority Register, an operation
that causes a VMEXIT to the hypervisor. For more information about the APIC TPR, see the Intel, AMD,
or ARM manuals). This means that if a normal-mode DPC is targeted at a processor while it is executing
VTL 1 code (at a compatible secure IRQL, which should be less than Dispatch), the VINA interrupt will
be delivered and will switch the execution context to VTL 0. As a matter of fact, this executes the DPC
in the normal world and raises for a while the normal kernel’s IRQL to dispatch level. When the DPC
queue is drained, the normal kernel’s IRQL drops. Execution flow returns to the Secure Kernel thanks to

      the VSM communication loop code that is located in the VslpEnterIumSecureMode routine. The loop
      processes each normal call originated from the Secure Kernel.

         The Secure Kernel maps the first three secure IRQLs to the same IRQL of the normal world. When
      a Secure call is made from code executing at a particular IRQL (still less or equal to dispatch) in the
      normal world, the Secure Kernel switches its own secure IRQL to the same level. Vice versa, when the
      Secure Kernel executes a normal call to enter the NT kernel, it switches the normal kernel’s IRQL to the
      same level as its own. This works only for the first three levels.

          The normal raised level is used when the NT kernel enters the secure world at an IRQL higher than
      the DPC level. In those cases, the Secure Kernel maps all of the normal-world IRQLs, which are above
      DPC, to its normal raised secure level. Secure Kernel code executing at this level can’t receive any VINA
      for any kind of software IRQLs in the normal kernel (but it can still receive a VINA for hardware inter-
      rupts). Every time the NT kernel enters the secure world at a normal IRQL above DPC, the Secure Kernel
      raises its secure IRQL to normal raised.

         Secure IRQLs equal to or higher than VINA can never be preempted by any code in the normal
      world. This explains why the Secure Kernel supports the concept of secure, nonpreemptable timers
      and Secure Intercepts. Secure timers are generated from the hypervisor’s clock interrupt service rou-
      tine (ISR). This ISR, before injecting a synthetic clock interrupt to the NT kernel, checks whether there
      are one or more secure timers that are expired. If so, it injects a synthetic secure timer interrupt to VTL 1.
      Then it proceeds to forward the clock tick interrupt to the normal VTL.

      Secure intercepts
      There are cases where the Secure Kernel may need to prevent the NT kernel, which executes at a lower
      VTL, from accessing certain critical system resources. For example, writes to some processor’s MSRs
      could potentially be used to mount an attack that would disable the hypervisor or subvert some of its
      protections. VSM provides a mechanism to allow a higher VTL to lock down critical system resources
      and prevent access to them by lower VTLs. The mechanism is called secure intercepts.

          Secure intercepts are implemented in the Secure Kernel by registering a synthetic interrupt, which
      is provided by the hypervisor (remapped in the Secure Kernel to vector 0xF0). The hypervisor, when
      certain events cause a VMEXIT, injects a synthetic interrupt to the higher VTL on the virtual processor
      that triggered the intercept. At the time of this writing, the Secure Kernel registers with the hypervisor
      for the following types of intercepted events:

         ■    Write to some vital processor’s MSRs (Star, Lstar, Cstar, Efer, Sysenter, Ia32Misc, and APIC base
              on AMD64 architectures) and special registers (GDT, IDT, LDT)

         ■    Write to certain control registers (CR0, CR4, and XCR0)

         ■    Write to some I/O ports (ports 0xCF8 and 0xCFC are good examples; the intercept manages the
              reconfiguration of PCI devices)

         ■    Invalid access to protected guest physical memory

   When VTL 0 software causes an intercept that will be raised in VTL 1, the Secure Kernel needs to
recognize the intercept type from its interrupt service routine. For this purpose, the Secure Kernel uses
the message queue allocated by the SynIC for the “Intercept” synthetic interrupt source (see the “Inter-
partition communication” section previously in this section for more details about the SynIC and SINT).
The Secure Kernel is able to discover and map the physical memory page by checking the SIMP syn-
thetic MSR, which is virtualized by the hypervisor. The mapping of the physical page is executed at the
Secure Kernel initialization time in VTL 1. The Secure Kernel’s startup is described later in this chapter.

    Intercepts are used extensively by HyperGuard with the goal to protect sensitive parts of the normal
NT kernel. If a malicious rootkit installed in the NT kernel tries to modify the system by writing a par-
ticular value to a protected register (for example to the syscall handlers, CSTAR and LSTAR, or model-
specific registers), the Secure Kernel intercept handler (ShvlpInterceptHandler) filters the new register’s
value, and, if it discovers that the value is not acceptable, it injects a General Protection Fault (GPF)
nonmaskable exception to the NT kernel in VLT 0. This causes an immediate bugcheck resulting in the
system being stopped. If the value is acceptable, the Secure Kernel writes the new value of the register
using the hypervisor through the HvSetVpRegisters hypercall (in this case, the Secure Kernel is proxying
the access to the register).

Control over hypercalls
The last intercept type that the Secure Kernel registers with the hypervisor is the hypercall intercept.
The hypercall intercept’s handler checks that the hypercall emitted by the VTL 0 code to the hypervi-
sor is legit and is originated from the operating system itself, and not through some external mod-
ules. Every time in any VTL a hypercall is emitted, it causes a VMEXIT in the hypervisor (by design).
Hypercalls are the base service used by kernel components of each VTL to request services between
each other (and to the hypervisor itself). The hypervisor injects a synthetic intercept interrupt to the
higher VTL only for hypercalls used to request services directly to the hypervisor, skipping all the hy-
percalls used for secure and normal calls to and from the Secure Kernel.

    If the hypercall is not recognized as valid, it won’t be executed: the Secure Kernel in this case
updates the lower VTL’s registers with the goal to signal the hypercall error. The system is not crashed
(although this behavior can change in the future); the calling code can decide how to manage the error.

VSM system calls
As we have introduced in the previous sections, VSM uses hypercalls to request services to and from
the Secure Kernel. Hypercalls were originally designed as a way to request services to the hypervisor,
but in VSM the model has been extended to support new types of system calls:

   ■   Secure calls are emitted by the normal NT kernel in VTL 0 to require services to the Secure Kernel.

   ■   Normal calls are requested by the Secure Kernel in VTL 1 when it needs services provided by
       the NT kernel, which runs in VTL 0. Furthermore, some of them are used by secure processes
       (trustlets) running in Isolated User Mode (IUM) to request services from the Secure Kernel or
       the normal NT kernel.

        These kinds of system calls are implemented in the hypervisor, the Secure Kernel, and the normal
      NT kernel. The hypervisor defines two hypercalls for switching between different VTLs: HvVtlCall and
      HvVtlReturn. The Secure Kernel and NT kernel define the dispatch loop used for dispatching Secure and
      Normal Calls.

          Furthermore, the Secure Kernel implements another type of system call: secure system calls. They
      provide services only to secure processes (trustlets), which run in IUM. These system calls are not exposed
      to the normal NT kernel. The hypervisor is not involved at all while processing secure system calls.

      Virtual processor state
      Before delving into the Secure and Normal calls architecture, it is necessary to analyze how the virtual
      processor manages the VTL transition. Secure VTLs always operate in long mode (which is the execu-
      tion model of AMD64 processors where the CPU accesses 64-bit-only instructions and registers), with
      paging enabled. Any other execution model is not supported. This simplifies launch and management
      of secure VTLs and also provides an extra level of protection for code running in secure mode. (Some
      other important implications are discussed later in the chapter.)

          For efficiency, a virtual processor has some registers that are shared between VTLs and some other
      registers that are private to each VTL. The state of the shared registers does not change when switching
      between VTLs. This allows a quick passing of a small amount of information between VTLs, and it also
      reduces the context switch overhead when switching between VTLs. Each VTL has its own instance of
      private registers, which could only be accessed by that VTL. The hypervisor handles saving and restor-
      ing the contents of private registers when switching between VTLs. Thus, when entering a VTL on a
      virtual processor, the state of the private registers contains the same values as when the virtual proces-
      sor last ran that VTL.

         Most of a virtual processor’s register state is shared between VTLs. Specifically, general purpose
      registers, vector registers, and floating-point registers are shared between all VTLs with a few excep-
      tions, such as the RIP and the RSP registers. Private registers include some control registers, some
      architectural registers, and hypervisor virtual MSRs. The secure intercept mechanism (see the previous
      section for details) is used to allow the Secure environment to control which MSR can be accessed by
      the normal mode environment. Table 9-3 summarizes which registers are shared between VTLs and
      which are private to each VTL.

TABLE 9-3 Virtual processor per-VTL register states

Type       General Registers                   MSRs

Shared     Rax, Rbx, Rcx, Rdx, Rsi, Rdi, Rbp   HV_X64_MSR_TSC_FREQUENCY
           CR2                                 HV_X64_MSR_VP_INDEX
           R8 – R15                            HV_X64_MSR_VP_RUNTIME
           DR0 – DR5                           HV_X64_MSR_RESET
           X87 floating point state            HV_X64_MSR_TIME_REF_COUNT
           XMM registers                       HV_X64_MSR_GUEST_IDLE
           AVX registers                       HV_X64_MSR_DEBUG_DEVICE_OPTIONS
           XCR0 (XFEM)                         HV_X64_MSR_BELOW_1MB_PAGE
           DR6 (processor-dependent)           HV_X64_MSR_STATS_PARTITION_RETAIL_PAGE
                                               HV_X64_MSR_STATS_VP_RETAIL_PAGE
                                               MTRR’s and PAT
                                               MCG_CAP
                                               MCG_STATUS

Private    RIP, RSP                            SYSENTER_CS, SYSENTER_ESP, SYSENTER_EIP, STAR, LSTAR, CSTAR,
           RFLAGS                              SFMASK, EFER, KERNEL_GSBASE, FS.BASE, GS.BASE
           CR0, CR3, CR4                       HV_X64_MSR_HYPERCALL
           DR7                                 HV_X64_MSR_GUEST_OS_ID
           IDTR, GDTR                          HV_X64_MSR_REFERENCE_TSC
           CS, DS, ES, FS, GS, SS, TR, LDTR    HV_X64_MSR_APIC_FREQUENCY
           TSC                                 HV_X64_MSR_EOI
           DR6 (processor-dependent)           HV_X64_MSR_ICR
                                               HV_X64_MSR_TPR
                                               HV_X64_MSR_APIC_ASSIST_PAGE
                                               HV_X64_MSR_NPIEP_CONFIG
                                               HV_X64_MSR_SIRBP
                                               HV_X64_MSR_SCONTROL
                                               HV_X64_MSR_SVERSION
                                               HV_X64_MSR_SIEFP
                                               HV_X64_MSR_SIMP
                                               HV_X64_MSR_EOM
                                               HV_X64_MSR_SINT0 – HV_X64_MSR_SINT15
                                               HV_X64_MSR_STIMER0_CONFIG – HV_X64_MSR_STIMER3_CONFIG
                                               HV_X64_MSR_STIMER0_COUNT -HV_X64_MSR_STIMER3_COUNT
                                               Local APIC registers (including CR8/TPR)

Secure calls
When the NT kernel needs services provided by the Secure Kernel, it uses a special function,
VslpEnterIumSecureMode. The routine accepts a 104-byte data structure (called SKCALL), which is used
to describe the kind of operation (invoke service, flush TB, resume thread, or call enclave), the secure
call number, and a maximum of twelve 8-byte parameters. The function raises the processor’s IRQL,
if necessary, and determines the value of the Secure Thread cookie. This value communicates to the
Secure Kernel which secure thread will process the request. It then (re)starts the secure calls dispatch
loop. The executability state of each VTL is a state machine that depends on the other VTL.

    The loop described by the VslpEnterIumSecureMode function manages all the operations shown
on the left side of Figure 9-33 in VTL 0 (except the case of Secure Interrupts). The NT kernel can decide
to enter the Secure Kernel, and the Secure Kernel can decide to enter the normal NT kernel. The loop
starts by entering the Secure Kernel through the HvlSwitchToVsmVtl1 routine (specifying the opera-
tion requested by the caller). The latter function, which returns only if the Secure Kernel requests a VTL
switch, saves all the shared registers and copies the entire SKCALL data structure in some well-defined
CPU registers: RBX and the SSE registers XMM10 through XMM15. Finally, it emits an HvVtlCall hypercall
to the hypervisor. The hypervisor switches to the target VTL (by loading the saved per-VTL VMCS) and

      writes a VTL secure call entry reason to the VTL control page. Indeed, to be able to determine why a se-
      cure VTL was entered, the hypervisor maintains an informational memory page that is shared by each
      secure VTL. This page is used for bidirectional communication between the hypervisor and the code
      running in a secure VTL on a virtual processor.

                                    NT Kernel                   NT Kernel

      Start/Resume a Secure Thread OR                                  Terminate a Secure Thread OR
                 Emit a Secure Call OR                                 Secure Call Processed OR
                   VINA Processed OR                                   Process the VINA OR      VTL 0
                                                                                                VTL 1
             Normal Call Processed OR                                  Emits a Normal Call OR
                      Secure Interrupt*                                Secure Interrupt Processed *

                                  Secure Kernel               Secure Kernel

      FIGURE 9-33 The VSM dispatch loop.

         The virtual processor restarts the execution in VTL 1 context, in the SkCallNormalMode function of
      the Secure Kernel. The code reads the VTL entry reason; if it’s not a Secure Interrupt, it loads the current
      processor SKPRCB (Secure Kernel processor control block), selects a thread on which to run (starting
      from the secure thread cookie), and copies the content of the SKCALL data structure from the CPU
      shared registers to a memory buffer. Finally, it calls the IumInvokeSecureService dispatcher routine,
      which will process the requested secure call, by dispatching the call to the correct function (and imple-
      ments part of the dispatch loop in VTL 1).

         An important concept to understand is that the Secure Kernel can map and access VTL 0 memory, so
      there’s no need to marshal and copy any eventual data structure, pointed by one or more parameters, to
      the VTL 1 memory. This concept won’t apply to a normal call, as we will discuss in the next section.

          As we have seen in the previous section, Secure Interrupts (and intercepts) are dispatched by the
      hypervisor, which preempts any code executing in VTL 0. In this case, when the VTL 1 code starts the ex-
      ecution, it dispatches the interrupt to the right ISR. After the ISR finishes, the Secure Kernel immediately
      emits a HvVtlReturn hypercall. As a result, the code in VTL 0 restarts the execution at the point in which
      it has been previously interrupted, which is not located in the secure calls dispatch loop. Therefore,
      Secure Interrupts are not part of the dispatch loop even if they still produce a VTL switch.

      Normal calls
      Normal calls are managed similarly to the secure calls (with an analogous dispatch loop located in
      VTL 1, called normal calls loop), but with some important differences:

         ■   All the shared VTL registers are securely cleaned up by the Secure Kernel before emitting the
             HvVtlReturn to the hypervisor for switching the VTL. This prevents leaking any kind of secure
             data to normal mode.

   ■   The normal NT kernel can’t read secure VTL 1 memory. For correctly passing the syscall param-
       eters and data structures needed for the normal call, a memory buffer that both the Secure
       Kernel and the normal kernel can share is required. The Secure Kernel allocates this shared
       buffer using the ALLOCATE_VM normal call (which does not require passing any pointer as a pa-
       rameter). The latter is dispatched to the MmAllocateVirtualMemory function in the NT normal
       kernel. The allocated memory is remapped in the Secure Kernel at the same virtual address and
       has become part of the Secure process’s shared memory pool.

   ■   As we will discuss later in the chapter, the Isolated User Mode (IUM) was originally designed
       to be able to execute special Win32 executables, which should have been capable of running
       indifferently in the normal world or in the secure world. The standard unmodified Ntdll.dll and
       KernelBase.dll libraries are mapped even in IUM. This fact has the important consequence of
       requiring almost all the native NT APIs (which Kernel32.dll and many other user mode libraries
       depend on) to be proxied by the Secure Kernel.

    To correctly deal with the described problems, the Secure Kernel includes a marshaler, which identi-
fies and correctly copies the data structures pointed by the parameters of an NT API in the shared buf-
fer. The marshaler is also able to determine the size of the shared buffer, which will be allocated from
the secure process memory pool. The Secure Kernel defines three types of normal calls:

   ■   A disabled normal call is not implemented in the Secure Kernel and, if called from IUM, it
       simply fails with a STATUS_INVALID_SYSTEM_SERVICE exit code. This kind of call can’t be called
       directly by the Secure Kernel itself.

   ■   An enabled normal call is implemented only in the NT kernel and is callable from IUM in its
       original Nt or Zw version (through Ntdll.dll). Even the Secure Kernel can request an enabled
       normal call—but only through a little stub code that loads the normal call number—set the
       highest bit in the number, and call the normal call dispatcher (IumGenericSyscall routine). The
       highest bit identifies the normal call as required by the Secure Kernel itself and not by the
       Ntdll.dll module loaded in IUM.

   ■   A special normal call is implemented partially or completely in Secure Kernel (VTL 1), which
       can filter the original function’s results or entirely redesign its code.

   Enabled and special normal calls can be marked as KernelOnly. In the latter case, the normal call
can be requested only from the Secure Kernel itself (and not from secure processes). We’ve already
provided the list of enabled and special normal calls (which are callable from software running in VSM)
in Chapter 3 of Part 1, in the section named “Trustlet-accessible system calls.”

   Figure 9-34 shows an example of a special normal call. In the example, the LsaIso trustlet has called
the NtQueryInformationProcess native API to request information of a particular process. The Ntdll.dll
mapped in IUM prepares the syscall number and executes a SYSCALL instruction, which transfers the
execution flow to the KiSystemServiceStart global system call dispatcher, residing in the Secure Kernel
(VTL 1). The global system call dispatcher recognizes that the system call number belongs to a normal
call and uses the number to access the IumSyscallDispatchTable array, which represents the normal calls
dispatch table.

         The normal calls dispatch table contains an array of compacted entries, which are generated in
      phase 0 of the Secure Kernel startup (discussed later in this chapter). Each entry contains an offset to
      a target function (calculated relative to the table itself) and the number of its arguments (with some
      flags). All the offsets in the table are initially calculated to point to the normal call dispatcher routine
      (IumGenericSyscall). After the first initialization cycle, the Secure Kernel startup routine patches each
      entry that represents a special call. The new offset is pointed to the part of code that implements the
      normal call in the Secure Kernel.

                                   NtQueryInformationProcess:
                  Lsalso
                                   MOV     R10,   RCX
                                   MOV     EAX,   19h
                  Trustlet         SYSCALL

                                  ........

                             31                                       5 4     0
                                                                         # of                     Flags T Base
                                  NtQueryInformationProcess offset <<5 E Args        Index 25
       Secure Kernel                                                                              Flags T Base
                             31                                        5 4       0
        Normal Calls                                                    # of                      Flags T Base
       Dispatch Table              NtAllocateVirtualMemory offset <<5 E Args         Index 26
                                                                                                  Flags T Base
                                  ........                                                        Flags T Base
      (lumSyscallDispatch
                          31                                           5 4       0                  T = type of normal call
            Table)
                                                                          # of       Index 49
                                     offset of lumGenericSyscall <<5    E Args
                                                                                                  System Call
                                  ........                             E = enclave compatible   Descriptors Array

      FIGURE 9-34 A trustlet performing a special normal call to the NtQueryInformationProcess API.

          As a result, in Figure 9-34, the global system calls dispatcher transfers execution to the
      NtQueryInformationProcess function’s part implemented in the Secure Kernel. The latter checks
      whether the requested information class is one of the small subsets exposed to the Secure Kernel and, if
      so, uses a small stub code to call the normal call dispatcher routine (IumGenericSyscall).

         Figure 9-35 shows the syscall selector number for the NtQueryInformationProcess API. Note that the stub
      sets the highest bit (N bit) of the syscall number to indicate that the normal call is requested by the Secure
      Kernel. The normal call dispatcher checks the parameters and calls the marshaler, which is able to marshal
      each argument and copy it in the right offset of the shared buffer. There is another bit in the selector that
      further differentiates between a normal call or a secure system call, which is discussed later in this chapter.

      31 30      27 26

         1         0                NtQueryInformationProcess SYSCALL index (25)

                                  S bit = Secure System Call

                                  N bit = Called from the Secure Kernel

      FIGURE 9-35 The Syscall selector number of the Secure Kernel.

   The marshaler works thanks to two important arrays that describe each normal call: the descriptors
array (shown in the right side of Figure 9-34) and the arguments descriptors array. From these arrays,
the marshaler can fetch all the information that it needs: normal call type, marshalling function index,
argument type, size, and type of data pointed to (if the argument is a pointer).

    After the shared buffer has been correctly filled by the marshaler, the Secure Kernel compiles the
SKCALL data structure and enters the normal call dispatcher loop (SkCallNormalMode). This part
of the loop saves and clears all the shared virtual CPU registers, disables interrupts, and moves the
thread context to the PRCB thread (more about thread scheduling later in the chapter). It then copies
the content of the SKCALL data structure in some shared register. As a final stage, it calls the hypervi-
sor through the HvVtlReturn hypercall.

   Then the code execution resumes in the secure call dispatch loop in VTL 0. If there are some pending
interrupts in the queue, they are processed as normal (only if the IRQL allows it). The loop recognizes
the normal call operation request and calls the NtQueryInformationProcess function implemented in
VTL 0. After the latter function finished its processing, the loop restarts and reenters the Secure Kernel
again (as for Secure Calls), still through the HvlSwitchToVsmVtl1 routine, but with a different operation
request: Resume thread. This, as the name implies, allows the Secure Kernel to switch to the original
secure thread and to continue the execution that has been preempted for executing the normal call.

   The implementation of enabled normal calls is the same except for the fact that those calls have
their entries in the normal calls dispatch table, which point directly to the normal call dispatcher
routine, IumGenericSyscall. In this way, the code will transfer directly to the handler, skipping any
API implementation code in the Secure Kernel.

Secure system calls
The last type of system calls available in the Secure Kernel is similar to standard system calls provided
by the NT kernel to VTL 0 user mode software. The secure system calls are used for providing services
only to the secure processes (trustlets). VTL 0 software can’t emit secure system calls in any way. As
we will discuss in the “Isolated User Mode” section later in this chapter, every trustlet maps the IUM
Native Layer Dll (Iumdll.dll) in its address space. Iumdll.dll has the same job as its counterpart in VTL
0, Ntdll.dll: implement the native syscall stub functions for user mode application. The stub copies the
syscall number in a register and emits the SYSCALL instruction (the instruction uses different opcodes
depending on the platform).

    Secure system calls numbers always have the twenty-eighth bit set to 1 (on AMD64 architectures,
whereas ARM64 uses the sixteenth bit). In this way, the global system call dispatcher (KiSystemServiceStart)
recognizes that the syscall number belongs to a secure system call (and not a normal call) and switches
to the SkiSecureServiceTable, which represents the secure system calls dispatch table. As in the case of
normal calls, the global dispatcher verifies that the call number is in the limit, allocates stack space for
the arguments (if needed), calculates the system call final address, and transfers the code execution to it.

    Overall, the code execution remains in VTL 1, but the current privilege level of the virtual processor
raises from 3 (user mode) to 0 (kernel mode). The dispatch table for secure system calls is compacted—
similarly to the normal calls dispatch table—at phase 0 of the Secure Kernel startup. However, entries in
this table are all valid and point to functions implemented in the Secure Kernel.

      Secure threads and scheduling
      As we will describe in the “Isolated User Mode” section, the execution units in VSM are the secure
      threads, which live in the address space described by a secure process. Secure threads can be kernel
      mode or user mode threads. VSM maintains a strict correspondence between each user mode secure
      thread and normal thread living in VTL 0.

         Indeed, the Secure Kernel thread scheduling depends completely on the normal NT kernel; the
      Secure Kernel doesn’t include a proprietary scheduler (by design, the Secure Kernel attack surface
      needs to be small). In Chapter 3 of Part 1, we described how the NT kernel creates a process and the
      relative initial thread. In the section that describes Stage 4, “Creating the initial thread and its stack
      and context,” we explain that a thread creation is performed in two parts:

         ■   The executive thread object is created; its kernel and user stack are allocated. The
             KeInitThread routine is called for setting up the initial thread context for user mode threads.
             KiStartUserThread is the first routine that will be executed in the context of the new thread,
             which will lower the thread’s IRQL and call PspUserThreadStartup.

         ■   The execution control is then returned to NtCreateUserProcess, which, at a later stage, calls
             PspInsertThread to complete the initialization of the thread and insert it into the object man-
             ager namespace.

          As a part of its work, when PspInsertThread detects that the thread belongs to a secure process, it
      calls VslCreateSecureThread, which, as the name implies, uses the Create Thread secure service call to
      ask to the Secure Kernel to create an associated secure thread. The Secure Kernel verifies the param-
      eters and gets the process’s secure image data structure (more details about this later in this chapter).
      It then allocates the secure thread object and its TEB, creates the initial thread context (the first routine
      that will run is SkpUserThreadStartup), and finally makes the thread schedulable. Furthermore, the se-
      cure service handler in VTL 1, after marking the thread as ready to run, returns a specific thread cookie,
      which is stored in the ETHREAD data structure.

          The new secure thread still starts in VTL 0. As described in the “Stage 7” section of Chapter 3 of
      Part 1, PspUserThreadStartup performs the final initialization of the user thread in the new context.
      In case it determines that the thread’s owning process is a trustlet, PspUserThreadStartup calls the
      VslStartSecureThread function, which invokes the secure calls dispatch loop through the VslpEnterIum
      SecureMode routine in VTL 0 (passing the secure thread cookie returned by the Create Thread secure
      service handler). The first operation that the dispatch loop requests to the Secure Kernel is to resume
      the execution of the secure thread (still through the HvVtlCall hypercall).

          The Secure Kernel, before the switch to VTL 0, was executing code in the normal call dispatcher
      loop (SkCallNormalMode). The hypercall executed by the normal kernel restarts the execution in the
      same loop routine. The VTL 1 dispatcher loop recognizes the new thread resume request; it switches
      its execution context to the new secure thread, attaches to its address spaces, and makes it runnable.
      As part of the context switching, a new stack is selected (which has been previously initialized by the
      Create Thread secure call). The latter contains the address of the first secure thread system function,
      SkpUserThreadStartup, which, similarly to the case of normal NT threads, sets up the initial thunk con-
      text to run the image-loader initialization routine (LdrInitializeThunk in Ntdll.dll).

   After it has started, the new secure thread can return to normal mode for two main reasons: it emits
a normal call, which needs to be processed in VTL 0, or the VINA interrupts preempt the code execu-
tion. Even though the two cases are processed in a slightly different way, they both result in executing
the normal call dispatcher loop (SkCallNormalMode).

    As previously discussed in Part 1, Chapter 4, “Threads,” the NT scheduler works thanks to the pro-
cessor clock, which generates an interrupt every time the system clock fires (usually every 15.6 mil-
liseconds). The clock interrupt service routine updates the processor times and calculates whether the
thread quantum expires. The interrupt is targeted to VTL 0, so, when the virtual processor is executing
code in VTL 1, the hypervisor injects a VINA interrupt to the Secure Kernel, as shown in Figure 9-36.
The VINA interrupt preempts the current executing code, lowers the IRQL to the previous preempted
code’s IRQL value, and emits the VINA normal call for entering VTL 0.

                   VTL 1                                      VTL 0

             Thread 80
                                     Normal
                                     Service Call
                         VINA

                 Deselect Thread 80 and
      VP 0       Marks It as Not Running
                                                            DPC or Clock Timer Interrupt
                                      VTL return
                                                    Schedules a New Thread
                                                    (Thread’s Quantum Expired)

                                                               Another Thread Is Starting
                                                               on VP 0

                                                        DPC or Clock Timer Interrupt

      VP 3                                              Schedules Thread 80

                                                                    Code Resumes in the Secure
                                                                    Call Dispatch Loop
                           Normal Call
                                                            VTL Call (Resume Thread)
                           Dispatch Loop

        Select Secure Thread 80
Switch to the New Thread Stack
     Resume Thread Execution

FIGURE 9-36 Secure threads scheduling scheme.

         As the standard process of normal call dispatching, before the Secure Kernel emits the HvVtlReturn
      hypercall, it deselects the current execution thread from the virtual processor’s PRCB. This is important:
      The VP in VTL 1 is not tied to any thread context anymore and, on the next loop cycle, the Secure Kernel
      can switch to a different thread or decide to reschedule the execution of the current one.

          After the VTL switch, the NT kernel resumes the execution in the secure calls dispatch loop and still
      in the context of the new thread. Before it has any chance to execute any code, the code is preempted
      by the clock interrupt service routine, which can calculate the new quantum value and, if the latter has
      expired, switch the execution of another thread. When a context switch occurs, and another thread
      enters VTL 1, the normal call dispatch loop schedules a different secure thread depending on the value
      of the secure thread cookie:

         ■   A secure thread from the secure thread pool if the normal NT kernel has entered VTL 1 for dis-
             patching a secure call (in this case, the secure thread cookie is 0).

         ■   The newly created secure thread if the thread has been rescheduled for execution (the secure
             thread cookie is a valid value). As shown in Figure 9-36, the new thread can be also rescheduled
             by another virtual processor (VP 3 in the example).

         With the described schema, all the scheduling decisions are performed only in VTL 0. The secure
      call loop and normal call loops cooperate to correctly switch the secure thread context in VTL 1. All the
      secure threads have an associated a thread in the normal kernel. The opposite is not true, though; if a
      normal thread in VTL 0 decides to emit a secure call, the Secure Kernel dispatches the request by using
      an arbitrary thread context from a thread pool.

      The Hypervisor Enforced Code Integrity
      Hypervisor Enforced Code Integrity (HVCI) is the feature that powers Device Guard and provides the
      W^X (pronounced double-you xor ex) characteristic of the VTL 0 kernel memory. The NT kernel can’t
      map and executes any kind of executable memory in kernel mode without the aid of the Secure Kernel.
      The Secure Kernel allows only proper digitally signed drivers to run in the machine’s kernel. As we dis-
      cuss in the next section, the Secure Kernel keeps track of every virtual page allocated in the normal NT
      kernel; memory pages marked as executable in the NT kernel are considered privileged pages. Only the
      Secure Kernel can write to them after the SKCI module has correctly verified their content.

        You can read more about HVCI in Chapter 7 of Part 1, in the “Device Guard” and “Credential
      Guard” sections.

      UEFI runtime virtualization
      Another service provided by the Secure Kernel (when HVCI is enabled) is the ability to virtualize and
      protect the UEFI runtime services. As we discuss in Chapter 12, the UEFI firmware services are mainly
      implemented by using a big table of function pointers. Part of the table will be deleted from memory
      after the OS takes control and calls the ExitBootServices function, but another part of the table, which
      represents the Runtime services, will remain mapped even after the OS has already taken full control
      of the machine. Indeed, this is necessary because sometimes the OS needs to interact with the UEFI
      configuration and services.

   Every hardware vendor implements its own UEFI firmware. With HVCI, the firmware should cooper-
ate to provide the nonwritable state of each of its executable memory pages (no firmware page can be
mapped in VTL 0 with read, write, and execute state). The memory range in which the UEFI firmware
resides is described by multiple MEMORY_DESCRIPTOR data structures located in the EFI memory map.
The Windows Loader parses this data with the goal to properly protect the UEFI firmware’s memory.
Unfortunately, in the original implementation of UEFI, the code and data were stored mixed in a single
section (or multiple sections) and were described by relative memory descriptors. Furthermore, some
device drivers read or write configuration data directly from the UEFI’s memory regions. This clearly
was not compatible with HVCI.

   For overcoming this problem, the Secure Kernel employs the following two strategies:

   ■   New versions of the UEFI firmware (which adhere to UEFI 2.6 and higher specifications) main-
       tain a new configuration table (linked in the boot services table), called memory attribute table
       (MAT). The MAT defines fine-grained sections of the UEFI Memory region, which are subsec-
       tions of the memory descriptors defined by the EFI memory map. Each section never has both
       the executable and writable protection attribute.

   ■   For old firmware, the Secure Kernel maps in VTL 0 the entire UEFI firmware region’s physical
       memory with a read-only access right.

    In the first strategy, at boot time, the Windows Loader merges the information found both in the EFI
memory map and in the MAT, creating an array of memory descriptors that precisely describe the entire
firmware region. It then copies them in a reserved buffer located in VTL 1 (used in the hibernation path)
and verifies that each firmware’s section doesn’t violate the W X assumption. If so, when the Secure
Kernel starts, it applies a proper SLAT protection for every page that belongs to the underlying UEFI
firmware region. The physical pages are protected by the SLAT, but their virtual address space in VTL 0
is still entirely marked as RWX. Keeping the virtual memory’s RWX protection is important because the
Secure Kernel must support resume-from-hibernation in a scenario where the protection applied in the
MAT entries can change. Furthermore, this maintains the compatibility with older drivers, which read or
write directly from the UEFI memory region, assuming that the write is performed in the correct sections.
(Also, the UEFI code should be able to write in its own memory, which is mapped in VTL 0.) This strategy
allows the Secure Kernel to avoid mapping any firmware code in VTL 1; the only part of the firmware that
remains in VTL 1 is the Runtime function table itself. Keeping the table in VTL 1 allows the resume-from-
hibernation code to update the UEFI runtime services’ function pointer directly.

   The second strategy is not optimal and is used only for allowing old systems to run with HVCI
enabled. When the Secure Kernel doesn’t find any MAT in the firmware, it has no choice except to map
the entire UEFI runtime services code in VTL 1. Historically, multiple bugs have been discovered in the
UEFI firmware code (in SMM especially). Mapping the firmware in VTL 1 could be dangerous, but it’s the
only solution compatible with HVCI. (New systems, as stated before, never map any UEFI firmware code
in VTL 1.) At startup time, the NT Hal detects that HVCI is on and that the firmware is entirely mapped
in VTL 1. So, it switches its internal EFI service table’s pointer to a new table, called UEFI wrapper table.
Entries of the wrapper table contain stub routines that use the INVOKE_EFI_RUNTIME_SERVICE secure
call to enter in VTL 1. The Secure Kernel marshals the parameters, executes the firmware call, and yields
the results to VTL 0. In this case, all the physical memory that describes the entire UEFI firmware is still

      mapped in read-only mode in VTL 0. The goal is to allow drivers to correctly read information from the
      UEFI firmware memory region (like ACPI tables, for example). Old drivers that directly write into UEFI
      memory regions are not compatible with HVCI in this scenario.

         When the Secure Kernel resumes from hibernation, it updates the in-memory UEFI service table
      to point to the new services’ location. Furthermore, in systems that have the new UEFI firmware, the
      Secure Kernel reapplies the SLAT protection on each memory region mapped in VTL 0 (the Windows
      Loader is able to change the regions’ virtual addresses if needed).

      VSM startup
      Although we describe the entire Windows startup and shutdown mechanism in Chapter 12, this sec-
      tion describes the way in which the Secure Kernel and all the VSM infrastructure is started. The Secure
      Kernel is dependent on the hypervisor, the Windows Loader, and the NT kernel to properly start up.
      We discuss the Windows Loader, the hypervisor loader, and the preliminary phases by which the Secure
      Kernel is initialized in VTL 0 by these two modules in Chapter 12. In this section, we focus on the VSM
      startup method, which is implemented in the securekernel.exe binary.

          The first code executed by the securekernel.exe binary is still running in VTL 0; the hypervisor already
      has been started, and the page tables used for VTL 1 have been built. The Secure Kernel initializes the
      following components in VTL 0:

         ■    The memory manager’s initialization function stores the PFN of the VTL 0 root-level page-
              level structure, saves the code integrity data, and enables HVCI, MBEC (Mode-Based Execution
              Control), kernel CFG, and hot patching.

         ■    Shared architecture-specific CPU components, like the GDT and IDT.

         ■    Normal calls and secure system calls dispatch tables (initialization and compaction).

         ■    The boot processor. The process of starting the boot processor requires the Secure Kernel to
              allocate its kernel and interrupt stacks; initialize the architecture-specific components, which
              can’t be shared between different processors (like the TSS); and finally allocate the processor’s
              SKPRCB. The latter is an important data structure, which, like the PRCB data structure in VTL 0, is
              used to store important information associated to each CPU.

          The Secure Kernel initialization code is ready to enter VTL 1 for the first time. The hypervisor subsystem
      initialization function (ShvlInitSystem routine) connects to the hypervisor (through the hypervisor CPUID
      classes; see the previous section for more details) and checks the supported enlightenments. Then it saves
      the VTL 1’s page table (previously created by the Windows Loader) and the allocated hypercall pages
      (used for holding hypercall parameters). It finally initializes and enters VTL 1 in the following way:

         1.   Enables VTL 1 for the current hypervisor partition through the HvEnablePartitionVtl hypercall.
              The hypervisor copies the existing SLAT table of normal VTL to VTL 1 and enables MBEC and
              the new VTL 1 for the partition.

         2.   Enables VTL 1 for the boot processor through HvEnableVpVtl hypercall. The hypervisor initial-
              izes a new per-level VMCS data structure, compiles it, and sets the SLAT table.

   3.   Asks the hypervisor for the location of the platform-dependent VtlCall and VtlReturn hypercall
        code. The CPU opcodes needed for performing VSM calls are hidden from the Secure Kernel
        implementation. This allows most of the Secure Kernel’s code to be platform-independent.
        Finally, the Secure Kernel executes the transition to VTL 1, through the HvVtlCall hypercall. The
        hypervisor loads the VMCS for the new VTL and switches to it (making it active). This basically
        renders the new VTL runnable.

   The Secure Kernel starts a complex initialization procedure in VTL 1, which still depends on the
Windows Loader and also on the NT kernel. It is worth noting that, at this stage, VTL 1 memory is still
identity-mapped in VTL 0; the Secure Kernel and its dependent modules are still accessible to the nor-
mal world. After the switch to VTL 1, the Secure Kernel initializes the boot processor:

   1.   Gets the virtual address of the Synthetic Interrupt controller shared page, TSC, and VP assist
        page, which are provided by the hypervisor for sharing data between the hypervisor and VTL 1
        code. Maps in VTL 1 the Hypercall page.

   2.   Blocks the possibility for other system virtual processors to be started by a lower VTL and
        requests the memory to be zero-filled on reboot to the hypervisor.

   3.   Initializes and fills the boot processor Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT). Configures the IPI,
        callbacks, and secure timer interrupt handlers and sets the current secure thread as the default
        SKPRCB thread.

   4.   Starts the VTL 1 secure memory manager, which creates the boot table mapping and maps the
        boot loader’s memory in VTL 1, creates the secure PFN database and system hyperspace, initial-
        izes the secure memory pool support, and reads the VTL 0 loader block to copy the module
        descriptors of the Secure Kernel’s imported images (Skci.dll, Cnf.sys, and Vmsvcext.sys). It finally
        walks the NT loaded module list to establish each driver state, creating a NAR (normal address
        range) data structure for each one and compiling an Normal Table Entry (NTE) for every page
        composing the boot driver’s sections. Furthermore, the secure memory manager initialization
        function applies the correct VTL 0 SLAT protection to each driver’s sections.

   5.   Initializes the HAL, the secure threads pool, the process subsystem, the synthetic APIC, Secure
        PNP, and Secure PCI.

   6.   Applies a read-only VTL 0 SLAT protection for the Secure Kernel pages, configures MBEC, and
        enables the VINA virtual interrupt on the boot processor.

    When this part of the initialization ends, the Secure Kernel unmaps the boot-loaded memory. The
secure memory manager, as we discuss in the next section, depends on the VTL 0 memory manager for
being able to allocate and free VTL 1 memory. VTL 1 does not own any physical memory; at this stage,
it relies on some previously allocated (by the Windows Loader) physical pages for being able to satisfy
memory allocation requests. When the NT kernel later starts, the Secure Kernel performs normal calls for
requesting memory services to the VTL 0 memory manager. As a result, some parts of the Secure Kernel
initialization must be deferred after the NT kernel is started. Execution flow returns to the Windows
Loader in VTL 0. The latter loads and starts the NT kernel. The last part of the Secure Kernel initializa-
tion happens in phase 0 and phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization (see Chapter 12 for further details).

         Phase 0 of the NT kernel initialization still has no memory services available, but this is the last
      moment in which the Secure Kernel fully trusts the normal world. Boot-loaded drivers still have not
      been initialized and the initial boot process should have been already protected by Secure Boot. The
      PHASE3_INIT secure call handler modifies the SLAT protections of all the physical pages belonging
      to Secure Kernel and to its depended modules, rendering them inaccessible to VTL 0. Furthermore, it
      applies a read-only protection to the kernel CFG bitmaps. At this stage, the Secure Kernel enables the
      support for pagefile integrity, creates the initial system process and its address space, and saves all the
      “trusted” values of the shared CPU registers (like IDT, GDT, Syscall MSR, and so on). The data structures
      that the shared registers point to are verified (thanks to the NTE database). Finally, the secure thread
      pool is started and the object manager, the secure code integrity module (Skci.dll), and HyperGuard
      are initialized (more details on HyperGuard are available in Chapter 7 of Part 1).

         When the execution flow is returned to VTL 0, the NT kernel can then start all the other application
      processors (APs). When the Secure Kernel is enabled, the AP’s initialization happens in a slightly differ-
      ent way (we discuss AP initialization in the next section).

          As part of the phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization, the system starts the I/O manager. The I/O man-
      ager, as discussed in Part 1, Chapter 6, “I/O system,” is the core of the I/O system and defines the model
      within which I/O requests are delivered to device drivers. One of the duties of the I/O manager is to initial-
      ize and start the boot-loaded and ELAM drivers. Before creating the special sections for mapping the
      user mode system DLLs, the I/O manager initialization function emits a PHASE4_INIT secure call to start
      the last initialization phase of the Secure Kernel. At this stage, the Secure Kernel does not trust the VTL 0
      anymore, but it can use the services provided by the NT memory manager. The Secure Kernel initializes
      the content of the Secure User Shared data page (which is mapped both in VTL 1 user mode and kernel
      mode) and finalizes the executive subsystem initialization. It reclaims any resources that were reserved
      during the boot process, calls each of its own dependent module entry points (in particular, cng.sys and
      vmsvcext.sys, which start before any normal boot drivers). It allocates the necessary resources for the
      encryption of the hibernation, crash-dump, paging files, and memory-page integrity. It finally reads and
      maps the API set schema file in VTL 1 memory. At this stage, VSM is completely initialized.

      Application processors (APs) startup
      One of the security features provided by the Secure Kernel is the startup of the application processors
      (APs), which are the ones not used to boot up the system. When the system starts, the Intel and AMD
      specifications of the x86 and AMD64 architectures define a precise algorithm that chooses the boot
      strap processor (BSP) in multiprocessor systems. The boot processor always starts in 16-bit real mode
      (where it’s able to access only 1 MB of physical memory) and usually executes the machine’s firmware
      code (UEFI in most cases), which needs to be located at a specific physical memory location (the loca-
      tion is called reset vector). The boot processor executes almost all of the initialization of the OS, hyper-
      visor, and Secure Kernel. For starting other non-boot processors, the system needs to send a special IPI
      (inter-processor interrupt) to the local APICs belonging to each processor. The startup IPI (SIPI) vector
      contains the physical memory address of the processor start block, a block of code that includes the
      instructions for performing the following basic operations:

         1.   Load a GDT and switch from 16-bit real-mode to 32-bit protected mode (with no paging enabled).

   2.   Set a basic page table, enable paging, and enter 64-bit long mode.

   3.   Load the 64-bit IDT and GDT, set the proper processor registers, and jump to the OS startup
        function (KiSystemStartup).

    This process is vulnerable to malicious attacks. The processor startup code could be modified by
external entities while it is executing on the AP processor (the NT kernel has no control at this point).
In this case, all the security promises brought by VSM could be easily fooled. When the hypervisor
and the Secure Kernel are enabled, the application processors are still started by the NT kernel but
using the hypervisor.

    KeStartAllProcessors, which is the function called by phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization (see
Chapter 12 for more details), with the goal of starting all the APs, builds a shared IDT and enumerates
all the available processors by consulting the Multiple APIC Description Table (MADT) ACPI table. For
each discovered processor, it allocates memory for the PRCB and all the private CPU data structures for
the kernel and DPC stack. If the VSM is enabled, it then starts the AP by sending a START_PROCESSOR
secure call to the Secure Kernel. The latter validates that all the data structures allocated and filled
for the new processor are valid, including the initial values of the processor registers and the startup
routine (KiSystemStartup) and ensures that the APs startups happen sequentially and only once per
processor. It then initializes the VTL 1 data structures needed for the new application processor (the
SKPRCB in particular). The PRCB thread, which is used for dispatching the Secure Calls in the context
of the new processor, is started, and the VTL 0 CPU data structures are protected by using the SLAT.
The Secure Kernel finally enables VTL 1 for the new application processor and starts it by using the
HvStartVirtualProcessor hypercall. The hypervisor starts the AP in a similar way described in the begin-
ning of this section (by sending the startup IPI). In this case, however, the AP starts its execution in the
hypervisor context, switches to 64-bit long mode execution, and returns to VTL 1.

    The first function executed by the application processor resides in VTL 1. The Secure Kernel’s CPU
initialization routine maps the per-processor VP assist page and SynIC control page, configures MBEC,
and enables the VINA. It then returns to VTL 0 through the HvVtlReturn hypercall. The first routine exe-
cuted in VTL 0 is KiSystemStartup, which initializes the data structures needed by the NT kernel to man-
age the AP, initializes the HAL, and jumps to the idle loop (read more details in Chapter 12). The Secure
Call dispatch loop is initialized later by the normal NT kernel when the first secure call is executed.

   An attacker in this case can’t modify the processor startup block or any initial value of the CPU’s
registers and data structures. With the described secure AP start-up, any modification would have been
detected by the Secure Kernel and the system bug checked to defeat any attack effort.

The Secure Kernel memory manager
The Secure Kernel memory manager heavily depends on the NT memory manager (and on the
Windows Loader memory manager for its startup code). Entirely describing the Secure Kernel memory
manager is outside the scope of this book. Here we discuss only the most important concepts and data
structures used by the Secure Kernel.

         As mentioned in the previous section, the Secure Kernel memory manager initialization is divided
      into three phases. In phase 1, the most important, the memory manager performs the following:

         1.   Maps the boot loader firmware memory descriptor list in VTL 1, scans the list, and determines
              the first physical page that it can use for allocating the memory needed for its initial startup
              (this memory type is called SLAB). Maps the VTL 0’s page tables in a virtual address that is
              located exactly 512 GB before the VTL 1’s page table. This allows the Secure Kernel to perform
              a fast conversion between an NT virtual address and one from the Secure Kernel.

         2.   Initializes the PTE range data structures. A PTE range contains a bitmap that describes each
              chunk of allocated virtual address range and helps the Secure Kernel to allocate PTEs for its
              own address space.

         3.   Creates the Secure PFN database and initializes the Memory pool.

         4.   Initializes the sparse NT address table. For each boot-loaded driver, it creates and fills a NAR,
              verifies the integrity of the binary, fills the hot patch information, and, if HVCI is on, protects
              each executable section of driver using the SLAT. It then cycles between each PTE of the
              memory image and writes an NT Address Table Entry (NTE) in the NT address table.

         5.   Initializes the page bundles.

          The Secure Kernel keeps track of the memory that the normal NT kernel uses. The Secure Kernel
      memory manager uses the NAR data structure for describing a kernel virtual address range that
      contains executable code. The NAR contains some information of the range (such as its base address
      and size) and a pointer to a SECURE_IMAGE data structure, which is used for describing runtime drivers
      (in general, images verified using Secure HVCI, including user mode images used for trustlets) loaded
      in VTL 0. Boot-loaded drivers do not use the SECURE_IMAGE data structure because they are treated
      by the NT memory manager as private pages that contain executable code. The latter data structure
      contains information regarding a loaded image in the NT kernel (which is verified by SKCI), like the ad-
      dress of its entry point, a copy of its relocation tables (used also for dealing with Retpoline and Import
      Optimization), the pointer to its shared prototype PTEs, hot-patch information, and a data structure
      that specifies the authorized use of its memory pages. The SECURE_IMAGE data structure is very
      important because it’s used by the Secure Kernel to track and verify the shared memory pages that
      are used by runtime drivers.

           For tracking VTL 0 kernel private pages, the Secure Kernel uses the NTE data structure. An NTE ex-
      ists for every virtual page in the VTL 0 address space that requires supervision from the Secure Kernel;
      it’s often used for private pages. An NTE tracks a VTL 0 virtual page’s PTE and stores the page state and
      protection. When HVCI is enabled, the NTE table divides all the virtual pages between privileged and
      non-privileged. A privileged page represents a memory page that the NT kernel is not able to touch on
      its own because it’s protected through SLAT and usually corresponds to an executable page or to a kernel
      CFG read-only page. A nonprivileged page represents all the other types of memory pages that the NT
      kernel has full control over. The Secure Kernel uses invalid NTEs to represent nonprivileged pages. When
      HVCI is off, all the private pages are nonprivileged (the NT kernel has full control of all its pages indeed).

         In HVCI-enabled systems, the NT memory manager can’t modify any protected pages. Otherwise,
      an EPT violation exception will raise in the hypervisor, resulting in a system crash. After those systems

complete their boot phase, the Secure Kernel has already processed all the nonexecutable physical
pages by SLAT-protecting them only for read and write access. In this scenario, new executable pages
can be allocated only if the target code has been verified by Secure HVCI.

   When the system, an application, or the Plug and Play manager require the loading of a new run-
time driver, a complex procedure starts that involves the NT and the Secure Kernel memory manager,
summarized here:

   1.   The NT memory manager creates a section object, allocates and fills a new Control area (more
        details about the NT memory manager are available in Chapter 5 of Part 1), reads the first page
        of the binary, and calls the Secure Kernel with the goal to create the relative secure image,
        which describe the new loaded module.

   2.   The Secure Kernel creates the SECURE_IMAGE data structure, parses all the sections of the
        binary file, and fills the secure prototype PTEs array.

   3.   The NT kernel reads the entire binary in nonexecutable shared memory (pointed by the
        prototype PTEs of the control area). Calls the Secure Kernel, which, using Secure HVCI, cycles
        between each section of the binary image and calculates the final image hash.

   4.   If the calculated file hash matches the one stored in the digital signature, the NT memory walks
        the entire image and for each page calls the Secure Kernel, which validates the page (each page
        hash has been already calculated in the previous phase), applies the needed relocations (ASLR,
        Retpoline, and Import Optimization), and applies the new SLAT protection, allowing the page
        to be executable but not writable anymore.

   5.   The Section object has been created. The NT memory manager needs to map the driver in its
        address space. It calls the Secure Kernel for allocating the needed privileged PTEs for describ-
        ing the driver’s virtual address range. The Secure Kernel creates the NAR data structure. It
        then maps the physical pages of the driver, which have been previously verified, using the
        MiMapSystemImage routine.

   Note When a NARs is initialized for a runtime driver, part of the NTE table is filled for de-
   scribing the new driver address space. The NTEs are not used for keeping track of a runtime
   driver’s virtual address range (its virtual pages are shared and not private), so the relative
   part of the NT address table is filled with invalid “reserved” NTEs.

    While VTL 0 kernel virtual address ranges are represented using the NAR data structure, the Secure
Kernel uses secure VADs (virtual address descriptors) to track user-mode virtual addresses in VTL 1.
Secure VADs are created every time a new private virtual allocation is made, a binary image is mapped
in the address space of a trustlet (secure process), and when a VBS-enclave is created or a module is
mapped into its address space. A secure VAD is similar to the NT kernel VAD and contains a descriptor
of the VA range, a reference counter, some flags, and a pointer to the Secure section, which has been
created by SKCI. (The secure section pointer is set to 0 in case of secure VADs describing private virtual
allocations.) More details about Trustlets and VBS-based enclaves will be discussed later in this chapter.

      Page identity and the secure PFN database
      After a driver is loaded and mapped correctly into VTL 0 memory, the NT memory manager needs to
      be able to manage its memory pages (for various reasons, like the paging out of a pageable driver’s
      section, the creation of private pages, the application of private fixups, and so on; see Chapter 5 in
      Part 1 for more details). Every time the NT memory manager operates on protected memory, it needs
      the cooperation of the Secure Kernel. Two main kinds of secure services are offered to the NT memory
      manager for operating with privileged memory: protected pages copy and protected pages removal.

         A PAGE_IDENTITY data structure is the glue that allows the Secure Kernel to keep track of all the
      different kinds of pages. The data structure is composed of two fields: an Address Context and a Virtual
      Address. Every time the NT kernel calls the Secure Kernel for operating on privileged pages, it needs
      to specify the physical page number along with a valid PAGE_IDENTITY data structure describing what
      the physical page is used for. Through this data structure, the Secure Kernel can verify the requested
      page usage and decide whether to allow the request.

         Table 9-4 shows the PAGE_IDENTITY data structure (second and third columns), and all the types of
      verification performed by the Secure Kernel on different memory pages:

         ■   If the Secure Kernel receives a request to copy or to release a shared executable page of a
             runtime driver, it validates the secure image handle (specified by the caller) and gets its relative
             data structure (SECURE_IMAGE). It then uses the relative virtual address (RVA) as an index into
             the secure prototype array to obtain the physical page frame (PFN) of the driver’s shared page.
             If the found PFN is equal to the caller’s specified one, the Secure Kernel allows the request;
             otherwise it blocks it.

         ■   In a similar way, if the NT kernel requests to operate on a trustlet or an enclave page (more
             details about trustlets and secure enclaves are provided later in this chapter), the Secure Kernel
             uses the caller’s specified virtual address to verify that the secure PTE in the secure process page
             table contains the correct PFN.

         ■   As introduced earlier in the section ”The Secure Kernel memory manager” , for private kernel
             pages, the Secure Kernel locates the NTE starting from the caller’s specified virtual address and
             verifies that it contains a valid PFN, which must be the same as the caller’s specified one.

         ■   Placeholder pages are free pages that are SLAT protected. The Secure Kernel verifies the state of
             a placeholder page by using the PFN database.

      TABLE 9-4 Different page identities managed by the Secure Kernel

      Page Type          Address Context         Virtual Address                          erification tructure

      Kernel Shared      Secure Image Handle     RVA of the page                         Secure Prototype PTE

      Trustlet/Enclave   Secure Process Handle   Virtual Address of the Secure Process   Secure PTE

      Kernel Private     0                       Kernel Virtual Address of the page      NT address table entry (NTE)

      Placeholder        0                       0                                       PFN entry

   The Secure Kernel memory manager maintains a PFN database to represent the state of each physi-
cal page. A PFN entry in the Secure Kernel is much smaller compared to its NT equivalent; it basically
contains the page state and the share counter. A physical page, from the Secure Kernel perspective, can
be in one of the following states: invalid, free, shared, I/O, secured, or image (secured NT private).

   The secured state is used for physical pages that are private to the Secure Kernel (the NT kernel can
never claim them) or for physical pages that have been allocated by the NT kernel and later SLAT-
protected by the Secure Kernel for storing executable code verified by Secure HVCI. Only secured
nonprivate physical pages have a page identity.

    When the NT kernel is going to page out a protected page, it asks the Secure Kernel for a page remov-
al operation. The Secure Kernel analyzes the specified page identity and does its verification (as explained
earlier). In case the page identity refers to an enclave or a trustlet page, the Secure Kernel encrypts the
page’s content before releasing it to the NT kernel, which will then store the page in the paging file. In this
way, the NT kernel still has no chance to intercept the real content of the private memory.

Secure memory allocation
As discussed in previous sections, when the Secure Kernel initially starts, it parses the firmware’s mem-
ory descriptor lists, with the goal of being able to allocate physical memory for its own use. In phase
1 of its initialization, the Secure Kernel can’t use the memory services provided by the NT kernel (the
NT kernel indeed is still not initialized), so it uses free entries of the firmware’s memory descriptor lists
for reserving 2-MB SLABs. A SLAB is a 2-MB contiguous physical memory, which is mapped by a single
nested page table directory entry in the hypervisor. All the SLAB pages have the same SLAT protec-
tion. SLABs have been designed for performance considerations. By mapping a 2-MB chunk of physical
memory using a single nested page entry in the hypervisor, the additional hardware memory address
translation is faster and results in less cache misses on the SLAT table.

    The first Secure Kernel page bundle is filled with 1 MB of the allocated SLAB memory. A page bundle
is the data structure shown in Figure 9-37, which contains a list of contiguous free physical page frame
numbers (PFNs). When the Secure Kernel needs memory for its own purposes, it allocates physical
pages from a page bundle by removing one or more free page frames from the tail of the bundle’s
PFNs array. In this case, the Secure Kernel doesn’t need to check the firmware memory descriptors list
until the bundle has been entirely consumed. When the phase 3 of the Secure Kernel initialization is
done, memory services of the NT kernel become available, and so the Secure Kernel frees any boot
memory descriptor lists, retaining physical memory pages previously located in bundles.

   Future secure memory allocations use normal calls provided by the NT kernel. Page bundles have
been designed to minimize the number of normal calls needed for memory allocation. When a bundle
gets fully allocated, it contains no pages (all its pages are currently assigned), and a new one will be
generated by asking the NT kernel for 1 MB of contiguous physical pages (through the ALLOC_PHYSICAL
_PAGES normal call). The physical memory will be allocated by the NT kernel from the proper SLAB.

          In the same way, every time the Secure Kernel frees some of its private memory, it stores the cor-
      responding physical pages in the correct bundle by growing its PFN array until the limit of 256 free
      pages. When the array is entirely filled, and the bundle becomes free, a new work item is queued. The
      work item will zero-out all the pages and will emit a FREE_PHYSICAL_PAGES normal call, which ends up
      in executing the MmFreePagesFromMdl function of the NT memory manager.

         Every time enough pages are moved into and out of a bundle, they are fully protected in VTL 0 by
      using the SLAT (this procedure is called “securing the bundle”). The Secure Kernel supports three kinds
      of bundles, which all allocate memory from different SLABs: No access, Read-only, and Read-Execute.

                    Valid              Invalid                 PTE Entries
                 Bundle Page

                                          Header
                                 NumberOfPages: 80
                                 Next Bundle PFN: 0x4560
                                 Flags: 0

                                           PFN Array
                                 Entry 1: PFN 0x3590
                                 Entry 2: PFN 0xA8F01
                                 Entry 3: PFN 0x80D4
                                 …
                                 Entry 79: PFN 0x5012
                                 Entry 80: Invalid (in use)
                                 …
                                 Entry 255: Invalid (in use)

                                        Page Bundle

      FIGURE 9-37 A secure page bundle with 80 available pages. A bundle is composed of a
      header and a free PFNs array.

      Hot patching
      Several years ago, the 32-bit versions of Windows were supporting the hot patch of the operating-
      system’s components. Patchable functions contained a redundant 2-byte opcode in their prolog and
      some padding bytes located before the function itself. This allowed the NT kernel to dynamically
      replace the initial opcode with an indirect jump, which uses the free space provided by the padding, to
      divert the code to a patched function residing in a different module. The feature was heavily used by
      Windows Update, which allowed the system to be updated without the need for an immediate reboot
      of the machine. When moving to 64-bit architectures, this was no longer possible due to various
      problems. Kernel patch protection was a good example; there was no longer a reliable way to modify
      a protected kernel mode binary and to allow PatchGuard to be updated without exposing some of its
      private interfaces, and exposed PatchGuard interfaces could have been easily exploited by an attacker
      with the goal to defeat the protection.

    The Secure Kernel has solved all the problems related to 64-bit architectures and has reintroduced
to the OS the ability of hot patching kernel binaries. While the Secure Kernel is enabled, the following
types of executable images can be hot patched:

   ■   VTL 0 user-mode modules (both executables and libraries)

   ■   Kernel mode drivers, HAL, and the NT kernel binary, protected or not by PatchGuard

   ■   The Secure Kernel binary and its dependent modules, which run in VTL 1 Kernel mode

   ■   The hypervisor (Intel, AMD, and the ARM version).

   Patch binaries created for targeting software running in VTL 0 are called normal patches, whereas
the others are called secure patches. If the Secure Kernel is not enabled, only user mode applications
can be patched.

    A hot patch image is a standard Portable Executable (PE) binary that includes the hot patch table, the
data structure used for tracking the patch functions. The hot patch table is linked in the binary through
the image load configuration data directory. It contains one or more descriptors that describe each
patchable base image, which is identified by its checksum and time date stamp. (In this way, a hot patch
is compatible only with the correct base images. The system can’t apply a patch to the wrong image.) The
hot patch table also includes a list of functions or global data chunks that needs to be updated in the base
or in the patch image; we describe the patch engine shortly. Every entry in this list contains the functions’
offsets in the base and patch images and the original bytes of the base function that will be replaced.

   Multiple patches can be applied to a base image, but the patch application is idempotent. The same
patch may be applied multiple times, or different patches may be applied in sequence. Regardless, the
last applied patch will be the active patch for the base image. When the system needs to apply a hot
patch, it uses the NtManageHotPatch system call, which is employed to install, remove, or manage hot
patches. (The system call supports different “patch information” classes for describing all the possible
operations.) A hot patch can be installed globally for the entire system, or, if a patch is for user mode
code (VTL 0), for all the processes that belong to a specific user session.

   When the system requests the application of a patch, the NT kernel locates the hot patch table in
the patch binary and validates it. It then uses the DETERMINE_HOT_PATCH_TYPE secure call to securely
determine the type of patch. In the case of a secure patch, only the Secure Kernel can apply it, so the
APPLY_HOT_PATCH secure call is used; no other processing by the NT kernel is needed. In all the other
cases, the NT kernel first tries to apply the patch to a kernel driver. It cycles between each loaded kernel
module, searching for a base image that has the same checksum described by one of the patch image’s
hot patch descriptors.

    Hot patching is enabled only if the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control
\Session Manager\Memory Management\HotPatchTableSize registry value is a multiple of a standard
memory page size (4,096). Indeed, when hot patching is enabled, every image that is mapped in the
virtual address space needs to have a certain amount of virtual address space reserved immediately
after the image itself. This reserved space is used for the image’s hot patch address table (HPAT, not to
be confused with the hot patch table). The HPAT is used to minimize the amount of padding neces-
sary for each function to be patched by storing the address of the new function in the patched image.

      When patching a function, the HPAT location will be used to perform an indirect jump from the original
      function in the base image to the patched function in the patch image (note that for Retpoline compat-
      ibility, another kind of Retpoline routine is used instead of an indirect jump).

         When the NT kernel finds a kernel mode driver suitable for the patch, it loads and maps the patch
      binary in the kernel address space and creates the related loader data table entry (for more details,
      see Chapter 12). It then scans each memory page of both the base and the patch images and locks in
      memory the ones involved in the hot patch (this is important; in this way, the pages can’t be paged out
      to disk while the patch application is in progress). It finally emits the APPLY_HOT_PATCH secure call.

         The real patch application process starts in the Secure Kernel. The latter captures and verifies the hot
      patch table of the patch image (by remapping the patch image also in VTL 1) and locates the base im-
      age’s NAR (see the previous section, “The Secure Kernel memory manager” for more details about the
      NARs), which also tells the Secure Kernel whether the image is protected by PatchGuard. The Secure
      Kernel then verifies whether enough reserved space is available in the image HPAT. If so, it allocates
      one or more free physical pages (getting them from the secure bundle or using the ALLOC_PHYSICAL_
      PAGES normal call) that will be mapped in the reserved space. At this point, if the base image is pro-
      tected, the Secure Kernel starts a complex process that updates the PatchGuard’s internal state for the
      new patched image and finally calls the patch engine.

         The kernel's patch engine performs the following high-level operations, which are all described by a
      different entry type in the hot patch table:

         1.   Patches all calls from patched functions in the patch image with the goal to jump to the cor-
              responding functions in the base image. This ensures that all unpatched code always executes
              in the original base image. For example, if function A calls B in the base image and the patch
              changes function A but not function B, then the patch engine will update function B in the
              patch to jump to function B in the base image.

         2.   Patches the necessary references to global variables in patched functions to point to the cor-
              responding global variables in the base image.

         3.   Patches the necessary import address table (IAT) references in the patch image by copying the
              corresponding IAT entries from the base image.

         4.   Atomically patches the necessary functions in the base image to jump to the corresponding func-
              tion in the patch image. As soon as this is done for a given function in the base image, all new in-
              vocations of that function will execute the new patched function code in the patch image. When
              the patched function returns, it will return to the caller of the original function in the base image.

         Since the pointers of the new functions are 64 bits (8 bytes) wide, the patch engine inserts each
      pointer in the HPAT, which is located at the end of the binary. In this way, it needs only 5 bytes for plac-
      ing the indirect jump in the padding space located in the beginning of each function (the process has
      been simplified. Retpoline compatible hot-patches requires a compatible Retpoline. Furthermore, the
      HPAT is split in code and data page).

         As shown in Figure 9-38, the patch engine is compatible with different kinds of binaries. If the NT
      kernel has not found any patchable kernel mode module, it restarts the search through all the user

   mode processes and applies a procedure similar to properly hot patching a compatible user mode
   executable or library.

                                                  Process 1        Process 2          Process 3

     • Load patch binary
     • Point patched functions to patch binary     Foo.dll             Foo.dll          Foo.dll
       atomically
     • Unpatched code always executes in
       original binary                              Foo-             Foo-               Foo-
   User                                           Patch1.dll       Patch1.dll         Patch1.dll

   Kerner                                                       VTL0     VTL1
                           DriverA-                                                  SecureKernel.
                          DriverA-
                          Patch2.sys             Ntoskrnl.exe
     DriverA.sys                                                                         exe
                         Patch1.sys

                          DriverB-                Ntoskrnl-                         SecureKernel-
     DriverB.sys
                         Patch1.sys               Patch1.exe                          Patch1.exe

   FIGURE 9-38 A schema of the hot patch engine executing on different types of binaries.

Isolated User Mode
   Isolated User Mode (IUM), the services provided by the Secure Kernel to its secure processes (trustlets),
   and the trustlets general architecture are covered in Chapter 3 of Part 1. In this section, we continue
   the discussion starting from there, and we move on to describe some services provided by the Isolated
   User Mode, like the secure devices and the VBS enclaves.

      As introduced in Chapter 3 of Part 1, when a trustlet is created in VTL 1, it usually maps in its address
   space the following libraries:

          ■   Iumdll.dll The IUM Native Layer DLL implements the secure system call stub. It’s the equiva-
              lent of Ntdll.dll of VTL 0.

          ■   Iumbase.dll The IUM Base Layer DLL is the library that implements most of the secure APIs
              that can be consumed exclusively by VTL 1 software. It provides various services to each secure
              process, like secure identification, communication, cryptography, and secure memory manage-
              ment. Trustlets do not usually call secure system calls directly, but they pass through Iumbase.
              dll, which is the equivalent of kernelbase.dll in VTL 0.

          ■   IumCrypt.dll Exposes public/private key encryption functions used for signing and integrity
              verification. Most of the crypto functions exposed to VTL 1 are implemented in Iumbase.dll; only a
              small number of specialized encryption routines are implemented in IumCrypt. LsaIso is the main
              consumer of the services exposed by IumCrypt, which is not loaded in many other trustlets.

          ■   Ntdll.dll, Kernelbase.dll, and Kernel32.dll A trustlet can be designed to run both in VTL
              1 and VTL 0. In that case, it should only use routines implemented in the standard VTL 0 API
              surface. Not all the services available to VTL 0 are also implemented in VTL 1. For example, a
              trustlet can never do any registry I/O and any file I/O, but it can use synchronization routines,
              ALPC, thread APIs, and structured exception handling, and it can manage virtual memory and

             section objects. Almost all the services offered by the kernelbase and kernel32 libraries perform
             system calls through Ntdll.dll. In VTL 1, these kinds of system calls are “translated” in normal
             calls and redirected to the VTL 0 kernel. (We discussed normal calls in detail earlier in this chap-
             ter.) Normal calls are often used by IUM functions and by the Secure Kernel itself. This explains
             why ntdll.dll is always mapped in every trustlet.

         ■   Vertdll.dll The VSM enclave runtime DLL is the DLL that manages the lifetime of a VBS en-
             clave. Only limited services are provided by software executing in a secure enclave. This library
             implements all the enclave services exposed to the software enclave and is normally not loaded
             for standard VTL 1 processes.

         With this knowledge in mind, let’s look at what is involved in the trustlet creation process, starting
      from the CreateProcess API in VTL 0, for which its execution flow has already been described in detail
      in Chapter 3.

      Trustlets creation
      As discussed multiple times in the previous sections, the Secure Kernel depends on the NT kernel for per-
      forming various operations. Creating a trustlet follows the same rule: It is an operation that is managed
      by both the Secure Kernel and NT kernel. In Chapter 3 of Part 1, we presented the trustlet structure and
      its signing requirement, and we described its important policy metadata. Furthermore, we described the
      detailed flow of the CreateProcess API, which is still the starting point for the trustlet creation.

          To properly create a trustlet, an application should specify the CREATE_SECURE_PROCESS creation flag
      when calling the CreateProcess API. Internally, the flag is converted to the PS_CP_SECURE_ PROCESS
      NT attribute and passed to the NtCreateUserProcess native API. After the NtCreateUserProcess has
      successfully opened the image to be executed, it creates the section object of the image by specifying
      a special flag, which instructs the memory manager to use the Secure HVCI to validate its content. This
      allows the Secure Kernel to create the SECURE_IMAGE data structure used to describe the PE image
      verified through Secure HVCI.

         The NT kernel creates the required process’s data structures and initial VTL 0 address space (page
      directories, hyperspace, and working set) as for normal processes, and if the new process is a trustlet, it
      emits a CREATE_PROCESS secure call. The Secure Kernel manages the latter by creating the secure pro-
      cess object and relative data structure (named SEPROCESS). The Secure Kernel links the normal process
      object (EPROCESS) with the new secure one and creates the initial secure address space by allocating
      the secure page table and duplicating the root entries that describe the kernel portion of the secure
      address space in the upper half of it.

         The NT kernel concludes the setup of the empty process address space and maps the Ntdll library
      into it (see Stage 3D of Chapter 3 of Part 1 for more details). When doing so for secure processes, the
      NT kernel invokes the INITIALIZE_PROCESS secure call to finish the setup in VTL 1. The Secure Kernel
      copies the trustlet identity and trustlet attributes specified at process creation time into the new secure
      process, creates the secure handle table, and maps the secure shared page into the address space.

         The last step needed for the secure process is the creation of the secure thread. The initial thread
      object is created as for normal processes in the NT kernel: When the NtCreateUserProcess calls

PspInsertThread, it has already allocated the thread kernel stack and inserted the necessary data to
start from the KiStartUserThread kernel function (see Stage 4 in Chapter 3 of Part 1 for further de-
tails). If the process is a trustlet, the NT kernel emits a CREATE_THREAD secure call for performing the
final secure thread creation. The Secure Kernel attaches to the new secure process’s address space
and allocates and initializes a secure thread data structure, a thread’s secure TEB, and kernel stack.
The Secure Kernel fills the thread’s kernel stack by inserting the thread-first initial kernel routine:
SkpUserThreadStart. It then initializes the machine-dependent hardware context for the secure thread,
which specifies the actual image start address and the address of the first user mode routine. Finally, it
associates the normal thread object with the new created secure one, inserts the thread into the secure
threads list, and marks the thread as runnable.

   When the normal thread object is selected to run by the NT kernel scheduler, the execution still
starts in the KiStartUserThread function in VTL 0. The latter lowers the thread’s IRQL and calls the sys-
tem initial thread routine (PspUserThreadStartup). The execution proceeds as for normal threads, until
the NT kernel sets up the initial thunk context. Instead of doing that, it starts the Secure Kernel dispatch
loop by calling the VslpEnterIumSecureMode routine and specifying the RESUMETHREAD secure call.
The loop will exit only when the thread is terminated. The initial secure call is processed by the normal
call dispatcher loop in VTL 1, which identifies the “resume thread” entry reason to VTL 1, attaches to
the new process’s address space, and switches to the new secure thread stack. The Secure Kernel in
this case does not call the IumInvokeSecureService dispatcher function because it knows that the initial
thread function is on the stack, so it simply returns to the address located in the stack, which points to
the VTL 1 secure initial routine, SkpUserThreadStart.

   SkpUserThreadStart, similarly to standard VTL 0 threads, sets up the initial thunk context to run the im-
age loader initialization routine (LdrInitializeThunk in Ntdll.dll), as well as the system-wide thread startup
stub (RtlUserThreadStart in Ntdll.dll). These steps are done by editing the context of the thread in place
and then issuing an exit from system service operation, which loads the specially crafted user context and
returns to user mode. The newborn secure thread initialization proceeds as for normal VTL 0 threads; the
LdrInitializeThunk routine initializes the loader and its needed data structures. Once the function returns,
NtContinue restores the new user context. Thread execution now truly starts: RtlUserThreadStart uses the
address of the actual image entry point and the start parameter and calls the application’s entry point.

   Note A careful reader may have noticed that the Secure Kernel doesn’t do anything to pro-
   tect the new trustlet’s binary image. This is because the shared memory that describes the
   trustlet’s base binary image is still accessible to VTL 0 by design.
   Let’s assume that a trustlet wants to write private data located in the image’s global data.
   The PTEs that map the writable data section of the image global data are marked as copy-
   on-write. So, an access fault will be generated by the processor. The fault belongs to a user
   mode address range (remember that no NAR are used to track shared pages). The Secure
   Kernel page fault handler transfers the execution to the NT kernel (through a normal call),
   which will allocate a new page, copy the content of the old one in it, and protect it through
   the SLAT (using a protected copy operation; see the section “The Secure Kernel memory
   manager” earlier in this chapter for further details).

      EXPERIMENT: Debugging a trustlet
      Debugging a trustlet with a user mode debugger is possible only if the trustlet explicitly allows it
      through its policy metadata (stored in the .tPolicy section). In this experiment, we try to debug a
      trustlet through the kernel debugger. You need a kernel debugger attached to a test system (a lo-
      cal kernel debugger works, too), which must have VBS enabled. HVCI is not strictly needed, though.

         First, find the LsaIso.exe trustlet:
      lkd> !process 0 0 lsaiso.exe
      PROCESS ffff8904dfdaa080
          SessionId: 0 Cid: 02e8    Peb: 8074164000 ParentCid: 0250
          DirBase: 3e590002 ObjectTable: ffffb00d0f4dab00 HandleCount:           42.
          Image: LsaIso.exe

         Analyzing the process’s PEB reveals that some information is set to 0 or nonreadable:
      lkd> .process /P ffff8904dfdaa080
      lkd> !peb 8074164000
      PEB at 0000008074164000
          InheritedAddressSpace:     No
          ReadImageFileExecOptions: No
          BeingDebugged:             No
          ImageBaseAddress:          00007ff708750000
          NtGlobalFlag:              0
          NtGlobalFlag2:             0
          Ldr                        0000000000000000
          *** unable to read Ldr table at 0000000000000000
          SubSystemData:      0000000000000000
          ProcessHeap:        0000000000000000
          ProcessParameters: 0000026b55a10000
          CurrentDirectory: 'C:\Windows\system32\'
          WindowTitle: '< Name not readable >'
          ImageFile:     '\??\C:\Windows\system32\lsaiso.exe'
          CommandLine: '\??\C:\Windows\system32\lsaiso.exe'
          DllPath:       '< Name not readable >'lkd

         Reading from the process image base address may succeed, but it depends on whether the
      LsaIso image mapped in the VTL 0 address space has been already accessed. This is usually the
      case just for the first page (remember that the shared memory of the main image is accessible in
      VTL 0). In our system, the first page is mapped and valid, whereas the third one is invalid:
      lkd> db 0x7ff708750000 l20
      00007ff7`08750000 4d 5a 90 00 03 00 00 00-04 00 00 00 ff 00 00 MZ..............
      00007ff7`08750010 b8 00 00 00 00 00 00 00-40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 ........@.......
      lkd> db (0x7ff708750000 + 2000) l20
      00007ff7`08752000 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ????????????????
      00007ff7`08752010 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ????????????????
      lkd> !pte (0x7ff708750000 + 2000)
      1: kd> !pte (0x7ff708750000 + 2000)

                                             VA 00007ff708752000
PXE at FFFFD5EAF57AB7F8      PPE at FFFFD5EAF56FFEE0    PDE at FFFFD5EADFFDC218
contains 0A0000003E58D867    contains 0A0000003E58E867 contains 0A0000003E58F867
pfn 3e58d     ---DA--UWEV    pfn 3e58e     ---DA--UWEV pfn 3e58f      ---DA--UWEV

PTE at FFFFD5BFFB843A90
contains 00000000000000
not valid

   Dumping the process’s threads reveals important information that confirms what we have
discussed in the previous sections:
!process ffff8904dfdaa080 2
PROCESS ffff8904dfdaa080
    SessionId: 0 Cid: 02e8    Peb: 8074164000 ParentCid: 0250
    DirBase: 3e590002 ObjectTable: ffffb00d0f4dab00 HandleCount:          42.
    Image: LsaIso.exe

        THREAD ffff8904dfdd9080 Cid 02e8.02f8 Teb: 0000008074165000
        Win32Thread: 0000000000000000 WAIT: (UserRequest) UserMode Non-Alertable
            ffff8904dfdc5ca0 NotificationEvent

        THREAD ffff8904e12ac040 Cid 02e8.0b84 Teb: 0000008074167000
        Win32Thread: 0000000000000000 WAIT: (WrQueue) UserMode Alertable
            ffff8904dfdd7440 QueueObject

lkd> .thread /p ffff8904e12ac040
Implicit thread is now ffff8904`e12ac040
Implicit process is now ffff8904`dfdaa080
.cache forcedecodeuser done
lkd> k
  *** Stack trace for last set context - .thread/.cxr resets it
 # Child-SP          RetAddr           Call Site
00 ffffe009`1216c140 fffff801`27564e17 nt!KiSwapContext+0x76
01 ffffe009`1216c280 fffff801`27564989 nt!KiSwapThread+0x297
02 ffffe009`1216c340 fffff801`275681f9 nt!KiCommitThreadWait+0x549
03 ffffe009`1216c3e0 fffff801`27567369 nt!KeRemoveQueueEx+0xb59
04 ffffe009`1216c480 fffff801`27568e2a nt!IoRemoveIoCompletion+0x99
05 ffffe009`1216c5b0 fffff801`2764d504 nt!NtWaitForWorkViaWorkerFactory+0x99a
06 ffffe009`1216c7e0 fffff801`276db75f nt!VslpDispatchIumSyscall+0x34
07 ffffe009`1216c860 fffff801`27bab7e4 nt!VslpEnterIumSecureMode+0x12098b
08 ffffe009`1216c8d0 fffff801`276586cc nt!PspUserThreadStartup+0x178704
09 ffffe009`1216c9c0 fffff801`27658640 nt!KiStartUserThread+0x1c
0a ffffe009`1216cb00 00007fff`d06f7ab0 nt!KiStartUserThreadReturn
0b 00000080`7427fe18 00000000`00000000 ntdll!RtlUserThreadStart

   The stack clearly shows that the execution begins in VTL 0 at the KiStartUserThread routine.
PspUserThreadStartup has invoked the secure call dispatch loop, which never ended and has
been interrupted by a wait operation. There is no way for the kernel debugger to show any
Secure Kernel’s data structures or trustlet’s private data.

      Secure devices
      VBS provides the ability for drivers to run part of their code in the secure environment. The Secure
      Kernel itself can’t be extended to support kernel drivers; its attack surface would become too large.
      Furthermore, Microsoft wouldn’t allow external companies to introduce possible bugs in a component
      used primarily for security purposes.

         The User-Mode Driver Framework (UMDF) solves the problem by introducing the concept of driver
      companions, which can run both in user mode VTL 0 or VTL 1. In this case, they take the name of secure
      companions. A secure companion takes the subset of the driver’s code that needs to run in a different
      mode (in this case IUM) and loads it as an extension, or companion, of the main KMDF driver. Standard
      WDM drivers are also supported, though. The main driver, which still runs in VTL 0 kernel mode, contin-
      ues to manage the device’s PnP and power state, but it needs the ability to reach out to its companion
      to perform tasks that must be performed in IUM.

          Although the Secure Driver Framework (SDF) mentioned in Chapter 3 is deprecated, Figure 9-39
      shows the architecture of the new UMDF secure companion model, which is still built on top of the
      same UMDF core framework (Wudfx02000.dll) used in VTL 0 user mode. The latter leverages services
      provided by the UMDF secure companion host (WUDFCompanionHost.exe) for loading and managing
      the driver companion, which is distributed through a DLL. The UMDF secure companion host manag-
      es the lifetime of the secure companion and encapsulates many UMDF functions that deal specifically
      with the IUM environment.

                   Normal Mode (VTL 0)                    Secure Mode (VTL 1)

                                                          Trustlet

                                                            WDF Binding Stub Lib

                                                              Driver Companion

                                    UMDF Driver
                                     Manager
                                      Service                   UMDF Core Fx

                                                ALPC          UMDF SecureHost
                                        ALPC
         User Mode
        Kernel Mode

         KMDF Driver      WDF      KMDF Core Fx                 ALPC
                          APIs

      FIGURE 9-39 The WDF driver’s secure companion architecture.

   A secure companion usually comes associated with the main driver that runs in the VTL 0 kernel. It
must be properly signed (including the IUM EKU in the signature, as for every trustlet) and must de-
clare its capabilities in its metadata section. A secure companion has the full ownership of its managed
device (this explains why the device is often called secure device). A secure device controller by a secure
companion supports the following features:

   ■   Secure DMA The driver can instruct the device to perform DMA transfer directly in protected
       VTL 1 memory, which is not accessible to VTL 0. The secure companion can process the data
       sent or received through the DMA interface and can then transfer part of the data to the VTL 0
       driver through the standard KMDF communication interface (ALPC). The IumGetDmaEnabler
       and IumDmaMapMemory secure system calls, exposed through Iumbase.dll, allow the secure
       companion to map physical DMA memory ranges directly in VTL 1 user mode.

   ■   Memory mapped IO (MMIO) The secure companion can request the device to map its
       accessible MMIO range in VTL 1 (user mode). It can then access the memory-mapped device’s
       registers directly in IUM. MapSecureIo and the ProtectSecureIo APIs expose this feature.

   ■   Secure sections The companion can create (through the CreateSecureSection API) and map
       secure sections, which represent memory that can be shared between trustlets and the main
       driver running in VTL 0. Furthermore, the secure companion can specify a different type of SLAT
       protection in case the memory is accessed through the secure device (via DMA or MMIO).

   A secure companion can’t directly respond to device interrupts, which need to be mapped and
managed by the associated kernel mode driver in VTL 0. In the same way, the kernel mode driver still
needs to act as the high-level interface for the system and user mode applications by managing all the
received IOCTLs. The main driver communicates with its secure companion by sending WDF tasks using
the UMDF Task Queue object, which internally uses the ALPC facilities exposed by the WDF framework.

    A typical KMDF driver registers its companion via INF directives. WDF automatically starts the driver’s
companion in the context of the driver’s call to WdfDeviceCreate—which, for plug and play drivers usually
happens in the AddDevice callback— by sending an ALPC message to the UMDF driver manager service,
which spawns a new WUDFCompanionHost.exe trustlet by calling the NtCreateUserProcess native API.
The UMDF secure companion host then loads the secure companion DLL in its address space. Another
ALPC message is sent from the UMDF driver manager to the WUDFCompanionHost, with the goal to ac-
tually start the secure companion. The DriverEntry routine of the companion performs the driver’s secure
initialization and creates the WDFDRIVER object through the classic WdfDriverCreate API.

   The framework then calls the AddDevice callback routine of the companion in VTL 1, which usually
creates the companion’s device through the new WdfDeviceCompanionCreate UMDF API. The latter
transfers the execution to the Secure Kernel (through the IumCreateSecureDevice secure system call),
which creates the new secure device. From this point on, the secure companion has full ownership of its
managed device. Usually, the first thing that the companion does after the creation of the secure de-
vice is to create the task queue object (WDFTASKQUEUE) used to process any incoming tasks delivered
by its associated VTL 0 driver. The execution control returns to the kernel mode driver, which can now
send new tasks to its secure companion.

          This model is also supported by WDM drivers. WDM drivers can use the KMDF’s miniport mode to
      interact with a special filter driver, WdmCompanionFilter.sys, which is attached in a lower-level position
      of the device’s stack. The Wdm Companion filter allows WDM drivers to use the task queue object for
      sending tasks to the secure companion.

      VBS-based enclaves
      In Chapter 5 of Part 1, we discuss the Software Guard Extension (SGX), a hardware technology that allows
      the creation of protected memory enclaves, which are secure zones in a process address space where
      code and data are protected (encrypted) by the hardware from code running outside the enclave. The
      technology, which was first introduced in the sixth generation Intel Core processors (Skylake), has suf-
      fered from some problems that prevented its broad adoption. (Furthermore, AMD released another
      technology called Secure Encrypted Virtualization, which is not compatible with SGX.)

         To overcome these issues, Microsoft released VBS-based enclaves, which are secure enclaves whose
      isolation guarantees are provided using the VSM infrastructure. Code and data inside of a VBS-based
      enclave is visible only to the enclave itself (and the VSM Secure Kernel) and is inaccessible to the NT
      kernel, VTL 0 processes, and secure trustlets running in the system.

          A secure VBS-based enclave is created by establishing a single virtual address range within a normal
      process. Code and data are then loaded into the enclave, after which the enclave is entered for the first
      time by transferring control to its entry point via the Secure Kernel. The Secure Kernel first verifies that
      all code and data are authentic and are authorized to run inside the enclave by using image signature
      verification on the enclave image. If the signature checks pass, then the execution control is transferred
      to the enclave entry point, which has access to all of the enclave’s code and data. By default, the system
      only supports the execution of enclaves that are properly signed. This precludes the possibility that un-
      signed malware can execute on a system outside the view of anti-malware software, which is incapable
      of inspecting the contents of any enclave.

          During execution, control can transfer back and forth between the enclave and its containing pro-
      cess. Code executing inside of an enclave has access to all data within the virtual address range of the
      enclave. Furthermore, it has read and write access of the containing unsecure process address space. All
      memory within the enclave’s virtual address range will be inaccessible to the containing process. If mul-
      tiple enclaves exist within a single host process, each enclave will be able to access only its own memory
      and the memory that is accessible to the host process.

         As for hardware enclaves, when code is running in an enclave, it can obtain a sealed enclave report,
      which can be used by a third-party entity to validate that the code is running with the isolation guar-
      antees of a VBS enclave, and which can further be used to validate the specific version of code running.
      This report includes information about the host system, the enclave itself, and all DLLs that may have
      been loaded into the enclave, as well as information indicating whether the enclave is executing with
      debugging capabilities enabled.

   A VBS-based enclave is distributed as a DLL, which has certain specific characteristics:

   ■   It is signed with an authenticode signature, and the leaf certificate includes a valid EKU that per-
       mits the image to be run as an enclave. The root authority that has emitted the digital certificate
       should be Microsoft, or a third-party signing authority covered by a certificate manifest that’s
       countersigned by Microsoft. This implies that third-party companies could sign and run their own
       enclaves. Valid digital signature EKUs are the IUM EKU (1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.37) for internal Windows-
       signed enclaves or the Enclave EKU (1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.42) for all the third-party enclaves.

   ■   It includes an enclave configuration section (represented by an IMAGE_ENCLAVE_CONFIG data
       structure), which describes information about the enclave and which is linked to its image’s load
       configuration data directory.

   ■   It includes the correct Control Flow Guard (CFG) instrumentation.

   The enclave’s configuration section is important because it includes important information needed
to properly run and seal the enclave: the unique family ID and image ID, which are specified by the
enclave’s author and identify the enclave binary, the secure version number and the enclave’s policy
information (like the expected virtual size, the maximum number of threads that can run, and the
debuggability of the enclave). Furthermore, the enclave’s configuration section includes the list of
images that may be imported by the enclave, included with their identity information. An enclave’s
imported module can be identified by a combination of the family ID and image ID, or by a combina-
tion of the generated unique ID, which is calculated starting from the hash of the binary, and author ID,
which is derived from the certificate used to sign the enclave. (This value expresses the identity of who
has constructed the enclave.) The imported module descriptor must also include the minimum secure
version number.

    The Secure Kernel offers some basic system services to enclaves through the VBS enclave runtime
DLL, Vertdll.dll, which is mapped in the enclave address space. These services include: a limited subset
of the standard C runtime library, the ability to allocate or free secure memory within the address range
of the enclave, synchronization services, structured exception handling support, basic cryptographic
functions, and the ability to seal data.

   EXPERIMENT: Dumping the encla e configuration
   In this experiment, we use the Microsoft Incremental linker (link.exe) included in the Windows
   SDK and WDK to dump software enclave configuration data. Both packages are downloadable
   from the web. You can also use the EWDK, which contains all the necessary tools and does not
   require any installation. It’s available at https://docs.microsoft.com/ en-us/windows-hardware/
   drivers/download-the-wdk.

      Open the Visual Studio Developer Command Prompt through the Cortana search box or
   by executing the LaunchBuildEnv.cmd script file contained in the EWDK’s Iso image. We will
   analyze the configuration data of the System Guard Routine Attestation enclave—which is
   shown in Figure 9-40 and will be described later in this chapter—with the link.exe /dump
   /loadconfig command:

         The command’s output is large. So, in the example shown in the preceding figure, we have
      redirected it to the SgrmEnclave_secure_loadconfig.txt file. If you open the new output file, you
      see that the binary image contains a CFG table and includes a valid enclave configuration pointer,
      which targets the following data:
         Enclave Configuration

                      00000050 size
                      0000004C minimum required config size
                      00000000 policy flags
                      00000003 number of enclave import descriptors
                      0004FA04 RVA to enclave import descriptors
                      00000050 size of an enclave import descriptor
                      00000001 image version
                      00000001 security version
              0000000010000000 enclave size
                      00000008 number of threads
                      00000001 enclave flags

                       family ID : B1 35 7C 2B 69 9F 47 F9 BB C9 4F 44 F2 54 DB 9D
                        image ID : 24 56 46 36 CD 4A D8 86 A2 F4 EC 25 A9 72 02

            ucrtbase_enclave.dll

                         0 minimum security version
                         0 reserved

                          match type : image ID
                           family ID : 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
                            image ID : F0 3C CD A7 E8 7B 46 EB AA E7 1F 13 D5 CD DE 5D
                    unique/author ID : 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
                                       00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00

            bcrypt.dll

                      0 minimum security version
                      0 reserved

                       match type : image ID
                        family ID : 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
                         image ID : 20 27 BD 68 75 59 49 B7 BE 06 34 50 E2 16 D7 ED
                 unique/author ID : 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
                                    00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
          ...

       The configuration section contains the binary image’s enclave data (like the family ID, image
   ID, and security version number) and the import descriptor array, which communicates to the
   Secure Kernel from which library the main enclave’s binary can safely depend on. You can redo
   the experiment with the Vertdll.dll library and with all the binaries imported from the System
   Guard Routine Attestation enclave.

Enclave lifecycle
In Chapter 5 of Part 1, we discussed the lifecycle of a hardware enclave (SGX-based). The lifecycle of a
VBS-based enclave is similar; Microsoft has enhanced the already available enclave APIs to support the
new type of VBS-based enclaves.

Step 1: Creation An application creates a VBS-based enclave by specifying the ENCLAVE_TYPE_VBS
flag to the CreateEnclave API. The caller should specify an owner ID, which identifies the owner of
the enclave. The enclave creation code, in the same way as for hardware enclaves, ends up calling the
NtCreateEnclave in the kernel. The latter checks the parameters, copies the passed-in structures, and
attaches to the target process in case the enclave is to be created in a different process than the caller’s.
The MiCreateEnclave function allocates an enclave-type VAD describing the enclave virtual memory
range and selects a base virtual address if not specified by the caller. The kernel allocates the memory
manager’s VBS enclave data structure and the per-process enclave hash table, used for fast lookup of
the enclave starting by its number. If the enclave is the first created for the process, the system also cre-
ates an empty secure process (which acts as a container for the enclaves) in VTL 1 by using the CREATE
_PROCESS secure call (see the earlier section “Trustlets creation” for further details).

    The CREATE_ENCLAVE secure call handler in VTL 1 performs the actual work of the enclave creation:
it allocates the secure enclave key data structure (SKMI_ENCLAVE), sets the reference to the container
secure process (which has just been created by the NT kernel), and creates the secure VAD describ-
ing the entire enclave virtual address space (the secure VAD contains similar information to its VTL 0
counterpart). This VAD is inserted in the containing process’s VAD tree (and not in the enclave itself).
An empty virtual address space for the enclave is created in the same way as for its containing process:
the page table root is filled by system entries only.

        Step 2: Loading modules into the enclave Differently from hardware-based enclaves, the parent
        process can load only modules into the enclave but not arbitrary data. This will cause each page of the
        image to be copied into the address space in VTL 1. Each image’s page in the VTL 1 enclave will be a
        private copy. At least one module (which acts as the main enclave image) needs to be loaded into the
        enclave; otherwise, the enclave can’t be initialized. After the VBS enclave has been created, an applica-
        tion calls the LoadEnclaveImage API, specifying the enclave base address and the name of the module
        that must be loaded in the enclave. The Windows Loader code (in Ntdll.dll) searches the specified DLL
        name, opens and validates its binary file, and creates a section object that is mapped with read-only
        access right in the calling process.

            After the loader maps the section, it parses the image’s import address table with the goal to create
        a list of the dependent modules (imported, delay loaded, and forwarded). For each found module, the
        loader checks whether there is enough space in the enclave for mapping it and calculates the correct
        image base address. As shown in Figure 9-40, which represents the System Guard Runtime Attestation
        enclave, modules in the enclave are mapped using a top-down strategy. This means that the main
        image is mapped at the highest possible virtual address, and all the dependent ones are mapped in
        lower addresses one next to each other. At this stage, for each module, the Windows Loader calls the
        NtLoadEnclaveData kernel API.

                                                               0x026D'18200000 (Top of the Enclave)
                                SgrmEnclave_Secure.dll
                                                               0x026D'18194000
                                     ucrtbase_enclave.dll
                                                               0x026D'1811C000
                                          bcrypt.dll
                                                               0x026D'180FC000
                                          vertdll.dll
      Higher Addresses

                                                               0x026D'180C4000
                                     bcryptPrimitives.dll
                                                               0x026D'18043000
                                             Sp nd
                                        ee e a

                                                  e
                                               ac
                                      Fr vat
                                           i
                                        Pr

                                                               0x026D'08200000 (Enclave Base)

        FIGURE 9-40 The System Guard Runtime Attestation secure enclave (note the empty space at
        the base of the enclave).

   For loading the specified image in the VBS enclave, the kernel starts a complex process that al-
lows the shared pages of its section object to be copied in the private pages of the enclave in VTL 1.
The MiMapImageForEnclaveUse function gets the control area of the section object and validates it
through SKCI. If the validation fails, the process is interrupted, and an error is returned to the caller. (All
the enclave’s modules should be correctly signed as discussed previously.) Otherwise, the system at-
taches to the secure system process and maps the image’s section object in its address space in VTL 0.
The shared pages of the module at this time could be valid or invalid; see Chapter 5 of Part 1 for further
details. It then commits the virtual address space of the module in the containing process. This creates
private VTL 0 paging data structures for demand-zero PTEs, which will be later populated by the Secure
Kernel when the image is loaded in VTL 1.

   The LOAD_ENCLAVE_MODULE secure call handler in VTL 1 obtains the SECURE_IMAGE of the new
module (created by SKCI) and verifies whether the image is suitable for use in a VBS-based enclave (by
verifying the digital signature characteristics). It then attaches to the secure system process in VTL 1
and maps the secure image at the same virtual address previously mapped by the NT kernel. This al-
lows the sharing of the prototype PTEs from VTL 0. The Secure Kernel then creates the secure VAD that
describes the module and inserts it into the VTL 1 address space of the enclave. It finally cycles between
each module’s section prototype PTE. For each nonpresent prototype PTE, it attaches to the secure
system process and uses the GET_PHYSICAL_PAGE normal call to invoke the NT page fault handler
(MmAccessFault), which brings in memory the shared page. The Secure Kernel performs a similar
process for the private enclave pages, which have been previously committed by the NT kernel in VTL 0
by demand-zero PTEs. The NT page fault handler in this case allocates zeroed pages. The Secure Kernel
copies the content of each shared physical page into each new private page and applies the needed
private relocations if needed.

   The loading of the module in the VBS-based enclave is complete. The Secure Kernel applies the SLAT
protection to the private enclave pages (the NT kernel has no access to the image’s code and data in
the enclave), unmaps the shared section from the secure system process, and yields the execution to
the NT kernel. The Loader can now proceed with the next module.

Step 3: Enclave initialization After all the modules have been loaded into the enclave, an applica-
tion initializes the enclave using the InitializeEnclave API, and specifies the maximum number of threads
supported by the enclave (which will be bound to threads able to perform enclave calls in the contain-
ing process). The Secure Kernel’s INITIALIZE_ENCLAVE secure call’s handler verifies that the policies
specified during enclave creation are compatible with the policies expressed in the configuration infor-
mation of the primary image, verifies that the enclave’s platform library is loaded (Vertdll.dll), calculates
the final 256-bit hash of the enclave (used for generating the enclave sealed report), and creates all the
secure enclave threads. When the execution control is returned to the Windows Loader code in VTL 0,
the system performs the first enclave call, which executes the initialization code of the platform DLL.

Step 4: Enclave calls (inbound and outbound) After the enclave has been correctly initialized, an
application can make an arbitrary number of calls into the enclave. All the callable functions in the en-
clave need to be exported. An application can call the standard GetProcAddress API to get the address
of the enclave’s function and then use the CallEnclave routine for transferring the execution control to
the secure enclave. In this scenario, which describes an inbound call, the NtCallEnclave kernel routine

      performs the thread selection algorithm, which binds the calling VTL 0 thread to an enclave thread,
      according to the following rules:

         ■   If the normal thread was not previously called by the enclave (enclaves support nested calls),
             then an arbitrary idle enclave thread is selected for execution. In case no idle enclave threads
             are available, the call blocks until an enclave thread becomes available (if specified by the caller;
             otherwise the call simply fails).

         ■   In case the normal thread was previously called by the enclave, then the call into the enclave is
             made on the same enclave thread that issued the previous call to the host.

         A list of enclave thread’s descriptors is maintained by both the NT and Secure Kernel. When a
      normal thread is bound to an enclave thread, the enclave thread is inserted in another list, which is
      called the bound threads list. Enclave threads tracked by the latter are currently running and are not
      available anymore.

          After the thread selection algorithm succeeds, the NT kernel emits the CALLENCLAVE secure call.
      The Secure Kernel creates a new stack frame for the enclave and returns to user mode. The first user
      mode function executed in the context of the enclave is RtlEnclaveCallDispatcher. The latter, in case the
      enclave call was the first one ever emitted, transfers the execution to the initialization routine of the
      VSM enclave runtime DLL (Vertdll.dll), which initializes the CRT, the loader, and all the services provided
      to the enclave; it finally calls the DllMain function of the enclave’s main module and of all its dependent
      images (by specifying a DLL_PROCESS_ATTACH reason).

         In normal situations, where the enclave platform DLL has been already initialized, the enclave
      dispatcher invokes the DllMain of each module by specifying a DLL_THREAD_ATTACH reason, verifies
      whether the specified address of the target enclave’s function is valid, and, if so, finally calls the target
      function. When the target enclave’s routine finishes its execution, it returns to VTL 0 by calling back into
      the containing process. For doing this, it still relies on the enclave platform DLL, which again calls the
      NtCallEnclave kernel routine. Even though the latter is implemented slightly differently in the Secure
      Kernel, it adopts a similar strategy for returning to VTL 0. The enclave itself can emit enclave calls for
      executing some function in the context of the unsecure containing process. In this scenario (which
      describes an outbound call), the enclave code uses the CallEnclave routine and specifies the address of
      an exported function in the containing process’s main module.

      Step 5: Termination and destruction When termination of an entire enclave is requested through
      the TerminateEnclave API, all threads executing inside the enclave will be forced to return to VTL 0.
      Once termination of an enclave is requested, all further calls into the enclave will fail. As threads ter-
      minate, their VTL1 thread state (including thread stacks) is destroyed. Once all threads have stopped
      executing, the enclave can be destroyed. When the enclave is destroyed, all remaining VTL 1 state
      associated with the enclave is destroyed, too (including the entire enclave address space), and all pages
      are freed in VTL 0. Finally, the enclave VAD is deleted and all committed enclave memory is freed.
      Destruction is triggered when the containing process calls VirtualFree with the base of the enclave’s ad-
      dress range. Destruction is not possible unless the enclave has been terminated or was never initialized.

   Note As we have discussed previously, all the memory pages that are mapped into the
   enclave address space are private. This has multiple implications. No memory pages that
   belong to the VTL 0 containing process are mapped in the enclave address space, though
   (and also no VADs describing the containing process’s allocation is present). So how can the
   enclave access all the memory pages of the containing process?
   The answer is in the Secure Kernel page fault handler (SkmmAccessFault). In its code, the
   fault handler checks whether the faulting process is an enclave. If it is, the fault handler
   checks whether the fault happens because the enclave tried to execute some code out-
   side its region. In this case, it raises an access violation error. If the fault is due to a read
   or write access outside the enclave’s address space, the secure page fault handler emits a
   GET_PHYSICAL_PAGE normal service, which results in the VTL 0 access fault handler to be
   called. The VTL 0 handler checks the containing process VAD tree, obtains the PFN of the
   page from its PTE—by bringing it in memory if needed—and returns it to VTL 1. At this
   stage, the Secure Kernel can create the necessary paging structures to map the physical
   page at the same virtual address (which is guaranteed to be available thanks to the property
   of the enclave itself) and resumes the execution. The page is now valid in the context of the
   secure enclave.

Sealing and attestation
VBS-based enclaves, like hardware-based enclaves, support both the sealing and attestation of the
data. The term sealing refers to the encryption of arbitrary data using one or more encryption keys
that aren’t visible to the enclave’s code but are managed by the Secure Kernel and tied to the ma-
chine and to the enclave’s identity. Enclaves will never have access to those keys; instead, the Secure
Kernel offers services for sealing and unsealing arbitrary contents (through the EnclaveSealData and
EnclaveUnsealData APIs) using an appropriate key designated by the enclave. At the time the data is
sealed, a set of parameters is supplied that controls which enclaves are permitted to unseal the data.
The following policies are supported:

   ■   Security version number (SVN) of the Secure Kernel and of the primary image No en-
       clave can unseal any data that was sealed by a later version of the enclave or the Secure Kernel.

   ■   Exact code The data can be unsealed only by an enclave that maps the same identical mod-
       ules of the enclave that has sealed it. The Secure Kernel verifies the hash of the Unique ID of
       every image mapped in the enclave to allow a proper unsealing.

   ■   Same image, family, or author The data can be unsealed only by an enclave that has the
       same author ID, family ID, and/or image ID.

   ■   Runtime policy The data can be unsealed only if the unsealing enclave has the same debug-
       ging policy of the original one (debuggable versus nondebuggable).

         It is possible for every enclave to attest to any third party that it is running as a VBS enclave with all the
      protections offered by the VBS-enclave architecture. An enclave attestation report provides proof that
      a specific enclave is running under the control of the Secure Kernel. The attestation report contains the
      identity of all code loaded into the enclave as well as policies controlling how the enclave is executing.

         Describing the internal details of the sealing and attestation operations is outside the scope of this
      book. An enclave can generate an attestation report through the EnclaveGetAttestationReport API. The
      memory buffer returned by the API can be transmitted to another enclave, which can “attest” the in-
      tegrity of the environment in which the original enclave ran by verifying the attestation report through
      the EnclaveVerifyAttestationReport function.

      System Guard runtime attestation
      System Guard runtime attestation (SGRA) is an operating system integrity component that leverages
      the aforementioned VBS-enclaves—together with a remote attestation service component—to pro-
      vide strong guarantees around its execution environment. This environment is used to assert sensitive
      system properties at runtime and allows for a relying party to observe violations of security promises
      that the system provides. The first implementation of this new technology was introduced in Windows
      10 April 2018 Update (RS4).

        SGRA allows an application to view a statement about the security posture of the device. This state-
      ment is composed of three parts:

         ■    A session report, which includes a security level describing the attestable boot-time properties
              of the device

         ■    A runtime report, which describes the runtime state of the device

         ■    A signed session certificate, which can be used to verify the reports

          The SGRA service, SgrmBroker.exe, hosts a component (SgrmEnclave_secure.dll) that runs in a VTL
      1 as a VBS enclave that continually asserts the system for runtime violations of security features. These
      assertions are surfaced in the runtime report, which can be verified on the backend by a relying part. As
      the assertions run in a separate domain-of-trust, attacking the contents of the runtime report directly
      becomes difficult.

      SGRA internals
      Figure 9-41 shows a high-level overview of the architecture of Windows Defender System Guard run-
      time attestation, which consists of the following client-side components:

         ■    The VTL-1 assertion engine: SgrmEnclave_secure.dll

         ■    A VTL-0 kernel mode agent: SgrmAgent.sys

         ■    A VTL-0 WinTCB Protected broker process hosting the assertion engine: SgrmBroker.exe

         ■    A VTL-0 LPAC process used by the WinTCBPP broker process to interact with the networking
              stack: SgrmLpac.exe

               Windows
               Defender
 Attestation   ATP cloud
   service

               Windows     Windows
                                      Critical   Third party
               Defender    Defender
                                      Services    software
                 ATP          AV

                Windows Defender System Guard API

                                                                      Windows Defender System Guard
                  Windows Defender System Guard
                                                                         runtime monitor enclave
                      runtime monitor broker
                                                                            (Assertion engine)

                  Windows Defender System Guard
                      runtime monitor agent

                                                      VTL0     VTL1

FIGURE 9-41 Windows Defender System Guard runtime attestation’s architecture.

   To be able to rapidly respond to threats, SGRA includes a dynamic scripting engine (Lua) forming
the core of the assertion mechanism that executes in a VTL 1 enclave—an approach that allows fre-
quent assertion logic updates.

   Due to the isolation provided by the VBS enclave, threads executing in VTL 1 are limited in terms of
their ability to access VTL 0 NT APIs. Therefore, for the runtime component of SGRA to perform mean-
ingful work, a way of working around the limited VBS enclave API surface is necessary.

   An agent-based approach is implemented to expose VTL 0 facilities to the logic running in VTL 1;
these facilities are termed assists and are serviced by the SgrmBroker user mode component or by an
agent driver running in VTL 0 kernel mode (SgrmAgent.sys). The VTL 1 logic running in the enclave can
call out to these VTL 0 components with the goal of requesting assists that provide a range of facilities,
including NT kernel synchronize primitives, page mapping capabilities, and so on.

   As an example of how this mechanism works, SGRA is capable of allowing the VTL 1 assertion
engine to directly read VTL 0–owned physical pages. The enclave requests a mapping of an arbitrary
page via an assist. The page would then be locked and mapped into the SgrmBroker VTL 0 address
space (making it resident). As VBS enclaves have direct access to the host process address space, the
secure logic can read directly from the mapped virtual addresses. These reads must be synchronized
with the VTL 0 kernel itself. The VTL 0 resident broker agent (SgrmAgent.sys driver) is also used to
perform synchronization.

Assertion logic
As mentioned earlier, SGRA asserts system security properties at runtime. These assertions are execut-
ed within the assertion engine hosted in the VBS-based enclave. Signed Lua bytecode describing the
assertion logic is provided to the assertion engine during start up.

         Assertions are run periodically. When a violation of an asserted property is discovered (that is, when
      the assertion “fails”), the failure is recorded and stored within the enclave. This failure will be exposed
      to a relying party in the runtime report that is generated and signed (with the session certificate) within
      the enclave.

         An example of the assertion capabilities provided by SGRA are the asserts surrounding various ex-
      ecutive process object attributes—for example, the periodic enumeration of running processes and the
      assertion of the state of a process’s protection bits that govern protected process policies.

         The flow for the assertion engine performing this check can be approximated to the following steps:

         1.   The assertion engine running within VTL 1 calls into its VTL 0 host process (SgrmBroker) to
              request that an executive process object be referenced by the kernel.

         2.   The broker process forwards this request to the kernel mode agent (SgrmAgent), which services
              the request by obtaining a reference to the requested executive process object.

         3.   The agent notifies the broker that the request has been serviced and passes any necessary
              metadata down to the broker.

         4.   The broker forwards this response to the requesting VTL 1 assertion logic.

         5.   The logic can then elect to have the physical page backing the referenced executive process
              object locked and mapped into its accessible address space; this is done by calling out of the
              enclave using a similar flow as steps 1 through 4.

         6.   Once the page is mapped, the VTL 1 engine can read it directly and check the executive process
              object protection bit against its internally held context.

         7.   The VTL 1 logic again calls out to VTL 0 to unwind the page mapping and kernel object reference.

      Reports and trust establishment
      A WinRT-based API is exposed to allow relying parties to obtain the SGRA session certificate and the
      signed session and runtime reports. This API is not public and is available under NDA to vendors that
      are part of the Microsoft Virus Initiative (note that Microsoft Defender Advanced Threat Protection is
      currently the only in-box component that interfaces directly with SGRA via this API).

         The flow for obtaining a trusted statement from SGRA is as follows:

         1.   A session is created between the relying party and SGRA. Establishment of the session requires
              a network connection. The SgrmEnclave assertion engine (running in VTL-1) generates a public-
              private key pair, and the SgrmBroker protected process retrieves the TCG log and the VBS at-
              testation report, sending them to Microsoft’s System Guard attestation service with the public
              component of the key generated in the previous step.

         2.   The attestation service verifies the TCG log (from the TPM) and the VBS attestation report (as
              proof that the logic is running within a VBS enclave) and generates a session report describing
              the attested boot time properties of the device. It signs the public key with an SGRA attestation
              service intermediate key to create a certificate that will be used to verify runtime reports.

   3.   The session report and the certificate are returned to the relying party. From this point, the
        relying party can verify the validity of the session report and runtime certificate.

   4.   Periodically, the relying party can request a runtime report from SGRA using the established
        session: the SgrmEnclave assertion engine generates a runtime report describing the state of
        the assertions that have been run. The report will be signed using the paired private key gener-
        ated during session creation and returned to the relying party (the private key never leaves
        the enclave).

   5.   The relying party can verify the validity of the runtime report against the runtime certificate
        obtained earlier and make a policy decision based on both the contents of the session report
        (boot-time attested state) and the runtime report (asserted state).

    SGRA provides some API that relying parties can use to attest to the state of the device at a point
in time. The API returns a runtime report that details the claims that Windows Defender System Guard
runtime attestation makes about the security posture of the system. These claims include assertions,
which are runtime measurements of sensitive system properties. For example, an app could ask
Windows Defender System Guard to measure the security of the system from the hardware-backed
enclave and return a report. The details in this report can be used by the app to decide whether it
performs a sensitive financial transaction or displays personal information.

   As discussed in the previous section, a VBS-based enclave can also expose an enclave attestation
report signed by a VBS-specific signing key. If Windows Defender System Guard can obtain proof that
the host system is running with VSM active, it can use this proof with a signed session report to ensure
that the particular enclave is running. Establishing the trust necessary to guarantee that the runtime
report is authentic, therefore, requires the following:

   1.   Attesting to the boot state of the machine; the OS, hypervisor, and Secure Kernel (SK) binaries
        must be signed by Microsoft and configured according to a secure policy.

   2.   Binding trust between the TPM and the health of the hypervisor to allow trust in the Measured
        Boot Log.

   3.   Extracting the needed key (VSM IDKs) from the Measured Boot Log and using these to verify
        the VBS enclave signature (see Chapter 12 for further details).

   4.   Signing of the public component of an ephemeral key-pair generated within the enclave with
        a trusted Certificate Authority to issue a session certificate.

   5.   Signing of the runtime report with the ephemeral private key.

   Networking calls between the enclave and the Windows Defender System Guard attestation service
are made from VTL 0. However, the design of the attestation protocol ensures that it is resilient against
tampering even over untrusted transport mechanisms.

   Numerous underlying technologies are required before the chain of trust described earlier can be
sufficiently established. To inform a relying party of the level of trust in the runtime report that they can
expect on any particular configuration, a security level is assigned to each Windows Defender System
Guard attestation service-signed session report. The security level reflects the underlying technologies

      enabled on the platform and attributes a level of trust based on the capabilities of the platform.
      Microsoft is mapping the enablement of various security technologies to security levels and will share
      this when the API is published for third-party use. The highest level of trust is likely to require the fol-
      lowing features, at the very least:

         ■   VBS-capable hardware and OEM configuration.

         ■   Dynamic root-of-trust measurements at boot.

         ■   Secure boot to verify hypervisor, NT, and SK images.

         ■   Secure policy ensuring Hypervisor Enforced Code Integrity (HVCI) and kernel mode code integ-
             rity (KMCI), test-signing is disabled, and kernel debugging is disabled.

         ■   The ELAM driver is present.

Conclusion
      Windows is able to manage and run multiple virtual machines thanks to the Hyper-V hypervisor and
      its virtualization stack, which, combined together, support different operating systems running in a
      VM. Over the years, the two components have evolved to provide more optimizations and advanced
      features for the VMs, like nested virtualization, multiple schedulers for the virtual processors, different
      types of virtual hardware support, VMBus, VA-backed VMs, and so on.

          Virtualization-based security provides to the root operating system a new level of protection
      against malware and stealthy rootkits, which are no longer able to steal private and confidential infor-
      mation from the root operating system’s memory. The Secure Kernel uses the services supplied by the
      Windows hypervisor to create a new execution environment (VTL 1) that is protected and not acces-
      sible to the software running in the main OS. Furthermore, the Secure Kernel delivers multiple services
      to the Windows ecosystem that help to maintain a more secure environment.

          The Secure Kernel also defines the Isolated User Mode, allowing user mode code to be executed
      in the new protected environment through trustlets, secure devices, and enclaves. The chapter ended
      with the analysis of System Guard Runtime Attestation, a component that uses the services exposed by
      the Secure Kernel to measure the workstation’s execution environment and to provide strong guaran-
      tees about its integrity.

         In the next chapter, we look at the management and diagnostics components of Windows and
      discuss important mechanisms involved with their infrastructure: the registry, services, Task scheduler,
      Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI), kernel Event Tracing, and so on.

