CHAPTER 10

Management, diagnostics,
and tracing

   T   his chapter describes fundamental mechanisms in the Microsoft Windows operating system that
       are critical to its management and configuration. In particular, we describe the Windows registry,
   services, the Unified Background process manager, and Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI).
   The chapter also presents some fundamental components used for diagnosis and tracing purposes like
   Event Tracing for Windows (ETW), Windows Notification Facility (WNF), and Windows Error Reporting
   (WER). A discussion on the Windows Global flags and a brief introduction on the kernel and User Shim
   Engine conclude the chapter.

The registry
   The registry plays a key role in the configuration and control of Windows systems. It is the repository
   for both systemwide and per-user settings. Although most people think of the registry as static data
   stored on the hard disk, as you’ll see in this section, the registry is also a window into various in-
   memory structures maintained by the Windows executive and kernel.

      We’re starting by providing you with an overview of the registry structure, a discussion of the data
   types it supports, and a brief tour of the key information Windows maintains in the registry. Then we
   look inside the internals of the configuration manager, the executive component responsible for imple-
   menting the registry database. Among the topics we cover are the internal on-disk structure of the
   registry, how Windows retrieves configuration information when an application requests it, and what
   measures are employed to protect this critical system database.

   Viewing and changing the registry
   In general, you should never have to edit the registry directly. Application and system settings stored in
   the registry that require changes should have a corresponding user interface to control their modifi-
   cation. However, as we mention several times in this book, some advanced and debug settings have
   no editing user interface. Therefore, both graphical user interface (GUI) and command-line tools are
   included with Windows to enable you to view and modify the registry.

     Windows comes with one main GUI tool for editing the registry—Regedit.exe—and several
   command-line registry tools. Reg.exe, for instance, has the ability to import, export, back up, and

      restore keys, as well as to compare, modify, and delete keys and values. It can also set or query flags
      used in UAC virtualization. Regini.exe, on the other hand, allows you to import registry data based on
      text files that contain ASCII or Unicode configuration data.

          The Windows Driver Kit (WDK) also supplies a redistributable component, Offregs.dll, which hosts
      the Offline Registry Library. This library allows loading registry hive files (covered in the “Hives” section
      later in the chapter) in their binary format and applying operations on the files themselves, bypassing
      the usual logical loading and mapping that Windows requires for registry operations. Its use is primari-
      ly to assist in offline registry access, such as for purposes of integrity checking and validation. It can also
      provide performance benefits if the underlying data is not meant to be visible by the system because
      the access is done through local file I/O instead of registry system calls.

      Registry usage
      There are four principal times at which configuration data is read:

         ■   During the initial boot process, the boot loader reads configuration data and the list of boot de-
             vice drivers to load into memory before initializing the kernel. Because the Boot Configuration
             Database (BCD) is really stored in a registry hive, one could argue that registry access happens
             even earlier, when the Boot Manager displays the list of operating systems.

         ■   During the kernel boot process, the kernel reads settings that specify which device drivers to
             load and how various system elements—such as the memory manager and process manager—
             configure themselves and tune system behavior.

         ■   During logon, Explorer and other Windows components read per-user preferences from the
             registry, including network drive-letter mappings, desktop wallpaper, screen saver, menu be-
             havior, icon placement, and, perhaps most importantly, which startup programs to launch and
             which files were most recently accessed.

         ■   During their startup, applications read systemwide settings, such as a list of optionally installed
             components and licensing data, as well as per-user settings that might include menu and tool-
             bar placement and a list of most-recently accessed documents.

          However, the registry can be read at other times as well, such as in response to a modification of a
      registry value or key. Although the registry provides asynchronous callbacks that are the preferred way
      to receive change notifications, some applications constantly monitor their configuration settings in the
      registry through polling and automatically take updated settings into account. In general, however, on
      an idle system there should be no registry activity and such applications violate best practices. (Process
      Monitor, from Sysinternals, is a great tool for tracking down such activity and the applications at fault.)

         The registry is commonly modified in the following cases:

         ■   Although not a modification, the registry’s initial structure and many default settings are
             defined by a prototype version of the registry that ships on the Windows setup media that is
             copied onto a new installation.

   ■     Application setup utilities create default application settings and settings that reflect installa-
         tion configuration choices.

   ■     During the installation of a device driver, the Plug and Play system creates settings in the reg-
         istry that tell the I/O manager how to start the driver and creates other settings that configure
         the driver’s operation. (See Chapter 6, “I/O system,” in Part 1 for more information on how
         device drivers are installed.)

   ■     When you change application or system settings through user interfaces, the changes are often
         stored in the registry.

Registry data types
The registry is a database whose structure is similar to that of a disk volume. The registry contains keys,
which are similar to a disk’s directories, and values, which are comparable to files on a disk. A key is a
container that can consist of other keys (subkeys) or values. Values, on the other hand, store data. Top-
level keys are root keys. Throughout this section, we’ll use the words subkey and key interchangeably.

   Both keys and values borrow their naming convention from the file system. Thus, you can uniquely
identify a value with the name mark, which is stored in a key called trade, with the name trade\mark.
One exception to this naming scheme is each key’s unnamed value. Regedit displays the unnamed
value as (Default).

    Values store different kinds of data and can be one of the 12 types listed in Table 10-1. The majority
of registry values are REG_DWORD, REG_BINARY, or REG_SZ. Values of type REG_DWORD can store
numbers or Booleans (true/false values); REG_BINARY values can store numbers larger than 32 bits or
raw data such as encrypted passwords; REG_SZ values store strings (Unicode, of course) that can repre-
sent elements such as names, file names, paths, and types.

TABLE 10-1 Registry value types

Value Type                             Description

REG_NONE                               No value type

REG_SZ                                 Fixed-length Unicode string

REG_EXPAND_SZ                          Variable-length Unicode string that can have embedded environment variables

REG_BINARY                             Arbitrary-length binary data

REG_DWORD                              32-bit number

REG_DWORD_BIG_ENDIAN                   32-bit number, with high byte first

REG_LINK                               Unicode symbolic link

REG_MULTI_SZ                           Array of Unicode NULL-terminated strings

REG_RESOURCE_LIST                      Hardware resource description

REG_FULL_RESOURCE_DESCRIPTOR           Hardware resource description

REG_RESOURCE_REQUIREMENTS_LIST         Resource requirements

REG_QWORD                              64-bit number

          The REG_LINK type is particularly interesting because it lets a key transparently point to another
      key. When you traverse the registry through a link, the path searching continues at the target of the
      link. For example, if \Root1\Link has a REG_LINK value of \Root2\RegKey and RegKey contains the value
      RegValue, two paths identify RegValue: \Root1\Link\RegValue and \Root2\RegKey\RegValue. As ex-
      plained in the next section, Windows prominently uses registry links: three of the six registry root keys
      are just links to subkeys within the three nonlink root keys.

      Registry logical structure
      You can chart the organization of the registry via the data stored within it. There are nine root keys
      (and you can’t add new root keys or delete existing ones) that store information, as shown in Table 10-2.

      TABLE 10-2 The nine root keys

      Root Key                              Description

      HKEY_CURRENT_USER                     Stores data associated with the currently logged-on user

      HKEY_CURRENT_USER_LOCAL_SETTINGS      Stores data associated with the currently logged-on user that are local to the
                                            machine and are excluded from a roaming user profile

      HKEY_USERS                            Stores information about all the accounts on the machine

      HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT                     Stores file association and Component Object Model (COM) object registra-
                                            tion information

      HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE                    Stores system-related information

      HKEY_PERFORMANCE_DATA                 Stores performance information

      HKEY_PERFORMANCE_NLSTEXT              Stores text strings that describe performance counters in the local language
                                            of the area in which the computer system is running

      HKEY_PERFORMANCE_TEXT                 Stores text strings that describe performance counters in US English.

      HKEY_CURRENT_CONFIG                   Stores some information about the current hardware profile (deprecated)

         Why do root-key names begin with an H? Because the root-key names represent Windows handles
      (H) to keys (KEY). As mentioned in Chapter 1, “Concepts and tools” of Part 1, HKLM is an abbreviation
      used for HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE. Table 10-3 lists all the root keys and their abbreviations. The follow-
      ing sections explain in detail the contents and purpose of each of these root keys.

      TABLE 10-3 Registry root keys

      Root Key                               Abbreviation    Description                    Link

      HKEY_CURRENT_USER                      HKCU            Points to the user profile     Subkey under HKEY_USERS
                                                             of the currently logged-on     corresponding to currently
                                                             user                           logged-on user

      HKEY_CURRENT_USER_LOCAL_SETTINGS       HKCULS          Points to the local settings   Link to HKCU\Software\
                                                             of the currently logged-on     Classes\Local Settings
                                                             user

      HKEY_USERS                             HKU             Contains subkeys for all       Not a link
                                                             loaded user profiles

Root Key                                Abbreviation      Description                    Link

HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT                       HKCR              Contains file association and Not a direct link, but rather
                                                          COM registration information a merged view of HKLM\
                                                                                        SOFTWARE\Classes and
                                                                                        HKEY_USERS\<SID>\
                                                                                        SOFTWARE\Classes

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE                      HKLM              Global settings for the        Not a link
                                                          machine

HKEY_CURRENT_CONFIG                     HKCC              Current hardware profile       HKLM\SYSTEM\
                                                                                         CurrentControlSet\
                                                                                         Hardware Profiles\Current

HKEY_PERFORMANCE_DATA                   HKPD              Performance counters           Not a link

HKEY_PERFORMANCE_NLSTEXT                HKPNT             Performance counters           Not a link
                                                          text strings

HKEY_PERFORMANCE_TEXT                   HKPT              Performance counters text      Not a link
                                                          strings in US English

HKEY_CURRENT_USER
The HKCU root key contains data regarding the preferences and software configuration of the locally
logged-on user. It points to the currently logged-on user’s user profile, located on the hard disk at
\Users\<username>\Ntuser.dat. (See the section “Registry internals” later in this chapter to find out how
root keys are mapped to files on the hard disk.) Whenever a user profile is loaded (such as at logon time
or when a service process runs under the context of a specific username), HKCU is created to map to
the user’s key under HKEY_USERS (so if multiple users are logged on in the system, each user would see
a different HKCU). Table 10-4 lists some of the subkeys under HKCU.

TABLE 10-4 HKEY_CURRENT_USER subkeys

Subkey                      Description

AppEvents                   Sound/event associations

Console                     Command window settings (for example, width, height, and colors)

Control Panel               Screen saver, desktop scheme, keyboard, and mouse settings, as well as accessibility and
                            regional settings

Environment                 Environment variable definitions

EUDC                        Information on end-user defined characters

Keyboard Layout             Keyboard layout setting (for example, United States or United Kingdom)

Network                     Network drive mappings and settings

Printers                    Printer connection settings

Software                    User-specific software preferences

Volatile Environment        Volatile environment variable definitions

      HKEY_USERS
      HKU contains a subkey for each loaded user profile and user class registration database on the system. It
      also contains a subkey named HKU\.DEFAULT that is linked to the profile for the system (which is used by
      processes running under the local system account and is described in more detail in the section “Services”
      later in this chapter). This is the profile used by Winlogon, for example, so that changes to the desktop
      background settings in that profile will be implemented on the logon screen. When a user logs on to a
      system for the first time and her account does not depend on a roaming domain profile (that is, the user’s
      profile is obtained from a central network location at the direction of a domain controller), the system
      creates a profile for her account based on the profile stored in %SystemDrive%\Users\Default.

          The location under which the system stores profiles is defined by the registry value HKLM\
      Software\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\ProfileList\ProfilesDirectory, which is by default
      set to %SystemDrive%\Users. The ProfileList key also stores the list of profiles present on a system.
      Information for each profile resides under a subkey that has a name reflecting the security identifier
      (SID) of the account to which the profile corresponds. (See Chapter 7, “Security,” of Part 1 for more
      information on SIDs.) Data stored in a profile’s key includes the time of the last load of the profile in the
      LocalProfileLoadTimeLow value, the binary representation of the account SID in the Sid value, and the
      path to the profile’s on-disk hive (Ntuser.dat file, described later in this chapter in the “Hives” section)
      in the directory given by the ProfileImagePath value. Windows shows profiles stored on a system in the
      User Profiles management dialog box, shown in Figure 10-1, which you access by clicking Configure
      Advanced User Profile Properties in the User Accounts Control Panel applet.

      FIGURE 10-1 The User Profiles management dialog box.

   EXPERIMENT: Watching profile loading and unloading
   You can see a profile load into the registry and then unload by using the Runas command to
   launch a process in an account that’s not currently logged on to the machine. While the new
   process is running, run Regedit and note the loaded profile key under HKEY_USERS. After termi-
   nating the process, perform a refresh in Regedit by pressing the F5 key, and the profile should no
   longer be present.

HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT
HKCR consists of three types of information: file extension associations, COM class registrations, and
the virtualized registry root for User Account Control (UAC). (See Chapter 7 of Part 1 for more informa-
tion on UAC.) A key exists for every registered file name extension. Most keys contain a REG_SZ value
that points to another key in HKCR containing the association information for the class of files that
extension represents.

    For example, HKCR\.xls would point to information on Microsoft Office Excel files. For example,
the default value contains “Excel.Sheet.8” that is used to instantiate the Excel COM object. Other keys
contain configuration details for all COM objects registered on the system. The UAC virtualized registry
is located in the VirtualStore key, which is not related to the other kinds of data stored in HKCR.

   The data under HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT comes from two sources:

   ■   The per-user class registration data in HKCU\SOFTWARE\Classes (mapped to the file on hard
       disk \Users\<username>\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Usrclass.dat)

   ■   Systemwide class registration data in HKLM\SOFTWARE\Classes

         There is a separation of per-user registration data from systemwide registration data so that roam-
      ing profiles can contain customizations. Nonprivileged users and applications can read systemwide
      data and can add new keys and values to systemwide data (which are mirrored in their per-user data),
      but they can only modify existing keys and values in their private data. It also closes a security hole:
      a nonprivileged user cannot change or delete keys in the systemwide version HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT;
      thus, it cannot affect the operation of applications on the system.

      HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE
      HKLM is the root key that contains all the systemwide configuration subkeys: BCD00000000, COMPONENTS
      (loaded dynamically as needed), HARDWARE, SAM, SECURITY, SOFTWARE, and SYSTEM.

         The HKLM\BCD00000000 subkey contains the Boot Configuration Database (BCD) information
      loaded as a registry hive. This database replaces the Boot.ini file that was used before Windows Vista
      and adds greater flexibility and isolation of per-installation boot configuration data. The BCD00000000
      subkey is backed by the hidden BCD file, which, on UEFI systems, is located in \EFI\Microsoft\Boot. (For
      more information on the BCD, see Chapter 12, "Startup and shutdown”).

          Each entry in the BCD, such as a Windows installation or the command-line settings for the instal-
      lation, is stored in the Objects subkey, either as an object referenced by a GUID (in the case of a boot
      entry) or as a numeric subkey called an element. Most of these raw elements are documented in the
      BCD reference in Microsoft Docs and define various command-line settings or boot parameters. The
      value associated with each element subkey corresponds to the value for its respective command-line
      flag or boot parameter.

         The BCDEdit command-line utility allows you to modify the BCD using symbolic names for the ele-
      ments and objects. It also provides extensive help for all the boot options available. A registry hive can
      be opened remotely as well as imported from a hive file: you can modify or read the BCD of a remote
      computer by using the Registry Editor. The following experiment shows you how to enable kernel de-
      bugging by using the Registry Editor.

         EXPERIMENT: Remote BCD editing
         Although you can modify offline BCD stores by using the bcdedit /store command, in this
         experiment you will enable debugging through editing the BCD store inside the registry. For the
         purposes of this example, you edit the local copy of the BCD, but the point of this technique is
         that it can be used on any machine’s BCD hive. Follow these steps to add the /DEBUG command-
         line flag:

             1.   Open the Registry Editor and then navigate to the HKLM\BCD00000000 key. Expand
                  every subkey so that the numerical identifiers of each Elements key are fully visible.

    2.   Identify the boot entry for your Windows installation by locating the Description with
         a Type value of 0x10200003, and then select the 12000004 key in the Elements tree. In
         the Element value of that subkey, you should find the name of your version of Windows,
         such as Windows 10. In recent systems, you may have more than one Windows installa-
         tion or various boot applications, like the Windows Recovery Environment or Windows
         Resume Application. In those cases, you may need to check the 22000002 Elements
         subkey, which contains the path, such as \Windows.

    3.   Now that you’ve found the correct GUID for your Windows installation, create a new
         subkey under the Elements subkey for that GUID and name it 0x260000a0. If this subkey
         already exists, simply navigate to it. The found GUID should correspond to the identifi-
         er value under the Windows Boot Loader section shown by the bcdedit /v command
         (you can use the /store command-line option to inspect an offline store file).

    4.   If you had to create the subkey, now create a binary value called Element inside it.

    5.   Edit the value and set it to 1. This will enable kernel-mode debugging. Here’s what these
         changes should look like:

Note The 0x12000004 ID corresponds to BcdLibraryString_ApplicationPath, whereas the
0x22000002 ID corresponds to BcdOSLoaderString_SystemRoot. Finally, the ID you added,
0x260000a0, corresponds to BcdOSLoaderBoolean_KernelDebuggerEnabled. These values
are documented in the BCD reference in Microsoft Docs.

          The HKLM\COMPONENTS subkey contains information pertinent to the Component Based
      Servicing (CBS) stack. This stack contains various files and resources that are part of a Windows installa-
      tion image (used by the Automated Installation Kit or the OEM Preinstallation Kit) or an active instal-
      lation. The CBS APIs that exist for servicing purposes use the information located in this key to identify
      installed components and their configuration information. This information is used whenever compo-
      nents are installed, updated, or removed either individually (called units) or in groups (called packages).
      To optimize system resources, because this key can get quite large, it is only dynamically loaded and
      unloaded as needed if the CBS stack is servicing a request. This key is backed by the COMPONENTS
      hive file located in \Windows\system32\config.

          The HKLM\HARDWARE subkey maintains descriptions of the system’s legacy hardware and some
      hardware device-to-driver mappings. On a modern system, only a few peripherals—such as keyboard,
      mouse, and ACPI BIOS data—are likely to be found here. The Device Manager tool lets you view regis-
      try hardware information that it obtains by simply reading values out of the HARDWARE key (although
      it primarily uses the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Enum tree).

         HKLM\SAM holds local account and group information, such as user passwords, group definitions,
      and domain associations. Windows Server systems operating as domain controllers store domain ac-
      counts and groups in Active Directory, a database that stores domainwide settings and information.
      (Active Directory isn’t described in this book.) By default, the security descriptor on the SAM key is
      configured so that even the administrator account doesn’t have access.

          HKLM\SECURITY stores systemwide security policies and user-rights assignments. HKLM\SAM is
      linked into the SECURITY subkey under HKLM\SECURITY\SAM. By default, you can’t view the contents
      of HKLM\SECURITY or HKLM\SAM because the security settings of those keys allow access only by the
      System account. (System accounts are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter.) You can change
      the security descriptor to allow read access to administrators, or you can use PsExec to run Regedit in the
      local system account if you want to peer inside. However, that glimpse won’t be very revealing because
      the data is undocumented and the passwords are encrypted with one-way mapping—that is, you can’t
      determine a password from its encrypted form. The SAM and SECURITY subkeys are backed by the SAM
      and SECURITY hive files located in the \Windows\system32\config path of the boot partition.

        HKLM\SOFTWARE is where Windows stores systemwide configuration information not needed to
      boot the system. Also, third-party applications store their systemwide settings here, such as paths to
      application files and directories and licensing and expiration date information.

          HKLM\SYSTEM contains the systemwide configuration information needed to boot the system,
      such as which device drivers to load and which services to start. The key is backed by the SYSTEM hive
      file located in \Windows\system32\config. The Windows Loader uses registry services provided by the
      Boot Library for being able to read and navigate through the SYSTEM hive.

      HKEY_CURRENT_CONFIG
      HKEY_CURRENT_CONFIG is just a link to the current hardware profile, stored under HKLM\SYSTEM\
      CurrentControlSet\Hardware Profiles\Current. Hardware profiles are no longer supported in Windows,
      but the key still exists to support legacy applications that might depend on its presence.

HKEY_PERFORMANCE_DATA and HKEY_PERFORMANCE_TEXT
The registry is the mechanism used to access performance counter values on Windows, whether those
are from operating system components or server applications. One of the side benefits of providing
access to the performance counters via the registry is that remote performance monitoring works “for
free” because the registry is easily accessible remotely through the normal registry APIs.

   You can access the registry performance counter information directly by opening a special key
named HKEY_PERFORMANCE_DATA and querying values beneath it. You won’t find this key by look-
ing in the Registry Editor; this key is available only programmatically through the Windows registry
functions, such as RegQueryValueEx. Performance information isn’t actually stored in the registry; the
registry functions redirect access under this key to live performance information obtained from perfor-
mance data providers.

   The HKEY_PERFORMANCE_TEXT is another special key used to obtain performance counter
information (usually name and description). You can obtain the name of any performance counter by
querying data from the special Counter registry value. The Help special registry value yields all the
counters description instead. The information returned by the special key are in US English. The HKEY_
PERFORMANCE_NLSTEXT retrieves performance counters names and descriptions in the language in
which the OS runs.

   You can also access performance counter information by using the Performance Data Helper (PDH)
functions available through the Performance Data Helper API (Pdh.dll). Figure 10-2 shows the compo-
nents involved in accessing performance counter information.

Performance
monitoring           Custom                   Custom                    Performance
                   application A            application B                   tool
applications

                                                Pdh.dll
                         RegQueryValueEx             Windows Management Instrumentation
Programming
                                                     High-performance provider interface
interfaces
                  Advapi32.dll        PerfLib        Registry DLL provider

                     System                 Performance                     High-
                       System                 Performance                      High-
                                                                                 High-
                                                                         performance
                  performance
                         System              extension
                                                 Performance
                    performance                 extension                  performance
                                                                         data performance
                                                                              provider
                      DLL
                      performance                DLL
                                                  extension                data provider
                         DLL                       DLL                       data
                                                                            objectprovider
                           DLL                       DLL                       object
                                                                                 object

FIGURE 10-2 Registry performance counter architecture.

  As shown in Figure 10-2, this registry key is abstracted by the Performance Library (Perflib),
which is statically linked in Advapi32.dll. The Windows kernel has no knowledge about the
HKEY_PERFORMANCE_DATA registry key, which explains why it is not shown in the Registry Editor.

      Application hives
      Applications are normally able to read and write data from the global registry. When an application
      opens a registry key, the Windows kernel performs an access check verification against the access token
      of its process (or thread in case the thread is impersonating; see Chapter 7 in Part 1 for more details)
      and the ACL that a particular key contains. An application is also able to load and save registry hives by
      using the RegSaveKeyEx and RegLoadKeyEx APIs. In those scenarios, the application operates on data
      that other processes running at a higher or same privilege level can interfere with. Furthermore, for
      loading and saving hives, the application needs to enable the Backup and Restore privileges. The two
      privileges are granted only to processes that run with an administrative account.

         Clearly this was a limitation for most applications that want to access a private repository for storing
      their own settings. Windows 7 has introduced the concept of application hives. An application hive is a
      standard hive file (which is linked to the proper log files) that can be mounted visible only to the appli-
      cation that requested it. A developer can create a base hive file by using the RegSaveKeyEx API (which
      exports the content of a regular registry key in an hive file). The application can then mount the hive
      privately using the RegLoadAppKey function (specifying the REG_PROCESS_APPKEY flag prevents other
      applications from accessing the same hive). Internally, the function performs the following operations:

         1.   Creates a random GUID and assigns it to a private namespace, in the form of \Registry\
              A\<Random Guid>. (\Registry forms the NT kernel registry namespace, described in the
              “The registry namespace and operation” section later in this chapter.)

         2.   Converts the DOS path of the specified hive file name in NT format and calls the NtLoadKeyEx
              native API with the proper set of parameters.

         The NtLoadKeyEx function calls the regular registry callbacks. However, when it detects that the
      hive is an application hive, it uses CmLoadAppKey to load it (and its associated log files) in the private
      namespace, which is not enumerable by any other application and is tied to the lifetime of the calling
      process. (The hive and log files are still mapped in the “registry process,” though. The registry process
      will be described in the “Startup and registry process” section later in this chapter.) The application can
      use standard registry APIs to read and write its own private settings, which will be stored in the applica-
      tion hive. The hive will be automatically unloaded when the application exits or when the last handle to
      the key is closed.

         Application hives are used by different Windows components, like the Application Compatibility
      telemetry agent (CompatTelRunner.exe) and the Modern Application Model. Universal Windows
      Platform (UWP) applications use application hives for storing information of WinRT classes that can be
      instantiated and are private for the application. The hive is stored in a file called ActivationStore.dat
      and is consumed primarily by the Activation Manager when an application is launched (or more pre-
      cisely, is “activated”). The Background Infrastructure component of the Modern Application Model uses
      the data stored in the hive for storing background tasks information. In that way, when a background
      task timer elapses, it knows exactly in which application library the task’s code resides (and the activa-
      tion type and threading model).

        Furthermore, the modern application stack provides to UWP developers the concept of Application
      Data containers, which can be used for storing settings that can be local to the device in which the

application runs (in this case, the data container is called local) or can be automatically shared between
all the user’s devices that the application is installed on. Both kinds of containers are implemented in
the Windows.Storage.ApplicationData.dll WinRT library, which uses an application hive, local to the ap-
plication (the backing file is called settings.dat), to store the settings created by the UWP application.

   Both the settings.dat and the ActivationStore.dat hive files are created by the Modern Application
Model’s Deployment process (at app-installation time), which is covered extensively in Chapter 8,
“System mechanisms,” (with a general discussion of packaged applications). The Application
Data containers are documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/get-started/
settings-learning-track.

Transactional Registry (TxR)
Thanks to the Kernel Transaction Manager (KTM; for more information see the section about the KTM
in Chapter 8), developers have access to a straightforward API that allows them to implement robust
error-recovery capabilities when performing registry operations, which can be linked with nonregistry
operations, such as file or database operations.

    Three APIs support transactional modification of the registry: RegCreateKeyTransacted,
RegOpenKeyTransacted, and RegDeleteKeyTransacted. These new routines take the same parameters
as their nontransacted analogs except that a new transaction handle parameter is added. A developer
supplies this handle after calling the KTM function CreateTransaction.

   After a transacted create or open operation, all subsequent registry operations—such as creat-
ing, deleting, or modifying values inside the key—will also be transacted. However, operations on
the subkeys of a transacted key will not be automatically transacted, which is why the third API,
RegDeleteKeyTransacted exists. It allows the transacted deletion of subkeys, which RegDeleteKeyEx
would not normally do.

    Data for these transacted operations is written to log files using the common logging file system
(CLFS) services, similar to other KTM operations. Until the transaction is committed or rolled back
(both of which might happen programmatically or as a result of a power failure or system crash, de-
pending on the state of the transaction), the keys, values, and other registry modifications performed
with the transaction handle will not be visible to external applications through the nontransacted APIs.
Also, transactions are isolated from each other; modifications made inside one transaction will not be
visible from inside other transactions or outside the transaction until the transaction is committed.

   Note A nontransactional writer will abort a transaction in case of conflict—for example, if
   a value was created inside a transaction and later, while the transaction is still active, a non-
   transactional writer tries to create a value under the same key. The nontransactional opera-
   tion will succeed, and all operations in the conflicting transaction will be aborted.

  The isolation level (the “I” in ACID) implemented by TxR resource managers is read-commit, which
means that changes become available to other readers (transacted or not) immediately after being
committed. This mechanism is important for people who are familiar with transactions in databases,

      where the isolation level is predictable-reads (or cursor-stability, as it is called in database literature).
      With a predictable-reads isolation level, after you read a value inside a transaction, subsequent reads
      returns the same data. Read-commit does not make this guarantee. One of the consequences is that
      registry transactions can’t be used for “atomic” increment/decrement operations on a registry value.

         To make permanent changes to the registry, the application that has been using the transaction
      handle must call the KTM function CommitTransaction. (If the application decides to undo the changes,
      such as during a failure path, it can call the RollbackTransaction API.) The changes are then visible
      through the regular registry APIs as well.

         Note If a transaction handle created with CreateTransaction is closed before the transaction
         is committed (and there are no other handles open to that transaction), the system rolls back
         that transaction.

         Apart from using the CLFS support provided by the KTM, TxR also stores its own internal log files in
      the %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Txr folder on the system volume; these files have a .regtrans-ms
      extension and are hidden by default. There is a global registry resource manager (RM) that services all
      the hives mounted at boot time. For every hive that is mounted explicitly, an RM is created. For applica-
      tions that use registry transactions, the creation of an RM is transparent because KTM ensures that all
      RMs taking part in the same transaction are coordinated in the two-phase commit/abort protocol. For
      the global registry RM, the CLFS log files are stored, as mentioned earlier, inside System32\Config\Txr.
      For other hives, they are stored alongside the hive (in the same directory). They are hidden and follow
      the same naming convention, ending in .regtrans-ms. The log file names are prefixed with the name of
      the hive to which they correspond.

      Monitoring registry activity
      Because the system and applications depend so heavily on configuration settings to guide their behav-
      ior, system and application failures can result from changing registry data or security. When the system
      or an application fails to read settings that it assumes it will always be able to access, it might not func-
      tion properly, display error messages that hide the root cause, or even crash. It’s virtually impossible
      to know what registry keys or values are misconfigured without understanding how the system or the
      application that’s failing is accessing the registry. In such situations, the Process Monitor utility from
      Windows Sysinternals (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/ ) might provide the answer.

         Process Monitor lets you monitor registry activity as it occurs. For each registry access, Process
      Monitor shows you the process that performed the access; the time, type, and result of the access; and
      the stack of the thread at the moment of the access. This information is useful for seeing how applica-
      tions and the system rely on the registry, discovering where applications and the system store con-
      figuration settings, and troubleshooting problems related to applications having missing registry keys
      or values. Process Monitor includes advanced filtering and highlighting so that you can zoom in on
      activity related to specific keys or values or to the activity of particular processes.

Process Monitor internals
Process Monitor relies on a device driver that it extracts from its executable image at runtime before
starting it. Its first execution requires that the account running it has the Load Driver privilege as well as
the Debug privilege; subsequent executions in the same boot session require only the Debug privilege
because, once loaded, the driver remains resident.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing registry activity on an idle system
   Because the registry implements the RegNotifyChangeKey function that applications can use
   to request notification of registry changes without polling for them, when you launch Process
   Monitor on a system that’s idle you should not see repetitive accesses to the same registry keys
   or values. Any such activity identifies a poorly written application that unnecessarily negatively
   affects a system’s overall performance.

      Run Process Monitor, make sure that only the Show Registry Activity icon is enabled in the
   toolbar (with the goal to remove noise generated by the File system, network, and processes or
   threads) and, after several seconds, examine the output log to see whether you can spot polling
   behavior. Right-click an output line associated with polling and then choose Process Properties
   from the context menu to view details about the process performing the activity.

   EXPERIMENT: Using Process Monitor to locate application registry settings
   In some troubleshooting scenarios, you might need to determine where in the registry the sys-
   tem or an application stores particular settings. This experiment has you use Process Monitor to
   discover the location of Notepad’s settings. Notepad, like most Windows applications, saves user
   preferences—such as word-wrap mode, font and font size, and window position—across execu-
   tions. By having Process Monitor watching when Notepad reads or writes its settings, you can
   identify the registry key in which the settings are stored. Here are the steps for doing this:

        1.   Have Notepad save a setting you can easily search for in a Process Monitor trace.
             You can do this by running Notepad, setting the font to Times New Roman, and then
             exiting Notepad.

        2.   Run Process Monitor. Open the filter dialog box and the Process Name filter, and type
             notepad.exe as the string to match. Confirm by clicking the Add button. This step
             specifies that Process Monitor will log only activity by the notepad.exe process.

        3.   Run Notepad again, and after it has launched, stop Process Monitor’s event capture by
             toggling Capture Events on the Process Monitor File menu.

        4.   Scroll to the top line of the resultant log and select it.

              5.   Press Ctrl+F to open a Find dialog box, and search for times new. Process Monitor
                   should highlight a line like the one shown in the following screen that represents
                   Notepad reading the font value from the registry. Other operations in the immediate
                   vicinity should relate to other Notepad settings.

              6.   Right-click the highlighted line and click Jump To. Process Monitor starts Regedit (if it’s
                   not already running) and causes it to navigate to and select the Notepad-referenced
                   registry value.

      Registry internals
      This section describes how the configuration manager—the executive subsystem that implements the
      registry—organizes the registry’s on-disk files. We’ll examine how the configuration manager manages
      the registry as applications and other operating system components read and change registry keys and
      values. We’ll also discuss the mechanisms by which the configuration manager tries to ensure that the
      registry is always in a recoverable state, even if the system crashes while the registry is being modified.

      Hives
      On disk, the registry isn’t simply one large file but rather a set of discrete files called hives. Each hive
      contains a registry tree, which has a key that serves as the root or starting point of the tree. Subkeys
      and their values reside beneath the root. You might think that the root keys displayed by the Registry
      Editor correlate to the root keys in the hives, but such is not the case. Table 10-5 lists registry hives and
      their on-disk file names. The path names of all hives except for user profiles are coded into the con-
      figuration manager. As the configuration manager loads hives, including system profiles, it notes each
      hive’s path in the values under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Hivelist subkey, remov-
      ing the path if the hive is unloaded. It creates the root keys, linking these hives together to build the
      registry structure you’re familiar with and that the Registry Editor displays.

TABLE 10-5 On-disk files corresponding to paths in the registry

Hive Registry Path                                   Hive File Path

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\BCD00000000                       \EFI\Microsoft\Boot

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\COMPONENTS                        %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Components

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM                            %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\System

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SAM                               %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Sam

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SECURITY                          %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Security

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE                          %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Software

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\HARDWARE                          Volatile hive

\HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\WindowsAppLockerCache            %SystemRoot%\System32\AppLocker\AppCache.dat

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\ELAM                              %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Elam

HKEY_USERS\<SID of local service account>            %SystemRoot%\ServiceProfiles\LocalService\Ntuser.dat

HKEY_USERS\<SID of network service account>          %SystemRoot%\ServiceProfiles\NetworkService\NtUser.dat

HKEY_USERS\<SID of username>                         \Users\<username>\Ntuser.dat

HKEY_USERS\<SID of username>_Classes                 \Users\<username>\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\
                                                     Usrclass.dat

HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT                                  %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\Default

Virtualized HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE              Different paths. Usually
                                                     \ProgramData\Packages\<PackageFullName>\<UserSid>\
                                                     SystemAppData\Helium\Cache\<RandomName>.dat for
                                                     Centennial

Virtualized HKEY_CURRENT_USER                        Different paths. Usually
                                                     \ProgramData\Packages\<PackageFullName>\<UserSid>\
                                                     SystemAppData\Helium\User.dat for Centennial

Virtualized HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Classes Different paths. Usually
                                                \ProgramData\Packages\<PackageFullName>\<UserSid>\
                                                SystemAppData\Helium\UserClasses.dat for Centennial

   You’ll notice that some of the hives listed in Table 10-5 are volatile and don’t have associated files.
The system creates and manages these hives entirely in memory; the hives are therefore tempo-
rary. The system creates volatile hives every time it boots. An example of a volatile hive is the HKLM\
HARDWARE hive, which stores information about physical devices and the devices’ assigned resources.
Resource assignment and hardware detection occur every time the system boots, so not storing this
data on disk is logical. You will also notice that the last three entries in the table represent virtualized
hives. Starting from Windows 10 Anniversary Update, the NT kernel supports the Virtualized Registry
(VReg), with the goal to provide support for Centennial packaged applications, which runs in a Helium
container. Every time the user runs a centennial application (like the modern Skype, for example), the
system mounts the needed package hives. Centennial applications and the Modern Application Model
have been extensively discussed in Chapter 8.

         EXPERIMENT: Manually loading and unloading hives
         Regedit has the ability to load hives that you can access through its File menu. This capability can
         be useful in troubleshooting scenarios where you want to view or edit a hive from an unbootable
         system or a backup medium. In this experiment, you’ll use Regedit to load a version of the
         HKLM\SYSTEM hive that Windows Setup creates during the install process.

             1.   Hives can be loaded only underneath HKLM or HKU, so open Regedit, select HKLM,
                  and choose Load Hive from the Regedit File menu.

             2.   Navigate to the %SystemRoot%\System32\Config\RegBack directory in the Load Hive
                  dialog box, select System, and open it. Some newer systems may not have any file in
                  the RegBack folder. In that case, you can try the same experiment by opening the ELAM
                  hive located in the Config folder. When prompted, type Test as the name of the key
                  under which it will load.

             3.   Open the newly created HKLM\Test key and explore the contents of the hive.

             4.   Open HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Hivelist and locate the entry
                  \Registry\Machine\Test, which demonstrates how the configuration manager lists
                  loaded hives in the Hivelist key.

             5.   Select HKLM\Test and then choose Unload Hive from the Regedit File menu to unload
                  the hive.

      Hive size limits
      In some cases, hive sizes are limited. For example, Windows places a limit on the size of the
      HKLM\SYSTEM hive. It does so because Winload reads the entire HKLM\SYSTEM hive into physical
      memory near the start of the boot process when virtual memory paging is not enabled. Winload also
      loads Ntoskrnl and boot device drivers into physical memory, so it must constrain the amount of physi-
      cal memory assigned to HKLM\SYSTEM. (See Chapter 12 for more information on the role Winload
      plays during the startup process.) On 32-bit systems, Winload allows the hive to be as large as 400 MB
      or half the amount of physical memory on the system, whichever is lower. On x64 systems, the lower
      bound is 2 GB.

      Startup and the registry process
      Before Windows 8.1, the NT kernel was using paged pool for storing the content of every loaded hive
      file. Most of the hives loaded in the system remained in memory until the system shutdown (a good
      example is the SOFTWARE hive, which is loaded by the Session Manager after phase 1 of the System
      startup is completed and sometimes could be multiple hundreds of megabytes in size). Paged pool
      memory could be paged out by the balance set manager of the memory manager, if it is not accessed
      for a certain amount of time (see Chapter 5, “Memory management,” in Part 1 for more details). This
      implies that unused parts of a hive do not remain in the working set for a long time. Committed virtual

memory is backed by the page file and requires the system Commit charge to be increased, reducing
the total amount of virtual memory available for other purposes.

    To overcome this problem, Windows 10 April 2018 Update (RS4) introduced support for the section-
backed registry. At phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization, the Configuration manager startup routine
initializes multiple components of the Registry: cache, worker threads, transactions, callbacks support,
and so on. It then creates the Key object type, and, before loading the needed hives, it creates the
Registry process. The Registry process is a fully-protected (same protection as the SYSTEM process:
WinSystem level), minimal process, which the configuration manager uses for performing most of the
I/Os on opened registry hives. At initialization time, the configuration manager maps the preloaded
hives in the Registry process. The preloaded hives (SYSTEM and ELAM) continue to reside in nonpaged
memory, though (which is mapped using kernel addresses). Later in the boot process, the Session
Manager loads the Software hive by invoking the NtInitializeRegistry system call.

    A section object backed by the “SOFTWARE” hive file is created: the configuration manager divides
the file in 2-MB chunks and creates a reserved mapping in the Registry process’s user-mode address
space for each of them (using the NtMapViewOfSection native API. Reserved mappings are tracked by
valid VADs, but no actual pages are allocated. See Chapter 5 in Part 1 for further details). Each 2-MB
view is read-only protected. When the configuration manager wants to read some data from the hive,
it accesses the view’s pages and produces an access fault, which causes the shared pages to be brought
into memory by the memory manager. At that time, the system working set charge is increased, but
not the commit charge (the pages are backed by the hive file itself, and not by the page file).

    At initialization time, the configuration manager sets the hard-working set limit to the Registry pro-
cess at 64 MB. This means that in high memory pressure scenarios, it is guaranteed that no more than
64 MB of working set is consumed by the registry. Every time an application or the system uses the
APIs to access the registry, the configuration manager attaches to the Registry process address space,
performs the needed work, and returns the results. The configuration manager doesn’t always need to
switch address spaces: when the application wants to access a registry key that is already in the cache
(a Key control block already exists), the configuration manager skips the process attach and returns the
cached data. The registry process is primarily used for doing I/O on the low-level hive file.

   When the system writes or modifies registry keys and values stored in a hive, it performs a copy-
on-write operation (by first changing the memory protection of the 2 MB view to PAGE_WRITECOPY).
Writing to memory marked as copy-on-write creates new private pages and increases the system
commit charge. When a registry update is requested, the system immediately writes new entries in
the hive’s log, but the writing of the actual pages belonging to the primary hive file is deferred. Dirty
hive’s pages, as for every normal memory page, can be paged out to disk. Those pages are written to
the primary hive file when the hive is being unloaded or by the Reconciler: one of the configuration
manager’s lazy writer threads that runs by default once every hour (the time period is configurable
by setting the HKLM\SYSTEM\ CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Configuration Manager\
RegistryLazyReconcileInterval registry value).

    The Reconciler and the Incremental logging are discussed in the “Incremental logging” section later
in this chapter.

      Registry symbolic links
      A special type of key known as a registry symbolic link makes it possible for the configuration manager
      to link keys to organize the registry. A symbolic link is a key that redirects the configuration manager to
      another key. Thus, the key HKLM\SAM is a symbolic link to the key at the root of the SAM hive. Symbolic
      links are created by specifying the REG_CREATE_LINK parameter to RegCreateKey or RegCreateKeyEx.
      Internally, the configuration manager will create a REG_LINK value called SymbolicLinkValue, which con-
      tains the path to the target key. Because this value is a REG_LINK instead of a REG_SZ, it will not be visible
      with Regedit—it is, however, part of the on-disk registry hive.

         EXPERIMENT: Looking at hive handles
         The configuration manager opens hives by using the kernel handle table (described in Chapter 8)
         so that it can access hives from any process context. Using the kernel handle table is an efficient
         alternative to approaches that involve using drivers or executive components to access from the
         System process only handles that must be protected from user processes. You can start Process
         Explorer as Administrator to see the hive handles, which will be displayed as being opened in
         the System process. Select the System process, and then select Handles from the Lower Pane
         View menu entry on the View menu. Sort by handle type, and scroll until you see the hive files,
         as shown in the following screen.

Hive structure
The configuration manager logically divides a hive into allocation units called blocks in much the same
way that a file system divides a disk into clusters. By definition, the registry block size is 4096 bytes
(4 KB). When new data expands a hive, the hive always expands in block-granular increments. The first
block of a hive is the base block.

    The base block includes global information about the hive, including a signature—regf—that iden-
tifies the file as a hive, two updated sequence numbers, a time stamp that shows the last time a write
operation was initiated on the hive, information on registry repair or recovery performed by Winload,
the hive format version number, a checksum, and the hive file’s internal file name (for example,
\Device\HarddiskVolume1\WINDOWS\SYSTEM32\CONFIG\SAM). We’ll clarify the significance of the
two updated sequence numbers and time stamp when we describe how data is written to a hive file.

    The hive format version number specifies the data format within the hive. The configuration man-
ager uses hive format version 1.5, which supports large values (values larger than 1 MB are supported)
and improved searching (instead of caching the first four characters of a name, a hash of the entire
name is used to reduce collisions). Furthermore, the configuration manager supports differencing hives
introduced for container support. Differencing hives uses hive format 1.6.

   Windows organizes the registry data that a hive stores in containers called cells. A cell can hold a
key, a value, a security descriptor, a list of subkeys, or a list of key values. A four-byte character tag at
the beginning of a cell’s data describes the data’s type as a signature. Table 10-6 describes each cell
data type in detail. A cell’s header is a field that specifies the cell’s size as the 1’s complement (not pres-
ent in the CM_ structures). When a cell joins a hive and the hive must expand to contain the cell, the
system creates an allocation unit called a bin.

   A bin is the size of the new cell rounded up to the next block or page boundary, whichever is higher.
The system considers any space between the end of the cell and the end of the bin to be free space
that it can allocate to other cells. Bins also have headers that contain a signature, hbin, and a field that
records the offset into the hive file of the bin and the bin’s size.

TABLE 10-6 Cell data types

Data Type               Structure Type      Description

Key cell                CM_KEY_NODE         A cell that contains a registry key, also called a key node. A key cell con-
                                            tains a signature (kn for a key, kl for a link node), the time stamp of the
                                            most recent update to the key, the cell index of the key’s parent key cell,
                                            the cell index of the subkey-list cell that identifies the key’s subkeys, a cell
                                            index for the key’s security descriptor cell, a cell index for a string key that
                                            specifies the class name of the key, and the name of the key (for example,
                                            CurrentControlSet). It also saves cached information such as the number
                                            of subkeys under the key, as well as the size of the largest key, value name,
                                            value data, and class name of the subkeys under this key.

Value cell              CM_KEY_VALUE        A cell that contains information about a key’s value. This cell includes
                                            a signature (kv), the value’s type (for example, REG_ DWORD or
                                            REG_BINARY), and the value’s name (for example, Boot-Execute).
                                            A value cell also contains the cell index of the cell that contains the
                                            value’s data.

      Data Type                  Structure Type    Description

      Big Value cell             CM_BIG_DATA       A cell that represents a registry value bigger than 16 kB. For this kind of
                                                   cell type, the cell content is an array of cell indexes each pointing to a
                                                   16-kB cell, which contains a chunk of the registry value.

      Subkey-list cell           CM_KEY_INDEX      A cell composed of a list of cell indexes for key cells that are all subkeys
                                                   of a common parent key.

      Value-list cell            CM_KEY_INDEX      A cell composed of a list of cell indexes for value cells that are all values
                                                   of a common parent key.

      Security-descriptor cell   CM_KEY_SECURITY   A cell that contains a security descriptor. Security-descriptor cells in-
                                                   clude a signature (ks) at the head of the cell and a reference count that
                                                   records the number of key nodes that share the security descriptor.
                                                   Multiple key cells can share security-descriptor cells.

          By using bins instead of cells, to track active parts of the registry, Windows minimizes some man-
      agement chores. For example, the system usually allocates and deallocates bins less frequently than it
      does cells, which lets the configuration manager manage memory more efficiently. When the configu-
      ration manager reads a registry hive into memory, it reads the whole hive, including empty bins, but it
      can choose to discard them later. When the system adds and deletes cells in a hive, the hive can contain
      empty bins interspersed with active bins. This situation is similar to disk fragmentation, which occurs
      when the system creates and deletes files on the disk. When a bin becomes empty, the configuration
      manager joins to the empty bin any adjacent empty bins to form as large a contiguous empty bin as
      possible. The configuration manager also joins adjacent deleted cells to form larger free cells. (The con-
      figuration manager shrinks a hive only when bins at the end of the hive become free. You can compact
      the registry by backing it up and restoring it using the Windows RegSaveKey and RegReplaceKey func-
      tions, which are used by the Windows Backup utility. Furthermore, the system compacts the bins at hive
      initialization time using the Reorganization algorithm, as described later.)

         The links that create the structure of a hive are called cell indexes. A cell index is the offset of a cell
      into the hive file minus the size of the base block. Thus, a cell index is like a pointer from one cell to an-
      other cell that the configuration manager interprets relative to the start of a hive. For example, as you
      saw in Table 10-6, a cell that describes a key contains a field specifying the cell index of its parent key; a
      cell index for a subkey specifies the cell that describes the subkeys that are subordinate to the specified
      subkey. A subkey-list cell contains a list of cell indexes that refer to the subkey’s key cells. Therefore, if
      you want to locate, for example, the key cell of subkey A whose parent is key B, you must first locate the
      cell containing key B’s subkey list using the subkey-list cell index in key B’s cell. Then you locate each of
      key B’s subkey cells by using the list of cell indexes in the subkey-list cell. For each subkey cell, you check
      to see whether the subkey’s name, which a key cell stores, matches the one you want to locate—in this
      case, subkey A.

         The distinction between cells, bins, and blocks can be confusing, so let’s look at an example of a
      simple registry hive layout to help clarify the differences. The sample registry hive file in Figure 10-3
      contains a base block and two bins. The first bin is empty, and the second bin contains several cells.
      Logically, the hive has only two keys: the root key Root and a subkey of Root, Sub Key. Root has two val-
      ues, Val 1 and Val 2. A subkey-list cell locates the root key’s subkey, and a value-list cell locates the root
      key’s values. The free spaces in the second bin are empty cells. Figure 10-3 doesn’t show the security
      cells for the two keys, which would be present in a hive.

                                          Block boundaries

                                                                                    Sub
        Base block              Empty bin            Root                   Vol 1       Vol 2
                                                                                    Key

                                  Bin 1
     Key cell (key node)     Subkey-list cell                       Bin 2
     Value cell              Free space
     Value-list cell

FIGURE 10-3 Internal structure of a registry hive.

    To optimize searches for both values and subkeys, the configuration manager sorts subkey-list cells
alphabetically. The configuration manager can then perform a binary search when it looks for a subkey
within a list of subkeys. The configuration manager examines the subkey in the middle of the list, and
if the name of the subkey the configuration manager is looking for alphabetically precedes the name
of the middle subkey, the configuration manager knows that the subkey is in the first half of the subkey
list; otherwise, the subkey is in the second half of the subkey list. This splitting process continues until
the configuration manager locates the subkey or finds no match. Value-list cells aren’t sorted, however,
so new values are always added to the end of the list.

Cell maps
If hives never grew, the configuration manager could perform all its registry management on the in-
memory version of a hive as if the hive were a file. Given a cell index, the configuration manager could
calculate the location in memory of a cell simply by adding the cell index, which is a hive file offset, to
the base of the in-memory hive image. Early in the system boot, this process is exactly what Winload
does with the SYSTEM hive: Winload reads the entire SYSTEM hive into memory as a read-only hive and
adds the cell indexes to the base of the in-memory hive image to locate cells. Unfortunately, hives grow
as they take on new keys and values, which means the system must allocate new reserved views and
extend the hive file to store the new bins that contain added keys and values. The reserved views that
keep the registry data in memory aren’t necessarily contiguous.

    To deal with noncontiguous memory addresses referencing hive data in memory, the configura-
tion manager adopts a strategy similar to what the Windows memory manager uses to map virtual
memory addresses to physical memory addresses. While a cell index is only an offset in the hive file, the
configuration manager employs a two-level scheme, which Figure 10-4 illustrates, when it represents
the hive using the mapped views in the registry process. The scheme takes as input a cell index (that is,
a hive file offset) and returns as output both the address in memory of the block the cell index resides
in and the address in memory of the block the cell resides in. Remember that a bin can contain one or
more blocks and that hives grow in bins, so Windows always represents a bin with a contiguous region
of memory. Therefore, all blocks within a bin occur within the same 2-MB hive’s mapped view.

                                    Cell index
            Directory index         Table index          Byte offset
       32                                                              0

                   Hive’s cell map
                     directory
               0                                                           Target block
                                                  Cell map table
                                             0
                                                                                          Cell

            1023

                                           511

      Hive cell map directory pointer

      FIGURE 10-4 Structure of a cell index.

         To implement the mapping, the configuration manager divides a cell index logically into fields, in
      the same way that the memory manager divides a virtual address into fields. Windows interprets a
      cell index’s first field as an index into a hive’s cell map directory. The cell map directory contains 1024
      entries, each of which refers to a cell map table that contains 512 map entries. An entry in this cell map
      table is specified by the second field in the cell index. That entry locates the bin and block memory ad-
      dresses of the cell.

         In the final step of the translation process, the configuration manager interprets the last field of the
      cell index as an offset into the identified block to precisely locate a cell in memory. When a hive initial-
      izes, the configuration manager dynamically creates the mapping tables, designating a map entry for
      each block in the hive, and it adds and deletes tables from the cell directory as the changing size of the
      hive requires.

      Hive reorganization
      As for real file systems, registry hives suffer fragmentation problems: when cells in the bin are freed
      and it is not possible to coalescence them in a contiguous manner, fragmented little chunks of free
      space are created into various bins. If there is not enough available contiguous space for new cells, new
      bins are appended at the end of the hive file, while the fragmented ones will be rarely repurposed. To
      overcome this problem, starting from Windows 8.1, every time the configuration manager mounts a
      hive file, it checks whether a hive’s reorganization needs to be performed. The configuration manager
      records the time of the last reorganization in the hive’s basic block. If the hive has valid log files, is not
      volatile, and if the time passed after the previous reorganization is greater than seven days, the reor-
      ganization operation is started. The reorganization is an operation that has two main goals: shrink the
      hive file and optimize it. It starts by creating a new empty hive that is identical to the original one but
      does not contains any cells in it. The created clone is used to copy the root key of the original hive, with
      all its values (but no subkeys). A complex algorithm analyzes all the child keys: indeed, during its normal

activity, the configuration manager records whether a particular key is accessed, and, if so, stores an
index representing the current runtime phase of the operating system (Boot or normal) in its key cell.

    The reorganization algorithm first copies the keys accessed during the normal execution of the OS,
then the ones accessed during the boot phase, and finally the keys that have not been accessed at all
(since the last reorganization). This operation groups all the different keys in contiguous bins of the hive
file. The copy operation, by definition, produces a nonfragmented hive file (each cell is stored sequentially
in the bin, and new bin are always appended at the end of the file). Furthermore, the new hive has the
characteristic to contain hot and cold classes of keys stored in big contiguous chunks. This result renders
the boot and runtime phase of the operating system much quicker when reading data from the registry.

   The reorganization algorithm resets the access state of all the new copied cells. In this way, the
system can track the hive’s keys usage by restarting from a neutral state. The new usage statistics will
be consumed by the next reorganization, which will start after seven days. The configuration manager
stores the results of a reorganization cycle in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session
Manager\Configuration Manager\Defrag registry key, as shown in Figure 10-5. In the sample screen-
shot, the last reorganization was run on April 10, 2019 and saved 10 MB of fragmented hive space.

FIGURE 10-5 Registry reorganization data.

The registry namespace and operation
The configuration manager defines a key object type to integrate the registry’s namespace with the
kernel’s general namespace. The configuration manager inserts a key object named Registry into the
root of the Windows namespace, which serves as the entry point to the registry. Regedit shows key
names in the form HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet, but the Windows subsystem
translates such names into their object namespace form (for example, \Registry\Machine\System\
CurrentControlSet). When the Windows object manager parses this name, it encounters the key

      object by the name of Registry first and hands the rest of the name to the configuration manager. The
      configuration manager takes over the name parsing, looking through its internal hive tree to find the
      desired key or value. Before we describe the flow of control for a typical registry operation, we need
      to discuss key objects and key control blocks. Whenever an application opens or creates a registry key,
      the object manager gives a handle with which to reference the key to the application. The handle cor-
      responds to a key object that the configuration manager allocates with the help of the object manager.
      By using the object manager’s object support, the configuration manager takes advantage of the
      security and reference-counting functionality that the object manager provides.

         For each open registry key, the configuration manager also allocates a key control block. A key
      control block stores the name of the key, includes the cell index of the key node that the control block
      refers to, and contains a flag that notes whether the configuration manager needs to delete the key
      cell that the key control block refers to when the last handle for the key closes. Windows places all key
      control blocks into a hash table to enable quick searches for existing key control blocks by name. A key
      object points to its corresponding key control block, so if two applications open the same registry key,
      each receives a key object, and both key objects point to a common key control block.

          When an application opens an existing registry key, the flow of control starts with the applica-
      tion specifying the name of the key in a registry API that invokes the object manager’s name-parsing
      routine. The object manager, upon encountering the configuration manager’s registry key object in the
      namespace, hands the path name to the configuration manager. The configuration manager performs
      a lookup on the key control block hash table. If the related key control block is found there, there’s no
      need for any further work (no registry process attach is needed); otherwise, the lookup provides the
      configuration manager with the closest key control block to the searched key, and the lookup con-
      tinues by attaching to the registry process and using the in-memory hive data structures to search
      through keys and subkeys to find the specified key. If the configuration manager finds the key cell, the
      configuration manager searches the key control block tree to determine whether the key is open (by
      the same application or another one). The search routine is optimized to always start from the clos-
      est ancestor with a key control block already opened. For example, if an application opens \Registry\
      Machine\Key1\Subkey2, and \Registry\Machine is already open, the parse routine uses the key control
      block of \Registry\Machine as a starting point. If the key is open, the configuration manager incre-
      ments the existing key control block’s reference count. If the key isn’t open, the configuration manager
      allocates a new key control block and inserts it into the tree. Then the configuration manager allocates
      a key object, points the key object at the key control block, detaches from the Registry process, and
      returns control to the object manager, which returns a handle to the application.

         When an application creates a new registry key, the configuration manager first finds the key cell
      for the new key’s parent. The configuration manager then searches the list of free cells for the hive in
      which the new key will reside to determine whether cells exist that are large enough to hold the new
      key cell. If there aren’t any free cells large enough, the configuration manager allocates a new bin and
      uses it for the cell, placing any space at the end of the bin on the free cell list. The new key cell fills with
      pertinent information—including the key’s name—and the configuration manager adds the key cell to
      the subkey list of the parent key’s subkey-list cell. Finally, the system stores the cell index of the parent
      cell in the new subkey’s key cell.

   The configuration manager uses a key control block’s reference count to determine when to delete
the key control block. When all the handles that refer to a key in a key control block close, the reference
count becomes 0, which denotes that the key control block is no longer necessary. If an application that
calls an API to delete the key sets the delete flag, the configuration manager can delete the associated
key from the key’s hive because it knows that no application is keeping the key open.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing key control blocks
   You can use the kernel debugger to list all the key control blocks allocated on a system with the
   !reg openkeys command. Alternatively, if you want to view the key control block for a particular
   open key, use !reg querykey:
   0: kd> !reg querykey \Registry\machine\software\microsoft

   Found KCB = ffffae08c156ae60 :: \REGISTRY\MACHINE\SOFTWARE\MICROSOFT

   Hive           ffffae08c03b0000
   KeyNode        00000225e8c3475c

   [SubKeyAddr]           [SubKeyName]
   225e8d23e64            .NETFramework
   225e8d24074            AccountsControl
   225e8d240d4            Active Setup
   225ec530f54            ActiveSync
   225e8d241d4            Ads
   225e8d2422c            Advanced INF Setup
   225e8d24294            ALG
   225e8d242ec            AllUserInstallAgent
   225e8d24354            AMSI
   225e8d243f4            Analog
   225e8d2448c            AppServiceProtocols
   225ec661f4c            AppV
   225e8d2451c            Assistance
   225e8d2458c            AuthHost
   ...

      You can then examine a reported key control block with the !reg kcb command:
   kd> !reg kcb ffffae08c156ae60

   Key              : \REGISTRY\MACHINE\SOFTWARE\MICROSOFT
   RefCount         : 1f
   Flags            : CompressedName, Stable
   ExtFlags         :
   Parent           : 0xe1997368
   KeyHive          : 0xe1c8a768
   KeyCell          : 0x64e598 [cell index]
   TotalLevels      : 4
   DelayedCloseIndex: 2048
   MaxNameLen       : 0x3c
   MaxValueNameLen : 0x0
   MaxValueDataLen : 0x0
   LastWriteTime    : 0x1c42501:0x7eb6d470
   KeyBodyListHead : 0xe1034d70 0xe1034d70

         SubKeyCount      : 137
         ValueCache.Count : 0
         KCBLock          : 0xe1034d40
         KeyLock          : 0xe1034d40

             The Flags field indicates that the name is stored in compressed form, and the SubKeyCount
         field shows that the key has 137 subkeys.

      Stable storage
      To make sure that a nonvolatile registry hive (one with an on-disk file) is always in a recoverable state,
      the configuration manager uses log hives. Each nonvolatile hive has an associated log hive, which is a
      hidden file with the same base name as the hive and a logN extension. To ensure forward progress, the
      configuration manager uses a dual-logging scheme. There are potentially two log files: .log1 and .log2.
      If, for any reason, .log1 was written but a failure occurred while writing dirty data to the primary log
      file, the next time a flush happens, a switch to .log2 occurs with the cumulative dirty data. If that fails
      as well, the cumulative dirty data (the data in .log1 and the data that was dirtied in between) is saved in
      .log2. As a consequence, .log1 will be used again next time around, until a successful write operation is
      done to the primary log file. If no failure occurs, only .log1 is used.

          For example, if you look in your %SystemRoot%\System32\Config directory (and you have the
      Show Hidden Files And Folders folder option selected and Hide Protected Operating System
      Files unselected; otherwise, you won’t see any file), you’ll see System.log1, Sam.log1, and other .log1
      and .log2 files. When a hive initializes, the configuration manager allocates a bit array in which each bit
      represents a 512-byte portion, or sector, of the hive. This array is called the dirty sector array because a
      bit set in the array means that the system has modified the corresponding sector in the hive in memory
      and must write the sector back to the hive file. (A bit not set means that the corresponding sector is up
      to date with the in-memory hive’s contents.)

          When the creation of a new key or value or the modification of an existing key or value takes place, the
      configuration manager notes the sectors of the primary hive that change and writes them in the hive’s
      dirty sectors array in memory. Then the configuration manager schedules a lazy flush operation, or a log
      sync. The hive lazy writer system thread wakes up one minute after the request to synchronize the hive’s
      log. It generates new log entries from the in-memory hive sectors referenced by valid bits of the dirty
      sectors array and writes them to the hive log files on disk. At the same time, the system flushes all the reg-
      istry modifications that take place between the time a hive sync is requested and the time the hive sync
      occurs. The lazy writer uses low priority I/Os and writes dirty sectors to the log file on disk (and not to the
      primary hive). When a hive sync takes place, the next hive sync occurs no sooner than one minute later.

         If the lazy writer simply wrote all a hive’s dirty sectors to the hive file and the system crashed in mid-
      operation, the hive file would be in an inconsistent (corrupted) and unrecoverable state. To prevent
      such an occurrence, the lazy writer first dumps the hive’s dirty sector array and all the dirty sectors to
      the hive’s log file, increasing the log file’s size if necessary. A hive’s basic block contains two sequence
      numbers. After the first flush operation (and not in the subsequent flushes), the configuration manager
      updates one of the sequence number, which become bigger than the second one. Thus, if the system

crashes during the write operations to the hive, at the next reboot the configuration manager notices
that the two sequence numbers in the hive’s base block don’t match. The configuration manager can
update the hive with the dirty sectors in the hive’s log file to roll the hive forward. The hive is then up
to date and consistent.

    After writing log entries in the hive’s log, the lazy flusher clears the corresponding valid bits in the
dirty sector array but inserts those bits in another important vector: the unreconciled array. The latter
is used by the configuration manager to understand which log entries to write in the primary hive.
Thanks to the new incremental logging support (discussed later), the primary hive file is rarely written
during the runtime execution of the operating system. The hive’s sync protocol (not to be confused by
the log sync) is the algorithm used to write all the in-memory and in-log registry’s modifications to the
primary hive file and to set the two sequence numbers in the hive. It is indeed an expensive multistage
operation that is described later.

    The Reconciler, which is another type of lazy writer system thread, wakes up once every hour, freez-
es up the log, and writes all the dirty log entries in the primary hive file. The reconciliation algorithm
knows which parts of the in-memory hive to write to the primary file thanks to both the dirty sectors
and unreconciled array. Reconciliation happens rarely, though. If a system crashes, the configuration
manager has all the information needed to reconstruct a hive, thanks to the log entries that have been
already written in the log files. Performing registry reconciliation only once per hour (or when the size
of the log is behind a threshold, which depends on the size of the volume in which the hive reside) is a
big performance improvement. The only possible time window in which some data loss could happen
in the hive is between log flushes.

    Note that the Reconciliation still does not update the second sequence number in the main hive file.
The two sequence numbers will be updated with an equal value only in the “validation” phase (another
form of hive flushing), which happens only at the hive’s unload time (when an application calls the
RegUnloadKey API), when the system shuts down, or when the hive is first loaded. This means that in
most of the lifetime of the operating system, the main registry hive is in a dirty state and needs its log
file to be correctly read.

    The Windows Boot Loader also contains some code related to registry reliability. For example, it can
parse the System.log file before the kernel is loaded and do repairs to fix consistency. Additionally, in
certain cases of hive corruption (such as if a base block, bin, or cell contains data that fails consistency
checks), the configuration manager can reinitialize corrupted data structures, possibly deleting subkeys
in the process, and continue normal operation. If it must resort to a self-healing operation, it pops up a
system error dialog box notifying the user.

Incremental logging
As mentioned in the previous section, Windows 8.1 introduced a big improvement on the performance
of the hive sync algorithm thanks to incremental logging. Normally, cells in a hive file can be in four
different states:

   ■   Clean    The cell’s data is in the hive’s primary file and has not been modified.

   ■   Dirty    The cell’s data has been modified but resides only in memory.

         ■    Unreconciled The cell’s data has been modified and correctly written to a log file but isn’t in
              the primary file yet.

         ■    Dirty and Unreconciled After the cell has been written to the log file, it has been modified
              again. Only the first modification is on the log file, whereas the last one resides in memory only.

        The original pre-Windows 8.1 synchronization algorithm was executing five seconds after one or
      more cells were modified. The algorithm can be summarized in four steps:

         1.   The configuration manager writes all the modified cells signaled by the dirty vector in a single
              entry in the log file.

         2.   It invalidates the hive’s base block (by setting only one sequence number with an incremented
              value than the other one).

         3.   It writes all the modified data on the primary hive’s file.

         4.   It performs the validation of the primary hive (the validation sets the two sequence numbers
              with an identical value in the primary hive file).

         To maintain the integrity and the recoverability of the hive, the algorithm should emit a flush opera-
      tion to the file system driver after each phase; otherwise, corruption could happen. Flush operations on
      random access data can be very expensive (especially on standard rotation disks).

          Incremental logging solved the performance problem. In the legacy algorithm, one single log entry
      was written containing all the dirty data between multiple hive validations; the incremental model
      broke this assumption. The new synchronization algorithm writes a single log entry every time the
      lazy flusher executes, which, as discussed previously, invalidates the primary hive’s base block only in
      the first time it executes. Subsequent flushes continue to write new log entries without touching the
      hive’s primary file. Every hour, or if the space in the log exhausts, the Reconciler writes all the data
      stored in the log entries to the primary hive’s file without performing the validation phase. In this way,
      space in the log file is reclaimed while maintaining the recoverability of the hive. If the system crashes
      at this stage, the log contains original entries that will be reapplied at hive loading time; otherwise,
      new entries are reapplied at the beginning of the log, and, in case the system crashes later, at hive load
      time only the new entries in the log are applied.

         Figure 10-6 shows the possible crash situations and how they are managed by the incremental log-
      ging scheme. In case A, the system has written new data to the hive in memory, and the lazy flusher
      has written the corresponding entries in the log (but no reconciliation happened). When the system
      restarts, the recovery procedure applies all the log entries to the primary hive and validates the hive file
      again. In case B, the reconciler has already written the data stored in the log entries to the primary hive
      before the crash (no hive validation happened). At system reboot, the recovery procedure reapplies the
      existing log entries, but no modification in the primary hive file are made. Case C shows a similar situ-
      ation of case B but where a new entry has been written to the log after the reconciliation. In this case,
      the recovery procedure writes only the last modification that is not in the primary file.

     A. Non reconciled invalid hive                                              B. Reconciled invalid hive

              SEQ 1     SEQ 2              SEQ 1     SEQ 2                             SEQ 1     SEQ 2         SEQ 1       SEQ 2
              9431      9434               9550      9550                              9431      9434          9550        9550

               BASE Block                  Log BASE Block                               BASE Block             Log BASE Block
           Key Cell    Value Cell                                                   Key Cell    Value Cell
                                                                                    Big Value SubKey list              …
           Big Value SubKey list
   BIN                                                                     BIN      Value list Key Cell
           Value list Unreconcil
                                              Entry 9560                            Sec Desc        …             Entry 9560
           Sec Desc        …
           Key Cell    Big value                                                    Key Cell    Big value
                                              Entry 9561                                                          Entry 9561
           Unreconcil SubKey list                                                   Value list SubKey list
   BIN                                                                     BIN      Big value Key Cell
           Big value Key Cell
                                              Entry 9562                                                          Entry 9562
           Sec Desc        …                                 Last valid             Sec Desc        …                              Last valid
           Key Cell    Value Cell                            entry                  Key Cell    Value Cell                         entry
           Sec Desc Unreconcil                                                      Sec Desc Big value
   BIN                                                                     BIN
           Value list Key Cell                                                      Value list Key Cell
           Subkey list     …                                                        Subkey list     …

C. Reconciled invalid hive with new data

             SEQ 1      SEQ 2              SEQ 1     SEQ 2
             9431       9434               9563      9563

               BASE Block                  Log BASE Block
           Key Cell    Value Cell
                                              Entry 9563
           Big Value SubKey list                             Last valid
  BIN      Value list Key Cell                               entry
                                               Invalid
           Sec Desc        …
           Key Cell    Big value
                                              End of log
           Value list SubKey list
  BIN      Big value Unreconcil
           Sec Desc        …
           Key Cell    Value Cell
           Sec Desc Big value
  BIN
           Value list Key Cell
           Subkey list     …

FIGURE 10-6 Consequences of possible system crashes in different times.

    The hive’s validation is performed only in certain (rare) cases. When a hive is unloaded, the system
performs reconciliation and then validates the hive’s primary file. At the end of the validation, it sets the
two sequence numbers of the hive’s primary file to a new identical value and emits the last file system
flush request before unloading the hive from memory. When the system restarts, the hive load’s code
detects that the hive primary is in a clean state (thanks to the two sequence numbers having the same
value) and does not start any form of the hive’s recovery procedure. Thanks to the new incremental
synchronization protocol, the operating system does not suffer any longer for the performance penal-
ties brought by the old legacy logging protocol.

    Note Loading a hive created by Windows 8.1 or a newer operating system in older machines
    is problematic in case the hive’s primary file is in a non-clean state. The old OS (Windows 7,
    for example) has no idea how to process the new log files. For this reason, Microsoft created
    the RegHiveRecovery minifilter driver, which is distributed through the Windows Assessment
    and Deployment Kit (ADK). The RegHiveRecovery driver uses Registry callbacks, which in-
    tercept “hive load” requests from the system and determine whether the hive’s primary file
    needs recovery and uses incremental logs. If so, it performs the recovery and fixes the hive’s
    primary file before the system has a chance to read it.

      Registry filtering
      The configuration manager in the Windows kernel implements a powerful model of registry filtering,
      which allows for monitoring of registry activity by tools such as Process Monitor. When a driver uses
      the callback mechanism, it registers a callback function with the configuration manager. The configura-
      tion manager executes the driver’s callback function before and after the execution of registry system
      services so that the driver has full visibility and control over registry accesses. Antivirus products that
      scan registry data for viruses or prevent unauthorized processes from modifying the registry are other
      users of the callback mechanism.

          Registry callbacks are also associated with the concept of altitudes. Altitudes are a way for differ-
      ent vendors to register a “height” on the registry filtering stack so that the order in which the system
      calls each callback routine can be deterministic and correct. This avoids a scenario in which an anti-
      virus product would scan encrypted keys before an encryption product would run its own callback
      to decrypt them. With the Windows registry callback model, both types of tools are assigned a base
      altitude corresponding to the type of filtering they are doing—in this case, encryption versus scanning.
      Secondly, companies that create these types of tools must register with Microsoft so that within their
      own group, they will not collide with similar or competing products.

           The filtering model also includes the ability to either completely take over the processing of the
      registry operation (bypassing the configuration manager and preventing it from handling the request)
      or redirect the operation to a different operation (such as WoW64’s registry redirection). Additionally,
      it is also possible to modify the output parameters as well as the return value of a registry operation.

         Finally, drivers can assign and tag per-key or per-operation driver-defined information for their own
      purposes. A driver can create and assign this context data during a create or open operation, which the
      configuration manager remembers and returns during each subsequent operation on the key.

      Registry virtualization
      Windows 10 Anniversary Update (RS1) introduced registry virtualization for Argon and Helium contain-
      ers and the possibility to load differencing hives, which adhere to the new hive version 1.6. Registry
      virtualization is provided by both the configuration manager and the VReg driver (integrated in the
      Windows kernel). The two components provide the following services:

         ■   Namespace redirection An application can redirect the content of a virtual key to a real one
             in the host. The application can also redirect a virtual key to a key belonging to a differencing
             hive, which is merged to a root key in the host.

         ■   Registry merging Differencing hives are interpreted as a set of differences from a base hive.
             The base hive represents the Base Layer, which contains the Immutable registry view. Keys in
             a differencing hive can be an addition to the base one or a subtraction. The latter are called
             thumbstone keys.

   The configuration manager, at phase 1 of the OS initialization, creates the VRegDriver device
object (with a proper security descriptor that allows only SYSTEM and Administrator access) and
the VRegConfigurationContext object type, which represents the Silo context used for tracking the
namespace redirection and hive merging, which belongs to the container. Server silos have been cov-
ered already in Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs,” of Part 1.

Namespace redirection
Registry namespace redirection can be enabled only in a Silo container (both Server and applications
silos). An application, after it has created the silo (but before starting it), sends an initialization IOCTL
to the VReg device object, passing the handle to the silo. The VReg driver creates an empty configura-
tion context and attaches it to the Silo object. It then creates a single namespace node, which remaps
the \Registry\WC root key of the container to the host key because all containers share the same view
of it. The \Registry\WC root key is created for mounting all the hives that are virtualized for the silo
containers.

   The VReg driver is a registry filter driver that uses the registry callbacks mechanism for properly
implementing the namespace redirection. At the first time an application initializes a namespace redi-
rection, the VReg driver registers its main RegistryCallback notification routine (through an internal API
similar to CmRegisterCallbackEx). To properly add namespace redirection to a root key, the application
sends a Create Namespace Node IOCTL to the VReg’s device and specifies the virtual key path (which
will be seen by the container), the real host key path, and the container’s job handle. As a response,
the VReg driver creates a new namespace node (a small data structure that contains the key’s data and
some flags) and adds it to the silo’s configuration context.

   After the application has finished configuring all the registry redirections for the container, it at-
taches its own process (or a new spawned process) to the silo object (using AssignProcessToJobObject—
see Chapter 3 in Part 1 for more details). From this point forward, each registry I/O emitted by the
containerized process will be intercepted by the VReg registry minifilter. Let’s illustrate how namespace
redirection works through an example.

    Let’s assume that the modern application framework has set multiple registry namespace redirec-
tions for a Centennial application. In particular, one of the redirection nodes redirect keys from HKCU
to the host \Registry\WC\ a20834ea-8f46-c05f-46e2-a1b71f9f2f9cuser_sid key. At a certain point
in time, the Centennial application wants to create a new key named AppA in the HKCU\Software\
Microsoft parent key. When the process calls the RegCreateKeyEx API, the Vreg registry callback inter-
cepts the request and gets the job’s configuration context. It then searches in the context the closest
namespace node to the key’s path specified by the caller. If it does not find anything, it returns an
object not found error: Operating on nonvirtualized paths is not allowed for a container. Assuming that
a namespace node describing the root HKCU key exists in the context, and the node is a parent of the
HKCU\Software\Microsoft subkey, the VReg driver replaces the relative path of the original virtual key
with the parent host key name and forwards the request to the configuration manager. So, in this case
the configuration manager really sees a request to create \Registry\WC\a20834ea-8f46-c05f-46e2-
a1b71f9f2f9cuser_sid\Software\Microsoft\ AppA and succeeds. The containerized application does not
really detect any difference. From the application side, the registry key is in the host HKCU.

      Differencing hives
      While namespace redirection is implemented in the VReg driver and is available only in contain-
      erized environments, registry merging can also work globally and is implemented mainly in the
      configuration manager itself. (However, the VReg driver is still used as an entry-point, allowing the
      mounting of differencing hives to base keys.) As stated in the previous section, differencing hives use
      hive version 1.6, which is very similar to version 1.5 but supports metadata for the differencing keys.
      Increasing the hive version also prevents the possibility of mounting the hive in systems that do not
      support registry virtualization.

         An application can create a differencing hive and mount it globally in the system or in a silo con-
      tainer by sending IOCTLs to the VReg device. The Backup and Restore privileges are needed, though,
      so only administrative applications can manage differencing hives. To mount a differencing hive, the
      application fills a data structure with the name of the base key (called the base layer; a base layer is the
      root key from which all the subkeys and values contained in the differencing hive applies), the path of
      the differencing hive, and a mount point. It then sends the data structure to the VReg driver through
      the VR_LOAD_DIFFERENCING_HIVE control code. The mount point contains a merge of the data con-
      tained in the differencing hive and the data contained in the base layer.

          The VReg driver maintains a list of all the loaded differencing hives in a hash table. This allows the
      VReg driver to mount a differencing hive in multiple mount points. As introduced previously, the
      Modern Application Model uses random GUIDs in the \Registry\WC root key with the goal to mount
      independent Centennial applications’ differencing hives. After an entry in the hash table is created,
      the VReg driver simply forwards the request to the CmLoadDifferencingKey internal configuration
      manager’s function. The latter performs the majority of the work. It calls the registry callbacks and
      loads the differencing hive. The creation of the hive proceeds in a similar way as for a normal hive. After
      the hive is created by the lower layer of the configuration manager, a key control block data structure
      is also created. The new key control block is linked to the base layer key control block.

          When a request is directed to open or read values located in the key used as a mount point, or
      in a child of it, the configuration manager knows that the associated key control block represents a
      differencing hive. So, the parsing procedure starts from the differencing hive. If the configuration
      manager encounters a subkey in the differencing hive, it stops the parsing procedure and yields the
      keys and data stored in the differencing hive. Otherwise, in case no data is found in the differencing
      hive, the configuration manager restarts the parsing procedure from the base hive. Another case veri-
      fies whether a thumbstone key is found in the differencing hive: the configuration manager hides the
      searched key and returns no data (or an error). Thumb stones are indeed used to mark a key as deleted
      in the base hive.

         The system supports three kinds of differencing hives:

         ■   Mutable hives can be written and updated. All the write requests directed to the mount point
             (or to its children keys) are stored in the differencing hive.

         ■   Immutable hives can’t be modified. This means that all the modifications requested on a key
             that is located in the differencing hive will fail.

   ■    Write-through hives represent differencing hives that are immutable, but write requests
        directed to the mount point (or its children keys) are redirected to the base layer (which is not
        immutable anymore).

   The NT kernel and applications can also mount a differencing hive and then apply namespace
redirection on the top of its mount point, which allows the implementation of complex virtualized
configurations like the one employed for Centennial applications (shown in Figure 10-7). The Modern
Application Model and the architecture of Centennial applications are covered in Chapter 8.

                         Centennial App 12       Centennial App 24

                               Silo 12                Silo 24
           Mount            HKLM\Software          HKLM\Software
                                                                        Namespace redirection
           points
                            Silo12Software         Silo12Software

                                                                        Registry merging
                                     Host HKLM\Software

                                       Host\Registry\WC

 Loaded from                                     *Loaded from
C:\ProgramData\Packages\Centennial.Test.App12    C:\ProgramData\Packages\Centennial.Test.App24

FIGURE 10-7 Registry virtualization of the software hive in the Modern Application Model for
Centennial applications.

Registry optimizations
The configuration manager makes a few noteworthy performance optimizations. First, virtually every
registry key has a security descriptor that protects access to the key. However, storing a unique security
descriptor copy for every key in a hive would be highly inefficient because the same security settings
often apply to entire subtrees of the registry. When the system applies security to a key, the configura-
tion manager checks a pool of the unique security descriptors used within the same hive as the key
to which new security is being applied, and it shares any existing descriptor for the key, ensuring that
there is at most one copy of every unique security descriptor in a hive.

   The configuration manager also optimizes the way it stores key and value names in a hive. Although
the registry is fully Unicode-capable and specifies all names using the Unicode convention, if a name
contains only ASCII characters, the configuration manager stores the name in ASCII form in the hive.

      When the configuration manager reads the name (such as when performing name lookups), it converts
      the name into Unicode form in memory. Storing the name in ASCII form can significantly reduce the
      size of a hive.

         To minimize memory usage, key control blocks don’t store full key registry path names. Instead,
      they reference only a key’s name. For example, a key control block that refers to \Registry\System\
      Control would refer to the name Control rather than to the full path. A further memory optimization is
      that the configuration manager uses key name control blocks to store key names, and all key control
      blocks for keys with the same name share the same key name control block. To optimize performance,
      the configuration manager stores the key control block names in a hash table for quick lookups.

         To provide fast access to key control blocks, the configuration manager stores frequently accessed
      key control blocks in the cache table, which is configured as a hash table. When the configuration
      manager needs to look up a key control block, it first checks the cache table. Finally, the configuration
      manager has another cache, the delayed close table, that stores key control blocks that applications
      close so that an application can quickly reopen a key it has recently closed. To optimize lookups, these
      cache tables are stored for each hive. The configuration manager removes the oldest key control blocks
      from the delayed close table because it adds the most recently closed blocks to the table.

Windows services
      Almost every operating system has a mechanism to start processes at system startup time not tied
      to an interactive user. In Windows, such processes are called services or Windows services. Services
      are similar to UNIX daemon processes and often implement the server side of client/server applica-
      tions. An example of a Windows service might be a web server because it must be running regardless
      of whether anyone is logged on to the computer, and it must start running when the system starts so
      that an administrator doesn’t have to remember, or even be present, to start it.

          Windows services consist of three components: a service application, a service control program
      (SCP), and the Service Control Manager (SCM). First, we describe service applications, service accounts,
      user and packaged services, and all the operations of the SCM. Then we explain how autostart services
      are started during the system boot. We also cover the steps the SCM takes when a service fails during
      its startup and the way the SCM shuts down services. We end with the description of the Shared service
      process and how protected services are managed by the system.

      Service applications
      Service applications, such as web servers, consist of at least one executable that runs as a Windows
      service. A user who wants to start, stop, or configure a service uses a SCP. Although Windows supplies
      built-in SCPs (the most common are the command-line tool sc.exe and the user interface provided
      by the services.msc MMC snap-in) that provide generic start, stop, pause, and continue functionality,
      some service applications include their own SCP that allows administrators to specify configuration set-
      tings particular to the service they manage.

   Service applications are simply Windows executables (GUI or console) with additional code to
receive commands from the SCM as well as to communicate the application’s status back to the SCM.
Because most services don’t have a user interface, they are built as console programs.

    When you install an application that includes a service, the application’s setup program (which
usually acts as an SCP too) must register the service with the system. To register the service, the setup
program calls the Windows CreateService function, a services-related function exported in Advapi32.
dll (%SystemRoot%\System32\ Advapi32.dll). Advapi32, the Advanced API DLL, implements only a
small portion of the client-side SCM APIs. All the most important SCM client APIs are implemented in
another DLL, Sechost.dll, which is the host library for SCM and LSA client APIs. All the SCM APIs not
implemented in Advapi32.dll are simply forwarded to Sechost.dll. Most of the SCM client APIs commu-
nicate with the Service Control Manager through RPC. SCM is implemented in the Services.exe binary.
More details are described later in the “Service Control Manager” section.

   When a setup program registers a service by calling CreateService, an RPC call is made to the SCM
instance running on the target machine. The SCM then creates a registry key for the service under
HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services. The Services key is the nonvolatile representation of the
SCM’s database. The individual keys for each service define the path of the executable image that con-
tains the service as well as parameters and configuration options.

   After creating a service, an installation or management application can start the service via the
StartService function. Because some service-based applications also must initialize during the boot
process to function, it’s not unusual for a setup program to register a service as an autostart service,
ask the user to reboot the system to complete an installation, and let the SCM start the service as the
system boots.

   When a program calls CreateService, it must specify a number of parameters describing the service’s
characteristics. The characteristics include the service’s type (whether it’s a service that runs in its own
process rather than a service that shares a process with other services), the location of the service’s
executable image file, an optional display name, an optional account name and password used to start
the service in a particular account’s security context, a start type that indicates whether the service
starts automatically when the system boots or manually under the direction of an SCP, an error code
that indicates how the system should react if the service detects an error when starting, and, if the
service starts automatically, optional information that specifies when the service starts relative to other
services. While delay-loaded services are supported since Windows Vista, Windows 7 introduced sup-
port for Triggered services, which are started or stopped when one or more specific events are verified.
An SCP can specify trigger event information through the ChangeServiceConfig2 API.

   A service application runs in a service process. A service process can host one or more service
applications. When the SCM starts a service process, the process must immediately invoke the
StartServiceCtrlDispatcher function (before a well-defined timeout expires—see the “Service logon”
section for more details). StartServiceCtrlDispatcher accepts a list of entry points into services, with one
entry point for each service in the process. Each entry point is identified by the name of the service
the entry point corresponds to. After making a local RPC (ALPC) communications connection to the
SCM (which acts as a pipe), StartServiceCtrlDispatcher waits in a loop for commands to come through
the pipe from the SCM. Note that the handle of the connection is saved by the SCM in an internal

      list, which is used for sending and receiving service commands to the right process. The SCM sends
      a service-start command each time it starts a service the process owns. For each start command it
      receives, the StartServiceCtrlDispatcher function creates a thread, called a service thread, to invoke
      the starting service’s entry point (Service Main) and implement the command loop for the service.
      StartServiceCtrlDispatcher waits indefinitely for commands from the SCM and returns control to the
      process’s main function only when all the process’s services have stopped, allowing the service process
      to clean up resources before exiting.

         A service entry point’s (ServiceMain) first action is to call the RegisterServiceCtrlHandler function.
      This function receives and stores a pointer to a function, called the control handler, which the ser-
      vice implements to handle various commands it receives from the SCM. RegisterServiceCtrlHandler
      doesn’t communicate with the SCM, but it stores the function in local process memory for the
      StartServiceCtrlDispatcher function. The service entry point continues initializing the service, which can
      include allocating memory, creating communications end points, and reading private configuration
      data from the registry. As explained earlier, a convention most services follow is to store their param-
      eters under a subkey of their service registry key, named Parameters.

         While the entry point is initializing the service, it must periodically send status messages, using the
      SetServiceStatus function, to the SCM indicating how the service’s startup is progressing. After the
      entry point finishes initialization (the service indicates this to the SCM through the SERVICE_RUNNING
      status), a service thread usually sits in a loop waiting for requests from client applications. For example,
      a web server would initialize a TCP listen socket and wait for inbound HTTP connection requests.

         A service process’s main thread, which executes in the StartServiceCtrlDispatcher function, receives
      SCM commands directed at services in the process and invokes the target service’s control handler
      function (stored by RegisterServiceCtrlHandler). SCM commands include stop, pause, resume, interro-
      gate, and shutdown or application-defined commands. Figure 10-8 shows the internal organization of
      a service process—the main thread and the service thread that make up a process hosting one service.

                                 Main thread                                 Service thread

                                     Main                    1         RegisterServiceCtrlHandler
       Pipe to
        SCM
                 3         StartServiceCtrlDispatcher                             Initialize
                                                             2
                                       3

                            Service control handler                      Process client requests

                                                                                      4
                                                                                           Connections to
      1. StartServiceCtrlDispatcher launches service thread.                               service clients
      2. Service thread registers control handler.
      3. StartServiceCtrlDispatcher calls handlers in response to SCM commands.
      4. Service thread processes client requests.

      FIGURE 10-8 Inside a service process.

Service characteristics
The SCM stores each characteristic as a value in the service’s registry key. Figure 10-9 shows an example
of a service registry key.

FIGURE 10-9 Example of a service registry key.

   Table 10-7 lists all the service characteristics, many of which also apply to device drivers. (Not every
characteristic applies to every type of service or device driver.)

   Note The SCM does not access a service’s Parameters subkey until the service is deleted,
   at which time the SCM deletes the service’s entire key, including subkeys like Parameters.

TABLE 10-7 Service and Driver Registry Parameters

 Value Setting         Value Name                         Value Setting Description

 Start                 SERVICE_BOOT_START (0x0)           Winload preloads the driver so that it is in memory dur-
                                                          ing the boot. These drivers are initialized just prior to
                                                          SERVICE_SYSTEM_START drivers.

                       SERVICE_SYSTEM_START (0x1)         The driver loads and initializes during kernel initializa-
                                                          tion after SERVICE_BOOT_START drivers have initialized.

                       SERVICE_AUTO_START (0x2)           The SCM starts the driver or service after the SCM pro-
                                                          cess, Services.exe, starts.

                       SERVICE_DEMAND_START (0x3)         The SCM starts the driver or service on demand (when a
                                                          client calls StartService on it, it is trigger started, or when
                                                          another starting service is dependent on it.)

                       SERVICE_DISABLED (0x4)             The driver or service cannot be loaded or initialized.

      Value Setting        Value Name                              Value Setting Description

      ErrorControl         SERVICE_ERROR_IGNORE (0x0)              Any error the driver or service returns is ignored, and no
                                                                   warning is logged or displayed.

                           SERVICE_ERROR_NORMAL (0x1)              If the driver or service reports an error, an event log
                                                                   message is written.

                           SERVICE_ERROR_SEVERE (0x2)              If the driver or service returns an error and last known
                                                                   good isn’t being used, reboot into last known good;
                                                                   otherwise, log an event message.

                           SERVICE_ERROR_CRITICAL (0x3)            If the driver or service returns an error and last known
                                                                   good isn’t being used, reboot into last known good;
                                                                   otherwise, log an event message.

      Type                 SERVICE_KERNEL_DRIVER (0x1)             Device driver.

                           SERVICE_FILE_SYSTEM_DRIVER (0x2)        Kernel-mode file system driver.

                           SERVICE_ADAPTER (0x4)                   Obsolete.

                           SERVICE_RECOGNIZER_DRIVER (0x8)         File system recognizer driver.

                           SERVICE_WIN32_OWN_PROCESS               The service runs in a process that hosts only one service.
                           (0x10)

                           SERVICE_WIN32_SHARE_PROCESS             The service runs in a process that hosts multiple services.
                           (0x20)

                           SERVICE_USER_OWN_PROCESS                The service runs with the security token of the logged-in
                           (0x50)                                  user in its own process.

                           SERVICE_USER_SHARE_PROCESS              The service runs with the security token of the logged-in
                           (0x60)                                  user in a process that hosts multiple services.

                           SERVICE_INTERACTIVE_PROCESS             The service is allowed to display windows on the console
                           (0x100)                                 and receive user input, but only on the console session
                                                                   (0) to prevent interacting with user/console applications
                                                                   on other sessions. This option is deprecated.

      Group                Group name                              The driver or service initializes when its group is
                                                                   initialized.

      Tag                  Tag number                              The specified location in a group initialization order. This
                                                                   parameter doesn’t apply to services.

      ImagePath            Path to the service or driver execut-   If ImagePath isn’t specified, the I/O manager looks for
                           able file                               drivers in %SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers. Required
                                                                   for Windows services.

      DependOnGroup        Group name                              The driver or service won’t load unless a driver or service
                                                                   from the specified group loads.

      DependOnService      Service name                            The service won’t load until after the specified service
                                                                   loads. This parameter doesn’t apply to device drivers or
                                                                   services with a start type different than SERVICE_AUTO_
                                                                   START or SERVICE_DEMAND_START.

      ObjectName           Usually LocalSystem, but it can         Specifies the account in which the service will run. If
                           be an account name, such as .\          ObjectName isn’t specified, LocalSystem is the account
                           Administrator                           used. This parameter doesn’t apply to device drivers.

      DisplayName          Name of the service                     The service application shows services by this name. If
                                                                   no name is specified, the name of the service’s registry
                                                                   key becomes its name.

Value Setting        Value Name                             Value Setting Description

DeleteFlag           0 or 1 (TRUE or FALSE)                 Temporary flag set by the SCM when a service is marked
                                                            to be deleted.

Description          Description of service                 Up to 32,767-byte description of the service.

FailureActions       Description of actions the SCM         Failure actions include restarting the service process,
                     should take when the service process   rebooting the system, and running a specified program.
                     exits unexpectedly                     This value doesn’t apply to drivers.

FailureCommand       Program command line                   The SCM reads this value only if FailureActions specifies
                                                            that a program should execute upon service failure. This
                                                            value doesn’t apply to drivers.

DelayedAutoStart     0 or 1 (TRUE or FALSE)                 Tells the SCM to start this service after a certain delay
                                                            has passed since the SCM was started. This reduces
                                                            the number of services starting simultaneously during
                                                            startup.

PreshutdownTimeout Timeout in milliseconds                  This value allows services to override the default pre-
                                                            shutdown notification timeout of 180 seconds. After this
                                                            timeout, the SCM performs shutdown actions on the
                                                            service if it has not yet responded.

ServiceSidType       SERVICE_SID_TYPE_NONE (0x0)            Backward-compatibility setting.

                     SERVICE_SID_TYPE_UNRESTRICTED          The SCM adds the service SID as a group owner to the
                     (0x1)                                  service process’s token when it is created.

                     SERVICE_SID_TYPE_RESTRICTED            The SCM runs the service with a write-restricted token,
                     (0x3)                                  adding the service SID to the restricted SID list of the
                                                            service process, along with the world, logon, and write-
                                                            restricted SIDs.

Alias                String                                 Name of the service’s alias.

RequiredPrivileges   List of privileges                     This value contains the list of privileges that the service
                                                            requires to function. The SCM computes their union
                                                            when creating the token for the shared process related
                                                            to this service, if any.

Security             Security descriptor                    This value contains the optional security descriptor that
                                                            defines who has what access to the service object cre-
                                                            ated internally by the SCM. If this value is omitted, the
                                                            SCM applies a default security descriptor.

LaunchProtected      SERVICE_LAUNCH_PROTECTED_              The SCM launches the service unprotected (default value).
                     NONE (0x0)

                     SERVICE_LAUNCH_PROTECTED_              The SCM launches the service in a Windows protected
                     WINDOWS (0x1)                          process.

                     SERVICE_LAUNCH_PROTECTED_              The SCM launches the service in a Windows protected
                     WINDOWS_ LIGHT (0x2)                   process light.

                     SERVICE_LAUNCH_PROTECTED_              The SCM launches the service in an Antimalware pro-
                     ANTIMALWARE_LIGHT (0x3)                tected process light.

                     SERVICE_LAUNCH_PROTECTED_              The SCM launches the service in an App protected pro-
                     APP_LIGHT (0x4)                        cess light (internal only).

      Value Setting         Value Name                          Value Setting Description

      UserServiceFlags      USER_SERVICE_FLAG_DSMA_ALLOW        Allow the default user to start the user service.
                            (0x1)

                            USER_SERVICE_FLAG_NONDSMA_          Do not allow the default user to start the service.
                            ALLOW (0x2)

      SvcHostSplitDisable   0 or 1 (TRUE or FALSE)              When set to, 1 prohibits the SCM to enable Svchost split-
                                                                ting. This value applies only to shared services.

      PackageFullName       String                              Package full name of a packaged service.

      AppUserModelId        String                              Application user model ID (AUMID) of a packaged service.

      PackageOrigin         PACKAGE_ORIGIN_UNSIGNED (0x1)       These values identify the origin of the AppX package
                            PACKAGE_ORIGIN_INBOX (0x2)          (the entity that has created it).
                            PACKAGE_ORIGIN_STORE (0x3)
                            PACKAGE_ORIGIN_DEVELOPER_
                            UNSIGNED (0x4)
                            PACKAGE_ORIGIN_DEVELOPER_
                            SIGNED (0x5)

         Notice that Type values include three that apply to device drivers: device driver, file system driver,
      and file system recognizer. These are used by Windows device drivers, which also store their param-
      eters as registry data in the Services registry key. The SCM is responsible for starting non-PNP driv-
      ers with a Start value of SERVICE_AUTO_START or SERVICE_DEMAND_START, so it’s natural for the
      SCM database to include drivers. Services use the other types, SERVICE_WIN32_OWN_PROCESS and
      SERVICE_WIN32_SHARE_PROCESS, which are mutually exclusive.

         An executable that hosts just one service uses the SERVICE_WIN32_OWN_PROCESS type. In a
      similar way, an executable that hosts multiple services specifies the SERVICE_WIN32_SHARE_PROCESS.
      Hosting multiple services in a single process saves system resources that would otherwise be consumed
      as overhead when launching multiple service processes. A potential disadvantage is that if one of the
      services of a collection running in the same process causes an error that terminates the process, all the
      services of that process terminate. Also, another limitation is that all the services must run under the
      same account (however, if a service takes advantage of service security hardening mechanisms, it can
      limit some of its exposure to malicious attacks). The SERVICE_USER_SERVICE flag is added to denote a
      user service, which is a type of service that runs with the identity of the currently logged-on user

         Trigger information is normally stored by the SCM under another subkey named TriggerInfo.
      Each trigger event is stored in a child key named as the event index, starting from 0 (for example,
      the third trigger event is stored in the “TriggerInfo 2” subkey). Table 10-8 lists all the possible registry
      values that compose the trigger information.

TABLE 10-8 Triggered services registry parameters

Value Setting         Value Name                          Value Setting Description

Action                SERVICE_TRIGGER_ACTION_             Start the service when the trigger event occurs.
                      SERVICE_ START (0x1)

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_ACTION_             Stop the service when the trigger event occurs.
                      SERVICE_ STOP (0x2)

Type                  SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_DEVICE_        Specifies an event triggered when a device of the speci-
                      INTERFACE_ARRIVAL (0x1)             fied device interface class arrives or is present when the
                                                          system starts.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_IP_            Specifies an event triggered when an IP address be-
                      ADDRESS_AVAILABILITY (0x2)          comes available or unavailable on the network stack.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_DOMAIN_        Specifies an event triggered when the computer joins or
                      JOIN (0x3)                          leaves a domain.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_FIREWALL_      Specifies an event triggered when a firewall port is
                      PORT_EVENT (0x4)                    opened or closed.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_GROUP_         Specifies an event triggered when a machine or user
                      POLICY (0x5)                        policy change occurs.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_NETWORK_       Specifies an event triggered when a packet or request
                      ENDPOINT (0x6)                      arrives on a particular network protocol.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_TYPE_CUSTOM         Specifies a custom event generated by an ETW provider.
                      (0x14)

Guid                  Trigger subtype GUID                A GUID that identifies the trigger event subtype. The
                                                          GUID depends on the Trigger type.

Data Index            Trigger-specific data               Trigger-specific data for the service trigger event. This
                                                          value depends on the trigger event type.

DataType Index        SERVICE_TRIGGER_DATA_TYPE_          The trigger-specific data is in binary format.
                      BINARY (0x1)

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_DATA_TYPE_          The trigger-specific data is in string format.
                      STRING (0x2)

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_DATA_TYPE_          The trigger-specific data is a byte value.
                      LEVEL (0x3)

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_DATA_TYPE_          The trigger-specific data is a 64-bit (8 bytes) unsigned
                      KEYWORD_ANY (0x4)                   integer value.

                      SERVICE_TRIGGER_DATA_TYPE_          The trigger-specific data is a 64-bit (8 bytes) unsigned
                      KEYWORD_ALL (0x5)                   integer value.

Service accounts
The security context of a service is an important consideration for service developers as well as for system
administrators because it dictates which resource the process can access. Most built-in services run in the
security context of an appropriate Service account (which has limited access rights, as described in the
following subsections). When a service installation program or the system administrator creates a service,
it usually specifies the security context of the local system account (displayed sometimes as SYSTEM and
other times as LocalSystem), which is very powerful. Two other built-in accounts are the network service
and local service accounts. These accounts have fewer capabilities than the local system account from a se-
curity standpoint. The following subsections describe the special characteristics of all the service accounts.

      The local system account
      The local system account is the same account in which core Windows user-mode operating system com-
      ponents run, including the Session Manager (%SystemRoot%\System32\Smss.exe), the Windows subsys-
      tem process (Csrss.exe), the Local Security Authority process (%SystemRoot%\System32\Lsass.exe), and
      the Logon process (%SystemRoot%\System32\Winlogon.exe). For more information on these processes,
      see Chapter 7 in Part 1.

          From a security perspective, the local system account is extremely powerful—more powerful than
      any local or domain account when it comes to security ability on a local system. This account has the
      following characteristics:

         ■   It is a member of the local Administrators group. Table 10-9 shows the groups to which the local
             system account belongs. (See Chapter 7 in Part 1 for information on how group membership is
             used in object access checks.)

         ■   It has the right to enable all privileges (even privileges not normally granted to the local ad-
             ministrator account, such as creating security tokens). See Table 10-10 for the list of privileges
             assigned to the local system account. (Chapter 7 in Part 1 describes the use of each privilege.)

         ■   Most files and registry keys grant full access to the local system account. Even if they don’t grant
             full access, a process running under the local system account can exercise the take-ownership
             privilege to gain access.

         ■   Processes running under the local system account run with the default user profile (HKU\.
             DEFAULT). Therefore, they can’t directly access configuration information stored in the user
             profiles of other accounts (unless they explicitly use the LoadUserProfile API).

         ■   When a system is a member of a Windows domain, the local system account includes the ma-
             chine security identifier (SID) for the computer on which a service process is running. Therefore,
             a service running in the local system account will be automatically authenticated on other
             machines in the same forest by using its computer account. (A forest is a grouping of domains.)

         ■   Unless the machine account is specifically granted access to resources (such as network shares,
             named pipes, and so on), a process can access network resources that allow null sessions—that
             is, connections that require no credentials. You can specify the shares and pipes on a particular
             computer that permit null sessions in the NullSessionPipes and NullSessionShares registry values
             under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\LanmanServer\Parameters.

      TABLE 10-9 Service account group membership (and integrity level)

      Local System                 Network Service               Local Service             Service Account

      Administrators               Everyone                      Everyone                  Everyone
      Everyone                     Users                         Users                     Users
      Authenticated users          Authenticated users           Authenticated users       Authenticated users
                                   Local                         Local                     Local
                                   Network service               Local service             Local service
                                   Console logon                 Console logon             All services
                                                                 UWP capabilities groups   Write restricted
                                                                                           Console logon

      System integrity level       System integrity level        System integrity level    High integrity Level

TABLE 10-10 Service account privileges

Local System                                Local Service / Network Service   Service Account

SeAssignPrimaryTokenPrivilege               SeAssignPrimaryTokenPrivilege     SeChangeNotifyPrivilege
SeAuditPrivilege                            SeAuditPrivilege                  SeCreateGlobalPrivilege
SeBackupPrivilege                           SeChangeNotifyPrivilege           SeImpersonatePrivilege
SeChangeNotifyPrivilege                     SeCreateGlobalPrivilege           SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege
SeCreateGlobalPrivilege                     SeImpersonatePrivilege            SeShutdownPrivilege
SeCreatePagefilePrivilege                   SeIncreaseQuotaPrivilege          SeTimeZonePrivilege
SeCreatePermanentPrivilege                  SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege     SeUndockPrivilege
SeCreateSymbolicLinkPrivilege               SeShutdownPrivilege
SeCreateTokenPrivilege                      SeSystemtimePrivilege
SeDebugPrivilege                            SeTimeZonePrivilege
SeDelegateSessionUserImpersonatePrivilege   SeUndockPrivilege (client only)
SeImpersonatePrivilege
SeIncreaseBasePriorityPrivilege
SeIncreaseQuotaPrivilege
SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege
SeLoadDriverPrivilege
SeLockMemoryPrivilege
SeManageVolumePrivilege
SeProfileSingleProcessPrivilege
SeRestorePrivilege
SeSecurityPrivilege
SeShutdownPrivilege
SeSystemEnvironmentPrivilege
SeSystemProfilePrivilege
SeSystemtimePrivilege
SeTakeOwnershipPrivilege
SeTcbPrivilege
SeTimeZonePrivilege
SeTrustedCredManAccessPrivilege
SeRelabelPrivilege
SeUndockPrivilege (client only)

The network service account
The network service account is intended for use by services that want to authenticate to other ma-
chines on the network using the computer account, as does the local system account, but do not have
the need for membership in the Administrators group or the use of many of the privileges assigned to
the local system account. Because the network service account does not belong to the Administrators
group, services running in the network service account by default have access to far fewer registry keys,
file system folders, and files than the services running in the local system account. Further, the assign-
ment of few privileges limits the scope of a compromised network service process. For example, a pro-
cess running in the network service account cannot load a device driver or open arbitrary processes.

    Another difference between the network service and local system accounts is that processes run-
ning in the network service account use the network service account’s profile. The registry component
of the network service profile loads under HKU\S-1-5-20, and the files and directories that make up the
component reside in %SystemRoot%\ServiceProfiles\NetworkService.

   A service that runs in the network service account is the DNS client, which is responsible for resolv-
ing DNS names and for locating domain controllers.

      The local service account
      The local service account is virtually identical to the network service account with the important dif-
      ference that it can access only network resources that allow anonymous access. Table 10-10 shows that
      the network service account has the same privileges as the local service account, and Table 10-9 shows
      that it belongs to the same groups with the exception that it belongs to the local service group instead
      of the network service group. The profile used by processes running in the local service loads into
      HKU\S-1-5-19 and is stored in %SystemRoot%\ServiceProfiles\LocalService.

          Examples of services that run in the local service account include the Remote Registry Service, which
      allows remote access to the local system’s registry, and the LmHosts service, which performs NetBIOS
      name resolution.

      Running services in alternate accounts
      Because of the restrictions just outlined, some services need to run with the security credentials of a
      user account. You can configure a service to run in an alternate account when the service is created or
      by specifying an account and password that the service should run under with the Windows Services
      MMC snap-in. In the Services snap-in, right-click a service and select Properties, click the Log On tab,
      and select the This Account option, as shown in Figure 10-10.

         Note that when required to start, a service running with an alternate account is always launched us-
      ing the alternate account credentials, even though the account is not currently logged on. This means
      that the user profile is loaded even though the user is not logged on. User Services, which are described
      later in this chapter (in the “User services” section), have also been designed to overcome this problem.
      They are loaded only when the user logs on.

      FIGURE 10-10 Service account settings.

Running with least privilege
A service’s process typically is subject to an all-or-nothing model, meaning that all privileges available
to the account the service process is running under are available to a service running in the process that
might require only a subset of those privileges. To better conform to the principle of least privilege, in
which Windows assigns services only the privileges they require, developers can specify the privileges
their service requires, and the SCM creates a security token that contains only those privileges.

   Service developers use the ChangeServiceConfig2 API (specifying the SERVICE_CONFIG_REQUIRED_
PRIVILEGES _INFO information level) to indicate the list of privileges they desire. The API saves that
information in the registry into the RequiredPrivileges value of the root service key (refer to Table 10-7).
When the service starts, the SCM reads the key and adds those privileges to the token of the process in
which the service is running.

   If there is a RequiredPrivileges value and the service is a stand-alone service (running as a dedicated
process), the SCM creates a token containing only the privileges that the service needs. For services
running as part of a shared service process (as are a subset of services that are part of Windows) and
specifying required privileges, the SCM computes the union of those privileges and combines them
for the service-hosting process’s token. In other words, only the privileges not specified by any of the
services that are hosted in the same service process will be removed. In the case in which the registry
value does not exist, the SCM has no choice but to assume that the service is either incompatible with
least privileges or requires all privileges to function. In this case, the full token is created, containing all
privileges, and no additional security is offered by this model. To strip almost all privileges, services can
specify only the Change Notify privilege.

   Note The privileges a service specifies must be a subset of those that are available to the
   service account in which it runs.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing privileges required by services
   You can view the privileges a service requires with the Service Control utility, sc.exe, and the
   qprivs option. Additionally, Process Explorer can show you information about the security token
   of any service process on the system, so you can compare the information returned by sc.exe
   with the privileges part of the token. The following steps show you how to do this for some of the
   best locked-down services on the system.

        1.   Use sc.exe to look at the required privileges specified by CryptSvc by typing the follow-
             ing into a command prompt:
             sc qprivs cryptsvc

              You should see three privileges being requested: the SeChangeNotifyPrivilege,
              SeCreateGlobalPrivilege, and the SeImpersonatePrivilege.

         2.   Run Process Explorer as administrator and look at the process list.

              You should see multiple Svchost.exe processes that are hosting the services on your
              machine (in case Svchost splitting is enabled, the number of Svchost instances are even
              more). Process Explorer highlights these in pink.

         3.   CryptSvc is a service that runs in a shared hosting process. In Windows 10, locat-
              ing the correct process instance is easily achievable through Task Manager. You do
              not need to know the name of the Service DLL, which is listed in the HKLM\SYSTEM\
              CurrentControlSet\Services\CryptSvc \Parameters registry key.

         4.   Open Task Manager and look at the Services tab. You should easily find the PID of the
              CryptSvc hosting process.

         5.   Return to Process Explorer and double-click the Svchost.exe process that has the same
              PID found by Task Manager to open the Properties dialog box.

         6.   Double check that the Services tab includes the CryptSvc service. If service splitting is en-
              abled, it should contain only one service; otherwise, it will contain multiple services. Then
              click the Security tab. You should see security information similar to the following figure:

      Note that although the service is running as part of the local service account, the list of privi-
   leges Windows assigned to it is much shorter than the list available to the local service account
   shown in Table 10-10.

      For a service-hosting process, the privileges part of the token is the union of the privileges
   requested by all the services running inside it, so this must mean that services such as DnsCache
   and LanmanWorkstation have not requested privileges other than the ones shown by Process
   Explorer. You can verify this by running the Sc.exe tool on those other services as well (only if
   Svchost Service Splitting is disabled).

Service isolation
Although restricting the privileges that a service has access to helps lessen the ability of a compromised
service process to compromise other processes, it does nothing to isolate the service from resources
that the account in which it is running has access under normal conditions. As mentioned earlier, the
local system account has complete access to critical system files, registry keys, and other securable
objects on the system because the access control lists (ACLs) grant permissions to that account.

   At times, access to some of these resources is critical to a service’s operation, whereas other objects
should be secured from the service. Previously, to avoid running in the local system account to obtain
access to required resources, a service would be run under a standard user account, and ACLs would be
added on the system objects, which greatly increased the risk of malicious code attacking the system.
Another solution was to create dedicated service accounts and set specific ACLs for each account (as-
sociated to a service), but this approach easily became an administrative hassle.

   Windows now combines these two approaches into a much more manageable solution: it allows
services to run in a nonprivileged account but still have access to specific privileged resources without
lowering the security of those objects. Indeed, the ACLs on an object can now set permissions directly for
a service, but not by requiring a dedicated account. Instead, Windows generates a service SID to repre-
sent a service, and this SID can be used to set permissions on resources such as registry keys and files.

    The Service Control Manager uses service SIDs in different ways. If the service is configured to be
launched using a virtual service account (in the NT SERVICE\ domain), a service SID is generated and
assigned as the main user of the new service’s token. The token will also be part of the NT SERVICE\ALL
SERVICES group. This group is used by the system to allow a securable object to be accessed by any
service. In the case of shared services, the SCM creates the service-hosting processes (a process that
contains more than one service) with a token that contains the service SIDs of all services that are part
of the service group associated with the process, including services that are not yet started (there is no
way to add new SIDs after a token has been created). Restricted and unrestricted services (explained
later in this section) always have a service SID in the hosting process’s token.

      EXPERIMENT: Understanding Service SIDs
      In Chapter 9, we presented an experiment (“Understanding the security of the VM worker pro-
      cess and the virtual hard disk files”) in which we showed how the system generates VM SIDs for
      different VM worker processes. Similar to the VM worker process, the system generates Service
      SIDs using a well-defined algorithm. This experiment uses Process Explorer to show service SIDs
      and explains how the system generates them.

          First, you need to choose a service that runs with a virtual service account or under a re-
      stricted/nonrestricted access token. Open the Registry Editor (by typing regedit in the Cortana
      search box) and navigate to the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services registry key. Then
      select Find from the Edit menu. As discussed previously in this section, the service account is
      stored in the ObjectName registry value. Unfortunately, you would not find a lot of services run-
      ning in a virtual service account (those accounts begin with the NT SERVICE\ virtual domain), so it
      is better if you look at a restricted token (unrestricted tokens work, too). Type ServiceSidType
      (the value of which is stored whether the Service should run with a restricted or unrestricted
      token) and click the Find Next button.

          For this experiment, you are looking for a restricted service account (which has the
      ServiceSidType value set to 3), but unrestricted services work well, too (the value is set to 1).
      If the desired value does not match, you can use the F3 button to find the next service. In this
      experiment, use the BFE service.

         Open Process Explorer, search the BFE hosting process (refer to the previous experiment for
      understanding how to find the correct one), and double-click it. Select the Security tab and click
      the NT SERVICE\BFE Group (the human-readable notation of the service SID) or the service SID of
      your service if you have chosen another one. Note the extended group SID, which appears under
      the group list (if the service is running under a virtual service account, the service SID is instead
      shown by Process Explorer in the second line of the Security Tab):

           S-1-5-80-1383147646-27650227-2710666058-1662982300-1023958487

         The NT authority (ID 5) is responsible for the service SIDs, generated by using the service base
      RID (80) and by the SHA-1 hash of the uppercased UTF-16 Unicode string of the service name.
      SHA-1 is an algorithm that produces a 160-bit (20-bytes) value. In the Windows security world,
      this means that the SID will have 5 (4-bytes) sub-authority values. The SHA-1 hash of the Unicode
      (UTF-16) BFE service name is:

           7e 28 71 52 b3 e8 a5 01 4a 7b 91 a1 9c 18 1f 63 d7 5d 08 3d

         If you divide the produced hash in five groups of eight hexadecimal digits, you will find
      the following:

       ■     0x5271287E (first DWORD value), which equals 1383147646 in decimal (remember that
             Windows is a little endian OS)

       ■     0x01A5E8B3 (second DWORD value), which equals 27650227 in decimal

    ■   0xA1917B4A (third DWORD value), which equals 2710666058 in decimal

    ■   0x631F189C (fourth DWORD value), which equals 1662982300 in decimal

    ■   0x3D085DD7 (fifth DWORD value), which equals 1023958487 in decimal

      If you combine the numbers and add the service SID authority value and first RID (S-1-5-80),
   you build the same SID shown by Process Explorer. This demonstrates how the system generates
   service SIDs.

   The usefulness of having a SID for each service extends beyond the mere ability to add ACL entries and
permissions for various objects on the system as a way to have fine-grained control over their access. Our
discussion initially covered the case in which certain objects on the system, accessible by a given account,
must be protected from a service running within that same account. As we’ve previously described,
service SIDs prevent that problem only by requiring that Deny entries associated with the service SID
be placed on every object that needs to be secured, which is a clearly an unmanageable approach.

   To avoid requiring Deny access control entries (ACEs) as a way to prevent services from having ac-
cess to resources that the user account in which they run does have access, there are two types of ser-
vice SIDs: the restricted service SID (SERVICE_SID_TYPE_RESTRICTED) and the unrestricted service SID
(SERVICE_SID_TYPE_UNRESTRICTED), the latter being the default and the case we’ve looked at up to
now. The names are a little misleading in this case. The service SID is always generated in the same way
(see the previous experiment). It is the token of the hosting process that is generated in a different way.

   Unrestricted service SIDs are created as enabled-by-default, group owner SIDs, and the process
token is also given a new ACE that provides full permission to the service logon SID, which allows the
service to continue communicating with the SCM. (A primary use of this would be to enable or disable
service SIDs inside the process during service startup or shutdown.) A service running with the SYSTEM
account launched with an unrestricted token is even more powerful than a standard SYSTEM service.

   A restricted service SID, on the other hand, turns the service-hosting process’s token into a write-
restricted token. Restricted tokens (see Chapter 7 of Part 1 for more information on tokens) generally
require the system to perform two access checks while accessing securable objects: one using the stan-
dard token’s enabled group SIDs list, and another using the list of restricted SIDs. For a standard restricted
token, access is granted only if both access checks allow the requested access rights. On the other hand,
write-restricted tokens (which are usually created by specifying the WRITE_RESTRICTED flag to the
CreateRestrictedToken API) perform the double access checks only for write requests: read-only access
requests raise just one access check on the token’s enabled group SIDs as for regular tokens.

    The service host process running with a write-restricted token can write only to objects granting
explicit write access to the service SID (and the following three supplemental SIDs added for compat-
ibility), regardless of the account it’s running. Because of this, all services running inside that pro-
cess (part of the same service group) must have the restricted SID type; otherwise, services with the
restricted SID type fail to start. Once the token becomes write-restricted, three more SIDs are added
for compatibility reasons:

         ■    The world SID is added to allow write access to objects that are normally accessible by anyone
              anyway, most importantly certain DLLs in the load path.

         ■    The service logon SID is added to allow the service to communicate with the SCM.

         ■    The write-restricted SID is added to allow objects to explicitly allow any write-restricted service
              write access to them. For example, ETW uses this SID on its objects to allow any write-restricted
              service to generate events.

         Figure 10-11 shows an example of a service-hosting process containing services that have been
      marked as having restricted service SIDs. For example, the Base Filtering Engine (BFE), which is respon-
      sible for applying Windows Firewall filtering rules, is part of this hosting process because these rules are
      stored in registry keys that must be protected from malicious write access should a service be compro-
      mised. (This could allow a service exploit to disable the outgoing traffic firewall rules, enabling bidirec-
      tional communication with an attacker, for example.)

      FIGURE 10-11 Service with restricted SIDs.

    By blocking write access to objects that would otherwise be writable by the service (through inherit-
ing the permissions of the account it is running as), restricted service SIDs solve the other side of the
problem we initially presented because users do not need to do anything to prevent a service running
in a privileged account from having write access to critical system files, registry keys, or other objects,
limiting the attack exposure of any such service that might have been compromised.

   Windows also allows for firewall rules that reference service SIDs linked to one of the three behav-
iors described in Table 10-11.

TABLE 10-11 Network restriction rules

Scenario                     Example                                       Restrictions

Network access blocked       The shell hardware detection service          All network communications are blocked
                             (ShellHWDetection).                           (both incoming and outgoing).

Network access statically    The RPC service (Rpcss) operates on port      Network communications are restricted to
port-restricted              135 (TCP and UDP).                            specific TCP or UDP ports.

Network access dynamically   The DNS service (Dns) listens on variable     Network communications are restricted to
port-restricted              ports (UDP).                                  configurable TCP or UDP ports.

The virtual service account
As introduced in the previous section, a service SID also can be set as the owner of the token of a
service running in the context of a virtual service account. A service running with a virtual service ac-
count has fewer privileges than the LocalService or NetworkService service types (refer to Table 10-10
for the list of privileges) and no credentials available to authenticate it through the network. The
Service SID is the token’s owner, and the token is part of the Everyone, Users, Authenticated Users, and
All Services groups. This means that the service can read (or write, unless the service uses a restricted
SID type) objects that belong to standard users but not to high-privileged ones belonging to the
Administrator or System group. Unlike the other types, a service running with a virtual service ac-
count has a private profile, which is loaded by the ProfSvc service (Profsvc.dll) during service logon, in
a similar way as for regular services (more details in the “Service logon” section). The profile is initially
created during the first service logon using a folder with the same name as the service located in the
%SystemRoot%\ServiceProfiles path. When the service’s profile is loaded, its registry hive is mounted
in the HKEY_USERS root key, under a key named as the virtual service account’s human readable SID
(starting with S-1-5-80 as explained in the “Understanding service SIDs” experiment).

    Users can easily assign a virtual service account to a service by setting the log-on account to NT
SERVICE\<ServiceName>, where <ServiceName> is the name of the service. At logon time, the Service
Control Manager recognizes that the log-on account is a virtual service account (thanks to the NT
SERVICE logon provider) and verifies that the account’s name corresponds to the name of the ser-
vice. A service can’t be started using a virtual service account that belongs to another one, and this
is enforced by SCM (through the internal ScIsValidAccountName function). Services that share a host
process cannot run with a virtual service account.

   While operating with securable objects, users can add to the object’s ACL using the service log-on
account (in the form of NT SERVICE\<ServiceName>), an ACE that allows or denies access to a virtual

      service. As shown in Figure 10-12, the system is able to translate the virtual service account’s name to
      the proper SID, thus establishing fine-grained access control to the object from the service. (This also
      works for regular services running with a nonsystem account, as explained in the previous section.)

      FIGURE 10-12 A file (securable object) with an ACE allowing full access to the TestService.

      Interactive services and Session 0 Isolation
      One restriction for services running under a proper service account, the local system, local service, and
      network service accounts that has always been present in Windows is that these services could not display
      dialog boxes or windows on the interactive user’s desktop. This limitation wasn’t the direct result of run-
      ning under these accounts but rather a consequence of the way the Windows subsystem assigns service
      processes to window stations. This restriction is further enhanced by the use of sessions, in a model called
      Session 0 Isolation, a result of which is that services cannot directly interact with a user’s desktop.

         The Windows subsystem associates every Windows process with a window station. A window station
      contains desktops, and desktops contain windows. Only one window station can be visible at a time
      and receive user mouse and keyboard input. In a Terminal Services environment, one window station
      per session is visible, but services all run as part of the hidden session 0. Windows names the visible
      window station WinSta0, and all interactive processes access WinSta0.

         Unless otherwise directed, the Windows subsystem associates services running within the proper
      service account or the local system account with a nonvisible window station named Service-0x0-
      3e7$ that all noninteractive services share. The number in the name, 3e7, represents the logon session
      identifier that the Local Security Authority process (LSASS) assigns to the logon session the SCM uses

for noninteractive services running in the local system account. In a similar way, services running in the
Local service account are associated with the window station generated by the logon session 3e5, while
services running in the network service account are associated with the window station generated by
the logon session 3e4.

   Services configured to run under a user account (that is, not the local system account) are run in a
different nonvisible window station named with the LSASS logon identifier assigned for the service’s
logon session. Figure 10-13 shows a sample display from the Sysinternals WinObj tool that shows the
object manager directory in which Windows places window station objects. Visible are the interactive
window station (WinSta0) and the three noninteractive services window stations.

FIGURE 10-13 List of window stations.

   Regardless of whether services are running in a user account, the local system account, or the local
or network service accounts, services that aren’t running on the visible window station can’t receive
input from a user or display visible windows. In fact, if a service were to pop up a modal dialog box,
the service would appear hung because no user would be able to see the dialog box, which of course
would prevent the user from providing keyboard or mouse input to dismiss it and allow the service to
continue executing.

   A service could have a valid reason to interact with the user via dialog boxes or windows. Services
configured using the SERVICE_INTERACTIVE_PROCESS flag in the service’s registry key’s Type parameter
are launched with a hosting process connected to the interactive WinSta0 window station. (Note that
services configured to run under a user account can’t be marked as interactive.) Were user processes to
run in the same session as services, this connection to WinSta0 would allow the service to display dialog

      boxes and windows and enable those windows to respond to user input because they would share the
      window station with the interactive services. However, only processes owned by the system and Windows
      services run in session 0; all other logon sessions, including those of console users, run in different ses-
      sions. Therefore, any window displayed by processes in session 0 is not visible to the user.

          This additional boundary helps prevent shatter attacks, whereby a less-privileged application sends
      window messages to a window visible on the same window station to exploit a bug in a more privi-
      leged process that owns the window, which permits it to execute code in the more privileged process.
      In the past, Windows included the Interactive Services Detection service (UI0Detect), which notified
      users when a service had displayed a window on the main desktop of the WinSta0 window station of
      Session 0. This would allow the user to switch to the session 0’s window station, making interactive
      services run properly. For security purposes, this feature was first disabled; since Windows 10 April 2018
      Update (RS4), it has been completely removed.

         As a result, even though interactive services are still supported by the Service Control Manager (only
      by setting the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Windows\NoInteractiveServices registry
      value to 0), access to session 0 is no longer possible. No service can display any window anymore (at
      least without some undocumented hack).

      The Service Control Manager (SCM)
      The SCM’s executable file is %SystemRoot%\System32\Services.exe, and like most service processes, it
      runs as a Windows console program. The Wininit process starts the SCM early during the system boot.
      (Refer to Chapter 12 for details on the boot process.) The SCM’s startup function, SvcCtrlMain, orches-
      trates the launching of services that are configured for automatic startup.

          SvcCtrlMain first performs its own initialization by setting its process secure mitigations and
      unhandled exception filter and by creating an in-memory representation of the well-known SIDs. It
      then creates two synchronization events: one named SvcctrlStartEvent_A3752DX and the other named
      SC_AutoStartComplete. Both are initialized as nonsignaled. The first event is signaled by the SCM after
      all the steps necessary to receive commands from SCPs are completed. The second is signaled when the
      entire initialization of the SCM is completed. The event is used for preventing the system or other users
      from starting another instance of the Service Control Manager. The function that an SCP uses to estab-
      lish a dialog with the SCM is OpenSCManager. OpenSCManager prevents an SCP from trying to contact
      the SCM before the SCM has initialized by waiting for SvcctrlStartEvent_A3752DX to become signaled.

         Next, SvcCtrlMain gets down to business, creates a proper security descriptor, and calls
      ScGenerateServiceDB, the function that builds the SCM’s internal service database. ScGenerateServiceDB
      reads and stores the contents of HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\ServiceGroupOrder\List,
      a REG_MULTI_SZ value that lists the names and order of the defined service groups. A service’s registry
      key contains an optional Group value if that service or device driver needs to control its startup order-
      ing with respect to services from other groups. For example, the Windows networking stack is built
      from the bottom up, so networking services must specify Group values that place them later in the
      startup sequence than networking device drivers. The SCM internally creates a group list that preserves
      the ordering of the groups it reads from the registry. Groups include (but are not limited to) NDIS, TDI,
      Primary Disk, Keyboard Port, Keyboard Class, Filters, and so on. Add-on and third-party applications

can even define their own groups and add them to the list. Microsoft Transaction Server, for example,
adds a group named MS Transactions.

   ScGenerateServiceDB then scans the contents of HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services, creat-
ing an entry (called “service record”) in the service database for each key it encounters. A database
entry includes all the service-related parameters defined for a service as well as fields that track the
service’s status. The SCM adds entries for device drivers as well as for services because the SCM starts
services and drivers marked as autostart and detects startup failures for drivers marked boot-start and
system-start. It also provides a means for applications to query the status of drivers. The I/O manager
loads drivers marked boot-start and system-start before any user-mode processes execute, and there-
fore any drivers having these start types load before the SCM starts.

   ScGenerateServiceDB reads a service’s Group value to determine its membership in a group and
associates this value with the group’s entry in the group list created earlier. The function also reads and
records in the database the service’s group and service dependencies by querying its DependOnGroup
and DependOnService registry values. Figure 10-14 shows how the SCM organizes the service entry
and group order lists. Notice that the service list is sorted alphabetically. The reason this list is sorted
alphabetically is that the SCM creates the list from the Services registry key, and Windows enumerates
registry keys alphabetically.

                                     Service database
Group order list
   Group1             Group2              Group3

Service entry list
Service1                       Service2                   Service3
  Type                          Type                         Type
  Start                         Start                        Start
  DependOnGroup                 DependOnGroup                DependOnGroup
  DependOnService               DependOnService              DependOnService
  Status                        Status                       Status
  Group                         Group                        Group
  …                             …                            …

FIGURE 10-14 Organization of the service database.

    During service startup, the SCM calls on LSASS (for example, to log on a service in a nonlocal system
account), so the SCM waits for LSASS to signal the LSA_RPC_SERVER_ACTIVE synchronization event,
which it does when it finishes initializing. Wininit also starts the LSASS process, so the initialization of
LSASS is concurrent with that of the SCM, and the order in which LSASS and the SCM complete initial-
ization can vary. The SCM cleans up (from the registry, other than from the database) all the services
that were marked as deleted (through the DeleteFlag registry value) and generates the dependency list
for each service record in the database. This allows the SCM to know which service is dependent on a
particular service record, which is the opposite dependency information compared to the one stored
in the registry.

         The SCM then queries whether the system is started in safe mode (from the HKLM\System\
      CurrentControlSet\ Control\Safeboot\Option\OptionValue registry value). This check is needed for
      determining later if a service should start (details are explained in the “Autostart services startup”
      section later in this chapter). It then creates its remote procedure call (RPC) named pipe, which is
      named \Pipe\Ntsvcs, and then RPC launches a thread to listen on the pipe for incoming messages
      from SCPs. The SCM signals its initialization-complete event, SvcctrlStartEvent_A3752DX. Registering a
      console application shutdown event handler and registering with the Windows subsystem process via
      RegisterServiceProcess prepares the SCM for system shutdown.

         Before starting the autostart services, the SCM performs a few more steps. It initializes the UMDF
      driver manager, which is responsible in managing UMDF drivers. Since Windows 10 Fall Creators
      Update (RS3), it’s part of the Service Control Manager and waits for the known DLLs to be fully initial-
      ized (by waiting on the \KnownDlls\SmKnownDllsInitialized event that’s signaled by Session Manager).

         EXPERIMENT: Enable services logging
         The Service Control Manager usually logs ETW events only when it detects abnormal error con-
         ditions (for example, while failing to start a service or to change its configuration). This behavior
         can be overridden by manually enabling or disabling a different kind of SCM events. In this ex-
         periment, you will enable two kinds of events that are particularly useful for debugging a service
         change of state. Events 7036 and 7042 are raised when a service change status or when a STOP
         control request is sent to a service.

             Those two events are enabled by default on server SKUs but not on client editions of
         Windows 10. Using your Windows 10 machine, you should open the Registry Editor (by typing
         regedit.exe in the Cortana search box) and navigate to the following registry key: HKLM\
         SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\ScEvents. If the last subkey does not exist, you should create
         it by right-clicking the Control subkey and selecting the Key item from the New context menu).

            Now you should create two DWORD values and name them 7036 and 7042. Set the data of the
         two values to 1. (You can set them to 0 to gain the opposite effect of preventing those events from
         being generated, even on Server SKUs.) You should get a registry state like the following one:

   Restart your workstation, and then start and stop a service (for example, the AppXSvc service)
using the sc.exe tool by opening an administrative command prompt and typing the following
commands:
sc stop AppXSvc
sc start AppXSvc

   Open the Event Viewer (by typing eventvwr in the Cortana search box) and navigate to
Windows Logs and then System. You should note different events from the Service Control
Manager with Event ID 7036 and 7042. In the top ones, you should find the stop event generated
by the AppXSvc service, as shown in the following figure:

   Note that the Service Control Manager by default logs all the events generated by services
started automatically at system startup. This can generate an undesired number of events flood-
ing the System event log. To mitigate the problem, you can disable SCM autostart events by
creating a registry value named EnableAutostartEvents in the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\
Control key and set it to 0 (the default implicit value is 1 in both client and server SKUs). As a
result, this will log only events generated by service applications when starting, pausing, or stop-
ping a target service.

      Network drive letters
      In addition to its role as an interface to services, the SCM has another totally unrelated responsibil-
      ity: It notifies GUI applications in a system whenever the system creates or deletes a network drive-
      letter connection. The SCM waits for the Multiple Provider Router (MPR) to signal a named event,
      \BaseNamedObjects\ScNetDrvMsg, which MPR signals whenever an application assigns a drive letter
      to a remote network share or deletes a remote-share drive-letter assignment. When MPR signals the
      event, the SCM calls the GetDriveType Windows function to query the list of connected network drive
      letters. If the list changes across the event signal, the SCM sends a Windows broadcast message of type
      WM_DEVICECHANGE. The SCM uses either DBT_DEVICEREMOVECOMPLETE or DBT_DEVICEARRIVAL
      as the message’s subtype. This message is primarily intended for Windows Explorer so that it can up-
      date any open computer windows to show the presence or absence of a network drive letter.

      Service control programs
      As introduced in the “Service applications” section, service control programs (SCPs) are stan-
      dard Windows applications that use SCM service management functions, including CreateService,
      OpenService, StartService, ControlService, QueryServiceStatus, and DeleteService. To use the SCM func-
      tions, an SCP must first open a communications channel to the SCM by calling the OpenSCManager
      function to specify what types of actions it wants to perform. For example, if an SCP simply wants
      to enumerate and display the services present in the SCM’s database, it requests enumerate-service
      access in its call to OpenSCManager. During its initialization, the SCM creates an internal object that
      represents the SCM database and uses the Windows security functions to protect the object with a
      security descriptor that specifies what accounts can open the object with what access permissions. For
      example, the security descriptor indicates that the Authenticated Users group can open the SCM object
      with enumerate-service access. However, only administrators can open the object with the access
      required to create or delete a service.

         As it does for the SCM database, the SCM implements security for services themselves. When an
      SCP creates a service by using the CreateService function, it specifies a security descriptor that the
      SCM associates internally with the service’s entry in the service database. The SCM stores the security
      descriptor in the service’s registry key as the Security value, and it reads that value when it scans the
      registry’s Services key during initialization so that the security settings persist across reboots. In the
      same way that an SCP must specify what types of access it wants to the SCM database in its call to
      OpenSCManager, an SCP must tell the SCM what access it wants to a service in a call to OpenService.
      Accesses that an SCP can request include the ability to query a service’s status and to configure, stop,
      and start a service.

        The SCP you’re probably most familiar with is the Services MMC snap-in that’s included in Windows,
      which resides in %SystemRoot%\System32\Filemgmt.dll. Windows also includes Sc.exe (Service
      Controller tool), a command-line service control program that we’ve mentioned multiple times.

         SCPs sometimes layer service policy on top of what the SCM implements. A good example is the
      timeout that the Services MMC snap-in implements when a service is started manually. The snap-in
      presents a progress bar that represents the progress of a service’s startup. Services indirectly inter-
      act with SCPs by setting their configuration status to reflect their progress as they respond to SCM

commands such as the start command. SCPs query the status with the QueryServiceStatus function.
They can tell when a service actively updates the status versus when a service appears to be hung, and
the SCM can take appropriate actions in notifying a user about what the service is doing.

Autostart services startup
SvcCtrlMain invokes the SCM function ScAutoStartServices to start all services that have a Start value
designating autostart (except delayed autostart and user services). ScAutoStartServices also starts auto-
start drivers. To avoid confusion, you should assume that the term services means services and drivers
unless indicated otherwise. ScAutoStartServices begins by starting two important and basic services,
named Plug and Play (implemented in the Umpnpmgr.dll library) and Power (implemented in the
Umpo.dll library), which are needed by the system for managing plug-and-play hardware and power
interfaces. The SCM then registers its Autostart WNF state, used to indicate the current autostart phase
to the Power and other services.

   Before the starting of other services can begin, the ScAutoStartService routine calls ScGetBootAnd
SystemDriverState to scan the service database looking for boot-start and system-start device driver
entries. ScGetBootAndSystemDriverState determines whether a driver with the start type set to Boot
Start or System Start successfully started by looking up its name in the object manager namespace
directory named \Driver. When a device driver successfully loads, the I/O manager inserts the driver’s
object in the namespace under this directory, so if its name isn’t present, it hasn’t loaded. Figure 10-15
shows WinObj displaying the contents of the Driver directory. ScGetBootAndSystemDriverState
notes the names of drivers that haven’t started and that are part of the current profile in a list named
ScStoppedDrivers. The list will be used later at the end of the SCM initialization for logging an event to
the system event log (ID 7036), which contains the list of boot drivers that have failed to start.

FIGURE 10-15 List of driver objects.

         The algorithm in ScAutoStartServices for starting services in the correct order proceeds in phases,
      whereby a phase corresponds to a group and phases proceed in the sequence defined by the group
      ordering stored in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\ServiceGroupOrder\List registry
      value. The List value, shown in Figure 10-16, includes the names of groups in the order that the SCM
      should start them. Thus, assigning a service to a group has no effect other than to fine-tune its startup
      with respect to other services belonging to different groups.

      FIGURE 10-16 ServiceGroupOrder registry key.

          When a phase starts, ScAutoStartServices marks all the service entries belonging to the phase’s
      group for startup. Then ScAutoStartServices loops through the marked services to see whether it can
      start each one. Part of this check includes seeing whether the service is marked as delayed autostart or
      a user template service; in both cases, the SCM will start it at a later stage. (Delayed autostart services
      must also be ungrouped. User services are discussed later in the “User services” section.) Another part
      of the check it makes consists of determining whether the service has a dependency on another group,
      as specified by the existence of the DependOnGroup value in the service’s registry key. If a dependency
      exists, the group on which the service is dependent must have already initialized, and at least one
      service of that group must have successfully started. If the service depends on a group that starts later
      than the service’s group in the group startup sequence, the SCM notes a “circular dependency” error
      for the service. If ScAutoStartServices is considering a Windows service or an autostart device driver,
      it next checks to see whether the service depends on one or more other services; if it is dependent, it
      determines whether those services have already started. Service dependencies are indicated with the
      DependOnService registry value in a service’s registry key. If a service depends on other services that
      belong to groups that come later in the ServiceGroupOrder\List, the SCM also generates a “circular
      dependency” error and doesn’t start the service. If the service depends on any services from the same
      group that haven’t yet started, the service is skipped.

    When the dependencies of a service have been satisfied, ScAutoStartServices makes a final check
to see whether the service is part of the current boot configuration before starting the service. When
the system is booted in safe mode, the SCM ensures that the service is either identified by name or by
group in the appropriate safe boot registry key. There are two safe boot keys, Minimal and Network,
under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\SafeBoot, and the one that the SCM checks depends
on what safe mode the user booted. If the user chose Safe Mode or Safe Mode With Command Prompt
at the modern or legacy boot menu, the SCM references the Minimal key; if the user chose Safe Mode
With Networking, the SCM refers to Network. The existence of a string value named Option under the
SafeBoot key indicates not only that the system booted in safe mode but also the type of safe mode the
user selected. For more information about safe boots, see the section “Safe mode” in Chapter 12.

Service start
Once the SCM decides to start a service, it calls StartInternal, which takes different steps for services
than for device drivers. When StartInternal starts a Windows service, it first determines the name of
the file that runs the service’s process by reading the ImagePath value from the service’s registry key.
If the service file corresponds to LSASS.exe, the SCM initializes a control pipe, connects to the already-
running LSASS process, and waits for the LSASS process response. When the pipe is ready, the LSASS
process connects to the SCM by calling the classical StartServiceCtrlDispatcher routine. As shown in
Figure 10-17, some services like Credential Manager or Encrypting File System need to cooperate with
the Local Security Authority Subsystem Service (LSASS)—usually for performing cryptography opera-
tion for the local system policies (like passwords, privileges, and security auditing. See Chapter 7 of Part
1 for more details).

FIGURE 10-17 Services hosted by the Local Security Authority Subsystem Service (LSASS) process.

          The SCM then determines whether the service is critical (by analyzing the FailureAction registry value)
      or is running under WoW64. (If the service is a 32-bit service, the SCM should apply file system redirec-
      tion. See the “WoW64” section of Chapter 8 for more details.) It also examines the service’s Type value. If
      the following conditions apply, the SCM initiates a search in the internal Image Record Database:

         ■   The service type value includes SERVICE_WINDOWS_SHARE_PROCESS (0x20).

         ■   The service has not been restarted after an error.

         ■   Svchost service splitting is not allowed for the service (see the “Svchost service splitting” section
             later in this chapter for further details).

          An Image record is a data structure that represents a launched process hosting at least one service.
      If the preceding conditions apply, the SCM searches an image record that has the same process execut-
      able’s name as the new service ImagePath value.

          If the SCM locates an existing image database entry with matching ImagePath data, the service can
      be shared, and one of the hosting processes is already running. The SCM ensures that the found host-
      ing process is logged on using the same account as the one specified for the service being started. (This
      is to ensure that the service is not configured with the wrong account, such as a LocalService account,
      but with an image path pointing to a running Svchost, such as netsvcs, which runs as LocalSystem.) A
      service’s ObjectName registry value stores the user account in which the service should run. A service
      with no ObjectName or an ObjectName of LocalSystem runs in the local system account. A process can
      be logged on as only one account, so the SCM reports an error when a service specifies a different ac-
      count name than another service that has already started in the same process.

         If the image record exists, before the new service can be run, another final check should be per-
      formed: The SCM opens the token of the currently executing host process and checks whether the nec-
      essary service SID is located in the token (and all the required privileges are enabled). Even in this case,
      the SCM reports an error if the condition is not verified. Note that, as we describe in the next section
      (“Service logon”), for shared services, all the SIDs of the hosted services are added at token creation
      time. It is not possible for any user-mode component to add group SIDs in a token after the token has
      already been created.

          If the image database doesn’t have an entry for the new service ImagePath value, the SCM creates
      one. When the SCM creates a new entry, it stores the logon account name used for the service and
      the data from the service’s ImagePath value. The SCM requires services to have an ImagePath value.
      If a service doesn’t have an ImagePath value, the SCM reports an error stating that it couldn’t find the
      service’s path and isn’t able to start the service. After the SCM creates an image record, it logs on the
      service account and starts the new hosting process. (The procedure is described in the next section,
      “Service logon.”)

          After the service has been logged in, and the host process correctly started, the SCM waits for the
      initial “connection” message from the service. The service connects to SCM thanks to the SCM RPC pipe
      (\Pipe\Ntsvcs, as described in the “The Service Control Manager” section) and to a Channel Context
      data structure built by the LogonAndStartImage routine. When the SCM receives the first message, it
      proceeds to start the service by posting a SERVICE_CONTROL_START control message to the service
      process. Note that in the described communication protocol is always the service that connects to SCM.

    The service application is able to process the message thanks to the message loop located in the
StartServiceCtrlDispatcher API (see the “Service applications” section earlier in this chapter for more de-
tails). The service application enables the service group SID in its token (if needed) and creates the new
service thread (which will execute the Service Main function). It then calls back into the SCM for creat-
ing a handle to the new service, storing it in an internal data structure (INTERNAL_DISPATCH_TABLE)
similar to the service table specified as input to the StartServiceCtrlDispatcher API. The data structure is
used for tracking the active services in the hosting process. If the service fails to respond positively to
the start command within the timeout period, the SCM gives up and notes an error in the system Event
Log that indicates the service failed to start in a timely manner.

   If the service the SCM starts with a call to StartInternal has a Type registry value of SERVICE_KERNEL_
DRIVER or SERVICE_FILE_SYSTEM_DRIVER, the service is really a device driver, so StartInternal enables
the load driver security privilege for the SCM process and then invokes the kernel service NtLoadDriver,
passing in the data in the ImagePath value of the driver’s registry key. Unlike services, drivers don’t
need to specify an ImagePath value, and if the value is absent, the SCM builds an image path by ap-
pending the driver’s name to the string %SystemRoot%\System32\ Drivers\.

   Note A device driver with the start value of SERVICE_AUTO_START or SERVICE_DEMAND_
   START is started by the SCM as a runtime driver, which implies that the resulting loaded
   image uses shared pages and has a control area that describes them. This is different than
   drivers with the start value of SERVICE_BOOT_START or SERVICE_SYSTEM_START, which are
   loaded by the Windows Loader and started by the I/O manager. Those drivers all use private
   pages and are neither sharable nor have an associated Control Area.
   More details are available in Chapter 5 in Part 1.

   ScAutoStartServices continues looping through the services belonging to a group until all the
services have either started or generated dependency errors. This looping is the SCM’s way of auto-
matically ordering services within a group according to their DependOnService dependencies. The SCM
starts the services that other services depend on in earlier loops, skipping the dependent services until
subsequent loops. Note that the SCM ignores Tag values for Windows services, which you might come
across in subkeys under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services key; the I/O manager honors
Tag values to order device driver startup within a group for boot-start and system-start drivers. Once
the SCM completes phases for all the groups listed in the ServiceGroupOrder\List value, it performs
a phase for services belonging to groups not listed in the value and then executes a final phase for
services without a group.

   After handling autostart services, the SCM calls ScInitDelayStart, which queues a delayed work item
associated with a worker thread responsible for processing all the services that ScAutoStartServices
skipped because they were marked delayed autostart (through the DelayedAutostart registry value).
This worker thread will execute after the delay. The default delay is 120 seconds, but it can be overrid-
den by the creating an AutoStartDelay value in HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control. The SCM
performs the same actions as those executed during startup of nondelayed autostart services.

          When the SCM finishes starting all autostart services and drivers, as well as setting up the delayed
      autostart work item, the SCM signals the event \BaseNamedObjects\SC_AutoStartComplete. This event
      is used by the Windows Setup program to gauge startup progress during installation.

      Service logon
      During the start procedure, if the SCM does not find any existing image record, it means that the host
      process needs to be created. Indeed, the new service is not shareable, it’s the first one to be executed,
      it has been restarted, or it’s a user service. Before starting the process, the SCM should create an access
      token for the service host process. The LogonAndStartImage function’s goal is to create the token and
      start the service’s host process. The procedure depends on the type of service that will be started.

         User services (more precisely user service instances) are started by retrieving the current
      logged-on user token (through functions implemented in the UserMgr.dll library). In this case, the
      LogonAndStartImage function duplicates the user token and adds the “WIN://ScmUserService” security
      attribute (the attribute value is usually set to 0). This security attribute is used primarily by the Service
      Control Manager when receiving connection requests from the service. Although SCM can recognize
      a process that’s hosting a classical service through the service SID (or the System account SID if the
      service is running under the Local System Account), it uses the SCM security attribute for identifying a
      process that’s hosting a user service.

         For all other type of services, the SCM reads the account under which the service will be started
      from the registry (from the ObjectName value) and calls ScCreateServiceSids with the goal to create a
      service SID for each service that will be hosted by the new process. (The SCM cycles between each ser-
      vice in its internal service database.) Note that if the service runs under the LocalSystem account (with
      no restricted nor unrestricted SID), this step is not executed.

          The SCM logs on services that don’t run in the System account by calling the LSASS function
      LogonUserExEx. LogonUserExEx normally requires a password, but normally the SCM indicates to LSASS
      that the password is stored as a service’s LSASS “secret” under the key HKLM\SECURITY\Policy\Secrets
      in the registry. (Keep in mind that the contents of SECURITY aren’t typically visible because its default
      security settings permit access only from the System account.) When the SCM calls LogonUserExEx, it
      specifies a service logon as the logon type, so LSASS looks up the password in the Secrets subkey that
      has a name in the form _SC_<Service Name>.

         Note Services running with a virtual service account do not need a password for having
         their service token created by the LSA service. For those services, the SCM does not provide
         any password to the LogonUserExEx API.

         The SCM directs LSASS to store a logon password as a secret using the LsaStorePrivateData function
      when an SCP configures a service’s logon information. When a logon is successful, LogonUserEx returns
      a handle to an access token to the caller. The SCM adds the necessary service SIDs to the returned
      token, and, if the new service uses restricted SIDs, invokes the ScMakeServiceTokenWriteRestricted

function, which transforms the token in a write-restricted token (adding the proper restricted SIDs).
Windows uses access tokens to represent a user’s security context, and the SCM later associates the
access token with the process that implements the service.

   Next, the SCM creates the user environment block and security descriptor to associate with the
new service process. In case the service that will be started is a packaged service, the SCM reads all the
package information from the registry (package full name, origin, and application user model ID) and
calls the Appinfo service, which stamps the token with the necessary AppModel security attributes and
prepares the service process for the modern package activation. (See the “Packaged applications” sec-
tion in Chapter 8 for more details about the AppModel.)

   After a successful logon, the SCM loads the account’s profile information, if it’s not already loaded,
by calling the User Profile Basic Api DLL’s (%SystemRoot%\System32\Profapi.dll) LoadProfileBasic
function. The value HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\ProfileList\<user profile
key>\ProfileImagePath contains the location on disk of a registry hive that LoadUserProfile loads into
the registry, making the information in the hive the HKEY_CURRENT_USER key for the service.

   As its next step, LogonAndStartImage proceeds to launch the service’s process. The SCM starts the
process in a suspended state with the CreateProcessAsUser Windows function. (Except for a process
hosting services under a local system account, which are created through the standard CreateProcess
API. The SCM already runs with a SYSTEM token, so there is no need of any other logon.)

    Before the process is resumed, the SCM creates the communication data structure that allows the
service application and the SCM to communicate through asynchronous RPCs. The data structure con-
tains a control sequence, a pointer to a control and response buffer, service and hosting process data
(like the PID, the service SID, and so on), a synchronization event, and a pointer to the async RPC state.

   The SCM resumes the service process via the ResumeThread function and waits for the ser-
vice to connect to its SCM pipe. If it exists, the registry value HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
Control\ServicesPipeTimeout determines the length of time that the SCM waits for a service to call
StartServiceCtrlDispatcher and connect before it gives up, terminates the process, and concludes
that the service failed to start (note that in this case the SCM terminates the process, unlike when the
service doesn’t respond to the start request, discussed previously in the “Service start” section). If
ServicesPipeTimeout doesn’t exist, the SCM uses a default timeout of 30 seconds. The SCM uses the
same timeout value for all its service communications.

Delayed autostart services
Delayed autostart services enable Windows to cope with the growing number of services that are
being started when a user logs on, which bogs down the boot-up process and increases the time
before a user is able to get responsiveness from the desktop. The design of autostart services was
primarily intended for services required early in the boot process because other services depend on
them, a good example being the RPC service, on which all other services depend. The other use was to
allow unattended startup of a service, such as the Windows Update service. Because many autostart

      services fall in this second category, marking them as delayed autostart allows critical services to start
      faster and for the user’s desktop to be ready sooner when a user logs on immediately after booting.
      Additionally, these services run in background mode, which lowers their thread, I/O, and memory
      priority. Configuring a service for delayed autostart requires calling the ChangeServiceConfig2 API. You
      can check the state of the flag for a service by using the qc option of sc.exe.

         Note If a nondelayed autostart service has a delayed autostart service as one of its
         dependencies, the delayed autostart flag is ignored and the service is started immediately
         to satisfy the dependency.

      Triggered-start services
      Some services need to be started on demand, after certain system events occur. For that reason,
      Windows 7 introduced the concept of triggered-start service. A service control program can use the
      ChangeServiceConfig2 API (by specifying the SERVICE_CONFIG_TRIGGER_INFO information level) for
      configuring a demand-start service to be started (or stopped) after one or more system events occur.
      Examples of system events include the following:

         ■   A specific device interface is connected to the system.

         ■   The computer joins or leaves a domain.

         ■   A TCP/IP port is opened or closed in the system firewall.

         ■   A machine or user policy has been changed.

         ■   An IP address on the network TCP/IP stack becomes available or unavailable.

         ■   A RPC request or Named pipe packet arrives on a particular interface.

         ■   An ETW event has been generated in the system.

         The first implementation of triggered-start services relied on the Unified Background Process
      Manager (see the next section for details). Windows 8.1 introduced the Broker Infrastructure, which had
      the main goal of managing multiple system events targeted to Modern apps. All the previously listed
      events have been thus begun to be managed by mainly three brokers, which are all parts of the Broker
      Infrastructure (with the exception of the Event Aggregation): Desktop Activity Broker, System Event
      Broker, and the Event Aggregation. More information on the Broker Infrastructure is available in the
      “Packaged applications” section of Chapter 8.

          After the first phase of ScAutoStartServices is complete (which usually starts critical services listed
      in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\EarlyStartServices registry value), the SCM calls
      ScRegisterServicesForTriggerAction, the function responsible in registering the triggers for each trig-
      gered-start service. The routine cycles between each Win32 service located in the SCM database. For
      each service, the function generates a temporary WNF state name (using the NtCreateWnfStateName

native API), protected by a proper security descriptor, and publishes it with the service status stored as
state data. (WNF architecture is described in the “Windows Notification Facility” section of Chapter 8.)
This WNF state name is used for publishing services status changes. The routine then queries all the
service triggers from the TriggerInfo registry key, checking their validity and bailing out in case no trig-
gers are available.

   Note The list of supported triggers, described previously, together with their parameters,
   is documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winsvc/ns-winsvc-
   service_trigger.

    If the check succeeded, for each trigger the SCM builds an internal data structure containing all the
trigger information (like the targeted service name, SID, broker name, and trigger parameters) and
determines the correct broker based on the trigger type: external devices events are managed by the
System Events broker, while all the other types of events are managed by the Desktop Activity broker.
The SCM at this stage is able to call the proper broker registration routine. The registration process is
private and depends on the broker: multiple private WNF state names (which are broker specific) are
generated for each trigger and condition.

    The Event Aggregation broker is the glue between the private WNF state names published by the
two brokers and the Service Control Manager. It subscribes to all the WNF state names corresponding
to the triggers and the conditions (by using the RtlSubscribeWnfStateChangeNotification API). When
enough WNF state names have been signaled, the Event Aggregation calls back the SCM, which can
start or stop the triggered start service.

    Differently from the WNF state names used for each trigger, the SCM always independently publishes
a WNF state name for each Win32 service whether or not the service has registered some triggers. This
is because an SCP can receive notification when the specified service status changes by invoking the
NotifyServiceStatusChange API, which subscribes to the service’s status WNF state name. Every time the
SCM raises an event that changes the status of a service, it publishes new state data to the “service status
change” WNF state, which wakes up a thread running the status change callback function in the SCP.

Startup errors
If a driver or a service reports an error in response to the SCM’s startup command, the ErrorControl
value of the service’s registry key determines how the SCM reacts. If the ErrorControl value is SERVICE_
ERROR_IGNORE (0) or the ErrorControl value isn’t specified, the SCM simply ignores the error and
continues processing service startups. If the ErrorControl value is SERVICE_ERROR_NORMAL (1), the
SCM writes an event to the system Event Log that says, “The <service name> service failed to start due
to the following error.” The SCM includes the textual representation of the Windows error code that the
service returned to the SCM as the reason for the startup failure in the Event Log record. Figure 10-18
shows the Event Log entry that reports a service startup error.

      FIGURE 10-18 Service startup failure Event Log entry.

          If a service with an ErrorControl value of SERVICE_ERROR_SEVERE (2) or SERVICE_ERROR_CRITICAL
      (3) reports a startup error, the SCM logs a record to the Event Log and then calls the internal function
      ScRevertToLastKnownGood. This function checks whether the last known good feature is enabled, and,
      if so, switches the system’s registry configuration to a version, named last known good, with which the
      system last booted successfully. Then it restarts the system using the NtShutdownSystem system ser-
      vice, which is implemented in the executive. If the system is already booting with the last known good
      configuration, or if the last known good configuration is not enabled, the SCM does nothing more than
      emit a log event.

      Accepting the boot and last known good
      Besides starting services, the system charges the SCM with determining when the system’s registry
      configuration, HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet, should be saved as the last known good control
      set. The CurrentControlSet key contains the Services key as a subkey, so CurrentControlSet includes the
      registry representation of the SCM database. It also contains the Control key, which stores many kernel-
      mode and user-mode subsystem configuration settings. By default, a successful boot consists of a suc-
      cessful startup of autostart services and a successful user logon. A boot fails if the system halts because
      a device driver crashes the system during the boot or if an autostart service with an ErrorControl value
      of SERVICE_ERROR_SEVERE or SERVICE_ERROR_CRITICAL reports a startup error.

          The last known good configuration feature is usually disabled in the client version of Windows.
      It can be enabled by setting the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\
      Configuration Manager\LastKnownGood\Enabled registry value to 1. In Server SKUs of Windows, the
      value is enabled by default.

         The SCM knows when it has completed a successful startup of the autostart services, but Winlogon
      (%SystemRoot%\System32\Winlogon.exe) must notify it when there is a successful logon. Winlogon
      invokes the NotifyBootConfigStatus function when a user logs on, and NotifyBootConfigStatus sends a

message to the SCM. Following the successful start of the autostart services or the receipt of the mes-
sage from NotifyBootConfigStatus (whichever comes last), if the last known good feature is enabled, the
SCM calls the system function NtInitializeRegistry to save the current registry startup configuration.

    Third-party software developers can supersede Winlogon’s definition of a successful logon
with their own definition. For example, a system running Microsoft SQL Server might not consider
a boot successful until after SQL Server is able to accept and process transactions. Developers im-
pose their definition of a successful boot by writing a boot-verification program and installing the
program by pointing to its location on disk with the value stored in the registry key HKLM\SYSTEM\
CurrentControlSet\Control\BootVerificationProgram. In addition, a boot-verification program’s instal-
lation must disable Winlogon’s call to NotifyBootConfigStatus by setting HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\
Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Winlogon\ReportBootOk to 0. When a boot-verification program is
installed, the SCM launches it after finishing autostart services and waits for the program’s call to
NotifyBootConfigStatus before saving the last known good control set.

    Windows maintains several copies of CurrentControlSet, and CurrentControlSet is really a symbolic
registry link that points to one of the copies. The control sets have names in the form HKLM\SYSTEM\
ControlSetnnn, where nnn is a number such as 001 or 002. The HKLM\SYSTEM\Select key contains values
that identify the role of each control set. For example, if CurrentControlSet points to ControlSet001, the
Current value under Select has a value of 1. The LastKnownGood value under Select contains the number
of the last known good control set, which is the control set last used to boot successfully. Another value
that might be on your system under the Select key is Failed, which points to the last control set for which
the boot was deemed unsuccessful and aborted in favor of an attempt at booting with the last known
good control set. Figure 10-19 displays a Windows Server system’s control sets and Select values.

   NtInitializeRegistry takes the contents of the last known good control set and synchronizes it with
that of the CurrentControlSet key’s tree. If this was the system’s first successful boot, the last known
good won’t exist, and the system will create a new control set for it. If the last known good tree exists,
the system simply updates it with differences between it and CurrentControlSet.

FIGURE 10-19 Control set selection key on Windows Server 2019.

         Last known good is helpful in situations in which a change to CurrentControlSet, such as the modifi-
      cation of a system performance-tuning value under HKLM\SYSTEM\Control or the addition of a service
      or device driver, causes the subsequent boot to fail. Figure 10-20 shows the Startup Settings of the
      modern boot menu. Indeed, when the Last Known Good feature is enabled, and the system is in the
      boot process, users can select the Startup Settings choice in the Troubleshoot section of the modern
      boot menu (or in the Windows Recovery Environment) to bring up another menu that lets them direct
      the boot to use the last known good control set. (In case the system is still using the Legacy boot
      menu, users should press F8 to enable the Advanced Boot Options.) As shown in the figure, when the
      Enable Last Known Good Configuration option is selected, the system boots by rolling the system’s
      registry configuration back to the way it was the last time the system booted successfully. Chapter 12
      describes in more detail the use of the Modern boot menu, the Windows Recovery Environment, and
      other recovery mechanisms for troubleshooting system startup problems.

      FIGURE 10-20 Enabling the last known good configuration.

      Service failures
      A service can have optional FailureActions and FailureCommand values in its registry key that the SCM
      records during the service’s startup. The SCM registers with the system so that the system signals the
      SCM when a service process exits. When a service process terminates unexpectedly, the SCM deter-
      mines which services ran in the process and takes the recovery steps specified by their failure-related
      registry values. Additionally, services are not only limited to requesting failure actions during crashes
      or unexpected service termination, since other problems, such as a memory leak, could also result in
      service failure.

    If a service enters the SERVICE_STOPPED state and the error code returned to the SCM is not
ERROR_SUCCESS, the SCM checks whether the service has the FailureActionsOnNonCrashFailures flag
set and performs the same recovery as if the service had crashed. To use this functionality, the service
must be configured via the ChangeServiceConfig2 API or the system administrator can use the Sc.exe
utility with the Failureflag parameter to set FailureActionsOnNonCrashFailures to 1. The default value
being 0, the SCM will continue to honor the same behavior as on earlier versions of Windows for all
other services.

    Actions that a service can configure for the SCM include restarting the service, running a program,
and rebooting the computer. Furthermore, a service can specify the failure actions that take place the
first time the service process fails, the second time, and subsequent times, and it can indicate a delay
period that the SCM waits before restarting the service if the service asks to be restarted. You can easily
manage the recovery actions for a service using the Recovery tab of the service’s Properties dialog
box in the Services MMC snap-in, as shown in Figure 10-21.

FIGURE 10-21 Service Recovery options.

   Note that in case the next failure action is to reboot the computer, the SCM, after starting the ser-
vice, marks the hosting process as critical by invoking the NtSetInformationProcess native API with the
ProcessBreakOnTermination information class. A critical process, if terminated unexpectedly, crashes
the system with the CRITICAL_PROCESS_DIED bugcheck (as already explained in Part 1, Chapter 2,
“System architecture.”

      Service shutdown
      When Winlogon calls the Windows ExitWindowsEx function, ExitWindowsEx sends a message to
      Csrss, the Windows subsystem process, to invoke Csrss’s shutdown routine. Csrss loops through the
      active processes and notifies them that the system is shutting down. For every system process except
      the SCM, Csrss waits up to the number of seconds specified in milliseconds by HKCU\Control Panel\
      Desktop\WaitToKillTimeout (which defaults to 5 seconds) for the process to exit before moving on to the
      next process. When Csrss encounters the SCM process, it also notifies it that the system is shutting down
      but employs a timeout specific to the SCM. Csrss recognizes the SCM using the process ID Csrss saved
      when the SCM registered with Csrss using the RegisterServicesProcess function during its initialization.
      The SCM’s timeout differs from that of other processes because Csrss knows that the SCM communi-
      cates with services that need to perform cleanup when they shut down, so an administrator might need
      to tune only the SCM’s timeout. The SCM’s timeout value in milliseconds resides in the HKLM\SYSTEM\
      CurrentControlSet\Control\WaitToKillServiceTimeout registry value, and it defaults to 20 seconds.

         The SCM’s shutdown handler is responsible for sending shutdown notifications to all the ser-
      vices that requested shutdown notification when they initialized with the SCM. The SCM function
      ScShutdownAllServices first queries the value of the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
      ShutdownTimeout (by setting a default of 20 seconds in case the value does not exists). It then loops
      through the SCM services database. For each service, it unregisters eventual service triggers and deter-
      mines whether the service desires to receive a shutdown notification, sending a shutdown command
      (SERVICE_CONTROL_SHUTDOWN) if that is the case. Note that all the notifications are sent to services
      in parallel by using thread pool work threads. For each service to which it sends a shutdown command,
      the SCM records the value of the service’s wait hint, a value that a service also specifies when it registers
      with the SCM. The SCM keeps track of the largest wait hint it receives (in case the maximum calculated
      wait hint is below the Shutdown timeout specified by the ShutdownTimeout registry value, the shutdown
      timeout is considered as maximum wait hint). After sending the shutdown messages, the SCM waits either
      until all the services it notified of shutdown exit or until the time specified by the largest wait hint passes.

         While the SCM is busy telling services to shut down and waiting for them to exit, Csrss waits
      for the SCM to exit. If the wait hint expires without all services exiting, the SCM exits, and Csrss
      continues the shutdown process. In case Csrss’s wait ends without the SCM having exited (the
      WaitToKillServiceTimeout time expired), Csrss kills the SCM and continues the shutdown process. Thus,
      services that fail to shut down in a timely manner are killed. This logic lets the system shut down with
      the presence of services that never complete a shutdown as a result of flawed design, but it also means
      that services that require more than 5 seconds will not complete their shutdown operations.

         Additionally, because the shutdown order is not deterministic, services that might depend on other
      services to shut down first (called shutdown dependencies) have no way to report this to the SCM and
      might never have the chance to clean up either.

         To address these needs, Windows implements preshutdown notifications and shutdown ordering
      to combat the problems caused by these two scenarios. A preshutdown notification is sent to a service
      that has requested it via the SetServiceStatus API (through the SERVICE_ACCEPT_PRESHUTDOWN ac-
      cepted control) using the same mechanism as shutdown notifications. Preshutdown notifications are
      sent before Wininit exits. The SCM generally waits for them to be acknowledged.

   The idea behind these notifications is to flag services that might take a long time to clean up (such as
database server services) and give them more time to complete their work. The SCM sends a progress
query request and waits 10 seconds for a service to respond to this notification. If the service does not
respond within this time, it is killed during the shutdown procedure; otherwise, it can keep running as
long as it needs, as long as it continues to respond to the SCM.

   Services that participate in the preshutdown can also specify a shutdown order with respect to
other preshutdown services. Services that depend on other services to shut down first (for example,
the Group Policy service needs to wait for Windows Update to finish) can specify their shutdown de-
pendencies in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\PreshutdownOrder registry value.

Shared service processes
Running every service in its own process instead of having services share a process whenever possible
wastes system resources. However, sharing processes means that if any of the services in the process
has a bug that causes the process to exit, all the services in that process terminate.

   Of the Windows built-in services, some run in their own process and some share a process with
other services. For example, the LSASS process contains security-related services—such as the Security
Accounts Manager (SamSs) service, the Net Logon (Netlogon) service, the Encrypting File System (EFS)
service, and the Crypto Next Generation (CNG) Key Isolation (KeyIso) service.

   There is also a generic process named Service Host (SvcHost - %SystemRoot%\System32\Svchost.
exe) to contain multiple services. Multiple instances of SvcHost run as different processes. Services
that run in SvcHost processes include Telephony (TapiSrv), Remote Procedure Call (RpcSs), and Remote
Access Connection Manager (RasMan). Windows implements services that run in SvcHost as DLLs and
includes an ImagePath definition of the form %SystemRoot%\System32\svchost.exe –k netsvcs in the
service’s registry key. The service’s registry key must also have a registry value named ServiceDll under
a Parameters subkey that points to the service’s DLL file.

    All services that share a common SvcHost process specify the same parameter (–k netsvcs in the ex-
ample in the preceding paragraph) so that they have a single entry in the SCM’s image database. When
the SCM encounters the first service that has a SvcHost ImagePath with a particular parameter during
service startup, it creates a new image database entry and launches a SvcHost process with the param-
eter. The parameter specified with the -k switch is the name of the service group. The entire command
line is parsed by the SCM while creating the new shared hosting process. As discussed in the “Service
logon” section, in case another service in the database shares the same ImagePath value, its service SID
will be added to the new hosting process’s group SIDs list.

   The new SvcHost process takes the service group specified in the command line and looks for a val-
ue having the same name under HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Svchost.
SvcHost reads the contents of the value, interpreting it as a list of service names, and notifies the SCM
that it’s hosting those services when SvcHost registers with the SCM.

   When the SCM encounters another shared service (by checking the service type value) during
service startup with an ImagePath matching an entry it already has in the image database, it doesn’t
launch a second process but instead just sends a start command for the service to the SvcHost it

      already started for that ImagePath value. The existing SvcHost process reads the ServiceDll parameter
      in the service’s registry key, enables the new service group SID in its token, and loads the DLL into its
      process to start the service.

         Table 10-12 lists all the default service groupings on Windows and some of the services that are
      registered for each of them.

      TABLE 10-12 Major service groupings

      Service Group                         Services                                 Notes

      LocalService                          Network Store Interface, Windows         Services that run in the local service
                                            Diagnostic Host, Windows Time,           account and make use of the network
                                            COM+ Event System, HTTP Auto-            on various ports or have no network
                                            Proxy Service, Software Protection       usage at all (and hence no restric-
                                            Platform UI Notification, Thread Order   tions).
                                            Service, LLDT Discovery, SSL, FDP
                                            Host, WebClient

      LocalServiceAndNoImpersonation        UPnP and SSDP, Smart Card, TPM,          Services that run in the local service
                                            Font Cache, Function Discovery,          account and make use of the network
                                            AppID, qWAVE, Windows Connect            on a fixed set of ports. Services run
                                            Now, Media Center Extender,              with a write-restricted token.
                                            Adaptive Brightness

      LocalServiceNetworkRestricted         DHCP, Event Logger, Windows Audio,       Services that run in the local service
                                            NetBIOS, Security Center, Parental       account and make use of the network
                                            Controls, HomeGroup Provider             on a fixed set of ports.

      LocalServiceNoNetwork                 Diagnostic Policy Engine, Base           Services that run in the local service
                                            Filtering Engine, Performance Logging    account but make no use of the net-
                                            and Alerts, Windows Firewall, WWAN       work at all. Services run with a write-
                                            AutoConfig                               restricted token.

      LocalSystemNetworkRestricted          DWM, WDI System Host, Network            Services that run in the local system
                                            Connections, Distributed Link            account and make use of the network
                                            Tracking, Windows Audio Endpoint,        on a fixed set of ports.
                                            Wired/WLAN AutoConfig, Pnp-X, HID
                                            Access, User-Mode Driver Framework
                                            Service, Superfetch, Portable Device
                                            Enumerator, HomeGroup Listener,
                                            Tablet Input, Program Compatibility,
                                            Offline Files

      NetworkService                        Cryptographic Services, DHCP Client,     Services that run in the network
                                            Terminal Services, WorkStation,          service account and make use of the
                                            Network Access Protection, NLA, DNS      network on various ports (or have no
                                            Client, Telephony, Windows Event         enforced network restrictions).
                                            Collector, WinRM

      NetworkServiceAndNoImpersonation      KTM for DTC                              Services that run in the network ser-
                                                                                     vice account and make use of the net-
                                                                                     work on a fixed set of ports. Services
                                                                                     run with a write-restricted token.

      NetworkServiceNetworkRestricted       IPSec Policy Agent                       Services that run in the network ser-
                                                                                     vice account and make use of the net-
                                                                                     work on a fixed set of ports.

Svchost service splitting
As discussed in the previous section, running a service in a shared host process saves system resources
but has the big drawback that a single unhandled error in a service obliges all the other services shared
in the host process to be killed. To overcome this problem, Windows 10 Creators Update (RS2) has
introduced the Svchost Service splitting feature.

    When the SCM starts, it reads three values from the registry representing the services global commit
limits (divided in: low, medium, and hard caps). These values are used by the SCM to send “low resources”
messages in case the system runs under low-memory conditions. It then reads the Svchost Service
split threshold value from the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\SvcHostSplitThresholdInKB
registry value. The value contains the minimum amount of system physical memory (expressed in KB)
needed to enable Svchost Service splitting (the default value is 3.5 GB on client systems and around
3.7 GB on server systems). The SCM then obtains the value of the total system physical memory using
the GlobalMemoryStatusEx API and compares it with the threshold previously read from the registry.
If the total physical memory is above the threshold, it enables Svchost service splitting (by setting an
internal global variable).

    Svchost service splitting, when active, modifies the behavior in which SCM starts the host Svchost
process of shared services. As already discussed in the “Service start” section earlier in this chapter, the
SCM does not search for an existing image record in its database if service splitting is allowed for a ser-
vice. This means that, even though a service is marked as sharable, it is started using its private hosting
process (and its type is changed to SERVICE_WIN32_OWN_PROCESS). Service splitting is allowed only
if the following conditions apply:

   ■   Svchost Service splitting is globally enabled.

   ■   The service is not marked as critical. A service is marked as critical if its next recovery action
       specifies to reboot the machine (as discussed previously in the “Service failures” section).

   ■   The service host process name is Svchost.exe.

   ■   Service splitting is not explicitly disabled for the service through the SvcHostSplitDisable registry
       value in the service control key.

     Memory manager’s technologies like Memory Compression and Combining help in saving as much
of the system working set as possible. This explains one of the motivations behind the enablement
of Svchost service splitting. Even though many new processes are created in the system, the memory
manager assures that all the physical pages of the hosting processes remain shared and consume as
little system resources as possible. Memory combining, compression, and memory sharing are ex-
plained in detail in Chapter 5 of Part 1.

         EXPERIMENT: Playing with Svchost service splitting
         In case you are using a Windows 10 workstation equipped with 4 GB or more of memory, when you
         open the Task Manager, you may notice that a lot of Svchost.exe process instances are currently
         executing. As explained in this section, this doesn’t produce a memory waste problem, but you
         could be interested in disabling Svchost splitting. First, open Task Manager and count how many
         svchost process instances are currently running in the system. On a Windows 10 May 2019 Update
         (19H1) system, you should have around 80 Svchost process instances. You can easily count them by
         opening an administrative PowerShell window and typing the following command:
         (get-process -Name "svchost" | measure).Count

            On the sample system, the preceding command returned 85.

            Open the Registry Editor (by typing regedit.exe in the Cortana search box) and navi-
         gate to the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control key. Note the current value of the
         SvcHostSplitThresholdInKB DWORD value. To globally disable Svchost service splitting, you
         should modify the registry value by setting its data to 0. (You change it by double-clicking the
         registry value and entering 0.) After modifying the registry value, restart the system and repeat
         the previous step: counting the number of Svchost process instances. The system now runs with
         much fewer of them:
         PS C:\> (get-process -Name "svchost" | measure).Count
         26

            To return to the previous behavior, you should restore the previous content of the
         SvcHostSplitThresholdInKB registry value. By modifying the DWORD value, you can also fine-tune
         the amount of physical memory needed by Svchost splitting for correctly being enabled.

      Service tags
      One of the disadvantages of using service-hosting processes is that accounting for CPU time and us-
      age, as well as for the usage of resources by a specific service is much harder because each service is
      sharing the memory address space, handle table, and per-process CPU accounting numbers with the
      other services that are part of the same service group. Although there is always a thread inside the
      service-hosting process that belongs to a certain service, this association might not always be easy to
      make. For example, the service might be using worker threads to perform its operation, or perhaps the
      start address and stack of the thread do not reveal the service’s DLL name, making it hard to figure out
      what kind of work a thread might be doing and to which service it might belong.

         Windows implements a service attribute called the service tag (not to be confused with the driver
      tag), which the SCM generates by calling ScGenerateServiceTag when a service is created or when the
      service database is generated during system boot. The attribute is simply an index identifying the ser-
      vice. The service tag is stored in the SubProcessTag field of the thread environment block (TEB) of each
      thread (see Chapter 3 of Part 1 for more information on the TEB) and is propagated across all threads
      that a main service thread creates (except threads created indirectly by thread-pool APIs).

    Although the service tag is kept internal to the SCM, several Windows utilities, like Netstat.exe
(a utility you can use for displaying which programs have opened which ports on the network), use
undocumented APIs to query service tags and map them to service names. Another tool you can use
to look at service tags is ScTagQuery from Winsider Seminars & Solutions Inc. (www.winsiderss.com/
tools/sctagquery/sctagquery.htm). It can query the SCM for the mappings of every service tag and
display them either systemwide or per-process. It can also show you to which services all the threads
inside a service-hosting process belong. (This is conditional on those threads having a proper service
tag associated with them.) This way, if you have a runaway service consuming lots of CPU time, you can
identify the culprit service in case the thread start address or stack does not have an obvious service
DLL associated with it.

User services
As discussed in the “Running services in alternate accounts” section, a service can be launched using
the account of a local system user. A service configured in that way is always loaded using the specified
user account, regardless of whether the user is currently logged on. This could represent a limitation
in multiuser environments, where a service should be executed with the access token of the currently
logged-on user. Furthermore, it can expose the user account at risk because malicious users can po-
tentially inject into the service process and use its token to access resources they are not supposed to
(being able also to authenticate on the network).

   Available from Windows 10 Creators Update (RS2), User Services allow a service to run with the
token of the currently logged-on user. User services can be run in their own process or can share a
process with one or more other services running in the same logged-on user account as for standard
services. They are started when a user performs an interactive logon and stopped when the user logs
off. The SCM internally supports two additional type flags—SERVICE_USER_SERVICE (64) and SERVICE_
USERSERVICE_INSTANCE (128)—which identify a user service template and a user service instance.

   One of the states of the Winlogon finite-state machine (see Chapter 12 for details on Winlogon
and the boot process) is executed when an interactive logon has been initiated. The state creates the
new user’s logon session, window station, desktop, and environment; maps the HKEY_CURRENT_USER
registry hive; and notifies the logon subscribers (LogonUI and User Manager). The User Manager
service (Usermgr.dll) through RPC is able to call into the SCM for delivering the WTS_SESSION_LOGON
session event.

   The SCM processes the message through the ScCreateUserServicesForUser function, which calls
back into the User Manager for obtaining the currently logged-on user’s token. It then queries the list
of user template services from the SCM database and, for each of them, generates the new name of
the user instance service.

      EXPERIMENT: Witnessing user services
      A kernel debugger can easily show the security attributes of a process’s token. In this experi-
      ment, you need a Windows 10 machine with a kernel debugger enabled and attached to a host
      (a local debugger works, too). In this experiment, you choose a user service instance and analyze
      its hosting process’s token. Open the Services tool by typing its name in the Cortana search box.
      The application shows standard services and also user services instances (even though it erro-
      neously displays Local System as the user account), which can be easily identified because they
      have a local unique ID (LUID, generated by the User Manager) attached to their displayed names.
      In the example, the Connected Device User Service is displayed by the Services application as
      Connected Device User Service_55d01:

          If you double-click the identified service, the tool shows the actual name of the user service
      instance (CDPUserSvc_55d01 in the example). If the service is hosted in a shared process, like the
      one chosen in the example, you should use the Registry Editor to navigate in the service root key
      of the user service template, which has the same name as the instance but without the LUID (the
      user service template name is CDPUserSvc in the example). As explained in the “Viewing privi-
      leges required by services” experiment, under the Parameters subkey, the Service DLL name is
      stored. The DLL name should be used in Process Explorer for finding the correct hosting process
      ID (or you can simply use Task Manager in the latest Windows 10 versions).

         After you have found the PID of the hosting process, you should break into the kernel de-
      bugger and type the following commands (by replacing the <ServicePid> with the PID of the
      service’s hosting process):
      !process <ServicePid> 1

   The debugger displays several pieces of information, including the address of the associated
security token object:
Kd: 0> !process 0n5936 1
Searching for Process with Cid == 1730
PROCESS ffffe10646205080
    SessionId: 2 Cid: 1730     Peb: 81ebbd1000 ParentCid: 0344
    DirBase: 8fe39002 ObjectTable: ffffa387c2826340 HandleCount: 313.
    Image: svchost.exe
    VadRoot ffffe1064629c340 Vads 108 Clone 0 Private 962. Modified 214. Locked 0.
    DeviceMap ffffa387be1341a0
    Token                              ffffa387c2bdc060
    ElapsedTime                        00:35:29.441
    ...
    <Output omitted for space reasons>

    To show the security attributes of the token, you just need to use the !token command fol-
lowed by the address of the token object (which internally is represented with a _TOKEN data
structure) returned by the previous command. You should easily confirm that the process is
hosting a user service by seeing the WIN://ScmUserService security attribute, as shown in the
following output:
0: kd> !token ffffa387c2bdc060
_TOKEN 0xffffa387c2bdc060
TS Session ID: 0x2
User: S-1-5-21-725390342-1520761410-3673083892-1001
User Groups:
 00 S-1-5-21-725390342-1520761410-3673083892-513
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled

... <Output omitted for space reason> ...

OriginatingLogonSession: 3e7
PackageSid: (null)
CapabilityCount: 0      Capabilities: 0x0000000000000000
LowboxNumberEntry: 0x0000000000000000
Security Attributes:
 00 Claim Name   : WIN://SCMUserService
    Claim Flags: 0x40 - UNKNOWN
    Value Type   : CLAIM_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_TYPE_UINT64
    Value Count: 1
    Value[0]   : 0
 01 Claim Name   : TSA://ProcUnique
    Claim Flags: 0x41 - UNKNOWN
    Value Type   : CLAIM_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_TYPE_UINT64
    Value Count: 2
    Value[0]   : 102
    Value[1]   : 352550

   Process Hacker, a system tool similar to Process Explorer and available at https://processhacker.
sourceforge.io/ is able to extract the same information.

            As discussed previously, the name of a user service instance is generated by combining the
         original name of the service and a local unique ID (LUID) generated by the User Manager for
         identifying the user’s interactive session (internally called context ID). The context ID for the
         interactive logon session is stored in the volatile HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\
         CurrentVersion\Winlogon\VolatileUserMgrKey\ <Session ID>\<User SID>\contextLuid registry
         value, where <Session ID> and <User SID> identify the logon session ID and the user SID. If you
         open the Registry Editor and navigate to this key, you will find the same context ID value as the
         one used for generating the user service instance name.

         Figure 10-22 shows an example of a user service instance, the Clipboard User Service, which is run
      using the token of the currently logged-on user. The generated context ID for session 1 is 0x3a182, as
      shown by the User Manager volatile registry key (see the previous experiment for details). The SCM
      then calls ScCreateService, which creates a service record in the SCM database. The new service record
      represents a new user service instance and is saved in the registry as for normal services. The service
      security descriptor, all the dependent services, and the triggers information are copied from the user
      service template to the new user instance service.

      FIGURE 10-22 The Clipboard User Service instance running in the context ID 0x3a182.

    The SCM registers the eventual service triggers (see the “Triggered-start services” section earlier in
this chapter for details) and then starts the service (if its start type is set to SERVICE_AUTO_START). As
discussed in the “Service logon” section, when SCM starts a process hosting a user service, it assigns the
token of the current logged-on user and the WIN://ScmUserService security attribute used by the SCM
to recognize that the process is really hosting a service. Figure 10-23 shows that, after a user has logged
in to the system, both the instance and template subkeys are stored in the root services key represent-
ing the same user service. The instance subkey is deleted on user logoff and ignored if it’s still present
at system startup time.

FIGURE 10-23 User service instance and template registry keys.

Packaged services
As briefly introduced in the “Service logon” section, since Windows 10 Anniversary Update (RS1), the
Service Control Manager has supported packaged services. A packaged service is identified through the
SERVICE_PKG_SERVICE (512) flag set in its service type. Packaged services have been designed mainly to
support standard Win32 desktop applications (which may run with an associated service) converted to
the new Modern Application Model. The Desktop App Converter is indeed able to convert a Win32 ap-
plication to a Centennial app, which runs in a lightweight container, internally called Helium. More details
on the Modern Application Model are available in the “Packaged application” section of Chapter 8.

    When starting a packaged service, the SCM reads the package information from the registry, and, as
for standard Centennial applications, calls into the AppInfo service. The latter verifies that the package
information exists in the state repository and the integrity of all the application package files. It then
stamps the new service’s host process token with the correct security attributes. The process is then
launched in a suspended state using CreateProcessAsUser API (including the Package Full Name at-
tribute) and a Helium container is created, which will apply registry redirection and Virtual File System
(VFS) as for regular Centennial applications.

      Protected services
      Chapter 3 of Part 1 described in detail the architecture of protected processes and protected processes
      light (PPL). The Windows 8.1 Service Control Manager supports protected services. At the time of this
      writing, a service can have four levels of protection: Windows, Windows light, Antimalware light, and
      App. A service control program can specify the protection of a service using the ChangeServiceConfig2
      API (with the SERVICE_CONFIG_LAUNCH_ PROTECTED information level). A service’s main executable (or
      library in the case of shared services) must be signed properly for running as a protected service, follow-
      ing the same rules as for protected processes (which means that the system checks the digital signature’s
      EKU and root certificate and generates a maximum signer level, as explained in Chapter 3 of Part 1).

         A service’s hosting process launched as protected guarantees a certain kind of protection with
      respect to other nonprotected processes. They can’t acquire some access rights while trying to access
      a protected service’s hosting process, depending on the protection level. (The mechanism is identical
      to standard protected processes. A classic example is a nonprotected process not being able to inject
      any kind of code in a protected service.)

         Even processes launched under the SYSTEM account can’t access a protected process. However,
      the SCM should be fully able to access a protected service’s hosting process. So, Wininit.exe launches the
      SCM by specifying the maximum user-mode protection level: WinTcb Light. Figure 10-24 shows the
      digital signature of the SCM main executable, services.exe, which includes the Windows TCB Component
      EKU (1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.23).

      FIGURE 10-24 The Service Control Manager main executable (service.exe) digital certificate.

      The second part of protection is brought by the Service Control Manager. While a client requests an
   action to be performed on a protected service, the SCM calls the ScCheckServiceProtectedProcess rou-
   tine with the goal to check whether the caller has enough access rights to perform the requested action
   on the service. Table 10-13 lists the denied operations when requested by a nonprotected process on a
   protected service.

   TABLE 10-13 List of denied operations while requested from nonprotected client

   Involved API Name         Operation                      Description

   ChangeServiceConfig 2     Change Service                 Any change of configuration to a protected service is denied.
                             Configuration

   SetServiceObjectSecurity Set a new security descrip-     Application of a new security descriptor to a protected service
                            tor to a service                is denied. (It could lower the service attack surface.)

   DeleteService             Delete a Service               Nonprotected process can’t delete a protected service.

   ControlService            Send a control code to a       Only service-defined control code and SERVICE_CONTROL_
                             service                        INTERROGATE are allowed for nonprotected callers.
                                                            SERVICE_CONTROL_STOP is allowed for any protection level
                                                            except for Antimalware.

      The ScCheckServiceProtectedProcess function looks up the service record from the caller-specified
   service handle and, in case the service is not protected, always grants access. Otherwise, it imperson-
   ates the client process token, obtains its process protection level, and implements the following rules:

      ■   If the request is a STOP control request and the target service is not protected at Antimalware
          level, grant the access (Antimalware protected services are not stoppable by non-protected
          processes).

      ■   In case the TrustedInstaller service SID is present in the client’s token groups or is set as the
          token user, the SCM grants access regarding the client’s process protection.

      ■   Otherwise, it calls RtlTestProtectedAccess, which performs the same checks implemented for
          protected processes. The access is granted only if the client process has a compatible protection
          level with the target service. For example, a Windows protected process can always operate on
          all protected service levels, while an antimalware PPL can only operate on Antimalware and app
          protected services.

      Noteworthy is that the last check described is not executed for any client process running with the
   TrustedInstaller virtual service account. This is by design. When Windows Update installs an update, it
   should be able to start, stop, and control any kind of service without requiring itself to be signed with a
   strong digital signature (which could expose Windows Update to an undesired attack surface).

Task scheduling and UBPM
   Various Windows components have traditionally been in charge of managing hosted or background
   tasks as the operating system has increased in complexity in features, from the Service Control
   Manager, described earlier, to the DCOM Server Launcher and the WMI Provider—all of which are also

      responsible for the execution of out-of-process, hosted code. Although modern versions of Windows
      use the Background Broker Infrastructure to manage the majority of background tasks of modern ap-
      plications (see Chapter 8 for more details), the Task Scheduler is still the main component that manages
      Win32 tasks. Windows implements a Unified Background Process Manager (UBPM), which handles
      tasks managed by the Task Scheduler.

         The Task Scheduler service (Schedule) is implemented in the Schedsvc.dll library and started in a
      shared Svchost process. The Task Scheduler service maintains the tasks database and hosts UBPM,
      which starts and stops tasks and manages their actions and triggers. UBPM uses the services provided
      by the Desktop Activity Broker (DAB), the System Events Broker (SEB), and the Resource Manager for
      receiving notification when tasks’ triggers are generated. (DAB and SEB are both hosted in the System
      Events Broker service, whereas Resource Manager is hosted in the Broker Infrastructure service.) Both
      the Task Scheduler and UBPM provide public interfaces exposed over RPC. External applications can
      use COM objects to attach to those interfaces and interact with regular Win32 tasks.

      The Task Scheduler
      The Task Scheduler implements the task store, which provides storage for each task. It also hosts the
      Scheduler idle service, which is able to detect when the system enters or exits the idle state, and the
      Event trap provider, which helps the Task Scheduler to launch a task upon a change in the machine
      state and provides an internal event log triggering system. The Task Scheduler also includes another
      component, the UBPM Proxy, which collects all the tasks’ actions and triggers, converts their descrip-
      tors to a format that UBPM can understand, and sends them to UBPM.

         An overview of the Task Scheduler architecture is shown in Figure 10-25. As highlighted by the
      picture, the Task Scheduler works deeply in collaboration with UBPM (both components run in the Task
      Scheduler service, which is hosted by a shared Svchost.exe process.) UBPM manages the task’s states
      and receives notification from SEB, DAB, and Resource Manager through WNF states.

                                    Powershell/WMI
                                 WmiPrvSE.exe

                                                COM     APIs
                                   Process

                                                Schedprov.dll
                 Schedcli.dll
       at.exe                                   COM     APIs                                                                         BrokerInfrastructure Service
       Process                                  Taskschd.dll
                 MsTask.dll                                                                                                           Resource Manager
                                                       RPCs                                                                  F
                                                                                                                          N
      Task Scheduler Compat                                                                                              W
                                                                                                                                                            System Events Broker

       plugin (taskcomp.dll)                                          Task Scheduler Service                                             Desktop Activity
                                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                         WN               Broker (DAB)
                                          Task Scheduler                                             UBPM
                                                                UbpmProxy

                                                                                                                                                                  Service

                     RPCs                  (schedsvc.dll)                                  Task Host Server (ubpm.dll)   WN
                                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                                          System Events
                                                RPCs                          RPCs                                                         Broker (SEB)
                                                                                                    RPCs
                        Task    Taskschd.dll            Schtasks            Taskschd.dll
                       Control                          Process
                                                                                            Task Host Client       Non-Hosted
                       Process COM APIs                                     COM                                                      …
                                                                                             (taskhostw.exe)          Task
                                                           Task Scheduler                         COM Task
                       Task Control Program
                                                          Configuration Tool

      FIGURE 10-25 The Task Scheduler architecture.

   The Task Scheduler has the important job of exposing the server part of the COM Task Scheduler
APIs. When a Task Control program invokes one of those APIs, the Task Scheduler COM API library
(Taskschd.dll) is loaded in the address space of the application by the COM engine. The library requests
services on behalf of the Task Control Program to the Task Scheduler through RPC interfaces.

   In a similar way, the Task Scheduler WMI provider (Schedprov.dll) implements COM classes and
methods able to communicate with the Task Scheduler COM API library. Its WMI classes, properties,
and events can be called from Windows PowerShell through the ScheduledTasks cmdlet (documented
at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/scheduledtasks/ ). Note that the Task Scheduler
includes a Compatibility plug-in, which allows legacy applications, like the AT command, to work with
the Task Scheduler. In the May 2019 Update edition of Windows 10 (19H1), the AT tool has been de-
clared deprecated, and you should instead use schtasks.exe.

Initialization
When started by the Service Control Manager, the Task Scheduler service begins its initialization pro-
cedure. It starts by registering its manifest-based ETW event provider (that has the DE7B24EA-73C8-
4A09-985D-5BDADCFA9017 global unique ID). All the events generated by the Task Scheduler are con-
sumed by UBPM. It then initializes the Credential store, which is a component used to securely access
the user credentials stored by the Credential Manager and the Task store. The latter checks that all the
XML task descriptors located in the Task store’s secondary shadow copy (maintained for compatibility
reasons and usually located in %SystemRoot%\System32\Tasks path) are in sync with the task descrip-
tors located in the Task store cache. The Task store cache is represented by multiple registry keys, with
the root being HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Schedule\TaskCache.

   The next step in the Task Scheduler initialization is to initialize UBPM. The Task Scheduler service uses
the UbpmInitialize API exported from UBPM.dll for starting the core components of UBPM. The func-
tion registers an ETW consumer of the Task Scheduler’s event provider and connects to the Resource
Manager. The Resource Manager is a component loaded by the Process State Manager (Psmsrv.dll, in the
context of the Broker Infrastructure service), which drives resource-wise policies based on the machine
state and global resource usage. Resource Manager helps UBPM to manage maintenance tasks. Those
types of tasks run only in particular system states, like when the workstation CPU usage is low, when
game mode is off, the user is not physically present, and so on. UBPM initialization code then retrieves
the WNF state names representing the task’s conditions from the System Event Broker: AC power, Idle
Workstation, IP address or network available, Workstation switching to Battery power. (Those conditions
are visible in the Conditions sheet of the Create Task dialog box of the Task Scheduler MMC plug-in.)

    UBPM initializes its internal thread pool worker threads, obtains system power capabilities, reads a
list of the maintenance and critical task actions (from the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\
Ubpm registry key and group policy settings) and subscribes to system power settings notifications
(in that way UBPM knows when the system changes its power state).

   The execution control returns to the Task Scheduler, which finally registers the global RPC interfaces
of both itself and UBPM. Those interfaces are used by the Task Scheduler API client-side DLL (Taskschd.dll)
to provide a way for client processes to interact via the Task Scheduler via the Task Scheduler COM
interfaces, which are documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/taskschd/.

          After the initialization is complete, the Task store enumerates all the tasks that are installed in the
      system and starts each of them. Tasks are stored in the cache in four groups: Boot, logon, plain, and
      Maintenance task. Each group has an associated subkey, called Index Group Tasks key, located in the
      Task store’s root registry key (HKLM\ SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Schedule\
      TaskCache, as introduced previously). Inside each Index Tasks group key is one subkey per each task,
      identified through a global unique identifier (GUID). The Task Scheduler enumerates the names of all
      the group’s subkeys, and, for each of them, opens the relative Task’s master key, which is located in the
      Tasks subkey of the Task store’s root registry key. Figure 10-26 shows a sample boot task, which has the
      {0C7D8A27-9B28-49F1-979C-AD37C4D290B1} GUID. The task GUID is listed in the figure as one of the
      first entries in the Boot index group key. The figure also shows the master Task key, which stores binary
      data in the registry to entirely describe the task.

      FIGURE 10-26 A boot task master key.

          The task’s master key contains all the information that describes the task. Two properties of the task
      are the most important: Triggers, which describe the conditions that will trigger the task, and Actions,
      which describe what happen when the task is executed. Both properties are stored in binary registry
      values (named “Triggers” and “Actions,”, as shown in Figure 10-26). The Task Scheduler first reads the
      hash of the entire task descriptor (stored in the Hash registry value); then it reads all the task’s configu-
      ration data and the binary data for triggers and actions. After parsing this data, it adds each identified
      trigger and action descriptor to an internal list.

    The Task Scheduler then recalculates the SHA256 hash of the new task descriptor (which includes
all the data read from the registry) and compares it with the expected value. If the two hashes do not
match, the Task Scheduler opens the XML file associated with the task contained in the store’s shadow
copy (the %SystemRoot%\System32\Tasks folder), parses its data and recalculates a new hash, and
finally replaces the task descriptor in the registry. Indeed, tasks can be described by binary data in-
cluded in the registry and also by an XML file, which adhere to a well-defined schema, documented at
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/taskschd/task-scheduler-schema.

   EXPERIMENT: Explore a task’s XML descriptor
   Task descriptors, as introduced in this section, are stored by the Task store in two formats: XML
   file and in the registry. In this experiment, you will peek at both formats. First, open the Task
   Scheduler applet by typing taskschd.msc in the Cortana search box. Expand the Task Scheduler
   Library node and all the subnodes until you reach the Microsoft\Windows folder. Explore each
   subnode and search for a task that has the Actions tab set to Custom Handler. The action type
   is used for describing COM-hosted tasks, which are not supported by the Task Scheduler applet.
   In this example, we consider the ProcessMemoryDiagnosticEvents, which can be found under the
   MemoryDiagnostics folder, but any task with the Actions set to Custom Handler works well:

      Open an administrative command prompt window (by typing CMD in the Cortana search
   box and selecting Run As Administrator); then type the following command (replacing the task
   path with the one of your choice):
   schtasks /query /tn "Microsoft\Windows\MemoryDiagnostic\ProcessMemoryDiagnosticEvents" /xml

         The output shows the task’s XML descriptor, which includes the Task’s security descriptor
      (used to protect the task for being opened by unauthorized identities), the task’s author and de-
      scription, the security principal that should run it, the task settings, and task triggers and actions:
      <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-16"?>
      <Task xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/windows/2004/02/mit/task">
        <RegistrationInfo>
          <Version>1.0</Version>
          <SecurityDescriptor>D:P(A;;FA;;;BA)(A;;FA;;;SY)(A;;FR;;;AU)</SecurityDescriptor>
          <Author>$(@%SystemRoot%\system32\MemoryDiagnostic.dll,-600)</Author>
          <Description>$(@%SystemRoot%\system32\MemoryDiagnostic.dll,-603)</Description>
          <URI>\Microsoft\Windows\MemoryDiagnostic\ProcessMemoryDiagnosticEvents</URI>
        </RegistrationInfo>
        <Principals>
          <Principal id="LocalAdmin">
            <GroupId>S-1-5-32-544</GroupId>
            <RunLevel>HighestAvailable</RunLevel>
          </Principal>
        </Principals>
        <Settings>
          <AllowHardTerminate>false</AllowHardTerminate>
          <DisallowStartIfOnBatteries>true</DisallowStartIfOnBatteries>
          <StopIfGoingOnBatteries>true</StopIfGoingOnBatteries>
          <Enabled>false</Enabled>
          <ExecutionTimeLimit>PT2H</ExecutionTimeLimit>
          <Hidden>true</Hidden>
          <MultipleInstancesPolicy>IgnoreNew</MultipleInstancesPolicy>
          <StartWhenAvailable>true</StartWhenAvailable>
          <RunOnlyIfIdle>true</RunOnlyIfIdle>
          <IdleSettings>
            <StopOnIdleEnd>true</StopOnIdleEnd>
            <RestartOnIdle>true</RestartOnIdle>
          </IdleSettings>
          <UseUnifiedSchedulingEngine>true</UseUnifiedSchedulingEngine>
        </Settings>
        <Triggers>
          <EventTrigger>
              <Subscription>&lt;QueryList&gt;&lt;Query Id="0" Path="System"&gt;&lt;Select Pa
      th="System"&gt;*[System[Provider[@Name='Microsoft-Windows-WER-SystemErrorReporting']
      and (EventID=1000 or EventID=1001 or EventID=1006)]]&lt;/Select&gt;&lt;/Query&gt;&lt;/
      QueryList&gt;</Subscription>
          </EventTrigger>
          . . . [cut for space reasons] . . .
        </Triggers>
        <Actions Context="LocalAdmin">
          <ComHandler>
            <ClassId>{8168E74A-B39F-46D8-ADCD-7BED477B80A3}</ClassId>
            <Data><![CDATA[Event]]></Data>
          </ComHandler>
        </Actions>
      </Task>

       In the case of the ProcessMemoryDiagnosticEvents task, there are multiple ETW triggers (which
   allow the task to be executed only when certain diagnostics events are generated. Indeed, the
   trigger descriptors include the ETW query specified in XPath format). The only registered action
   is a ComHandler, which includes just the CLSID (class ID) of the COM object representing the task.
   Open the Registry Editor and navigate to the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Classes\CLSID
   key. Select Find... from the Edit menu and copy and paste the CLSID located after the ClassID XML
   tag of the task descriptor (with or without the curly brackets). You should be able to find the DLL
   that implements the ITaskHandler interface representing the task, which will be hosted by the Task
   Host client application (Taskhostw.exe, described later in the “Task host client” section):

      If you navigate in the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Schedule\
   TaskCache\Tasks registry key, you should also be able to find the GUID of the task descriptor
   stored in the Task store cache. To find it, you should search using the task’s URI. Indeed, the
   task’s GUID is not stored in the XML configuration file. The data belonging to the task descrip-
   tor in the registry is identical to the one stored in the XML configuration file located in the
   store’s shadow copy (%systemroot%\System32\Tasks\Microsoft\ Windows\MemoryDiagnostic\
   ProcessMemoryDiagnosticEvents). Only the binary format in which it is stored changes.

    Enabled tasks should be registered with UBPM. The Task Scheduler calls the RegisterTask function
of the Ubpm Proxy, which first connects to the Credential store, for retrieving the credential used to
start the task, and then processes the list of all actions and triggers (stored in an internal list), convert-
ing them in a format that UBPM can understand. Finally, it calls the UbpmTriggerConsumerRegister API
exported from UBPM.dll. The task is ready to be executed when the right conditions are verified.

Unified Background Process Manager (UBPM)
Traditionally, UBPM was mainly responsible in managing tasks’ life cycles and states (start, stop, enable/
disable, and so on) and to provide notification and triggers support. Windows 8.1 introduced the Broker
Infrastructure and moved all the triggers and notifications management to different brokers that can

      be used by both Modern and standard Win32 applications. Thus, in Windows 10, UBPM acts as a proxy
      for standard Win32 Tasks’ triggers and translates the trigger consumers request to the correct broker.
      UBPM is still responsible for providing COM APIs available to applications for the following:

         ■   Registering and unregistering a trigger consumer, as well as opening and closing a handle to one

         ■   Generating a notification or a trigger

         ■   Sending a command to a trigger provider

        Similar to the Task Scheduler’s architecture, UBPM is composed of various internal components: Task
      Host server and client, COM-based Task Host library, and Event Manager.

      Task host server
      When one of the System brokers raises an event registered by a UBPM trigger consumer (by publishing
      a WNF state change), the UbpmTriggerArrived callback function is executed. UBPM searches the inter-
      nal list of a registered task’s triggers (based on the WNF state name) and, when it finds the correct one,
      processes the task’s actions. At the time of this writing, only the Launch Executable action is supported.
      This action supports both hosted and nonhosted executables. Nonhosted executables are regular
      Win32 executables that do not directly interact with UBPM; hosted executables are COM classes that
      directly interact with UBPM and need to be hosted by a task host client process. After a host-based
      executable (taskhostw.exe) is launched, it can host different tasks, depending on its associated token.
      (Host-based executables are very similar to shared Svchost services.)

          Like SCM, UBPM supports different types of logon security tokens for task’s host processes. The
      UbpmTokenGetTokenForTask function is able to create a new token based on the account information
      stored in the task descriptor. The security token generated by UBPM for a task can have one of the fol-
      lowing owners: a registered user account, Virtual Service account, Network Service account, or Local
      Service account. Unlike SCM, UBPM fully supports Interactive tokens. UBPM uses services exposed by
      the User Manager (Usermgr.dll) to enumerate the currently active interactive sessions. For each session,
      it compares the User SID specified in the task’s descriptor with the owner of the interactive session. If
      the two match, UBPM duplicates the token attached to the interactive session and uses it to log on the
      new executable. As a result, interactive tasks can run only with a standard user account. (Noninteractive
      tasks can run with all the account types listed previously.)

         After the token has been generated, UBPM starts the task’s host process. In case the task is a hosted
      COM task, the UbpmFindHost function searches inside an internal list of Taskhostw.exe (task host cli-
      ent) process instances. If it finds a process that runs with the same security context of the new task, it
      simply sends a Start Task command (which includes the COM task’s name and CLSID) through the task
      host local RPC connection and waits for the first response. The task host client process and UBPM are
      connected through a static RPC channel (named ubpmtaskhostchannel) and use a connection protocol
      similar to the one implemented in the SCM.

    If a compatible client process instance has not been found, or if the task’s host process is a regular
non-COM executable, UBPM builds a new environment block, parses the command line, and creates a
new process in a suspended state using the CreateProcessAsUser API. UBPM runs each task’s host pro-
cess in a Job object, which allows it to quickly set the state of multiple tasks and fine-tune the resources
allocated for background tasks. UBPM searches inside an internal list for Job objects containing host
processes belonging to the same session ID and the same type of tasks (regular, critical, COM-based,
or non-hosted). If it finds a compatible Job, it simply assigns the new process to the Job (by using the
AssignProcessToJobObject API). Otherwise, it creates a new one and adds it to its internal list.

   After the Job object has been created, the task is finally ready to be started: the initial process’s
thread is resumed. For COM-hosted tasks, UBPM waits for the initial contact from the task host client
(performed when the client wants to open a RPC communication channel with UBPM, similar to the
way in which Service control applications open a channel to the SCM) and sends the Start Task com-
mand. UBPM finally registers a wait callback on the task’s host process, which allow it to detect when
a task host’s process terminates unexpectedly.

Task Host client
The Task Host client process receives commands from UBPM (Task Host Server) living in the Task
Scheduler service. At initialization time, it opens the local RPC interface that was created by UBPM during
its initialization and loops forever, waiting for commands to come through the channel. Four commands
are currently supported, which are sent over the TaskHostSendResponseReceiveCommand RPC API:

   ■   Stopping the host

   ■   Starting a task

   ■   Stopping a task

   ■   Terminating a task

   All task-based commands are internally implemented by a generic COM task library, and they
essentially result in the creation and destruction of COM components. In particular, hosted tasks
are COM objects that inherit from the ITaskHandler interface. The latter exposes only four required
methods, which correspond to the different task’s state transitions: Start, Stop, Pause, and Resume.
When UBPM sends the command to start a task to its client host process, the latter (Taskhostw.exe)
creates a new thread for the task. The new task worker thread uses the CoCreateInstance func-
tion to create an instance of the ITaskHandler COM object representing the task and calls its Start
method. UBPM knows exactly which CLSID (class unique ID) identifies a particular task: The task’s
CLSID is stored by the Task store in the task’s configuration and is specified at task registration time.
Additionally, hosted tasks use the functions exposed by the ITaskHandlerStatus COM interface to
notify UBPM of their current execution state. The interface uses RPCs to call UbpmReportTaskStatus
and report the new state back to UBPM.

      EXPERIMENT: Witnessing a COM-hosted task
      In this experiment, you witness how the task host client process loads the COM server DLL that
      implements the task. For this experiment, you need the Debugging tools installed on your
      system. (You can find the Debugging tools as part of the Windows SDK, which is available at the
      https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/windows-10-sdk/.) You will enable the
      https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/windows-10-sdk/
      task start’s debugger breakpoint by following these steps:

          1.   You need to set up Windbg as the default post-mortem debugger. (You can skip this
               step if you have connected a kernel debugger to the target system.) To do that, open an
               administrative command prompt and type the following commands:
               cd "C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Debuggers\x64"
               windbg.exe /I

               Note that C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Debuggers\x64 is the path of the
               Debugging tools, which can change depending on the debugger’s version and the
               setup program.

          2.   Windbg should run and show the following message, confirming the success of
               the operation:

          3.   After you click on the OK button, WinDbg should close automatically.

          4.   Open the Task Scheduler applet (by typing taskschd.msc in the command prompt).

          5.   Note that unless you have a kernel debugger attached, you can’t enable the initial task’s
               breakpoint on noninteractive tasks; otherwise, you won’t be able to interact with the
               debugger window, which will be spawned in another noninteractive session.

          6.   Looking at the various tasks (refer to the previous experiment, “Explore a task’s XML
               descriptor” for further details), you should find an interactive COM task (named
               CacheTask) under the \Microsoft\Windows\Wininet path. Remember that the task’s
               Actions page should show Custom Handler; otherwise the task is not COM task.

          7.   Open the Registry Editor (by typing regedit in the command prompt window) and
               navigate to the following registry key: HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\
               CurrentVersion\Schedule.

          8.   Right-click the Schedule key and create a new registry value by selecting Multi-String
               Value from the New menu.

9.   Name the new registry value as EnableDebuggerBreakForTaskStart. To enable the initial
     task breakpoint, you should insert the full path of the task. In this case, the full path is
     \Microsoft\Windows\Wininet\CacheTask. In the previous experiment, the task path has
     been referred as the task’s URI.

10. Close the Registry Editor and switch back to the Task Scheduler.

11. Right-click the CacheTask task and select Run.

12. If you have configured everything correctly, a new WinDbg window should appear.

13. Configure the symbols used by the debugger by selecting the Symbol File Path item
     from the File menu and by inserting a valid path to the Windows symbol server (see
     https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/ microsoft-
     public-symbols for more details).

14. You should be able to peek at the call stack of the Taskhostw.exe process just before
     it was interrupted using the k command:
     0:000> k
      # Child-SP          RetAddr           Call Site
     00 000000a7`01a7f610 00007ff6`0b0337a8 taskhostw!ComTaskMgrBase::[ComTaskMgr]::Sta
     rtComTask+0x2c4
     01 000000a7`01a7f960 00007ff6`0b033621 taskhostw!StartComTask+0x58
     02 000000a7`01a7f9d0 00007ff6`0b033191 taskhostw!UbpmTaskHostWaitForCommands+0x2d1
     3 000000a7`01a7fb00 00007ff6`0b035659 taskhostw!wWinMain+0xc1
     04 000000a7`01a7fb60 00007ffa`39487bd4 taskhostw!__wmainCRTStartup+0x1c9
     05 000000a7`01a7fc20 00007ffa`39aeced1 KERNEL32!BaseThreadInitThunk+0x14
     06 000000a7`01a7fc50 00000000`00000000 ntdll!RtlUserThreadStart+0x21

15. The stack shows that the task host client has just been spawned by UBPM and has re-
     ceived the Start command requesting to start a task.

16. In the Windbg console, insert the ~. command and press Enter. Note the current execut-
     ing thread ID.

17. You should now put a breakpoint on the CoCreateInstance COM API and resume the
     execution, using the following commands:
     bp combase!CoCreateInstance
     g

18. After the debugger breaks, again insert the ~. command in the Windbg console, press
     Enter, and note that the thread ID has completely changed.

19. This demonstrates that the task host client has created a new thread for executing the
     task entry point. The documented CoCreateInstance function is used for creating a single
     COM object of the class associated with a particular CLSID, specified as a parameter. Two
     GUIDs are interesting for this experiment: the GUID of the COM class that represents the
     Task and the interface ID of the interface implemented by the COM object.

              20. In 64-bit systems, the calling convention defines that the first four function parameters
                  are passed through registers, so it is easy to extract those GUIDs:
                  0:004> dt combase!CLSID @rcx
                   {0358b920-0ac7-461f-98f4-58e32cd89148}
                     +0x000 Data1            : 0x358b920
                     +0x004 Data2            : 0xac7
                     +0x006 Data3            : 0x461f
                     +0x008 Data4            : [8] "???"
                  0:004> dt combase!IID @r9
                   {839d7762-5121-4009-9234-4f0d19394f04}
                     +0x000 Data1            : 0x839d7762
                     +0x004 Data2            : 0x5121
                     +0x006 Data3            : 0x4009
                     +0x008 Data4            : [8] "???"

            As you can see from the preceding output, the COM server CLSID is {0358b920-0ac7-461f-
         98f4-58e32cd89148}. You can verify that it corresponds to the GUID of the only COM action
         located in the XML descriptor of the “CacheTask” task (see the previous experiment for details).
         The requested interface ID is “{839d7762-5121-4009-9234-4f0d19394f04}”, which correspond to
         the GUID of the COM task handler action interface (ITaskHandler).
                                                             ITaskHandler
                                                             ITaskHandler).

      Task Scheduler COM interfaces
      As we have discussed in the previous section, a COM task should adhere to a well-defined interface,
      which is used by UBPM to manage the state transition of the task. While UBPM decides when to start
      the task and manages all of its state, all the other interfaces used to register, remove, or just manually
      start and stop a task are implemented by the Task Scheduler in its client-side DLL (Taskschd.dll).

          ITaskService is the central interface by which clients can connect to the Task Scheduler and perform
      multiple operations, like enumerate registered tasks; get an instance of the Task store (represented by
      the ITaskFolder COM interface); and enable, disable, delete, or register a task and all of its associated
      triggers and actions (by using the ITaskDefinition COM interface). When a client application invokes for
      the first time a Task Scheduler APIs through COM, the system loads the Task Scheduler client-side DLL
      (Taskschd.dll) into the client process’s address space (as dictated by the COM contract: Task Scheduler
      COM objects live in an in-proc COM server). The COM APIs are implemented by routing requests
      through RPC calls into the Task Scheduler service, which processes each request and forwards it to
      UBPM if needed. The Task Scheduler COM architecture allows users to interact with it via scripting
      languages like PowerShell (through the ScheduledTasks cmdlet) or VBScript.

Windows Management Instrumentation
      Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) is an implementation of Web-Based Enterprise
      Management (WBEM), a standard that the Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF—an indus-
      try consortium) defines. The WBEM standard encompasses the design of an extensible enterprise

data-collection and data-management facility that has the flexibility and extensibility required to man-
age local and remote systems that comprise arbitrary components.

WMI architecture
WMI consists of four main components, as shown in Figure 10-27: management applications, WMI
infrastructure, providers, and managed objects. Management applications are Windows applications
that access and display or process data about managed objects. A simple example of a management
application is a performance tool replacement that relies on WMI rather than the Performance API to
obtain performance information. A more complex example is an enterprise-management tool that lets
administrators perform automated inventories of the software and hardware configuration of every
computer in their enterprise.

    Database        VbScript/          .NET              C/C++       Management
   application        Perl          application        application   applications

                    ActiveX                  Windows
     ODBC
                    controls                PowerShell

                  Windows Management API

                                 COM/DCOM

 CIM repository           CIM Object Manager (CIMOM)            WMI infrastructure

                                 COM/DCOM

      SNM                Windows                   Registry
                                                                Providers
    provider             provider                  provider

    SNMP                 Windows                   Registry
                                                                Managed objects
    objects              objects                   objects

FIGURE 10-27 WMI architecture.

    Developers typically must target management applications to collect data from and manage
specific objects. An object might represent one component, such as a network adapter device, or a col-
lection of components, such as a computer. (The computer object might contain the network adapter
object.) Providers need to define and export the representation of the objects that management ap-
plications are interested in. For example, the vendor of a network adapter might want to add adapter-
specific properties to the network adapter WMI support that Windows includes, querying and setting
the adapter’s state and behavior as the management applications direct. In some cases (for example,
for device drivers), Microsoft supplies a provider that has its own API to help developers leverage the
provider’s implementation for their own managed objects with minimal coding effort.

         The WMI infrastructure, the heart of which is the Common Information Model (CIM) Object
      Manager (CIMOM), is the glue that binds management applications and providers. (CIM is described
      later in this chapter.) The infrastructure also serves as the object-class store and, in many cases, as
      the storage manager for persistent object properties. WMI implements the store, or repository, as an
      on-disk database named the CIMOM Object Repository. As part of its infrastructure, WMI supports
      several APIs through which management applications access object data and providers supply data
      and class definitions.

         Windows programs and scripts (such as Windows PowerShell) use the WMI COM API, the primary
      management API, to directly interact with WMI. Other APIs layer on top of the COM API and include an
      Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) adapter for the Microsoft Access database application. A data-
      base developer uses the WMI ODBC adapter to embed references to object data in the developer’s da-
      tabase. Then the developer can easily generate reports with database queries that contain WMI-based
      data. WMI ActiveX controls support another layered API. Web developers use the ActiveX controls to
      construct web-based interfaces to WMI data. Another management API is the WMI scripting API, for
      use in script-based applications (like Visual Basic Scripting Edition). WMI scripting support exists for all
      Microsoft programming language technologies.

         Because WMI COM interfaces are for management applications, they constitute the primary API
      for providers. However, unlike management applications, which are COM clients, providers are COM
      or Distributed COM (DCOM) servers (that is, the providers implement COM objects that WMI interacts
      with). Possible embodiments of a WMI provider include DLLs that load into a WMI’s manager process
      or stand-alone Windows applications or Windows services. Microsoft includes a number of built-in
      providers that present data from well-known sources, such as the Performance API, the registry, the
      Event Manager, Active Directory, SNMP, and modern device drivers. The WMI SDK lets developers
      develop third-party WMI providers.

      WMI providers
      At the core of WBEM is the DMTF-designed CIM specification. The CIM specifies how management
      systems represent, from a systems management perspective, anything from a computer to an applica-
      tion or device on a computer. Provider developers use the CIM to represent the components that make
      up the parts of an application for which the developers want to enable management. Developers use
      the Managed Object Format (MOF) language to implement a CIM representation.

          In addition to defining classes that represent objects, a provider must interface WMI to the objects.
      WMI classifies providers according to the interface features the providers supply. Table 10-14 lists WMI
      provider classifications. Note that a provider can implement one or more features; therefore, a provider
      can be, for example, both a class and an event provider. To clarify the feature definitions in Table 10-14,
      let’s look at a provider that implements several of those features. The Event Log provider supports
      several objects, including an Event Log Computer, an Event Log Record, and an Event Log File. The
      Event Log is an Instance provider because it can define multiple instances for several of its classes. One
      class for which the Event Log provider defines multiple instances is the Event Log File class (Win32_
      NTEventlogFile); the Event Log provider defines an instance of this class for each of the system’s event
      logs (that is, System Event Log, Application Event Log, and Security Event Log).

TABLE 10-14 Provider classifications

Classification       Description

Class                Can supply, modify, delete, and enumerate a provider-specific class. It can also support query
                     processing. Active Directory is a rare example of a service that is a class provider.

Instance             Can supply, modify, delete, and enumerate instances of system and provider-specific classes.
                     An instance represents a managed object. It can also support query processing.

Property             Can supply and modify individual object property values.

Method               Supplies methods for a provider-specific class.

Event                Generates event notifications.

Event consumer       Maps a physical consumer to a logical consumer to support event notification.

    The Event Log provider defines the instance data and lets management applications enumerate the
records. To let management applications use WMI to back up and restore the Event Log files, the Event
Log provider implements backup and restore methods for Event Log File objects. Doing so makes the
Event Log provider a Method provider. Finally, a management application can register to receive noti-
fication whenever a new record writes to one of the Event Logs. Thus, the Event Log provider serves as
an Event provider when it uses WMI event notification to tell WMI that Event Log records have arrived.

The Common Information Model and the Managed Object
Format Language
The CIM follows in the steps of object-oriented languages such as C++ and C , in which a modeler
designs representations as classes. Working with classes lets developers use the powerful modeling
techniques of inheritance and composition. Subclasses can inherit the attributes of a parent class, and
they can add their own characteristics and override the characteristics they inherit from the parent
class. A class that inherits properties from another class derives from that class. Classes also compose: a
developer can build a class that includes other classes. CIM classes consist of properties and methods.
Properties describe the configuration and state of a WMI-managed resource, and methods are execut-
able functions that perform actions on the WMI-managed resource.

   The DMTF provides multiple classes as part of the WBEM standard. These classes are CIM’s basic
language and represent objects that apply to all areas of management. The classes are part of the
CIM core model. An example of a core class is CIM_ManagedSystemElement. This class contains a
few basic properties that identify physical components such as hardware devices and logical compo-
nents such as processes and files. The properties include a caption, description, installation date, and
status. Thus, the CIM_LogicalElement and CIM_PhysicalElement classes inherit the attributes of the
CIM_ManagedSystemElement class. These two classes are also part of the CIM core model. The WBEM
standard calls these classes abstract classes because they exist solely as classes that other classes inherit
(that is, no object instances of an abstract class exist). You can therefore think of abstract classes as tem-
plates that define properties for use in other classes.

   A second category of classes represents objects that are specific to management areas but indepen-
dent of a particular implementation. These classes constitute the common model and are considered
an extension of the core model. An example of a common-model class is the CIM_FileSystem class,

      which inherits the attributes of CIM_LogicalElement. Because virtually every operating system—includ-
      ing Windows, Linux, and other varieties of UNIX—rely on file system–based structured storage, the
      CIM_FileSystem class is an appropriate constituent of the common model.

        The final class category, the extended model, comprises technology-specific additions to the
      common model. Windows defines a large set of these classes to represent objects specific to the
      Windows environment. Because all operating systems store data in files, the CIM model includes the
      CIM_LogicalFile class. The CIM_DataFile class inherits the CIM_LogicalFile class, and Windows adds the
      Win32_PageFile and Win32_ShortcutFile file classes for those Windows file types.

          Windows includes different WMI management applications that allow an administrator to inter-
      act with WMI namespaces and classes. The WMI command-line utility (WMIC.exe) and Windows
      PowerShell are able to connect to WMI, execute queries, and invoke WMI class object methods.
      Figure 10-28 shows a PowerShell window extracting information of the Win32_NTEventlogFile class,
      part of the Event Log provider. This class makes extensive use of inheritance and derives from CIM_
      DataFile. Event Log files are data files that have additional Event Log–specific attributes such as a log
      file name (LogfileName) and a count of the number of records that the file contains (NumberOfRecords).
      The Win32_NTEventlogFile is based on several levels of inheritance, in which CIM_DataFile derives
      from CIM_LogicalFile, which derives from CIM_LogicalElement, and CIM_LogicalElement derives from
      CIM_ManagedSystemElement.

      FIGURE 10-28 Windows PowerShell extracting information from the Win32_NTEventlogFile class.

    As stated earlier, WMI provider developers write their classes in the MOF language. The following
output shows the definition of the Event Log provider’s Win32_NTEventlogFile, which has been queried
in Figure 10-28:

[dynamic: ToInstance, provider("MS_NT_EVENTLOG_PROVIDER"): ToInstance, SupportsUpdate,
Locale(1033): ToInstance, UUID("{8502C57B-5FBB-11D2-AAC1-006008C78BC7}"): ToInstance]
class Win32_NTEventlogFile : CIM_DataFile
{
   [Fixed: ToSubClass, read: ToSubClass] string LogfileName;
   [read: ToSubClass, write: ToSubClass] uint32 MaxFileSize;
   [read: ToSubClass] uint32 NumberOfRecords;
   [read: ToSubClass, volatile: ToSubClass, ValueMap{"0", "1..365", "4294967295"}:
    ToSubClass] string OverWritePolicy;
   [read: ToSubClass, write: ToSubClass, Range("0-365 | 4294967295"): ToSubClass]
    uint32 OverwriteOutDated;
   [read: ToSubClass] string Sources[];
   [ValueMap{"0", "8", "21", ".."}: ToSubClass, implemented, Privileges{
    "SeSecurityPrivilege", "SeBackupPrivilege"}: ToSubClass]
      uint32 ClearEventlog([in] string ArchiveFileName);
   [ValueMap{"0", "8", "21", "183", ".."}: ToSubClass, implemented, Privileges{
    "SeSecurityPrivilege", "SeBackupPrivilege"}: ToSubClass]
      uint32 BackupEventlog([in] string ArchiveFileName);
};

    One term worth reviewing is dynamic, which is a descriptive designator for the Win32_NTEventlogFile
class that the MOF file in the preceding output shows. Dynamic means that the WMI infrastructure
asks the WMI provider for the values of properties associated with an object of that class whenever a
management application queries the object’s properties. A static class is one in the WMI repository; the
WMI infrastructure refers to the repository to obtain the values instead of asking a provider for the val-
ues. Because updating the repository is a relatively expensive operation, dynamic providers are more
efficient for objects that have properties that change frequently.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the MOF definitions of WMI classes
   You can view the MOF definition for any WMI class by using the Windows Management
   Instrumentation Tester tool (WbemTest) that comes with Windows. In this experiment, we
   look at the MOF definition for the Win32_NTEventLogFile class:

       1.   Type Wbemtest in the Cortana search box and press Enter. The Windows Management
            Instrumentation Tester should open.

       2.   Click the Connect button, change the Namespace to root\cimv2, and connect. The tool
            should enable all the command buttons, as shown in the following figure:

             3.   Click the Enum Classes button, select the Recursive option button, and then click OK.

             4.   Find Win32_NTEventLogFile in the list of classes, and then double-click it to see its class
                  properties.

             5.   Click the Show MOF button to open a window that displays the MOF text.

          After constructing classes in MOF, WMI developers can supply the class definitions to WMI in several
      ways. WDM driver developers compile a MOF file into a binary MOF (BMF) file—a more compact
      binary representation than an MOF file—and can choose to dynamically give the BMF files to the WDM
      infrastructure or to statically include it in their binary. Another way is for the provider to compile the
      MOF and use WMI COM APIs to give the definitions to the WMI infrastructure. Finally, a provider can
      use the MOF Compiler (Mofcomp.exe) tool to give the WMI infrastructure a classes-compiled represen-
      tation directly.

         Note Previous editions of Windows (until Windows 7) provided a graphical tool, called
         WMI CIM Studio, shipped with the WMI Administrative Tool. The tool was able to graphi-
         cally show WMI namespaces, classes, properties, and methods. Nowadays, the tool is not
         supported or available for download because it was superseded by the WMI capacities of
         Windows PowerShell. PowerShell is a scripting language that does not run with a GUI. Some
         third-party tools present a similar interface of CIM Studio. One of them is WMI Explorer,
         which is downloadable from https://github.com/vinaypamnani/wmie2/releases.

  The Common Information Model (CIM) repository is stored in the %SystemRoot%\System32\wbem\
Repository path and includes the following:

   ■   Index.btr    Binary-tree (btree) index file

   ■   MappingX.map Transaction control files (X is a number starting from 1)

   ■   Objects.data     CIM repository where managed resource definitions are stored

The WMI namespace
Classes define objects, which are provided by a WMI provider. Objects are class instances on a sys-
tem. WMI uses a namespace that contains several subnamespaces that WMI arranges hierarchically to
organize objects. A management application must connect to a namespace before the application can
access objects within the namespace.

   WMI names the namespace root directory ROOT. All WMI installations have four predefined
namespaces that reside beneath root: CIMV2, Default, Security, and WMI. Some of these namespaces
have other namespaces within them. For example, CIMV2 includes the Applications and ms_409
namespaces as subnamespaces. Providers sometimes define their own namespaces; you can see the
WMI namespace (which the Windows device driver WMI provider defines) beneath ROOT in Windows.

   Unlike a file system namespace, which comprises a hierarchy of directories and files, a WMI
namespace is only one level deep. Instead of using names as a file system does, WMI uses object
properties that it defines as keys to identify the objects. Management applications specify class names
with key names to locate specific objects within a namespace. Thus, each instance of a class must be
uniquely identifiable by its key values. For example, the Event Log provider uses the Win32_NTLogEvent
class to represent records in an Event Log. This class has two keys: Logfile, a string; and RecordNumber,
an unsigned integer. A management application that queries WMI for instances of Event Log records
obtains them from the provider key pairs that identify records. The application refers to a record using
the syntax that you see in this sample object path name:

\\ANDREA-LAPTOP\root\CIMV2:Win32_NTLogEvent.Logfile="Application",
                                                     RecordNumber="1"

    The first component in the name (\\ANDREA-LAPTOP) identifies the computer on which the object
is located, and the second component (\root\CIMV2) is the namespace in which the object resides. The
class name follows the colon, and key names and their associated values follow the period. A comma
separates the key values.

  WMI provides interfaces that let applications enumerate all the objects in a particular class or to
make queries that return instances of a class that match a query criterion.

Class association
Many object types are related to one another in some way. For example, a computer object has a
processor, software, an operating system, active processes, and so on. WMI lets providers construct an
association class to represent a logical connection between two different classes. Association classes

      associate one class with another, so the classes have only two properties: a class name and the Ref
      modifier. The following output shows an association in which the Event Log provider’s MOF file associ-
      ates the Win32_NTLogEvent class with the Win32_ComputerSystem class. Given an object, a manage-
      ment application can query associated objects. In this way, a provider defines a hierarchy of objects.

      [dynamic: ToInstance, provider("MS_NT_EVENTLOG_PROVIDER"): ToInstance, EnumPrivileges{"SeSe
      curityPrivilege"}: ToSubClass, Privileges{"SeSecurityPrivilege"}: ToSubClass, Locale(1033):
      ToInstance, UUID("{8502C57F-5FBB-11D2-AAC1-006008C78BC7}"): ToInstance, Association:
      DisableOverride ToInstance ToSubClass]
      class Win32_NTLogEventComputer
      {
          [key, read: ToSubClass] Win32_ComputerSystem ref Computer;
          [key, read: ToSubClass] Win32_NTLogEvent ref Record;
      };

         Figure 10-29 shows a PowerShell window displaying the first Win32_NTLogEventComputer class
      instance located in the CIMV2 namespace. From the aggregated class instance, a user can query the as-
      sociated Win32_ComputerSystem object instance WIN-46E4EFTBP6Q, which generated the event with
      record number 1031 in the Application log file.

      FIGURE 10-29 The Win32_NTLogEventComputer association class.

EXPERIMENT: Using WMI scripts to manage systems
A powerful aspect of WMI is its support for scripting languages. Microsoft has generated hun-
dreds of scripts that perform common administrative tasks for managing user accounts, files, the
registry, processes, and hardware devices. The Microsoft TechNet Scripting Center website serves
as the central location for Microsoft scripts. Using a script from the scripting center is as easy as
copying its text from your Internet browser, storing it in a file with a .vbs extension, and running
it with the command cscript script.vbs, where script is the name you gave the script.
Cscript is the command-line interface to Windows Script Host (WSH).

   Here’s a sample TechNet script that registers to receive events when Win32_Process object
instances are created, which occur whenever a process starts and prints a line with the name of
the process that the object represents:
strComputer = "."
Set objWMIService = GetObject("winmgmts:" _
     & "{impersonationLevel=impersonate}!\\" & strComputer & "\root\cimv2")
Set colMonitoredProcesses = objWMIService. _
     ExecNotificationQuery("SELECT * FROM __InstanceCreationEvent " _
         & " WITHIN 1 WHERE TargetInstance ISA 'Win32_Process'")
i = 0
Do While i = 0
     Set objLatestProcess = colMonitoredProcesses.NextEvent
     Wscript.Echo objLatestProcess.TargetInstance.Name
Loop

   The line that invokes ExecNotificationQuery does so with a parameter that includes a select
statement, which highlights WMI’s support for a read-only subset of the ANSI standard Structured
Query Language (SQL), known as WQL, to provide a flexible way for WMI consumers to specify the
information they want to extract from WMI providers. Running the sample script with Cscript and
then starting Notepad results in the following output:
C:\>cscript monproc.vbs
Microsoft (R) Windows Script Host Version 5.812
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

NOTEPAD.EXE

  PowerShell supports the same functionality through the Register-WmiEvent and Get-Event
commands:
PS C:\> Register-WmiEvent -Query “SELECT * FROM __InstanceCreationEvent WITHIN 1 WHERE
TargetInstance ISA 'Win32_Process'” -SourceIdentifier “TestWmiRegistration”

PS C:\> (Get-Event)[0].SourceEventArgs.NewEvent.TargetInstance | Select-Object -Property
ProcessId, ExecutablePath

ProcessId ExecutablePath
--------- --------------
    76016 C:\WINDOWS\system32\notepad.exe

PS C:\> Unregister-Event -SourceIdentifier "TestWmiRegistration"

      WMI implementation
      The WMI service runs in a shared Svchost process that executes in the local system account. It loads
      providers into the WmiPrvSE.exe provider-hosting process, which launches as a child of the DCOM
      Launcher (RPC service) process. WMI executes Wmiprvse in the local system, local service, or network
      service account, depending on the value of the HostingModel property of the WMI Win32Provider ob-
      ject instance that represents the provider implementation. A Wmiprvse process exits after the provider
      is removed from the cache, one minute following the last provider request it receives.

         EXPERIMENT: Viewing Wmiprvse creation
         You can see WmiPrvSE being created by running Process Explorer and executing Wmic. A
         WmiPrvSE process will appear beneath the Svchost process that hosts the DCOM Launcher
         service. If Process Explorer job highlighting is enabled, it will appear with the job highlight color
         because, to prevent a runaway provider from consuming all virtual memory resources on a
         system, Wmiprvse executes in a job object that limits the number of child processes it can create
         and the amount of virtual memory each process and all the processes of the job can allocate.
         (See Chapter 5 for more information on job objects.)

        Most WMI components reside by default in %SystemRoot%\System32 and %SystemRoot%\System32\
      Wbem, including Windows MOF files, built-in provider DLLs, and management application WMI DLLs.
      Look in the %SystemRoot%\System32\Wbem directory, and you’ll find Ntevt.mof, the Event Log provider
      MOF file. You’ll also find Ntevt.dll, the Event Log provider’s DLL, which the WMI service uses.

   Providers are generally implemented as dynamic link libraries (DLLs) exposing COM servers that
implement a specified set of interfaces (IWbemServices is the central one. Generally, a single provider is
implemented as a single COM server). WMI includes many built-in providers for the Windows family of
operating systems. The built-in providers, also known as standard providers, supply data and manage-
ment functions from well-known operating system sources such as the Win32 subsystem, event logs,
performance counters, and registry. Table 10-15 lists several of the standard WMI providers included
with Windows.

TABLE 10-15 Standard WMI providers included with Windows

Provider              Binary         Namespace                Description

Active Directory      dsprov.dll     root\directory\ldap      Maps Active Directory objects to WMI
provider

Event Log provider    ntevt.dll      root\cimv2               Manages Windows event logs—for example, read,
                                                              backup, clear, copy, delete, monitor, rename, com-
                                                              press, uncompress, and change event log settings

Performance Counter   wbemperf.dll   root\cimv2               Provides access to raw performance data
provider

Registry provider     stdprov.dll    root\default             Reads, writes, enumerates, monitors, creates, and
                                                              deletes registry keys and values

Virtualization        vmmsprox.dll   root\virtualization\v2   Provides access to virtualization services implemented
provider                                                      in vmms.exe, like managing virtual machines in the
                                                              host system and retrieving information of the host
                                                              system peripherals from a guest VM

WDM provider          wmiprov.dll    root\wmi                 Provides access to information on WDM device drivers

Win32 provider        cimwin32.dll   root\cimv2               Provides information about the computer, disks, pe-
                                                              ripheral devices, files, folders, file systems, networking
                                                              components, operating system, printers, processes,
                                                              security, services, shares, SAM users and groups, and
                                                              more

Windows Installer     msiprov.dll    root\cimv2               Provides access to information about installed
provider                                                      software

    Ntevt.dll, the Event Log provider DLL, is a COM server, registered in the HKLM\Software\Classes\
CLSID registry key with the {F55C5B4C-517D-11d1-AB57-00C04FD9159E} CLSID. (You can find it in the
MOF descriptor.) Directories beneath %SystemRoot%\System32\Wbem store the repository, log files,
and third-party MOF files. WMI implements the repository—named the CIMOM object repository—
using a proprietary version of the Microsoft JET database engine. The database file, by default, resides
in SystemRoot%\System32\Wbem\Repository\.

   WMI honors numerous registry settings that the service’s HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\WBEM\
CIMOM registry key stores, such as thresholds and maximum values for certain parameters.

   Device drivers use special interfaces to provide data to and accept commands—called the WMI
System Control commands—from WMI. These interfaces are part of the WDM, which is explained in
Chapter 6 of Part 1. Because the interfaces are cross-platform, they fall under the \root\WMI namespace.

      WMI security
      WMI implements security at the namespace level. If a management application successfully connects
      to a namespace, the application can view and access the properties of all the objects in that namespace.
      An administrator can use the WMI Control application to control which users can access a namespace.
      Internally, this security model is implemented by using ACLs and Security Descriptors, part of the
      standard Windows security model that implements Access Checks. (See Chapter 7 of Part 1 for more
      information on access checks.)

          To start the WMI Control application, open the Control Panel by typing Computer Management
      in the Cortana search box. Next, open the Services And Applications node. Right-click WMI Control
      and select Properties to launch the WMI Control Properties dialog box, as shown in Figure 10-30. To
      configure security for namespaces, click the Security tab, select the namespace, and click Security.
      The other tabs in the WMI Control Properties dialog box let you modify the performance and backup
      settings that the registry stores.

      FIGURE 10-30 The WMI Control Properties application and the Security tab of the root\virtualization\v2 namespace.

Event Tracing for Windows (ETW)
   Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) is the main facility that provides to applications and kernel-mode
   drivers the ability to provide, consume, and manage log and trace events. The events can be stored in
   a log file or in a circular buffer, or they can be consumed in real time. They can be used for debugging
   a driver, a framework like the .NET CLR, or an application and to understand whether there could be
   potential performance issues. The ETW facility is mainly implemented in the NT kernel, but an applica-
   tion can also use private loggers, which do not transition to kernel-mode at all. An application that uses
   ETW can be one of the following categories:

      ■   Controller A controller starts and stops event tracing sessions, manages the size of the buffer
          pools, and enables providers so they can log events to the session. Example controllers include
          Reliability and Performance Monitor and XPerf from the Windows Performance Toolkit (now
          part of the Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit, available for download from https://docs.
          microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/get-started/adk-install).

      ■   Provider A provider is an application or a driver that contains event tracing instrumentation.
          A provider registers with ETW a provider GUID (globally unique identifiers), which defines the
          events it can produce. After the registration, the provider can generate events, which can be
          enabled or disabled by the controller application through an associated trace session.

      ■   Consumer A consumer is an application that selects one or more trace sessions for which it
          wants to read trace data. Consumers can receive events stored in log files, in a circular buffer,
          or from sessions that deliver events in real time.

      It’s important to mention that in ETW, every provider, session, trait, and provider’s group is rep-
   resented by a GUID (more information about these concepts are provided later in this chapter). Four
   different technologies used for providing events are built on the top of ETW. They differ mainly in the
   method in which they store and define events (there are other distinctions though):

      ■   MOF (or classic) providers are the legacy ones, used especially by WMI. MOF providers store the
          events descriptor in MOF classes so that the consumer knows how to consume them.

      ■   WPP (Windows software trace processor) providers are used for tracing the operations of an
          application or driver (they are an extension of WMI event tracing) and use a TMF (trace message
          format) file for allowing the consumer to decode trace events.

      ■   Manifest-based providers use an XML manifest file to define events that can be decoded by
          the consumer.

      ■   TraceLogging providers, which, like WPP providers are used for fast tracing the operation of an
          application of driver, use self-describing events that contain all the required information for the
          consumption by the controller.

         When first installed, Windows already includes dozens of providers, which are used by each com-
      ponent of the OS for logging diagnostics events and performance traces. For example, Hyper-V has
      multiple providers, which provide tracing events for the Hypervisor, Dynamic Memory, Vid driver, and
      Virtualization stack. As shown in Figure 10-31, ETW is implemented in different components:

         ■   Most of the ETW implementation (global session creation, provider registration and enable-
             ment, main logger thread) resides in the NT kernel.

         ■   The Host for SCM/SDDL/LSA Lookup APIs library (sechost.dll) provides to applications the main
             user-mode APIs used for creating an ETW session, enabling providers and consuming events.
             Sechost uses services provided by Ntdll to invoke ETW in the NT kernel. Some ETW user-mode
             APIs are implemented directly in Ntdll without exposing the functionality to Sechost. Provider
             registration and events generation are examples of user-mode functionalities that are imple-
             mented in Ntdll (and not in Sechost).

         ■   The Event Trace Decode Helper Library (TDH.dll) implements services available for consumers
             to decode ETW events.

         ■   The Eventing Consumption and Configuration library (WevtApi.dll) implements the Windows
             Event Log APIs (also known as Evt APIs), which are available to consumer applications for man-
             aging providers and events on local and remote machines. Windows Event Log APIs support
             XPath 1.0 or structured XML queries for parsing events produced by an ETW session.

         ■   The Secure Kernel implements basic secure services able to interact with ETW in the NT kernel
             that lives in VTL 0. This allows trustlets and the Secure Kernel to use ETW for logging their own
             secure events.

             Consumer App.             Controller App.
             Decode Consume
             Events Events
                                                             Provider App.
                                         Sechost.dll
         WevtApi.dll    TDH.dll

                                         NTDLL.DLL
                                                                                  User Mode
                                                                                 Kernel Mode
                                                  Kernel
                                                   KernelDrivers
                                                    KernelDrivers
                                                           Drivers

                                            ETW
                                                                             Secure Kernel
                                         (NT Kernel)

      FIGURE 10-31 ETW architecture.

ETW initialization
The ETW initialization starts early in the NT kernel startup (for more details on the NT kernel initial-
ization, see Chapter 12). It is orchestrated by the internal EtwInitialize function in three phases. The
phase 0 of the NT kernel initialization calls EtwInitialize to properly allocate and initialize the per-silo
ETW-specific data structure that stores the array of logger contexts representing global ETW sessions
(see the “ETW session” section later in this chapter for more details). The maximum number of global
sessions is queried from the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\WMI\EtwMaxLoggers regis-
try value, which should be between 32 and 256, (64 is the default number in case the registry value
does not exist).

    Later, in the NT kernel startup, the IoInitSystemPreDrivers routine of phase 1 continues with the
initialization of ETW, which performs the following steps:

   1.   Acquires the system startup time and reference system time and calculates the QPC frequency.

   2.   Initializes the ETW security key and reads the default session and provider’s security descriptor.

   3.   Initializes the per-processor global tracing structures located in the PRCB.

   4.   Creates the real-time ETW consumer object type (called EtwConsumer), which is used to allow
        a user-mode real-time consumer process to connect to the main ETW logger thread and the
        ETW registration (internally called EtwRegistration) object type, which allow a provider to be
        registered from a user-mode application.

   5.   Registers the ETW bugcheck callback, used to dump logger sessions data in the bugcheck dump.

   6.   Initializes and starts the Global logger and Autologgers sessions, based on the AutoLogger and
        GlobalLogger registry keys located under the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\WMI
        root key.

   7.   Uses the EtwRegister kernel API to register various NT kernel event providers, like the Kernel
        Event Tracing, General Events provider, Process, Network, Disk, File Name, IO, and Memory
        providers, and so on.

   8.   Publishes the ETW initialized WNF state name to indicate that the ETW subsystem is initialized.

   9.   Writes the SystemStart event to both the Global Trace logging and General Events providers.
        The event, which is shown in Figure 10-32, logs the approximate OS Startup time.

   10. If required, loads the FileInfo driver, which provides supplemental information on files I/O to
        Superfetch (more information on the Proactive memory management is available in Chapter 5
        of Part 1).

      FIGURE 10-32 The SystemStart ETW event displayed by the Event Viewer.

          In early boot phases, the Windows registry and I/O subsystems are still not completely initialized. So
      ETW can’t directly write to the log files. Late in the boot process, after the Session Manager (SMSS.exe)
      has correctly initialized the software hive, the last phase of ETW initialization takes place. The purpose
      of this phase is just to inform each already-registered global ETW session that the file system is ready,
      so that they can flush out all the events that are recorded in the ETW buffers to the log file.

      ETW sessions
      One of the most important entities of ETW is the Session (internally called logger instance), which is a
      glue between providers and consumers. An event tracing session records events from one or more pro-
      viders that a controller has enabled. A session usually contains all the information that describes which
      events should be recorded by which providers and how the events should be processed. For example,
      a session might be configured to accept all events from the Microsoft-Windows-Hyper-V-Hypervisor
      provider (which is internally identified using the {52fc89f8-995e-434c-a91e-199986449890} GUID). The
      user can also configure filters. Each event generated by a provider (or a provider group) can be filtered
      based on event level (information, warning, error, or critical), event keyword, event ID, and other char-
      acteristics. The session configuration can also define various other details for the session, such as what
      time source should be used for the event timestamps (for example, QPC, TSC, or system time), which
      events should have stack traces captured, and so on. The session has the important rule to host the
      ETW logger thread, which is the main entity that flushes the events to the log file or delivers them to
      the real-time consumer.

   Sessions are created using the StartTrace API and configured using ControlTrace and EnableTraceEx2.
Command-line tools such as xperf, logman, tracelog, and wevtutil use these APIs to start or control
trace sessions. A session also can be configured to be private to the process that creates it. In this case,
ETW is used for consuming events created only by the same application that also acts as provider. The
application thus eliminates the overhead associated with the kernel-mode transition. Private ETW ses-
sions can record only events for the threads of the process in which it is executing and cannot be used
with real-time delivery. The internal architecture of private ETW is not described in this book.

    When a global session is created, the StartTrace API validates the parameters and copies them in a
data structure, which the NtTraceControl API uses to invoke the internal function EtwpStartLogger in the
kernel. An ETW session is represented internally through an ETW_LOGGER_CONTEXT data structure,
which contains the important pointers to the session memory buffers, where the events are written
to. As discussed in the “ETW initialization” section, a system can support a limited number of ETW ses-
sions, which are stored in an array located in a global per-SILO data structure. EtwpStartLogger checks
the global sessions array, determining whether there is free space or if a session with the same name
already exists. If that is the case, it exits and signals an error. Otherwise, it generates a session GUID (if
not already specified by the caller), allocates and initializes an ETW_LOGGER_CONTEXT data structure
representing the session, assigns to it an index, and inserts it in the per-silo array.

    ETW queries the session’s security descriptor located in the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\
Control\Wmi\Security registry key. As shown in Figure 10-33, each registry value in the key is named as
the session GUID (the registry key, however, also contains the provider’s GUID) and contains the binary
representation of a self-relative security descriptor. If a security descriptor for the session does not ex-
ist, a default one is returned for the session (see the “Witnessing the default security descriptor of ETW
sessions” experiment later in this chapter for details).

FIGURE 10-33 The ETW security registry key.

         The EtwpStartLogger function performs an access check on the session’s security descriptor, request-
      ing the TRACELOG_GUID_ENABLE access right (and the TRACELOG_CREATE_REALTIME or TRACELOG_
      CREATE_ONDISK depending on the log file mode) using the current process’s access token. If the check
      succeeds, the routine calculates the default size and numbers of event buffers, which are calculated
      based on the size of the system physical memory (the default buffer size is 8, 16, or 64KB). The number
      of buffers depends on the number of system processors and on the presence of the EVENT_TRACE_
      NO_PER_PROCESSOR_BUFFERING logger mode flag, which prevents events (which can be generated
      from different processors) to be written to a per-processor buffer.

          ETW acquires the session’s initial reference time stamp. Three clock resolutions are currently support-
      ed: Query performance counter (QPC, a high-resolution time stamp not affected by the system clock),
      System time, and CPU cycle counter. The EtwpAllocateTraceBuffer function is used to allocate each buffer
      associated with the logger session (the number of buffers was calculated before or specified as input
      from the user). A buffer can be allocated from the paged pool, nonpaged pool, or directly from physical
      large pages, depending on the logging mode. Each buffer is stored in multiple internal per-session lists,
      which are able to provide fast lookup both to the ETW main logger thread and ETW providers. Finally,
      if the log mode is not set to a circular buffer, the EtwpStartLogger function starts the main ETW logger
      thread, which has the goal of flushing events written by the providers associated with the session to the
      log file or to the real-time consumer. After the main thread is started, ETW sends a session notification to
      the registered session notification provider (GUID 2a6e185b-90de-4fc5-826c-9f44e608a427), a special
      provider that allows its consumers to be informed when certain ETW events happen (like a new session
      being created or destroyed, a new log file being created, or a log error being raised).

         EXPERIMENT: Enumerating ETW sessions
         In Windows 10, there are multiple ways to enumerate active ETW sessions. In this and all the
         next experiments regarding ETW, you will use the XPERF tool, which is part of the Windows
         Performance Toolkit distributed in the Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit (ADK), which
         is freely downloadable from https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/get-started/
         adk-install.

            Enumerating active ETW sessions can be done in multiple ways. XPERF can do it while
         executed with the following command (usually XPERF is installed in C:\Program Files
         (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Windows Performance Toolkit):
         xperf -Loggers

            The output of the command can be huge, so it is strongly advised to redirect the output in
         a TXT file:
         xperf -Loggers > ETW_Sessions.txt

   The tool can decode and show in a human-readable form all the session configuration data.
An example is given from the EventLog-Application session, which is used by the Event logger
service (Wevtsvc.dll) to write events in the Application.evtx file shown by the Event Viewer:
Logger Name           : EventLog-Application
Logger Id             : 9
Logger Thread Id      : 000000000000008C
Buffer Size           : 64
Maximum Buffers       : 64
Minimum Buffers       : 2
Number of Buffers     : 2
Free Buffers          : 2
Buffers Written       : 252
Events Lost           : 0
Log Buffers Lost      : 0
Real Time Buffers Lost: 0
Flush Timer           : 1
Age Limit             : 0
Real Time Mode        : Enabled
Log File Mode         : Secure PersistOnHybridShutdown PagedMemory IndependentSession
NoPerProcessorBuffering
Maximum File Size     : 100
Log Filename          :
Trace Flags           : "Microsoft-Windows-CertificateServicesClient-Lifecycle-User":0x800
0000000000000:0xff+"Microsoft-Windows-SenseIR":0x8000000000000000:0xff+
... (output cut for space reasons)

   The tool is also able to decode the name of each provider enabled in the session and the
bitmask of event categories that the provider should write to the sessions. The interpretation of
the bitmask (shown under “Trace Flags”) depends on the provider. For example, a provider can
define that the category 1 (bit 0 set) indicates the set of events generated during initialization
and cleanup, category 2 (bit 1 set) indicates the set of events generated when registry I/O is per-
formed, and so on. The trace flags are interpreted differently for System sessions (see the “System
loggers” section for more details.) In that case, the flags are decoded from the enabled kernel
flags that specify which kind of kernel events the system session should log.

   The Windows Performance Monitor, in addition to dealing with system performance counters,
can easily enumerate the ETW sessions. Open Performance Monitor (by typing perfmon in the
Cortana search box), expand the Data Collector Sets, and click Event Trace Sessions. The applica-
tion should list the same sessions listed by XPERF. If you right-click a session’s name and select
Properties, you should be able to navigate between the session’s configurations. In particular, the
Security property sheet decodes the security descriptor of the ETW session.

            Finally, you also can use the Microsoft Logman console tool (%SystemRoot%\System32\
         logman.exe) to enumerate active ETW sessions (by using the -ets command-line argument).

      ETW providers
      As stated in the previous sections, a provider is a component that produces events (while the applica-
      tion that includes the provider contains event tracing instrumentation). ETW supports different kinds
      of providers, which all share a similar programming model. (They are mainly different in the way in
      which they encode events.) A provider must be initially registered with ETW before it can generate any
      event. In a similar way, a controller application should enable the provider and associate it with an ETW
      session to be able to receive events from the provider. If no session has enabled a provider, the pro-
      vider will not generate any event. The provider defines its interpretation of being enabled or disabled.
      Generally, an enabled provider generates events, and a disabled provider does not.

      Providers registration
      Each provider’s type has its own API that needs to be called by a provider application (or driver) for reg-
      istering a provider. For example, manifest-based providers rely on the EventRegister API for user-mode
      registrations, and EtwRegister for kernel-mode registrations. All the provider types end up calling the
      internal EtwpRegisterProvider function, which performs the actual registration process (and is imple-
      mented in both the NT kernel and NTDLL). The latter allocates and initializes an ETW_GUID_ENTRY data
      structure, which represents the provider (the same data structure is used for notifications and traits).
      The data structure contains important information, like the provider GUID, security descriptor, refer-
      ence counter, enablement information (for each ETW session that enables the provider), and a list of
      provider’s registrations.

   For user-mode provider registrations, the NT kernel performs an access check on the calling pro-
cess’s token, requesting the TRACELOG_REGISTER_GUIDS access right. If the check succeeds, or if the
registration request originated from kernel code, ETW inserts the new ETW_GUID_ENTRY data struc-
ture in a hash table located in the global ETW per-silo data structure, using a hash of the provider’s
GUID as the table’s key (this allows fast lookup of all the providers registered in the system.) In case an
entry with the same GUID already exists in the hash table, ETW uses the existing entry instead of the
new one. A GUID could already exist in the hash table mainly for two reasons:

     ■      Another driver or application has enabled the provider before it has been actually registered
            (see the “Providers enablement” section later in this chapter for more details) .

     ■      The provider has been already registered once. Multiple registration of the same provider GUID
            are supported.

    After the provider has been successfully added into the global list, ETW creates and initializes an
ETW registration object, which represents a single registration. The object encapsulates an ETW_REG_
ENTRY data structure, which ties the provider to the process and session that requested its registration.
(ETW also supports registration from different sessions.) The object is inserted in a list located in the
ETW_GUID_ENTRY (the EtwRegistration object type has been previously created and registered with
the NT object manager at ETW initialization time). Figure 10-34 shows the two data structures and their
relationships. In the figure, two providers’ processes (process A, living in session 4, and process B, living
in session 16) have registered for provider 1. Thus two ETW_REG_ENTRY data structures have been cre-
ated and linked to the ETW_GUID_ENTRY representing provider 1.

                        ETW_GUID List                                                                  ETW_GUID List      …
                           entry                                                                          entry
   ETW_Global
                          Provider’s                                                                     Provider’s
per-SILO hash-table                             Reg. List Entry              Reg. List Entry
                            GUID                                                                           GUID
                                                ETW_GUID ptr.                ETW_GUID ptr.
                      ETW registrations                                                              ETW registrations    …
                         List head                Process A                     Process B               List head
                                                Session ID 0x4               Session ID 0x10
                           Security                                                                       Security
                          Descriptor            Callback’s Info              Callback’s Info             Descriptor
                         Enablement                  Flags                        Flags                 Enablement
                       Information [8]         Reg. Enablement              Reg. Enablement           Information [8]
                                                     Mask                         Mask
                             Ref.                                                                           Ref.
                           Counter                   Traits                       Traits                  Counter
                            Filter             ETW_REG_ENTRY               ETW_REG_ENTRY                   Filter
                            Data               for provider app. A         for provider app. B             Data
                                           which registered provider 1 which registered provider 1
                      ETW_GUID_ENTRY                                                                 ETW_GUID_ENTRY
                        (for provider 1)                                                               (for provider 2)

FIGURE 10-34 The ETW_GUID_ENTRY data structure and the ETW_REG_ENTRY.

     At this stage, the provider is registered and ready to be enabled in the session(s) that requested it
(through the EnableTrace API). In case the provider has been already enabled in at least one session before
its registration, ETW enables it (see the next section for details) and calls the Enablement callback, which can
be specified by the caller of the EventRegister (or EtwRegister) API that started the registration process.

         EXPERIMENT: Enumerating ETW providers
         As for ETW sessions, XPERF can enumerate the list of all the current registered providers (the
         WEVTUTIL tool, installed with Windows, can do the same). Open an administrative command
         prompt window and move to the Windows Performance Toolkit path. To enumerate the reg-
         istered providers, use the -providers command option. The option supports different flags.
         For this experiment, you will be interested in the I and R flags, which tell XPERF to enumerate
         the installed or registered providers. As we will discuss in the “Decoding events” section later
         in this chapter, the difference is that a provider can be registered (by specifying a GUID) but
         not installed in the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\WINEVT\Publishers
         registry key. This will prevent any consumer from decoding the event using TDH routines. The
         following commands
         cd /d “C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Windows Performance Toolkit”
         xperf -providers R > registered_providers.txt
         xperf -providers I > installed_providers.txt

             produce two text files with similar information. If you open the registered_providers.txt file,
         you will find a mix of names and GUIDs. Names identify providers that are also installed in the
         Publisher registry key, whereas GUID represents providers that have just been registered through
         the EventRegister API discussed in this section. All the names are present also in the installed_
         providers.txt file with their respective GUIDs, but you won’t find any GUID listed in the first text
         file in the installed providers list.

             XPERF also supports the enumeration of all the kernel flags and groups supported by system
         loggers (discussed in the “System loggers” section later in this chapter) through the K flag (which
         is a superset of the KF and KG flags).

      Provider Enablement
      As introduced in the previous section, a provider should be associated with an ETW session to be able
      to generate events. This association is called Provider Enablement, and it can happen in two ways:
      before or after the provider is registered. A controller application can enable a provider on a session
      through the EnableTraceEx API. The API allows you to specify a bitmask of keywords that determine the
      category of events that the session wants to receive. In the same way, the API supports advanced filters
      on other kinds of data, like the process IDs that generate the events, package ID, executable name,
      and so on. (You can find more information at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/
      evntprov/ns-evntprov-event_filter_descriptor.)

         Provider Enablement is managed by ETW in kernel mode through the internal EtwpEnableGuid
      function. For user-mode requests, the function performs an access check on both the session and
      provider security descriptors, requesting the TRACELOG_GUID_ENABLE access right on behalf of
      the calling process’s token. If the logger session includes the SECURITY_TRACE flag, EtwpEnableGuid
      requires that the calling process is a PPL (see the “ETW security” section later in this chapter for more
      details). If the check succeeds, the function performs a similar task to the one discussed previously for
      provider registrations:

   ■    It allocates and initializes an ETW_GUID_ENTRY data structure to represent the provider or use
        the one already linked in the global ETW per-silo data structure in case the provider has been
        already registered.

   ■    Links the provider to the logger session by adding the relative session enablement information
        in the ETW_GUID_ENTRY.

    In case the provider has not been previously registered, no ETW registration object exists that’s
linked in the ETW_GUID_ENTRY data structure, so the procedure terminates. (The provider will be
enabled after it is first registered.) Otherwise, the provider is enabled.

     While legacy MOF providers and WPP providers can be enabled only to one session at time,
Manifest-based and Tracelogging providers can be enabled on a maximum of eight sessions. As previ-
ously shown in Figure 10-32, the ETW_GUID_ENTRY data structure contains enablement information
for each possible ETW session that enabled the provider (eight maximum). Based on the enabled ses-
sions, the EtwpEnableGuid function calculates a new session enablement mask, storing it in the ETW_
REG_ENTRY data structure (representing the provider registration). The mask is very important because
it’s the key for event generations. When an application or driver writes an event to the provider, a
check is made: if a bit in the enablement mask equals 1, it means that the event should be written to the
buffer maintained by a particular ETW session; otherwise, the session is skipped and the event is not
written to its buffer.

    Note that for secure sessions, a supplemental access check is performed before updating the ses-
sion enablement mask in the provider registration. The ETW session’s security descriptor should allow
the TRACELOG_LOG_EVENT access right to the calling process’s access token. Otherwise, the relative
bit in the enablement mask is not set to 1. (The target ETW session will not receive any event from the
provider registration.) More information on secure sessions is available in the “Secure loggers and ETW
security” section later in this chapter.

Providing events
After registering one or more ETW providers, a provider application can start to generate events. Note
that events can be generated even though a controller application hasn’t had the chance to enable the
provider in an ETW session. The way in which an application or driver can generate events depends on
the type of the provider. For example, applications that write events to manifest-based providers usu-
ally directly create an event descriptor (which respects the XML manifest) and use the EventWrite API
to write the event to the ETW sessions that have the provider enabled. Applications that manage MOF
and WPP providers rely on the TraceEvent API instead.

    Events generated by manifest-based providers, as discussed previously in the “ETW session” sec-
tion, can be filtered by multiple means. ETW locates the ETW_GUID_ENTRY data structure from the
provider registration object, which is provided by the application through a handle. The internal
EtwpEventWriteFull function uses the provider’s registration session enablement mask to cycle between
all the enabled ETW sessions associated with the provider (represented by an ETW_LOGGER_CONTEXT).
For each session, it checks whether the event satisfies all the filters. If so, it calculates the full size of the
event’s payload and checks whether there is enough free space in the session’s current buffer.

          If there is no available space, ETW checks whether there is another free buffer in the session: free
      buffers are stored in a FIFO (first-in, first-out) queue. If there is a free buffer, ETW marks the old buffer
      as “dirty” and switches to the new free one. In this way, the Logger thread can wake up and flush the
      entire buffer to a log file or deliver it to a real-time consumer. If the session’s log mode is a circular log-
      ger, no logger thread is ever created: ETW simply links the old full buffer at the end of the free buffers
      queue (as a result the queue will never be empty). Otherwise, if there isn’t a free buffer in the queue,
      ETW tries to allocate an additional buffer before returning an error to the caller.

         After enough space in a buffer is found, EtwpEventWriteFull atomically writes the entire event
      payload in the buffer and exits. Note that in case the session enablement mask is 0, it means that no
      sessions are associated with the provider. As a result, the event is lost and not logged anywhere.

         MOF and WPP events go through a similar procedure but support only a single ETW session and
      generally support fewer filters. For these kinds of providers, a supplemental check is performed on the
      associated session: If the controller application has marked the session as secure, nobody can write
      any events. In this case, an error is yielded back to the caller (secure sessions are discussed later in the
      “Secure loggers and ETW security” section).

         EXPERIMENT: Listing processes activity using ETW
         In this experiment, will use ETW to monitor system’s processes activity. Windows 10 has two provid-
         ers that can monitor this information: Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Process and the NT kernel log-
         ger through the PROC_THREAD kernel flags. You will use the former, which is a classic provider and
         already has all the information for decoding its events. You can capture the trace with multiple tools.
         You still use XPERF (Windows Performance Monitor can be used, too).

            Open a command prompt window and type the following commands:
         cd /d “C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Windows Performance Toolkit”
         xperf -start TestSession -on Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Process -f c:\process_trace.etl

            The command starts an ETW session called TestSession (you can replace the name) that will
         consume events generated by the Kernel-Process provider and store them in the C:\process_
         trace.etl log file (you can also replace the file name).

            To verify that the session has actually started, repeat the steps described previously in the
         “Enumerating ETW sessions” experiment. (The TestSession trace session should be listed by both
         XPERF and the Windows Performance Monitor.) Now, you should start some new processes or
         applications (like Notepad or Paint, for example).

            To stop the ETW session, use the following command:
         xperf -stop TestSession

            The steps used for decoding the ETL file are described later in the “Decoding an ETL file”
         experiment. Windows includes providers for almost all its components. The Microsoft-Windows-
         MSPaint provider, for example, generates events based on Paint’s functionality. You can try this
         experiment by capturing events from the MsPaint provider.

ETW Logger thread
The Logger thread is one of the most important entities in ETW. Its main purpose is to flush events to
the log file or deliver them to the real-time consumer, keeping track of the number of delivered and
lost events. A logger thread is started every time an ETW session is initially created, but only in case the
session does not use the circular log mode. Its execution logic is simple. After it’s started, it links itself
to the ETW_LOGGER_CONTEXT data structure representing the associated ETW session and waits on
two main synchronization objects. The Flush event is signaled by ETW every time a buffer belonging
to a session becomes full (which can happen after a new event has been generated by a provider—for
example, as discussed in the previous section, “Providing events”), when a new real-time consumer
has requested to be connected, or when a logger session is going to be stopped. The TimeOut timer is
initialized to a valid value (usually 1 second) only in case the session is a real-time one or in case the user
has explicitly required it when calling the StartTrace API for creating the new session.

   When one of the two synchronization objects is signaled, the logger thread rearms them and
checks whether the file system is ready. If not, the main logger thread returns to sleep again (no ses-
sions should be flushed in early boot stages). Otherwise, it starts to flush each buffer belonging to the
session to the log file or the real-time consumer.

    For real-time sessions, the logger thread first creates a temporary per-session ETL file in the
%SystemRoot%\ System32\LogFiles\WMI\RtBackup folder (as shown in Figure 10-35.) The log file name
is generated by adding the EtwRT prefix to the name of the real-time session. The file is used for saving
temporary events before they are delivered to a real-time consumer (the log file can also store lost events
that have not been delivered to the consumer in the proper time frame). When started, real-time auto-
loggers restore lost events from the log file with the goal of delivering them to their consumer.

FIGURE 10-35 Real-time temporary ETL log files.

          The logger thread is the only entity able to establish a connection between a real-time consumer
      and the session. The first time that a consumer calls the ProcessTrace API for receiving events from a
      real-time session, ETW sets up a new RealTimeConsumer object and uses it with the goal of creating a
      link between the consumer and the real-time session. The object, which resolves to an ETW_REALTIME_
      CONSUMER data structure in the NT kernel, allows events to be “injected” in the consumer’s process
      address space (another user-mode buffer is provided by the consumer application).

          For non–real-time sessions, the logger thread opens (or creates, in case the file does not exist) the
      initial ETL log file specified by the entity that created the session. The logger thread can also create a
      brand-new log file in case the session’s log mode specifies the EVENT_TRACE_FILE_MODE_NEWFILE
      flag, and the current log file reaches the maximum size.

          At this stage, the ETW logger thread initiates a flush of all the buffers associated with the session
      to the current log file (which, as discussed, can be a temporary one for real-time sessions). The flush is
      performed by adding an event header to each event in the buffer and by using the NtWriteFile API for
      writing the binary content to the ETL log file. For real-time sessions, the next time the logger thread
      wakes up, it is able to inject all the events stored in the temporary log file to the target user-mode real-
      time consumer application. Thus, for real-time sessions, ETW events are never delivered synchronously.

      Consuming events
      Events consumption in ETW is performed almost entirely in user mode by a consumer application,
      thanks to the services provided by the Sechost.dll. The consumer application uses the OpenTrace API
      for opening an ETL log file produced by the main logger thread or for establishing the connection to
      a real-time logger. The application specifies an event callback function, which is called every time ETW
      consumes a single event. Furthermore, for real-time sessions, the application can supply an optional
      buffer-callback function, which receives statistics for each buffer that ETW flushes and is called every
      time a single buffer is full and has been delivered to the consumer.

        The actual event consumption is started by the ProcessTrace API. The API works for both standard
      and real-time sessions, depending on the log file mode flags passed previously to OpenTrace.

          For real-time sessions, the API uses kernel mode services (accessed through the NtTraceControl
      system call) to verify that the ETW session is really a real-time one. The NT kernel verifies that the secu-
      rity descriptor of the ETW session grants the TRACELOG_ACCESS_REALTIME access right to the caller
      process’s token. If it doesn’t have access, the API fails and returns an error to the controller applica-
      tion. Otherwise, it allocates a temporary user-mode buffer and a bitmap used for receiving events and
      connects to the main logger thread (which creates the associated EtwConsumer object; see the “ETW
      logger thread” section earlier in this chapter for details). Once the connection is established, the API
      waits for new data arriving from the session’s logger thread. When the data comes, the API enumerates
      each event and calls the event callback.

          For normal non–real-time ETW sessions, the ProcessTrace API performs a similar processing, but
      instead of connecting to the logger thread, it just opens and parses the ETL log file, reading each buf-
      fer one by one and calling the event callback for each found event (events are sorted in chronological
      order). Differently from real-time loggers, which can be consumed one per time, in this case the API

can work even with multiple trace handles created by the OpenTrace API, which means that it can parse
events from different ETL log files.

    Events belonging to ETW sessions that use circular buffers are not processed using the described
methodology. (There is indeed no logger thread that dumps any event.) Usually a controller applica-
tion uses the FlushTrace API when it wants to dump a snapshot of the current buffers belonging to an
ETW session configured to use a circular buffer into a log file. The API invokes the NT kernel through
the NtTraceControl system call, which locates the ETW session and verifies that its security descrip-
tor grants the TRACELOG_CREATE_ONDISK access right to the calling process’s access token. If so,
and if the controller application has specified a valid log file name, the NT kernel invokes the internal
EtwpBufferingModeFlush routine, which creates the new ETL file, adds the proper headers, and writes
all the buffers associated with the session. A consumer application can then parse the events written in
the new log file by using the OpenTrace and ProcessTrace APIs, as described earlier.

Events decoding
When the ProcessTrace API identifies a new event in an ETW buffer, it calls the event callback, which
is generally located in the consumer application. To be able to correctly process the event, the con-
sumer application should decode the event payload. The Event Trace Decode Helper Library (TDH.dll)
provides services to consumer applications for decoding events. As discussed in the previous sections,
a provider application (or driver), should include information that describes how to decode the events
generated by its registered providers.

    This information is encoded differently based on the provider type. Manifest-based providers, for
example, compile the XML descriptor of their events in a binary file and store it in the resource section
of their provider application (or driver). As part of provider registration, a setup application should
register the provider’s binary in the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\WINEVT\
Publishers registry key. The latter is important for event decoding, especially for the following reasons:

   ■   The system consults the Publishers key when it wants to resolve a provider name to its GUID
       (from an ETW point of view, providers do not have a name). This allows tools like Xperf to dis-
       play readable provider names instead of their GUIDs.

   ■   The Trace Decode Helper Library consults the key to retrieve the provider’s binary file, parse its
       resource section, and read the binary content of the events descriptor.

   After the event descriptor is obtained, the Trace Decode Helper Library gains all the needed infor-
mation for decoding the event (by parsing the binary descriptor) and allows consumer applications
to use the TdhGetEventInformation API to retrieve all the fields that compose the event’s payload and
the correct interpretation the data associated with them. TDH follows a similar procedure for MOF and
WPP providers (while TraceLogging incorporates all the decoding data in the event payload, which fol-
lows a standard binary format).

    Note that all events are natively stored by ETW in an ETL log file, which has a well-defined uncom-
pressed binary format and does not contain event decoding information. This means that if an ETL file
is opened by another system that has not acquired the trace, there is a good probability that it will not
be able to decode the events. To overcome these issues, the Event Viewer uses another binary format:

      EVTX. This format includes all the events and their decoding information and can be easily parsed by
      any application. An application can use the EvtExportLog Windows Event Log API to save the events
      included in an ETL file with their decoding information in an EVTX file.

         EXPERIMENT: Decoding an ETL file
         Windows has multiple tools that use the EvtExportLog API to automatically convert an ETL log file
         and include all the decoding information. In this experiment, you use netsh.exe, but TraceRpt.exe
         also works well:

             1.   Open a command prompt and move to the folder where the ETL file produced by the
                  previous experiment (“Listing processes activity using ETW”) resides and insert
                  netsh trace convert input=process_trace.etl output=process_trace.txt dump=txt
                  overwrite=yes

             2.   where process_trace.etl is the name of the input log file, and process_trace.
                  txt file is the name of the output decoded text file.

             3.   If you open the text file, you will find all the decoded events (one for each line) with a
                  description, like the following:
                  [2]1B0C.1154::2020-05-01 12:00:42.075601200 [Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Process]
                  Process 1808 started at time 2020 - 05 - 01T19:00:42.075562700Z by parent 6924
                  running in session 1 with name \Device\HarddiskVolume4\Windows\System32\notepad.
                  exe.

             4.   From the log, you will find that rarely some events are not decoded completely or do
                  not contain any description. This is because the provider manifest does not include the
                  needed information (a good example is given from the ThreadWorkOnBehalfUpdate
                  event). You can get rid of those events by acquiring a trace that does not include their
                  keyword. The event keyword is stored in the CSV or EVTX file.

             5.   Use netsh.exe to produce an EVTX file with the following command:
                  netsh trace convert input=process_trace.etl output=process_trace.evtx dump=evtx
                  overwrite=yes

             6.   Open the Event Viewer. On the console tree located in the left side of the window,
                  right-click the Event Viewer (Local) root node and select Open Saved Logs. Choose the
                  just-created process_trace.evtx file and click Open.

             7.   In the Open Saved Log window, you should give the log a name and select a folder
                  to display it. (The example accepted the default name, process_trace and the default
                  Saved Logs folder.)

8.   The Event Viewer should now display each event located in the log file. Click the Date
     and Time column for ordering the events by Date and Time in ascending order (from
     the oldest one to the newest). Search for ProcessStart with Ctrl+F to find the event indi-
     cating the Notepad.exe process creation:

9.   The ThreadWorkOnBehalfUpdate event, which has no human-readable description,
     causes too much noise, and you should get rid of it from the trace. If you click one of
     those events and open the Details tab, in the System node, you will find that the event
     belongs to the WINEVENT_KEYWORD_ WORK_ON_BEHALF category, which has a key-
     word bitmask set to 0x8000000000002000. (Keep in mind that the highest 16 bits of the
     keywords are reserved for Microsoft-defined categories.) The bitwise NOT operation of
     the 0x8000000000002000 64-bit value is 0x7FFFFFFFFFFFDFFF.

10. Close the Event Viewer and capture another trace with XPERF by using the following
     command:
     xperf -start TestSession -on Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Process:0x7FFFFFFFFFFFDFFF
     -f c:\process_trace.etl

11. Open Notepad or some other application and stop the trace as explained in the
     “Listing processes activity using ETW” experiment. Convert the ETL file to an EVTX.
     This time, the obtained decoded log should be smaller in size, and it does not contain
     ThreadWorkOnBehalfUpdate events.

      System loggers
      What we have described so far is how normal ETW sessions and providers work. Since Windows XP,
      ETW has supported the concepts of system loggers, which allow the NT kernel to globally emit log
      events that are not tied to any provider and are generally used for performance measurements. At
      the time of this writing, there are two main system loggers available, which are represented by the NT
      kernel logger and Circular Kernel Context Logger (while the Global logger is a subset of the NT kernel
      logger). The NT kernel supports a maximum of eight system logger sessions. Every session that receives
      events from a system logger is considered a system session.

         To start a system session, an application makes use of the StartTrace API, but it specifies the EVENT_
      TRACE_SYSTEM_LOGGER_MODE flag or the GUID of a system logger session as input parameters.
      Table 10-16 lists the system logger with their GUIDs. The EtwpStartLogger function in the NT kernel
      recognizes the flag or the special GUIDs and performs an additional check against the NT kernel log-
      ger security descriptor, requesting the TRACELOG_GUID_ENABLE access right on behalf of the caller
      process access token. If the check passes, ETW calculates a system logger index and updates both the
      logger group mask and the system global performance group mask.

      TABLE 10-16 System loggers

      INDEX    Name                             GUID                                     Symbol

      0        NT kernel logger                 {9e814aad-3204-11d2-9a82-006008a86939}   SystemTraceControlGuid

      1        Global logger                    {e8908abc-aa84-11d2-9a93-00805f85d7c6}   GlobalLoggerGuid

      2        Circular Kernel Context Logger   {54dea73a-ed1f-42a4-af71-3e63d056f174}   CKCLGuid

          The last step is the key that drives system loggers. Multiple low-level system functions, which can
      run at a high IRQL (the Context Swapper is a good example), analyzes the performance group mask
      and decides whether to write an event to the system logger. A controller application can enable or
      disable different events logged by a system logger by modifying the EnableFlags bit mask used by the
      StartTrace API and ControlTrace API. The events logged by a system logger are stored internally in the
      global performance group mask in a well-defined order. The mask is composed of an array of eight 32-
      bit values. Each index in the array represents a set of events. System event sets (also called Groups) can
      be enumerated using the Xperf tool. Table 10-17 lists the system logger events and the classification in
      their groups. Most of the system logger events are documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
      windows/win32/api/evntrace/ns-evntrace-event_trace_properties.

TABLE 10-17 System logger events (kernel flags) and their group

Name                 Description                                                 Group

ALL_FAULTS           All page faults including hard, copy-on-write, demand-      None
                     zero faults, and so on

ALPC                 Advanced Local Procedure Call                               None

CACHE_FLUSH          Cache flush events                                          None

CC                   Cache manager events                                        None

CLOCKINT             Clock interrupt events                                      None

COMPACT_CSWITCH Compact context switch                                           Diag

CONTMEMGEN           Contiguous memory generation                                None

CPU_CONFIG           NUMA topology, processor group, and processor index         None

CSWITCH              Context switch                                              IOTrace

DEBUG_EVENTS         Debugger scheduling events                                  None

DISK_IO              Disk I/O                                                    All except SysProf, ReferenceSet,
                                                                                 and Network

DISK_IO_INIT         Disk I/O initiation                                         None

DISPATCHER           CPU scheduler                                               None

DPC                  DPC events                                                  Diag, DiagEasy, and Latency

DPC_QUEUE            DPC queue events                                            None

DRIVERS              Driver events                                               None

FILE_IO              File system operation end times and results                 FileIO

FILE_IO_INIT         File system operation (create/open/close/read/write)        FileIO

FILENAME             FileName (e.g., FileName create/delete/rundown)             None

FLT_FASTIO           Minifilter fastio callback completion                       None

FLT_IO               Minifilter callback completion                              None

FLT_IO_FAILURE       Minifilter callback completion with failure                 None

FLT_IO_INIT          Minifilter callback initiation                              None

FOOTPRINT            Support footprint analysis                                  ReferenceSet

HARD_FAULTS          Hard page faults                                            All except SysProf and Network

HIBERRUNDOWN         Rundown(s) during hibernate                                 None

IDLE_STATES          CPU idle states                                             None

INTERRUPT            Interrupt events                                            Diag, DiagEasy, and Latency

INTERRUPT_STEER      Interrupt steering events                                   Diag, DiagEasy, and Latency

IPI                  Inter-processor interrupt events                            None

KE_CLOCK             Clock configuration events                                  None

KQUEUE               Kernel queue enqueue/dequeue                                None

LOADER               Kernel and user mode image load/unload events               Base

      Name                 Description                                       Group

      MEMINFO              Memory list info                                  Base, ResidentSet, and
                                                                             ReferenceSet

      MEMINFO_WS           Working set info                                  Base and ReferenceSet

      MEMORY               Memory tracing                                    ResidentSet and ReferenceSet

      NETWORKTRACE         Network events (e.g., tcp/udp send/receive)       Network

      OPTICAL_IO           Optical I/O                                       None

      OPTICAL_IO_INIT      Optical I/O initiation                            None

      PERF_COUNTER         Process perf counters                             Diag and DiagEasy

      PMC_PROFILE          PMC sampling events                               None

      POOL                 Pool tracing                                      None

      POWER                Power management events                           ResumeTrace

      PRIORITY             Priority change events                            None

      PROC_THREAD          Process and thread create/delete                  Base

      PROFILE              CPU sample profile                                SysProf

      REFSET               Support footprint analysis                        ReferenceSet

      REG_HIVE             Registry hive tracing                             None

      REGISTRY             Registry tracing                                  None

      SESSION              Session rundown/create/delete events              ResidentSet and ReferenceSet

      SHOULDYIELD          Tracing for the cooperative DPC mechanism         None

      SPINLOCK             Spinlock collisions                               None

      SPLIT_IO             Split I/O                                         None

      SYSCALL              System calls                                      None

      TIMER                Timer settings and its expiration                 None

      VAMAP                MapFile info                                      ResidentSet and ReferenceSet

      VIRT_ALLOC           Virtual allocation reserve and release            ResidentSet and ReferenceSet

      WDF_DPC              WDF DPC events                                    None

      WDF_INTERRUPT        WDF Interrupt events                              None

         When the system session starts, events are immediately logged. There is no provider that needs
      to be enabled. This implies that a consumer application has no way to generically decode the event.
      System logger events use a precise event encoding format (called NTPERF), which depends on the
      event type. However, most of the data structures representing different NT kernel logger events are
      usually documented in the Windows platform SDK.

EXPERIMENT: Tracing TCP/IP activity with the kernel logger
In this experiment, you listen to the network activity events generated by the System Logger
using the Windows Performance Monitor. As already introduced in the “Enumerating ETW ses-
sions” experiment, the graphical tool is not just able to obtain data from the system performance
counters but is also able to start, stop, and manage ETW sessions (system session included). To
enable the kernel logger and have it generate a log file of TCP/IP activity, follow these steps:

    1.   Run the Performance Monitor (by typing perfmon in the Cortana search box) and click
         Data Collector Sets, User Defined.

    2.   Right-click User Defined, choose New, and select Data Collector Set.

    3.   When prompted, enter a name for the data collector set (for example, experiment),
         and choose Create Manually (Advanced) before clicking Next.

    4.   In the dialog box that opens, select Create Data Logs, check Event Trace Data, and
         then click Next. In the Providers area, click Add, and locate Windows Kernel Trace. Click
         OK. In the Properties list, select Keywords (Any), and then click Edit.

    5.   From the list shown in the Property window, select Automatic and check only net for
         Network TCP/IP, and then click OK.

          6.   Click Next to select a location where the files are saved. By default, this location is
               %SystemDrive%\PerfLogs\Admin\experiment\, if this is how you named the data
               collector set. Click Next, and in the Run As edit box, enter the Administrator account
               name and set the password to match it. Click Finish. You should now see a window
               similar to the one shown here:

          7.   Right-click the name you gave your data collector set (experiment in our example), and
               then click Start. Now generate some network activity by opening a browser and visiting
               a website.

          8.   Right-click the data collector set node again and then click Stop.

          If you follow the steps listed in the “Decoding an ETL file” experiment to decode the acquired
      ETL trace file, you will find that the best way to read the results is by using a CSV file type. This
      is because the System session does not include any decoding information for the events, so the
      netsh.exe has no regular way to encode the customized data structures representing events in
      the EVTX file.

         Finally, you can repeat the experiment using XPERF with the following command (optionally
      replacing the C:\network.etl file with your preferred name):
      xperf -on NETWORKTRACE -f c:\network.etl

         After you stop the system trace session and you convert the obtained trace file, you will get
      similar events as the ones obtained with the Performance Monitor.

The Global logger and Autologgers
Certain logger sessions start automatically when the system boots. The Global logger session records
events that occur early in the operating system boot process, including events generated by the NT
kernel logger. (The Global logger is actually a system logger, as shown in Table 10-16.) Applications
and device drivers can use the Global logger session to capture traces before the user logs in (some
device drivers, such as disk device drivers, are not loaded at the time the Global logger session be-
gins.) While the Global logger is mostly used to capture traces produced by the NT kernel provider
(see Table 10-17), Autologgers are designed to capture traces from classic ETW providers (and not
from the NT kernel logger).

     You can configure the Global logger by setting the proper registry values in the GlobalLogger key, which
is located in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\WMI root key. In the same way, Autologgers
can be configured by creating a registry subkey, named as the logging session, in the Autologgers key (lo-
cated in the WMI root key). The procedure for configuring and starting Autologgers is documented at
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/etw/configuring-and-starting-an-Autologger-session.

     As introduced in the “ETW initialization” section previously in this chapter, ETW starts the Global log-
ger and Autologgers almost at the same time, during the early phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization. The
EtwStartAutoLogger internal function queries all the logger configuration data from the registry, validates
it, and creates the logger session using the EtwpStartLogger routine, which has already been extensively
discussed in the “ETW sessions” section. The Global logger is a system logger, so after the session is cre-
ated, no further providers are enabled. Unlike the Global logger, Autologgers require providers to be
enabled. They are started by enumerating each session’s name from the Autologger registry key. After a
session is created, ETW enumerates the providers that should be enabled in the session, which are listed
as subkeys of the Autologger key (a provider is identified by a GUID). Figure 10-36 shows the multiple pro-
viders enabled in the EventLog-System session. This session is one of the main Windows Logs displayed
by the Windows Event Viewer (captured by the Event Logger service).

FIGURE 10-36 The EventLog-System Autologger’s enabled providers.

   After the configuration data of a provider is validated, the provider is enabled in the session through
the internal EtwpEnableTrace function, as for classic ETW sessions.

      ETW security
      Starting and stopping an ETW session is considered a high-privilege operation because events can in-
      clude system data that can be used to exploit the system integrity (this is especially true for system log-
      gers). The Windows Security model has been extended to support ETW security. As already introduced
      in previous sections, each operation performed by ETW requires a well-defined access right that must
      be granted by a security descriptor protecting the session, provider, or provider’s group (depending on
      the operation). Table 10-18 lists all the new access rights introduced for ETW and their usage.

      TABLE 10-18 ETW security access rights and their usage

      Value                        Description                                                                     Applied to

      WMIGUID_QUERY                Allows the user to query information about the trace session                    Session

      WMIGUID_NOTIFICATION         Allows the user to send a notification to the session’s notification provider Session

      TRACELOG_CREATE_             Allows the user to start or update a real-time session                          Session
      REALTIME

      TRACELOG_CREATE_ONDISK       Allows the user to start or update a session that writes events to a log file   Session

      TRACELOG_GUID_ENABLE         Allows the user to enable the provider                                          Provider

      TRACELOG_LOG_EVENT           Allows the user to log events to a trace session if the session is running in   Session
                                   SECURE mode

      TRACELOG_ACCESS_             Allows a consumer application to consume events in real time                    Session
      REALTIME

      TRACELOG_REGISTER_GUIDS      Allows the user to register the provider (creating the EtwRegistration          Provider
                                   object backed by the ETW_REG_ENTRY data structure)

      TRACELOG_JOIN_GROUP          Allows the user to insert a manifest-based or tracelogging provider to          Provider
                                   a Providers group (part of the ETW traits, which are not described in
                                   this book)

          Most of the ETW access rights are automatically granted to the SYSTEM account and to members of
      the Administrators, Local Service, and Network Service groups. This implies that normal users are not
      allowed to interact with ETW (unless an explicit session and provider security descriptor allows it). To
      overcome the problem, Windows includes the Performance Log Users group, which has been designed
      to allow normal users to interact with ETW (especially for controlling trace sessions). Although all the
      ETW access rights are granted by the default security descriptor to the Performance Log Users group,
      Windows supports another group, called Performance Monitor Users, which has been designed only
      to receive or send notifications to the session notification provider. This is because the group has been
      designed to access system performance counters, enumerated by tools like Performance Monitor and
      Resource Monitor, and not to access the full ETW events. The two tools have been already described in
      the “Performance monitor and resource monitor” section of Chapter 1 in Part 1.

          As previously introduced in the “ETW Sessions” section of this chapter, all the ETW security descrip-
      tors are stored in the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Wmi\Security registry key in a binary
      format. In ETW, everything that is represented by a GUID can be protected by a customized security
      descriptor. To manage ETW security, applications usually do not directly interact with security descrip-
      tors stored in the registry but use the EventAccessControl and EventAccessQuery APIs implemented
      in Sechost.dll.

EXPERIMENT: Witnessing the default security descriptor of ETW sessions
A kernel debugger can easily show the default security descriptor associated with ETW sessions
that do not have a specific one associated with them. In this experiment, you need a Windows 10
machine with a kernel debugger already attached and connected to a host system. Otherwise,
you can use a local kernel debugger, or LiveKd (downloadable from https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-us/sysinternals/downloads/livekd.) After the correct symbols are configured, you should be
able to dump the default SD using the following command:
!sd poi(nt!EtwpDefaultTraceSecurityDescriptor)

   The output should be similar to the following (cut for space reasons):
->Revision: 0x1
->Sbz1    : 0x0
->Control : 0x8004
            SE_DACL_PRESENT
            SE_SELF_RELATIVE
->Owner   : S-1-5-32-544
->Group   : S-1-5-32-544
->Dacl    :
->Dacl    : ->AclRevision: 0x2
->Dacl    : ->Sbz1       : 0x0
->Dacl    : ->AclSize    : 0xf0
->Dacl    : ->AceCount   : 0x9
->Dacl    : ->Sbz2       : 0x0
->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->AceSize: 0x14
->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->Mask : 0x00001800
->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->SID: S-1-1-0

->Dacl    : ->Ace[1]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
->Dacl    : ->Ace[1]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
->Dacl    : ->Ace[1]: ->AceSize: 0x14
->Dacl    : ->Ace[1]: ->Mask : 0x00120fff
->Dacl    : ->Ace[1]: ->SID: S-1-5-18

->Dacl    : ->Ace[2]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
->Dacl    : ->Ace[2]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
->Dacl    : ->Ace[2]: ->AceSize: 0x14
->Dacl    : ->Ace[2]: ->Mask : 0x00120fff
->Dacl    : ->Ace[2]: ->SID: S-1-5-19

->Dacl    : ->Ace[3]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
->Dacl    : ->Ace[3]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
->Dacl    : ->Ace[3]: ->AceSize: 0x14
->Dacl    : ->Ace[3]: ->Mask : 0x00120fff
->Dacl    : ->Ace[3]: ->SID: S-1-5-20

->Dacl    : ->Ace[4]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
->Dacl    : ->Ace[4]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
->Dacl    : ->Ace[4]: ->AceSize: 0x18
->Dacl    : ->Ace[4]: ->Mask : 0x00120fff
->Dacl    : ->Ace[4]: ->SID: S-1-5-32-544

         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[5]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[5]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[5]: ->AceSize: 0x18
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[5]: ->Mask : 0x00000ee5
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[5]: ->SID: S-1-5-32-559

         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[6]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[6]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[6]: ->AceSize: 0x18
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[6]: ->Mask : 0x00000004
         ->Dacl     : ->Ace[6]: ->SID: S-1-5-32-558

             You can use the Psgetsid tool (available at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/
         downloads/psgetsid) to translate the SID to human-readable names. From the preceding output,
         you can see that all ETW access is granted to the SYSTEM (S-1-5-18), LOCAL SERVICE (S-1-5-19),
         NETWORK SERVICE (S-1-5-18), and Administrators (S-1-5-32-544) groups. As explained in the pre-
         vious section, the Performance Log Users group (S-1-5-32-559) has almost all ETW access, where-
         as the Performance Monitor Users group (S-1-5-32-558) has only the WMIGUID_NOTIFICATION
         access right granted by the session’s default security descriptor.
         C:\Users\andrea>psgetsid64 S-1-5-32-559

         PsGetSid v1.45 - Translates SIDs to names and vice versa
         Copyright (C) 1999-2016 Mark Russinovich

         Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

         Account for AALL86-LAPTOP\S-1-5-32-559:
         Alias: BUILTIN\Performance Log Users

      Security Audit logger
      The Security Audit logger is an ETW session used by the Windows Event logger service (wevtsvc.dll) to
      listen for events generated by the Security Lsass Provider. The Security Lsass provider (which is identi-
      fied by the {54849625-5478-4994-a5ba-3e3b0328c30d} GUID) can be registered only by the NT kernel
      at ETW initialization time and is never inserted in the global provider’s hash table. Only the Security
      audit logger and Autologgers configured with the EnableSecurityProvider registry value set to 1 can re-
      ceive events from the Security Lsass Provider. When the EtwStartAutoLogger internal function encoun-
      ters the value set to 1, it enables the SECURITY_TRACE flag on the associated ETW session, adding the
      session to the list of loggers that can receive Security audit events.

         The flag also has the important effect that user-mode applications can’t query, stop, flush, or control
      the session anymore, unless they are running as protected process light (at the antimalware, Windows,
      or WinTcb level; further details on protected processes are available in Chapter 3 of Part 1).

      Secure loggers
      Classic (MOF) and WPP providers have not been designed to support all the security features imple-
      mented for manifest-based and tracelogging providers. An Autologger or a generic ETW session can

   thus be created with the EVENT_TRACE_SECURE_MODE flag, which marks the session as secure. A
   secure session has the goal of ensuring that it receives events only from trusted identities. The flag has
   two main effects:

      ■   Prevents classic (MOF) and WPP providers from writing any event to the secure session. If a clas-
          sic provider is enabled in a secure section, the provider won’t be able to generate any events.

      ■   Requires the supplemental TRACELOG_LOG_EVENT access right, which should be granted by
          the session’s security descriptor to the controller application’s access token while enabling a
          provider to the secure session.

      The TRACE_LOG_EVENT access right allows a more-granular security to be specified in a session’s
   security descriptor. If the security descriptor grants only the TRACELOG_GUID_ENABLE to an untrusted
   user, and the ETW session is created as secure by another entity (a kernel driver or a more privileged
   application), the untrusted user can’t enable any provider on the secure section. If the section is created
   as nonsecure, the untrusted user can enable any providers on it.

Dynamic tracing (DTrace)
   As discussed in the previous section, Event Tracing for Windows is a powerful tracing technology inte-
   grated into the OS, but it’s static, meaning that the end user can only trace and log events that are gen-
   erated by well-defined components belonging to the operating system or to third-party frameworks/
   applications (.NET CLR, for example.) To overcome the limitation, the May 2019 Update of Windows
   10 (19H1) introduced DTrace, the dynamic tracing facility built into Windows. DTrace can be used by
   administrators on live systems to examine the behavior of both user programs and of the operating
   system itself. DTrace is an open-source technology that was developed for the Solaris operating system
   (and its descendant, illumos, both of which are Unix-based) and ported to several operating systems
   other than Windows.

       DTrace can dynamically trace parts of the operating system and user applications at certain locations
   of interest, called probes. A probe is a binary code location or activity to which DTrace can bind a request
   to perform a set of actions, like logging messages, recording a stack trace, a timestamp, and so on. When
   a probe fires, DTrace gathers the data from the probe and executes the actions associated with the probe.
   Both the probes and the actions are specified in a script file (or directly in the DTrace application through
   the command line), using the D programming language. Support for probes are provided by kernel mod-
   ules, called providers. The original illumos DTrace supported around 20 providers, which were deeply tied
   to the Unix-based OS. At the time of this writing, Windows supports the following providers:

      ■   SYSCALL Allows the tracing of the OS system calls (both on entry and on exit) invoked from
          user-mode applications and kernel-mode drivers (through Zw APIs).

      ■   FBT (Function Boundary tracing) Through FBT, a system administrator can trace the execution
          of individual functions implemented in all the modules that run in the NT kernel.

      ■   PID (User-mode process tracing) The provider is similar to FBT and allows tracing of individual
          functions of a user-mode process and application.

         ■    ETW (Event Tracing for Windows) DTrace can use this provider to attach to manifest-based and
              TraceLogging events fired from the ETW engine. DTrace is able to define new ETW providers and
              provide associated ETW events via the etw_trace action (which is not part of any provider).

         ■    PROFILE Provides probes associated with a time-based interrupt firing every fixed, specified
              time interval.

         ■    DTRACE Built-in provider is implicitly enabled in the DTrace engine.

         The listed providers allow system administrators to dynamically trace almost every component of
      the Windows operating system and user-mode applications.

        Note There are big differences between the first version of DTrace for Windows, which
        appeared in the May 2019 Update of Windows 10, and the current stable release (distributed
        at the time of this writing in the May 2021 edition of Windows 10). One of the most notable
        differences is that the first release required a kernel debugger to be set up to enable the FBT
        provider. Furthermore, the ETW provider was not completely available in the first release
        of DTrace.

        EXPERIMENT: Enabling DTrace and listing the installed providers
        In this experiment, you install and enable DTrace and list the providers that are available for
        dynamically tracing various Windows components. You need a system with Windows 10 May
        2020 Update (20H1) or later installed. As explained in the Microsoft documentation (https://docs.
        microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/devtest/dtrace), you should first enable DTrace
        by opening an administrative command prompt and typing the following command (remember
        to disable Bitlocker, if it is enabled):
        bcdedit /set dtrace ON

           After the command succeeds, you can download the DTrace package from https://www.
        microsoft.com/download/details.aspx?id=100441 and install it. Restart your computer (or virtual
        machine) and open an administrative command prompt (by typing CMD in the Cortana search
        box and selecting Run As Administrator). Type the following commands (replacing provid-
        ers.txt with another file name if desired):

        cd /d “C:\Program Files\DTrace”
        dtrace -l > providers.txt

           Open the generated file (providers.txt in the example). If DTrace has been successfully
        installed and enabled, a list of probes and providers (DTrace, syscall, and ETW) should be listed in
        the output file. Probes are composed of an ID and a human-readable name. The human-readable
        name is composed of four parts. Each part may or may not exist, depending on the provider. In
        general, providers try to follow the convention as close as possible, but in some cases the mean-
        ing of each part can be overloaded with something different:

          ■    Provider The name of the DTrace provider that is publishing the probe.

 ■     Module If the probe corresponds to a specific program location, the name of the module
       in which the probe is located. The module is used only for the PID (which is not shown in the
       output produced by the dtrace -l command) and ETW provider.

 ■     Function If the probe corresponds to a specific program location, the name of the
       program function in which the probe is located.

 ■     Name The final component of the probe name is a name that gives you some idea of the
       probe’s semantic meaning, such as BEGIN or END.

   When writing out the full human-readable name of a probe, all the parts of the name are
separated by colons. For example,
syscall::NtQuerySystemInformation:entry

   specifies a probe on the NtQueryInformation function entry provided by the syscall provider.
Note that in this case, the module name is empty because the syscall provider does not specify
any name (all the syscalls are implicitly provided by the NT kernel).

   The PID and FBT providers instead dynamically generate probes based on the process or
kernel image to which they are applied (and based on the currently available symbols). For ex-
ample, to correctly list the PID probes of a process, you should first get the process ID (PID) of the
process that you want to analyze (by simply opening the Task Manager and selecting the Details
property sheet; in this example, we are using Notepad, which in the test system has PID equal to
8020). Then execute DTrace with the following command:
dtrace -ln pid8020:::entry > pid_notepad.txt

   This lists all the probes on function entries generated by the PID provider for the Notepad
process. The output will contain a lot of entries. Note that if you do not have the symbol store
path set, the output will not contain any probes generated by private functions. To restrict the
output, you can add the name of the module:
dtrace.exe -ln pid8020:kernelbase::entry >pid_kernelbase_notepad.txt

   This yields all the PID probes generated for function entries of the kernelbase.dll module
mapped in Notepad. If you repeat the previous two commands after having set the symbol store
path with the following command,
set _NT_SYMBOL_PATH=srv*C:\symbols*http://msdl.microsoft.com/download/symbols

     you will find that the output is much different (and also probes on private functions).

   As explained in the “The Function Boundary Tracing (FBT) and Process (PID) providers” section
later in this chapter, the PID and FBT provider can be applied to any offset in a function’s code.
The following command returns all the offsets (always located at instruction boundary) in which
the PID provider can generate probes on the SetComputerNameW function of Kernelbase.dll:
dtrace.exe -ln pid8020:kernelbase:SetComputerNameW:

      Internal architecture
      As explained in the “Enabling DTrace and listing the installed providers” experiment earlier in this chap-
      ter, in Windows 10 May 2020 Update (20H1), some components of DTrace should be installed through
      an external package. Future versions of Windows may integrate DTrace completely in the OS image.
      Even though DTrace is deeply integrated in the operating system, it requires three external compo-
      nents to work properly. These include both the NT-specific implementation and the original DTrace
      code released under the free Common Development and Distribution License (CDDL), which is down-
      loadable from https://github.com/microsoft/DTrace-on-Windows/tree/windows.

         As shown in Figure 10-37, DTrace in Windows is composed of the following components:

         ■    DTrace.sys The DTrace extension driver is the main component that executes the actions as-
              sociated with the probes and stores the results in a circular buffer that the user-mode applica-
              tion obtains via IOCTLs.

         ■    DTrace.dll The module encapsulates LibDTrace, which is the DTrace user-mode engine.
              It implements the Compiler for the D scripts, sends the IOCTLs to the DTrace driver, and is the
              main consumer of the circular DTrace buffer (where the DTrace driver stores the output of
              the actions).

         ■    DTrace.exe The entry point executable that dispatches all the possible commands (specified
              through the command line) to the LibDTrace.

                      .d

                              DTrace.exe

                              LibDTrace                                        Symbol
                                                        Dbghelp.dll
                              (DTrace.dll)                                      Store

        User Mode
       Kernel Mode

                                       DTrace.sys
        Windload                                                  NT Kernel
                             FBT    SYSCALL    PID   ETW

      FIGURE 10-37 DTrace internal architecture.

         To start the dynamic trace of the Windows kernel, a driver, or a user-mode application, the user
      just invokes the DTrace.exe main executable specifying a command or an external D script. In both
      cases, the command or the file contain one or more probes and additional actions expressed in the D
      programming language. DTrace.exe parses the input command line and forwards the proper request

to the LibDTrace (which is implemented in DTrace.dll). For example, when started for enabling one or
more probes, the DTrace executable calls the internal dtrace_program_fcompile function implemented
in LibDTrace, which compiles the D script and produces the DTrace Intermediate Format (DIF) bytecode
in an output buffer.

   Note Describing the details of the DIF bytecode and how a D script (or D commands) is
   compiled is outside the scope of this book. Interested readers can find detailed documenta-
   tion in the OpenDTrace Specification book (released by the University of Cambridge), which
   is available at https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/techreports/UCAM-CL-TR-924.pdf.

    While the D compiler is entirely implemented in user-mode in LibDTrace, to execute the compiled DIF
bytecode, the LibDtrace module just sends the DTRACEIOC_ENABLE IOCTL to the DTrace driver, which
implements the DIF virtual machine. The DIF virtual machine is able to evaluate each D clause expressed
in the bytecode and to execute optional actions associated with them. A limited set of actions are avail-
able, which are executed through native code and not interpreted via the D virtual machine.

   As shown earlier in Figure 10-37, the DTrace extension driver implements all the providers. Before
discussing how the main providers work, it is necessary to present an introduction of the DTrace initial-
ization in the Windows OS.

DTrace initialization
The DTrace initialization starts in early boot stages, when the Windows loader is loading all the mod-
ules needed for the kernel to correctly start. One important part to load and validate is the API set file
(apisetschema.dll), which is a key component of the Windows system. (API Sets are described in Chapter
3 of part 1.) If the DTRACE_ENABLED BCD element is set in the boot entry (value 0x26000145, which
can be set through the dtrace readable name; see Chapter 12 for more details about BCD objects),
the Windows loader checks whether the dtrace.sys driver is present in the %SystemRoot%\System32\
Drivers path. If so, it builds a new API Set schema extension named ext-ms-win-ntos-trace-l1-1-0. The
schema targets the Dtrace.sys driver and is merged into the system API set schema (OslApiSetSchema).

   Later in the boot process, when the NT kernel is starting its phase 1 of initialization, the TraceInitSystem
function is called to initialize the Dynamic Tracing subsystem. The API is imported in the NT kernel
through the ext-ms-win-ntos-trace-l1-1-0.dll API set schema. This implies that if DTrace is not enabled by
the Windows loader, the name resolution would fail, and the function will be basically a no op.

    The TraceInitSystem has the important duty of calculating the content of the trace callouts array,
which contains the functions that will be called by the NT kernel when a trace probe fires. The array is
stored in the KiDynamicTraceCallouts global symbol, which will be later protected by Patchguard to
prevent malicious drivers from illegally redirecting the flow of execution of system routines. Finally,
through the TraceInitSystem function, the NT kernel sends to the DTrace driver another important ar-
ray, which contains private system interfaces used by the DTrace driver to apply the probes. (The array
is exposed in a trace extension context data structure.) This kind of initialization, where both the DTrace
driver and the NT kernel exchange private interfaces, is the main motivation why the DTrace driver is
called an extension driver.

         The Pnp manager later starts the DTrace driver, which is installed in the system as boot driver, and
      calls its main entry point (DriverEntry). The routine registers the \Device\DTrace control device and its
      symbolic link (\GLOBAL??\DTrace). It then initializes the internal DTrace state, creating the first DTrace
      built-in provider. It finally registers all the available providers by calling the initialization function of
      each of them. The initialization method depends on each provider and usually ends up calling the
      internal dtrace_register function, which registers the provider with the DTrace framework. Another
      common action in the provider initialization is to register a handler for the control device. User-mode
      applications can communicate with DTrace and with a provider through the DTrace control device,
      which exposes virtual files (handlers) to providers. For example, the user-mode LibDTrace communi-
      cates directly with the PID provider by opening a handle to the \\.\DTrace\Fasttrap virtual file (handler).

      The syscall provider
      When the syscall provider gets activated, DTrace ends up calling the KeSetSystemServiceCallback
      routine, with the goal of activating a callback for the system call specified in the probe. The routine is
      exposed to the DTrace driver thanks to the NT system interfaces array. The latter is compiled by the
      NT kernel at DTrace initialization time (see the previous section for more details) and encapsulated in
      an extension context data structure internally called KiDynamicTraceContext. The first time that the
      KeSetSystemServiceCallback is called, the routine has the important task of building the global service
      trace table (KiSystemServiceTraceCallbackTable), which is an RB (red-black) tree containing descrip-
      tors of all the available syscalls. Each descriptor includes a hash of the syscall’s name, its address, and
      number of parameters and flags indicating whether the callback is enabled on entry or on exit. The NT
      kernel includes a static list of syscalls exposed through the KiServicesTab internal array.

         After the global service trace table has been filled, the KeSetSystemServiceCallback calculates the
      hash of the syscall’s name specified by the probe and searches the hash in the RB tree. If there are
      no matches, the probe has specified a wrong syscall name (so the function exits signaling an error).
      Otherwise, the function modifies the enablement flags located in the found syscall’s descriptor and
      increases the number of the enabled trace callbacks (which is stored in an internal variable).

         When the first DTrace syscall callback is enabled, the NT kernel sets the syscall bit in the global
      KiDynamicTraceMask bitmask. This is very important because it enables the system call handler
      (KiSystemCall64) to invoke the global trace handlers. (System calls and system service dispatching have
      been discussed extensively in Chapter 8.)

          This design allows DTrace to coexist with the system call handling mechanism without having any
      sort of performance penalty. If no DTrace syscall probe is active, the trace handlers are not invoked. A
      trace handler can be called on entry and on exit of a system call. Its functionality is simple. It just scans
      the global service trace table looking for the descriptor of the system call. When it finds the descrip-
      tor, it checks whether the enablement flag is set and, if so, invokes the correct callout (contained in the
      global dynamic trace callout array, KiDynamicTraceCallouts, as specified in the previous section). The
      callout, which is implemented in the DTrace driver, uses the generic internal dtrace_probe function to
      fire the syscall probe and execute the actions associated with it.

The Function Boundary Tracing (FBT) and Process (PID) providers
Both the FBT and PID providers are similar because they allow a probe to be enabled on any function
entry and exit points (not necessarily a syscall). The target function can reside in the NT kernel or as
part of a driver (for these cases, the FBT provider is used), or it can reside in a user-mode module, which
should be executed by a process. (The PID provider can trace user-mode applications.) An FBT or PID
probe is activated in the system through breakpoint opcodes (INT 3 in x86, BRK in ARM64) that are
written directly in the target function’s code. This has the following important implications:

   ■   When a PID or FBT probe raises, DTrace should be able to re-execute the replaced instruction
       before calling back the target function. To do this, DTrace uses an instruction emulator, which,
       at the time of this writing, is compatible with the AMD64 and ARM64 architecture. The emula-
       tor is implemented in the NT kernel and is normally invoked by the system exception handler
       while dealing with a breakpoint exception.

   ■   DTrace needs a way to identify functions by name. The name of a function is never compiled in
       the final binary (except for exported functions). DTrace uses multiple techniques to achieve this,
       which will be discussed in the “DTrace type library” section later in this chapter.

   ■   A single function can exit (return) in multiple ways from different code branches. To identify the
       exit points, a function graph analyzer is required to disassemble the function’s instructions and
       find each exit point. Even though the original function graph analyzer was part of the Solaris
       code, the Windows implementation of DTrace uses a new optimized version of it, which still lives
       in the LibDTrace library (DTrace.dll). While user-mode functions are analyzed by the function
       graph analyzer, DTrace uses the PDATA v2 unwind information to reliably find kernel-mode
       function exit points (more information on function unwinds and exception dispatching is avail-
       able in Chapter 8). If the kernel-mode module does not make use of PDATA v2 unwind informa-
       tion, the FBT provider will not create any probes on function returns for it.

   DTrace installs FBT or PID probes by calling the KeSetTracepoint function of the NT kernel exposed
through the NT System interfaces array. The function validates the parameters (the callback pointer
in particular) and, for kernel targets, verifies that the target function is located in an executable code
section of a known kernel-mode module. Similar to the syscall provider, a KI_TRACEPOINT_ENTRY data
structure is built and used for keeping track of the activated trace points. The data structure contains
the owning process, access mode, and target function address. It is inserted in a global hash table,
KiTpHashTable, which is allocated at the first time an FBT or PID probe gets activated. Finally, the single
instruction located in the target code is parsed (imported in the emulator) and replaced with a break-
point opcode. The trap bit in the global KiDynamicTraceMask bitmask is set.

   For kernel-mode targets, the breakpoint replacement can happen only when VBS (Virtualization
Based Security) is enabled. The MmWriteSystemImageTracepoint routine locates the loader data table
entry associated with the target function and invokes the SECURESERVICE_SET_TRACEPOINT secure
call. The Secure Kernel is the only entity able to collaborate with HyperGuard and thus to render the
breakpoint application a legit code modification. As explained in Chapter 7 of Part 1, Kernel Patch
protection (also known as Patchguard) prevents any code modification from being performed on the
NT kernel and some essential kernel drivers. If VBS is not enabled on the system, and a debugger is not
attached, an error code is returned, and the probe application fails. If a kernel debugger is attached,

      the breakpoint opcode is applied by the NT kernel through the MmDbgCopyMemory function.
      (Patchguard is not enabled on debugged systems.)

         When called for debugger exceptions, which may be caused by a DTrace’s FTB or PID probe firing,
      the system exception handler (KiDispatchException) checks whether the “trap” bit is set in the global
      KiDynamicTraceMask bitmask. If it is, the exception handler calls the KiTpHandleTrap function, which
      searches into the KiTpHashTable to determine whether the exception occurred thanks to a registered
      FTB or PID probe firing. For user-mode probes, the function checks whether the process context is
      the expected one. If it is, or if the probe is a kernel-mode one, the function directly invokes the DTrace
      callback, FbtpCallback, which executes the actions associated with the probe. When the callback
      completes, the handler invokes the emulator, which emulates the original first instruction of the target
      function before transferring the execution context to it.

         EXPERIMENT: Tracing dynamic memory
         In this experiment, you dynamically trace the dynamic memory applied to a VM. Using Hyper-V
         Manager, you need to create a generation 2 Virtual Machine and apply a minimum of 768 MB
         and an unlimited maximum amount of dynamic memory (more information on dynamic memory
         and Hyper-V is available in Chapter 9). The VM should have the May 2019 (19H1) or May 2020
         (20H1) Update of Windows 10 or later installed as well as the DTrace package (which should be
         enabled as explained in the “Enabling DTrace and listing the installed providers” experiment from
         earlier in this chapter).

           The dynamic_memory.d script, which can be found in this book’s downloadable resources,
         needs to be copied in the DTrace directory and started by typing the following commands in an
         administrative command prompt window:
         cd /d "c:\Program Files\DTrace"
         dtrace.exe -s dynamic_memory.d

            With only the preceding commands, DTrace will refuse to compile the script because of an
         error similar to the following:
         dtrace: failed to compile script dynamic_memory.d: line 62: probe description fbt:nt:MiRem
         ovePhysicalMemory:entry does not match any probes

            This is because, in standard configurations, the path of the symbols store is not set. The script
         attaches the FBT provider on two OS functions: MmAddPhysicalMemory
                                                          MmAddPhysicalMemory, which is exported from
         the NT kernel binary, and MiRemovePhysicalMemory
                                    MiRemovePhysicalMemory, which is not exported or published in the
         public WDK. For the latter, the FBT provider has no way to calculate its address in the system.

            DTrace can obtain types and symbol information from different sources, as explained in the
         “DTrace type library” section later in this chapter. To allow the FBT provider to correctly work with
         internal OS functions, you should set the Symbol Store’s path to point to the Microsoft public
         symbol server, using the following command:
         set _NT_SYMBOL_PATH=srv*C:\symbols*http://msdl.microsoft.com/download/symbols

      After the symbol store’s path is set, if you restart DTrace targeting the dynamic_memory.d
   script, it should be able to correctly compile it and show the following output:
   The Dynamic Memory script has begun.

      Now you should simulate a high-memory pressure scenario. You can do this in multiple
   ways—for example, by starting your favorite browser and opening a lot of tabs, by starting a 3D
   game, or by simply using the TestLimit tool with the -d command switch, which forces the system
   to contiguously allocate memory and write to it until all the resources are exhausted. The VM
   worker process in the root partition should detect the scenario and inject new memory in the
   child VM. This would be detected by DTrace:
   Physical memory addition request intercepted. Start physical address 0x00112C00, Number of
   pages: 0x00000400.
      Addition of 1024 memory pages starting at PFN 0x00112C00 succeeded!

     In a similar way, if you close all the applications in the guest VM and you recreate a high-
   memory pressure scenario in your host system, the script would be able to intercept dynamic
   memory’s removal requests:
   Physical memory removal request intercepted. Start physical address 0x00132000, Number of
   pages: 0x00000200.
      Removal of 512 memory pages starting at PFN 0x00132000 succeeded!

      After interrupting DTrace using Ctrl+C, the script prints out some statistics information:
   Dynamic Memory script ended.
   Numbers of Hot Additions: 217
   Numbers of Hot Removals: 1602
   Since starts the system has gained 0x00017A00 pages (378 MB).

       If you open the dynamic_memory.d script using Notepad, you will find that it installs a total of
   six probes (four FBT and two built-in) and performs logging and counting actions. For example,
   fbt:nt:MmAddPhysicalMemory:return
   / self->pStartingAddress != 0 /

     installs a probe on the exit points of the MmAddPhysicalMemory function only if the starting
   physical address obtained at function entry point is not 0. More information on the D program-
   ming language applied to DTrace is available in the The illumos Dynamic Tracing Guide book,
   which is freely accessible at http://dtrace.org/guide/preface.html.

The ETW provider
DTrace supports both an ETW provider, which allows probes to fire when certain ETW events are gen-
erated by particular providers, and the etw_trace action, which allows DTrace scripts to generate new
customized TraceLogging ETW events. The etw_trace action is implemented in LibDTrace, which uses
TraceLogging APIs to dynamically register a new ETW provider and generate events associated with it.
More information on ETW has been presented in the “Event Tracing for Windows (ETW)” section previ-
ously in this chapter.

          The ETW provider is implemented in the DTrace driver. When the Trace engine is initialized by the
      Pnp manager, it registers all providers with the DTrace engine. At registration time, the ETW provider
      configures an ETW session called DTraceLoggingSession, which is set to write events in a circular buf-
      fer. When DTrace is started from the command line, it sends an IOCTL to DTrace driver. The IOCTL
      handler calls the provide function of each provider; the DtEtwpCreate internal function invokes the
      NtTraceControl API with the EtwEnumTraceGuidList function code. This allows DTrace to enumerate all
      the ETW providers registered in the system and to create a probe for each of them. (dtrace -l is also
      able to display ETW probes.)

          When a D script targeting the ETW provider is compiled and executed, the internal DtEtwEnable
      routine gets called with the goal of enabling one or more ETW probes. The logging session configured
      at registration time is started, if it’s not already running. Through the trace extension context (which,
      as previously discussed, contains private system interfaces), DTrace is able to register a kernel-mode
      callback called every time a new event is logged in the DTrace logging session. The first time that the
      session is started, there are no providers associated with it. Similar to the syscall and FBT provider, for
      each probe DTrace creates a tracking data structure and inserts it in a global RB tree (DtEtwpProbeTree)
      representing all the enabled ETW probes. The tracking data structure is important because it rep-
      resents the link between the ETW provider and the probes associated with it. DTrace calculates the
      correct enablement level and keyword bitmask for the provider (see the “Provider Enablement” section
      previously in this chapter for more details) and enables the provider in the session by invoking the
      NtTraceControl API.

         When an event is generated, the ETW subsystem calls the callback routine, which searches into
      the global ETW probe tree the correct context data structure representing the probe. When found,
      DTrace can fire the probe (still using the internal dtrace_probe function) and execute all the actions
      associated with it.

      DTrace type library
      DTrace works with types. System administrators are able to inspect internal operating system data
      structures and use them in D clauses to describe actions associated with probes. DTrace also supports
      supplemental data types compared to the ones supported by the standard D programming language.
      To be able to work with complex OS-dependent data types and allow the FBT and PID providers to set
      probes on internal OS and application functions, DTrace obtains information from different sources:

         ■   Function names, signatures, and data types are initially extracted from information embedded
             in the executable binary (which adheres to the Portable Executable file format), like from the
             export table and debug information.

         ■   For the original DTrace project, the Solaris operating system included support for Compact C
             Type Format (CTF) in its executable binary files (which adhere to the Executable and Linkable
             Format - ELF). This allowed the OS to store the debug information needed by DTrace to run di-
             rectly into its modules (the debug information can also be stored using the deflate compression
             format). The Windows version of DTrace still supports a partial CTF, which has been added as a
             resource section of the LibDTrace library (Dtrace.dll). CTF in the LibDTrace library stores the type

          information contained in the public WDK (Windows Driver Kit) and SDK (Software Development
          Kit) and allows DTrace to work with basic OS data types without requiring any symbol file.

      ■   Most of the private types and internal OS function signatures are obtained from PDB symbols.
          Public PDB symbols for the majority of the operating system’s modules are downloadable
          from the Microsoft Symbol Server. (These symbols are the same as those used by the Windows
          Debugger.) The symbols are deeply used by the FBT provider to correctly identify internal OS
          functions and by DTrace to be able to retrieve the correct type of parameters for each syscall
          and function.

   The DTrace symbol server
   DTrace includes an autonomous symbol server that can download PDB symbols from the Microsoft pub-
   lic Symbol store and render them available to the DTrace subsystem. The symbol server is implemented
   mainly in LibDTrace and can be queried by the DTrace driver using the Inverted call model. As part of the
   providers’ registration, the DTrace driver registers a SymServer pseudo-provider. The latter is not a real
   provider but just a shortcut for allowing the symsrv handler to the DTrace control device to be registered.

      When DTrace is started from the command line, the LibDTrace library starts the symbols server
   by opening a handle to the \\.\dtrace\symsrv control device (using the standard CreateFile API). The
   request is processed by the DTrace driver through the Symbol server IRP handler, which registers the
   user-mode process, adding it in an internal list of symbols server processes. LibDTrace then starts a
   new thread, which sends a dummy IOCTL to the DTrace symbol server device and waits indefinitely for
   a reply from the driver. The driver marks the IRP as pending and completes it only when a provider (or
   the DTrace subsystem), requires new symbols to be parsed.

      Every time the driver completes the pending IRP, the DTrace symbols server thread wakes up and
   uses services exposed by the Windows Image Helper library (Dbghelp.dll) to correctly download and
   parse the required symbol. The driver then waits for a new dummy IOCTL to be sent from the symbols
   thread. This time the new IOCTL will contain the results of the symbol parsing process. The user-mode
   thread wakes up again only when the DTrace driver requires it.

Windows Error Reporting (WER)
   Windows Error Reporting (WER) is a sophisticated mechanism that automates the submission of both
   user-mode process crashes as well as kernel-mode system crashes. Multiple system components have
   been designed for supporting reports generated when a user-mode process, protected process, trust-
   let, or the kernel crashes.

      Windows 10, unlike from its predecessors, does not include a graphical dialog box in which the
   user can configure the details that Windows Error Reporting acquires and sends to Microsoft (or to
   an internal server configured by the system administrator) when an application crashes. As shown in
   Figure 10-38, in Windows 10, the Security and Maintenance applet of the Control Panel can show the
   user a history of the reports generated by Windows Error Reporting when an application (or the kernel)
   crashes. The applet can show also some basic information contained in the report.

      FIGURE 10-38 The Reliability monitor of the Security and Maintenance applet of the Control Panel.

        Windows Error Reporting is implemented in multiple components of the OS, mainly because it
      needs to deal with different kind of crashes:

         ■    The Windows Error Reporting Service (WerSvc.dll) is the main service that manages the creation
              and sending of reports when a user-mode process, protected process, or trustlet crashes.

         ■    The Windows Fault Reporting and Secure Fault Reporting (WerFault.exe and WerFaultSecure.
              exe) are mainly used to acquire a snapshot of the crashing application and start the genera-
              tion and sending of a report to the Microsoft Online Crash Analysis site (or, if configured, to an
              internal error reporting server).

         ■    The actual generation and transmission of the report is performed by the Windows Error
              Reporting Dll (Wer.dll). The library includes all the functions used internally by the WER engine
              and also some exported API that the applications can use to interact with Windows Error
              Reporting (documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/_wer/ ). Note
              that some WER APIs are also implemented in Kernelbase.dll and Faultrep.dll.

         ■    The Windows User Mode Crash Reporting DLL (Faultrep.dll) contains common WER stub code
              that is used by system modules (Kernel32.dll, WER service, and so on) when a user-mode appli-
              cation crashes or hangs. It includes services for creating a crash signature and reports a hang to
              the WER service, managing the correct security context for the report creation and transmission
              (which includes the creation of the WerFault executable under the correct security token).

   ■   The Windows Error Reporting Dump Encoding Library (Werenc.dll) is used by the Secure Fault
       Reporting to encrypt the dump files generated when a trustlet crashes.

   ■   The Windows Error Reporting Kernel Driver (WerKernel.sys) is a kernel library that exports
       functions to capture a live kernel memory dump and submit the report to the Microsoft Online
       Crash Analysis site. Furthermore, the driver includes APIs for creating and submitting reports for
       user-mode faults from a kernel-mode driver.

   Describing the entire architecture of WER is outside the scope of this book. In this section, we mainly
describe error reporting for user-mode applications and the NT kernel (or kernel-driver) crashes.

User applications crashes
As discussed in Chapter 3 of Part 1, all the user-mode threads in Windows start with the RtlUserThreadStart
function located in Ntdll. The function does nothing more than calling the real thread start routine
under a structured exception handler. (Structured exception handling is described in Chapter 8.)
The handler protecting the real start routine is internally called Unhandled Exception Handler
because it is the last one that can manage an exception happening in a user-mode thread (when the
thread does not already handle it). The handler, if executed, usually terminates the process with the
NtTerminateProcess API. The entity that decides whether to execute the handler is the unhandled
exception filter, RtlpThreadExceptionFilter. Noteworthy is that the unhandled exception filter and
handler are executed only under abnormal conditions; normally, applications should manage their
own exceptions with inner exception handlers.

    When a Win32 process is starting, the Windows loader maps the needed imported libraries.
The kernelbase initialization routine installs its own unhandled exception filter for the process, the
UnhandledExceptionFilter routine. When a fatal unhandled exception happens in a process’s thread,
the filter is called to determine how to process the exception. The kernelbase unhandled exception
filter builds context information (such as the current value of the machine’s registers and stack, the
faulting process ID, and thread ID) and processes the exception:

   ■   If a debugger is attached to the process, the filter lets the exception happen (by returning
       CONTINUE_SEARCH). In this way, the debugger can break and see the exception.

   ■   If the process is a trustlet, the filter stops any processing and invokes the kernel to start the
       Secure Fault Reporting (WerFaultSecure.exe).

   ■   The filter calls the CRT unhandled exception routine (if it exists) and, in case the latter does not
       know how to handle the exception, it calls the internal WerpReportFault function, which con-
       nects to the WER service.

   Before opening the ALPC connection, WerpReportFault should wake up the WER service and
prepare an inheritable shared memory section, where it stores all the context information previously
acquired. The WER service is a direct triggered-start service, which is started by the SCM only in case
the WER_SERVICE_START WNF state is updated or in case an event is written in a dummy WER activa-
tion ETW provider (named Microsoft-Windows-Feedback-Service-Triggerprovider). WerpReportFault

      updates the relative WNF state and waits on the \KernelObjects\SystemErrorPortReady event, which is
      signaled by the WER service to indicate that it is ready to accept new connections. After a connection
      has been established, Ntdll connects to the WER service’s \WindowsErrorReportingServicePort ALPC
      port, sends the WERSVC_REPORT_CRASH message, and waits indefinitely for its reply.

         The message allows the WER service to begin to analyze the crashed program’s state and performs
      the appropriate actions to create a crash report. In most cases, this means launching the WerFault.exe
      program. For user-mode crashes, the Windows Fault Reporting process is invoked two times using the
      faulting process’s credentials. The first time is used to acquire a “snapshot” of the crashing process. This
      feature was introduced in Windows 8.1 with the goal of rendering the crash report generation of UWP
      applications (which, at that time, were all single-instance applications) faster. In that way, the user could
      have restarted a crashed UWP application without waiting for the report being generated. (UWP and
      the modern application stack are discussed in Chapter 8.)

      Snapshot creation
      WerFault maps the shared memory section containing the crash data and opens the faulting process
      and thread. When invoked with the -pss command-line argument (used for requesting a process snap-
      shot), it calls the PssNtCaptureSnapshot function exported by Ntdll. The latter uses native APIs to query
      multiple information regarding the crashing process (like basic information, job information, process
      times, secure mitigations, process file name, and shared user data section). Furthermore, the function
      queries information regarding all the memory sections baked by a file and mapped in the entire user-
      mode address space of the process. It then saves all the acquired data in a PSS_SNAPSHOT data struc-
      ture representing a snapshot. It finally creates an identical copy of the entire VA space of the crashing
      process into another dummy process (cloned process) using the NtCreateProcessEx API (providing a
      special combination of flags). From now on, the original process can be terminated, and further opera-
      tions needed for the report can be executed on the cloned process.

         Note WER does not perform any snapshot creation for protected processes and trustlets.
         In these cases, the report is generated by obtaining data from the original faulting process,
         which is suspended and resumed only after the report is completed.

      Crash report generation
      After the snapshot is created, execution control returns to the WER service, which initializes the envi-
      ronment for the crash report creation. This is done mainly in two ways:

         ■   If the crash happened to a normal, unprotected process, the WER service directly invokes the
             WerpInitiateCrashReporting routine exported from the Windows User Mode Crash Reporting
             DLL (Faultrep.dll).

         ■   Crashes belonging to protected processes need another broker process, which is spawned un-
             der the SYSTEM account (and not the faulting process credentials). The broker performs some
             verifications and calls the same routine used for crashes happening in normal processes.

    The WerpInitiateCrashReporting routine, when called from the WER service, prepares the environ-
ment for executing the correct Fault Reporting process. It uses APIs exported from the WER library to
initialize the machine store (which, in its default configuration, is located in C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\
Windows\WER) and load all the WER settings from the Windows registry. WER indeed contains many
customizable options that can be configured by the user through the Group Policy editor or by manu-
ally making changes to the registry. At this stage, WER impersonates the user that has started the fault-
ing application and starts the correct Fault Reporting process using the -u main command-line switch,
which indicates to the WerFault (or WerFaultSecure) to process the user crash and create a new report.

   Note If the crashing process is a Modern application running under a low-integrity level
   or AppContainer token, WER uses the User Manager service to generate a new medium-IL
   token representing the user that has launched the faulting application.

    Table 10-19 lists the WER registry configuration options, their use, and possible values. These values
are located under the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\Windows Error Reporting subkey for
computer configuration and in the equivalent path under HKEY_CURRENT_USER for per-user configu-
ration (some values can also be present in the \Software\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\Windows Error
Reporting key).

TABLE 10-19 WER registry settings

Settings                        Meaning                                      Values

ConfigureArchive                Contents of archived data                    1 for parameters, 2 for all data

Consent DefaultConsent          What kind of data should require             1 for any data, 2 for parameters only,
                                consent                                      3 for parameters and safe data, 4 for
                                                                             all data.

Consent DefaultOverrideBehavior Whether the DefaultConsent overrides         1 to enable override
                                WER plug-in consent values

Consent PluginName              Consent value for a specific WER plug-in     Same as DefaultConsent

CorporateWERDirectory           Directory for a corporate WER store          String containing the path

CorporateWERPortNumber          Port to use for a corporate WER store        Port number

CorporateWERServer              Name to use for a corporate WER store        String containing the name

CorporateWERUseAuthentication   Use Windows Integrated Authentication        1 to enable built-in authentication
                                for corporate WER store

CorporateWERUseSSL              Use Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) for           1 to enable SSL
                                corporate WER store

DebugApplications               List of applications that require the user   1 to require the user to choose
                                to choose between Debug and Continue

DisableArchive                  Whether the archive is enabled               1 to disable archive

Disabled                        Whether WER is disabled                      1 to disable WER

DisableQueue                    Determines whether reports are to be         1 to disable queue
                                queued

DontShowUI                      Disables or enables the WER UI               1 to disable UI

      Settings                          Meaning                                         Values

      DontSendAdditionalData            Prevents additional crash data from be-         1 not to send
                                        ing sent

      ExcludedApplications AppName      List of applications excluded from WER          String containing the application list

      ForceQueue                        Whether reports should be sent to the           1 to send reports to the queue
                                        user queue

      LocalDumps DumpFolder             Path at which to store the dump files           String containing the path

      LocalDumps DumpCount              Maximum number of dump files in the             Count
                                        path

      LocalDumps DumpType               Type of dump to generate during a crash         0 for a custom dump, 1 for a minidump, 2
                                                                                        for a full dump

      LocalDumps CustomDumpFlags        For custom dumps, specifies custom              Values defined in MINIDUMP_TYPE (see
                                        options                                         Chapter 12 for more information)

      LoggingDisabled                   Enables or disables logging                     1 to disable logging

      MaxArchiveCount                   Maximum size of the archive (in files)          Value between 1–5000

      MaxQueueCount                     Maximum size of the queue                       Value between 1–500

      QueuePesterInterval               Days between requests to have the user          Number of days
                                        check for solutions

          The Windows Fault Reporting process started with the -u switch starts the report generation:
      the process maps again the shared memory section containing the crash data, identifies the exception’s
      record and descriptor, and obtains the snapshot taken previously. In case the snapshot does not
      exist, the WerFault process operates directly on the faulting process, which is suspended. WerFault
      first determines the nature of the faulting process (service, native, standard, or shell process). If the
      faulting process has asked the system not to report any hard errors (through the SetErrorMode API),
      the entire process is aborted, and no report is created. Otherwise, WER checks whether a default
      post-mortem debugger is enabled through settings stored in the AeDebug subkey (AeDebugProtected
      for protected processes) under the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\ root
      registry key. Table 10-20 describes the possible values of both keys.

      TABLE 10-20 Valid registry values used for the AeDebug and AeDebugProtected root keys

      Value name             Meaning                                             Data

      Debugger               Specify the debugger executable to be               Full path of the debugger executable, with
                             launched when an application crashes.               eventual command-line arguments. The -p
                                                                                 switch is automatically added by WER, pointing
                                                                                 it to the crashing process ID.

      ProtectedDebugger      Same as Debugger but for protected                  Full path of the debugger executable. Not valid
                             processes only.                                     for the AeDebug key.

      Auto                   Specify the Autostartup mode                        1 to enable the launching of the debugger in
                                                                                 any case, without any user consent, 0 other-
                                                                                 wise.

      LaunchNonProtected     Specify whether the debugger should be ex-          1 to launch the debugger as a standard
                             ecuted as unprotected.                              process.
                             This setting applies only to the
                             AeDebugProtected key.

   If the debugger start type is set to Auto, WER starts it and waits for a debugger event to be sig-
naled before continuing the report creation. The report generation is started through the internal
GenerateCrashReport routine implemented in the User Mode Crash Reporting DLL (Faultrep.dll).
The latter configures all the WER plug-ins and initializes the report using the WerReportCreate
API, exported from the WER.dll. (Note that at this stage, the report is only located in memory.) The
GenerateCrashReport routine calculates the report ID and a signature and adds further diagnostics
data to the report, like the process times and startup parameters or application-defined data. It then
checks the WER configuration to determine which kind of memory dump to create (by default, a
minidump is acquired). It then calls the exported WerReportAddDump API with the goal to initialize the
dump acquisition for the faulting process (it will be added to the final report). Note that if a snapshot
has been previously acquired, it is used for acquiring the dump.

    The WerReportSubmit API, exported from WER.dll, is the central routine that generates the dump
of the faulting process, creates all the files included in the report, shows the UI (if configured to do so
by the DontShowUI registry value), and sends the report to the Online Crash server. The report usually
includes the following:

   ■   A minidump file of the crashing process (usually named memory.hdmp)

   ■   A human-readable text report, which includes exception information, the calculated signature
       of the crash, OS information, a list of all the files associated with the report, and a list of all the
       modules loaded in the crashing process (this file is usually named report.wer)

   ■   A CSV (comma separated values) file containing a list of all the active processes at the time of
       the crash and basic information (like the number of threads, the private working set size, hard
       fault count, and so on)

   ■   A text file containing the global memory status information

   ■   A text file containing application compatibility information

   The Fault Reporting process communicates through ALPC to the WER service and sends commands
to allow the service to generate most of the information present in the report. After all the files have
been generated, if configured appropriately, the Windows Fault Reporting process presents a dialog
box (as shown in Figure 10-39) to the user, notifying that a critical error has occurred in the target
process. (This feature is disabled by default in Windows 10.)

FIGURE 10-39 The Windows Error Reporting dialog box.

         In environments where systems are not connected to the Internet or where the administrator wants
      to control which error reports are submitted to Microsoft, the destination for the error report can
      be configured to be an internal file server. The System Center Desktop Error Monitoring (part of the
      Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack) understands the directory structure created by Windows Error
      Reporting and provides the administrator with the option to take selective error reports and submit
      them to Microsoft.

         As previously discussed, the WER service uses an ALPC port for communicating with crashed
      processes. This mechanism uses a systemwide error port that the WER service registers through
      NtSetInformationProcess (which uses DbgkRegisterErrorPort). As a result, all Windows processes have
      an error port that is actually an ALPC port object registered by the WER service. The kernel and the
      unhandled exception filter in Ntdll use this port to send a message to the WER service, which then
      analyzes the crashing process. This means that even in severe cases of thread state damage, WER is still
      able to receive notifications and launch WerFault.exe to log the detailed information of the critical er-
      ror in a Windows Event log (or to display a user interface to the user) instead of having to do this work
      within the crashing thread itself. This solves all the problems of silent process death: Users are notified,
      debugging can occur, and service administrators can see the crash event.

         EXPERIMENT: Enabling the WER user interface
         Starting with the initial release of Windows 10, the user interface displayed by WER when an ap-
         plication crashes has been disabled by default. This is primarily because of the introduction of the
         Restart Manager (part of the Application Recovery and Restart technology). The latter allows ap-
         plications to register a restart or recovery callback invoked when an application crashes, hangs,
         or just needs to be restarted for servicing an update. As a result, classic applications that do
         not register any recovery callback when they encounter an unhandled exception just terminate
         without displaying any message to the user (but correctly logging the error in the system log).
         As discussed in this section, WER supports a user interface, which can be enabled by just adding a
         value in one of the WER keys used for storing settings. For this experiment, you will re-enable the
         WER UI using the global system key.

             From the book’s downloadable resources, copy the BuggedApp executable and run it. After
         pressing a key, the application generates a critical unhandled exception that WER intercepts
         and reports. In default configurations, no error message is displayed. The process is terminated,
         an error event is stored in the system log, and the report is generated and sent without any
         user intervention. Open the Registry Editor (by typing regedit in the Cortana search box) and
         navigate to the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows \Windows Error Reporting registry key.
         If the DontShowUI value does not exist, create it by right-clicking the root key and selecting New,
         DWORD (32 bit) Value and assign 0 to it.

             If you restart the bugged application and press a key, WER displays a user interface similar
         to the one shown in Figure 10-39 before terminating the crashing application. You can repeat
         the experiment by adding a debugger to the AeDebug key. Running Windbg with the -I switch
         performs the registration automatically, as discussed in the “Witnessing a COM-hosted task”
         experiment earlier in this chapter.

Kernel-mode (system) crashes
Before discussing how WER is involved when a kernel crashes, we need to introduce how the ker-
nel records crash information. By default, all Windows systems are configured to attempt to record
information about the state of the system before the Blue Screen of Death (BSOD) is displayed, and
the system is restarted. You can see these settings by opening the System Properties tool in Control
Panel (under System and Security, System, Advanced System Settings), clicking the Advanced tab,
and then clicking the Settings button under Startup and Recovery. The default settings for a Windows
system are shown in Figure 10-40.

FIGURE 10-40 Crash dump settings.

Crash dump files
Different levels of information can be recorded on a system crash:

   ■   Active memory dump An active memory dump contains all physical memory accessible and
       in use by Windows at the time of the crash. This type of dump is a subset of the complete mem-
       ory dump; it just filters out pages that are not relevant for troubleshooting problems on the
       host machine. This dump type includes memory allocated to user-mode applications and active
       pages mapped into the kernel or user space, as well as selected Pagefile-backed Transition,
       Standby, and Modified pages such as the memory allocated with VirtualAlloc or page-file
       backed sections. Active dumps do not include pages on the free and zeroed lists, the file cache,
       guest VM pages, and various other types of memory that are not useful during debugging.

         ■   Complete memory dump A complete memory dump is the largest kernel-mode dump file
             that contains all the physical pages accessible by Windows. This type of dump is not fully sup-
             ported on all platforms (the active memory dump superseded it). Windows requires that a page
             file be at least the size of physical memory plus 1 MB for the header. Device drivers can add up
             to 256 MB for secondary crash dump data, so to be safe, it’s recommended that you increase
             the size of the page file by an additional 256 MB.

         ■   Kernel memory dump A kernel memory dump includes only the kernel-mode pages allo-
             cated by the operating system, the HAL, and device drivers that are present in physical memory
             at the time of the crash. This type of dump does not contain pages belonging to user processes.
             Because only kernel-mode code can directly cause Windows to crash, however, it’s unlikely that
             user process pages are necessary to debug a crash. In addition, all data structures relevant for
             crash dump analysis—including the list of running processes, the kernel-mode stack of the cur-
             rent thread, and list of loaded drivers—are stored in nonpaged memory that saves in a kernel
             memory dump. There is no way to predict the size of a kernel memory dump because its size
             depends on the amount of kernel-mode memory allocated by the operating system and drivers
             present on the machine.

         ■   Automatic memory dump This is the default setting for both Windows client and server
             systems. An automatic memory dump is similar to a kernel memory dump, but it also saves
             some metadata of the active user-mode process (at the time of the crash). Furthermore, this
             dump type allows better management of the system paging file’s size. Windows can set the size
             of the paging file to less than the size of RAM but large enough to ensure that a kernel memory
             dump can be captured most of the time.

         ■   Small memory dump A small memory dump, which is typically between 128 KB and 1 MB in
             size and is also called a minidump or triage dump, contains the stop code and parameters, the
             list of loaded device drivers, the data structures that describe the current process and thread
             (called the EPROCESS and ETHREAD—described in Chapter 3 of Part 1), the kernel stack for the
             thread that caused the crash, and additional memory considered potentially relevant by crash
             dump heuristics, such as the pages referenced by processor registers that contain memory ad-
             dresses and secondary dump data added by drivers.

         Note Device drivers can register a secondary dump data callback routine by calling
         KeRegisterBugCheckReasonCallback. The kernel invokes these callbacks after a crash and a
         callback routine can add additional data to a crash dump file, such as device hardware mem-
         ory or device information for easier debugging. Up to 256 MB can be added systemwide by
         all drivers, depending on the space required to store the dump and the size of the file into
         which the dump is written, and each callback can add at most one-eighth of the available
         additional space. Once the additional space is consumed, drivers subsequently called are
         not offered the chance to add data.

         The debugger indicates that it has limited information available to it when it loads a minidump, and
      basic commands like !process, which lists active processes, don’t have the data they need. A kernel

memory dump includes more information, but switching to a different process’s address space map-
pings won’t work because required data isn’t in the dump file. While a complete memory dump is a
superset of the other options, it has the drawback that its size tracks the amount of physical memory on
a system and can therefore become unwieldy. Even though user-mode code and data usually are not
used during the analysis of most crashes, the active memory dump overcame the limitation by storing
in the dump only the memory that is actually used (excluding physical pages in the free and zeroed
list). As a result, it is possible to switch address space in an active memory dump.

   An advantage of a minidump is its small size, which makes it convenient for exchange via email,
for example. In addition, each crash generates a file in the directory %SystemRoot%\Minidump with
a unique file name consisting of the date, the number of milliseconds that have elapsed since the
system was started, and a sequence number (for example, 040712-24835-01.dmp). If there's a conflict,
the system attempts to create additional unique file names by calling the Windows GetTickCount
function to return an updated system tick count, and it also increments the sequence number. By
default, Windows saves the last 50 minidumps. The number of minidumps saved is configurable
by modifying the MinidumpsCount value under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
CrashControl registry key.

   A significant disadvantage is that the limited amount of data stored in the dump can hamper effective
analysis. You can also get the advantages of minidumps even when you configure a system to generate
kernel, complete, active, or automatic crash dumps by opening the larger crash with WinDbg and using
the .dump /m command to extract a minidump. Note that a minidump is automatically created even if
the system is set for full or kernel dumps.

   Note You can use the .dump command from within LiveKd to generate a memory image
   of a live system that you can analyze offline without stopping the system. This approach is
   useful when a system is exhibiting a problem but is still delivering services, and you want to
   troubleshoot the problem without interrupting service. To prevent creating crash images
   that aren’t necessarily fully consistent because the contents of different regions of memory
   reflect different points in time, LiveKd supports the –m flag. The mirror dump option pro-
   duces a consistent snapshot of kernel-mode memory by leveraging the memory manager’s
   memory mirroring APIs, which give a point-in-time view of the system.

  The kernel memory dump option offers a practical middle ground. Because it contains all kernel-
mode-owned physical memory, it has the same level of analysis-related data as a complete memory
dump, but it omits the usually irrelevant user-mode data and code, and therefore can be significantly
smaller. As an example, on a system running a 64-bit version of Windows with 4 GB of RAM, a kernel
memory dump was 294 MB in size.

    When you configure kernel memory dumps, the system checks whether the paging file is large
enough, as described earlier. There isn’t a reliable way to predict the size of a kernel memory dump.
The reason you can’t predict the size of a kernel memory dump is that its size depends on the amount
of kernel-mode memory in use by the operating system and drivers present on the machine at the time
of the crash. Therefore, it is possible that at the time of the crash, the paging file is too small to hold a

      kernel dump, in which case the system will switch to generating a minidump. If you want to see the size
      of a kernel dump on your system, force a manual crash either by configuring the registry option to al-
      low you to initiate a manual system crash from the console (documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/
      en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/forcing-a-system-crash-from-the-keyboard) or by using
      the Notmyfault tool (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/notmyfault).

         The automatic memory dump overcomes this limitation, though. The system will be indeed able
      to create a paging file large enough to ensure that a kernel memory dump can be captured most of
      the time. If the computer crashes and the paging file is not large enough to capture a kernel memory
      dump, Windows increases the size of the paging file to at least the size of the physical RAM installed.

         To limit the amount of disk space that is taken up by crash dumps, Windows needs to determine
      whether it should maintain a copy of the last kernel or complete dump. After reporting the kernel
      fault (described later), Windows uses the following algorithm to decide whether it should keep the
      Memory.dmp file. If the system is a server, Windows always stores the dump file. On a Windows client
      system, only domain-joined machines will always store a crash dump by default. For a non-domain-
      joined machine, Windows maintains a copy of the crash dump only if there is more than 25 GB of
      free disk space on the destination volume (4 GB on ARM64, configurable via the HKLM\SYSTEM\
      CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl\PersistDumpDiskSpaceLimit registry value)—that is, the
      volume where the system is configured to write the Memory.dmp file. If the system, due to disk space
      constraints, is unable to keep a copy of the crash dump file, an event is written to the System event
      log indicating that the dump file was deleted, as shown in Figure 10-41. This behavior can be overrid-
      den by creating the DWORD registry value HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl\
      AlwaysKeepMemoryDump and setting it to 1, in which case Windows always keeps a crash dump,
      regardless of the amount of free disk space.

      FIGURE 10-41 Dump file deletion event log entry.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing dump file information
Each crash dump file contains a dump header that describes the stop code and its parameters,
the type of system the crash occurred on (including version information), and a list of pointers
to important kernel-mode structures required during analysis. The dump header also contains
the type of crash dump that was written and any information specific to that type of dump. The
.dumpdebug debugger command can be used to display the dump header of a crash dump file.
For example, the following output is from a crash of a system that was configured for an auto-
matic dump:
0: kd> .dumpdebug
----- 64 bit Kernel Bitmap Dump Analysis - Kernel address space is available,
      User address space may not be available.

DUMP_HEADER64:
MajorVersion        0000000f
MinorVersion        000047ba
KdSecondaryVersion 00000002
DirectoryTableBase 00000000`006d4000
PfnDataBase         ffffe980`00000000
PsLoadedModuleList fffff800`5df00170
PsActiveProcessHead fffff800`5def0b60
MachineImageType    00008664
NumberProcessors    00000003
BugCheckCode        000000e2
BugCheckParameter1 00000000`00000000
BugCheckParameter2 00000000`00000000
BugCheckParameter3 00000000`00000000
BugCheckParameter4 00000000`00000000
KdDebuggerDataBlock fffff800`5dede5e0
SecondaryDataState 00000000
ProductType         00000001
SuiteMask           00000110
Attributes          00000000

BITMAP_DUMP:
DumpOptions          00000000
HeaderSize           16000
BitmapSize           9ba00
Pages                25dee

KiProcessorBlock at fffff800`5e02dac0
  3 KiProcessorBlock entries:
  fffff800`5c32f180 ffff8701`9f703180 ffff8701`9f3a0180

    The .enumtag command displays all secondary dump data stored within a crash dump (as
shown below). For each callback of secondary data, the tag, the length of the data, and the data
itself (in byte and ASCII format) are displayed. Developers can use Debugger Extension APIs to
create custom debugger extensions to also read secondary dump data. (See the “Debugging
Tools for Windows” help file for more information.)

         {E83B40D2-B0A0-4842-ABEA71C9E3463DD1} - 0x100 bytes
           46 41 43 50 14 01 00 00 06 98 56 52 54 55 41 4C FACP......VRTUAL
           4D 49 43 52 4F 53 46 54 01 00 00 00 4D 53 46 54 MICROSFT....MSFT
           53 52 41 54 A0 01 00 00 02 C6 56 52 54 55 41 4C SRAT......VRTUAL
           4D 49 43 52 4F 53 46 54 01 00 00 00 4D 53 46 54 MICROSFT....MSFT
           57 41 45 54 28 00 00 00 01 22 56 52 54 55 41 4C WAET(...."VRTUAL
           4D 49 43 52 4F 53 46 54 01 00 00 00 4D 53 46 54 MICROSFT....MSFT
           41 50 49 43 60 00 00 00 04 F7 56 52 54 55 41 4C APIC`.....VRTUAL
         ...

      Crash dump generation
      Phase 1 of the system boot process allows the I/O manager to check the configured crash dump op-
      tions by reading the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl registry key. If a dump
      is configured, the I/O manager loads the crash dump driver (Crashdmp.sys) and calls its entry point.
      The entry point transfers back to the I/O manager a table of control functions, which are used by the
      I/O manager for interacting with the crash dump driver. The I/O manager also initializes the secure
      encryption needed by the Secure Kernel to store the encrypted pages in the dump. One of the control
      functions in the table initializes the global crash dump system. It gets the physical sectors (file extent)
      where the page file is stored and the volume device object associated with it.

          The global crash dump initialization function obtains the miniport driver that manages the physical
      disk in which the page file is stored. It then uses the MmLoadSystemImageEx routine to make a copy
      of the crash dump driver and the disk miniport driver, giving them their original names prefixed by the
      dump_ string. Note that this implies also creating a copy of all the drivers imported by the miniport
      driver, as shown in the Figure 10-42.

      FIGURE 10-42 Kernel modules copied for use to generate and write a crash dump file.

   The system also queries the DumpFilters value for any filter drivers that are required for writing to
the volume, an example being Dumpfve.sys, the BitLocker Drive Encryption Crashdump Filter driver. It
also collects information related to the components involved with writing a crash dump—including the
name of the disk miniport driver, the I/O manager structures that are necessary to write the dump, and
the map of where the paging file is on disk—and saves two copies of the data in dump-context struc-
tures. The system is ready to generate and write a dump using a safe, noncorrupted path.

   Indeed, when the system crashes, the crash dump driver (%SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers\
Crashdmp.sys) verifies the integrity of the two dump-context structures obtained at boot by perform-
ing a memory comparison. If there’s not a match, it does not write a crash dump because doing so
would likely fail or corrupt the disk. Upon a successful verification match, Crashdmp.sys, with sup-
port from the copied disk miniport driver and any required filter drivers, writes the dump information
directly to the sectors on disk occupied by the paging file, bypassing the file system driver and storage
driver stack (which might be corrupted or even have caused the crash).

   Note Because the page file is opened early during system startup for crash dump use,
   most crashes that are caused by bugs in system-start driver initialization result in a dump
   file. Crashes in early Windows boot components such as the HAL or the initialization of boot
   drivers occur too early for the system to have a page file, so using another computer to
   debug the startup process is the only way to perform crash analysis in those cases.

    During the boot process, the Session Manager (Smss.exe) checks the registry value HKLM\SYSTEM\
CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management\ExistingPageFiles for a list of ex-
isting page files from the previous boot. (See Chapter 5 of Part 1 for more information on page files.) It
then cycles through the list, calling the function SmpCheckForCrashDump on each file present, looking
to see whether it contains crash dump data. It checks by searching the header at the top of each paging
file for the signature PAGEDUMP or PAGEDU64 on 32-bit or 64-bit systems, respectively. (A match indi-
cates that the paging file contains crash dump information.) If crash dump data is present, the Session
Manager then reads a set of crash parameters from the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
CrashControl registry key, including the DumpFile value that contains the name of the target dump file
(typically %SystemRoot%\Memory.dmp, unless configured otherwise).

    Smss.exe then checks whether the target dump file is on a different volume than the paging file.
If so, it checks whether the target volume has enough free disk space (the size required for the crash
dump is stored in the dump header of the page file) before truncating the paging file to the size of the
crash data and renaming it to a temporary dump file name. (A new page file will be created later when
the Session Manager calls the NtCreatePagingFile function.) The temporary dump file name takes the
format DUMPxxxx.tmp, where xxxx is the current low-word value of the system’s tick count (The system
attempts 100 times to find a nonconflicting value.) After renaming the page file, the system removes
both the hidden and system attributes from the file and sets the appropriate security descriptors to
secure the crash dump.

  Next, the Session Manager creates the volatile registry key HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
Control\CrashControl\MachineCrash and stores the temporary dump file name in the value DumpFile.

      It then writes a DWORD to the TempDestination value indicating whether the dump file location is only
      a temporary destination. If the paging file is on the same volume as the destination dump file, a tempo-
      rary dump file isn’t used because the paging file is truncated and directly renamed to the target dump
      file name. In this case, the DumpFile value will be that of the target dump file, and TempDestination
      will be 0.

         Later in the boot, Wininit checks for the presence of the MachineCrash key, and if it exists, launches
      the Windows Fault Reporting process (Werfault.exe) with the -k -c command-line switches (the k
      flag indicates kernel error reporting, and the c flag indicates that the full or kernel dump should
      be converted to a minidump). WerFault reads the TempDestination and DumpFile values. If the
      TempDestination value is set to 1, which indicates a temporary file was used, WerFault moves the
      temporary file to its target location and secures the target file by allowing only the System account
      and the local Administrators group access. WerFault then writes the final dump file name to the
      FinalDumpFileLocation value in the MachineCrash key. These steps are shown in Figure 10-43.

           “MachineCrash”
                                                                            Memory.dmp
                                 5
                                                 Wininit
                   4
                                                                                  7 WerFault
                                                      6
             Session
             Manager
                                             WerFault                       Dumpxxxx.tmp

                                                                                  3 SMSS
                    1

                                     2
      SmpCheckForCrashDump                                                  Paging file

      FIGURE 10-43 Crash dump file generation.

          To provide more control over where the dump file data is written to—for example, on systems
      that boot from a SAN or systems with insufficient disk space on the volume where the paging file
      is configured—Windows also supports the use of a dedicated dump file that is configured in the
      DedicatedDumpFile and DumpFileSize values under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
      CrashControl registry key. When a dedicated dump file is specified, the crash dump driver creates
      the dump file of the specified size and writes the crash data there instead of to the paging file. If no
      DumpFileSize value is given, Windows creates a dedicated dump file using the largest file size that
      would be required to store a complete dump. Windows calculates the required size as the size of the
      total number of physical pages of memory present in the system plus the size required for the dump
      header (one page on 32-bit systems, and two pages on 64-bit systems), plus the maximum value for
      secondary crash dump data, which is 256 MB. If a full or kernel dump is configured but there is not
      enough space on the target volume to create the dedicated dump file of the required size, the system
      falls back to writing a minidump.

Kernel reports
After the WerFault process is started by Wininit and has correctly generated the final dump file,
WerFault generates the report to send to the Microsoft Online Crash Analysis site (or, if configured,
an internal error reporting server). Generating a report for a kernel crash is a procedure that involves
the following:

   1.   If the type of dump generated was not a minidump, it extracts a minidump from the dump file and
        stores it in the default location of %SystemRoot%\Minidump, unless otherwise configured through
        the MinidumpDir value in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl key.

   2.   It writes the name of the minidump files to HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\Windows
        Error Reporting\KernelFaults\Queue.

   3.   It adds a command to execute WerFault.exe (%SystemRoot%\System32\WerFault.exe) with the
        –k –rq flags (the rq flag specifies to use queued reporting mode and that WerFault should be
        restarted) to HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\RunOnce so that WerFault
        is executed during the first user’s logon to the system for purposes of actually sending the
        error report.

   When the WerFault utility executes during logon, as a result of having configured itself to start, it
launches itself again using the –k –q flags (the q flag on its own specifies queued reporting mode) and
terminates the previous instance. It does this to prevent the Windows shell from waiting on WerFault
by returning control to RunOnce as quickly as possible. The newly launched WerFault.exe checks the
HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\Windows Error Reporting\KernelFaults\Queue key to look
for queued reports that may have been added in the previous dump conversion phase. It also checks
whether there are previously unsent crash reports from previous sessions. If there are, WerFault.exe
generates two XML-formatted files:

   ■    The first contains a basic description of the system, including the operating system version,
        a list of drivers installed on the machine, and the list of devices present in the system.

   ■    The second contains metadata used by the OCA service, including the event type that triggered
        WER and additional configuration information, such as the system manufacturer.

   WerFault then sends a copy of the two XML files and the minidump to Microsoft OCA server, which
forwards the data to a server farm for automated analysis. The server farm’s automated analysis uses
the same analysis engine that the Microsoft kernel debuggers use when you load a crash dump file into
them. The analysis generates a bucket ID, which is a signature that identifies a particular crash type.

Process hang detection
Windows Error reporting is also used when an application hangs and stops work because of some
defect or bug in its code. An immediate effect of an application hanging is that it would not react to
any user interaction. The algorithm used for detecting a hanging application depends on the applica-
tion type: the Modern application stack detects that a Centennial or UWP application is hung when
a request sent from the HAM (Host Activity Manager) is not processed after a well-defined timeout
(usually 30 seconds); the Task manager detects a hung application when an application does not reply

      to the WM_QUIT message; Win32 desktop applications are considered not responding and hung when
      a foreground window stops to process GDI messages for more than 5 seconds.

         Describing all the hung detection algorithms is outside the scope of this book. Instead, we will con-
      sider the most likely case of a classical Win32 desktop application that stopped to respond to any user
      input. The detection starts in the Win32k kernel driver, which, after the 5-second timeout, sends a mes-
      sage to the DwmApiPort ALPC port created by the Desktop Windows Manager (DWM.exe). The DWM
      processes the message using a complex algorithm that ends up creating a “ghost” window on top of the
      hanging window. The ghost redraws the window’s original content, blurring it out and adding the (Not
      Responding) string in the title. The ghost window processes GDI messages through an internal message
      pump routine, which intercepts the close, exit, and activate messages by calling the ReportHang routine
      exported by the Windows User Mode Crash Reporting DLL (faultrep.dll). The ReportHang function simply
      builds a WERSVC_REPORT_HANG message and sends it to the WER service to wait for a reply.

          The WER service processes the message and initializes the Hang reporting by reading settings values
      from the HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows\Windows Error Reporting\Hangs root registry key. In par-
      ticular, the MaxHangrepInstances value is used to indicate how many hanging reports can be generated
      in the same time (the default number is eight if the value does not exist), while the TerminationTimeout
      value specifies the time that needs to pass after WER has tried to terminate the hanging process before
      considering the entire system to be in hanging situation (10 seconds by default). This situation can happen
      for various reasons—for example, an application has an active pending IRP that is never completed by
      a kernel driver. The WER service opens the hanging process and obtains its token, and some other basic
      information. It then creates a shared memory section object to store them (similar to user application
      crashes; in this case, the shared section has a name: Global\<Random GUID>).

         A WerFault process is spawned in a suspended state using the faulting process’s token and the -h
      command-line switch (which is used to specify to generate a report for a hanging process). Unlike
      with user application crashes, a snapshot of the hanging process is taken from the WER service using
      a full SYSTEM token by invoking the the PssNtCaptureSnapshot API exported in Ntdll. The snapshot’s
      handle is duplicated in the suspended WerFault process, which is resumed after the snapshot has been
      successfully acquired. When the WerFault starts, it signals an event indicating that the report genera-
      tion has started. From this stage, the original process can be terminated. Information for the report is
      grabbed from the cloned process.

          The report for a hanging process is similar to the one acquired for a crashing process: The WerFault
      process starts by querying the value of the Debugger registry value located in the global HKLM\
      Software\Microsoft\Windows\Windows Error Reporting\Hangs root registry key. If there is a valid
      debugger, it is launched and attached to the original hanging process. In case the Disable registry value
      is set to 1, the procedure is aborted and the WerFault process exits without generating any report.
      Otherwise, WerFault opens the shared memory section, validates it, and grabs all the information
      previously saved by the WER service. The report is initialized by using the WerReportCreate func-
      tion exported in WER.dll and used also for crashing processes. The dialog box for a hanging process
      (shown in Figure 10-44) is always displayed independently on the WER configuration. Finally, the
      WerReportSubmit function (exported in WER.dll) is used to generate all the files for the report (includ-
      ing the minidump file) similarly to user applications crashes (see the “Crash report generation” section
      earlier in this chapter). The report is finally sent to the Online Crash Analysis server.

FIGURE 10-44 The Windows Error Reporting dialog box for hanging applications.

    After the report generation is started and the WERSVC_HANG_REPORTING_STARTED message
is returned to DWM, WER kills the hanging process using the TerminateProcess API. If the process
is not terminated in an expected time frame (generally 10 seconds, but customizable through the
TerminationTimeout setting as explained earlier), the WER service relaunches another WerFault instance
running under a full SYSTEM token and waits another longer timeout (usually 60 seconds but custom-
izable through the LongTerminationTimeout setting). If the process is not terminated even by the end
of the longer timeout, WER has no other chances than to write an ETW event on the Application event
log, reporting the impossibility to terminate the process. The ETW event is shown in Figure 10-45.
Note that the event description is misleading because WER hasn’t been able to terminate the hanging
application.

FIGURE 10-45 ETW error event written to the Application log for a nonterminating hanging application.

Global flags
      Windows has a set of flags stored in two systemwide global variables named NtGlobalFlag and
      NtGlobalFlag2 that enable various internal debugging, tracing, and validation support in the
      operating system. The two system variables are initialized from the registry key HKLM\SYSTEM\
      CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager in the values GlobalFlag and GlobalFlag2 at system boot
      time (phase 0 of the NT kernel initialization). By default, both registry values are 0, so it’s likely that
      on your systems, you’re not using any global flags. In addition, each image has a set of global flags
      that also turn on internal tracing and validation code (although the bit layout of these flags is slightly
      different from the systemwide global flags).

         Fortunately, the debugging tools contain a utility named Gflags.exe that you can use to view and
      change the system global flags (either in the registry or in the running system) as well as image global
      flags. Gflags has both a command-line and a GUI interface. To see the command-line flags, type
      gflags /?. If you run the utility without any switches, the dialog box shown in Figure 10-46 is displayed.

      FIGURE 10-46 Setting system debugging options with GFlags.

   Flags belonging to the Windows Global flags variables can be split in different categories:

   ■   Kernel flags are processed directly by various components of the NT kernel (the heap manager,
       exceptions, interrupts handlers, and so on).

   ■   User flags are processed by components running in user-mode applications (usually Ntdll).

   ■   Boot-only flags are processed only when the system is starting.

   ■   Per-image file global flags (which have a slightly different meaning than the others) are pro-
       cessed by the loader, WER, and some other user-mode components, depending on the user-
       mode process context in which they are running.

   The names of the group pages shown by the GFlags tool is a little misleading. Kernel, boot-only, and
user flags are mixed together in each page. The main difference is that the System Registry page allows
the user to set global flags on the GlobalFlag and GlobalFlag2 registry values, parsed at system boot time.
This implies that eventual new flags will be enabled only after the system is rebooted. The Kernel Flags
page, despite its name, does not allow kernel flags to be applied on the fly to a live system. Only certain
user-mode flags can be set or removed (the enable page heap flag is a good example) without requiring
a system reboot: the Gflags tool sets those flags using the NtSetSystemInformation native API (with the
SystemFlagsInformation information class). Only user-mode flags can be set in that way.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing and setting global flags
   You can use the !gflag kernel debugger command to view and set the state of the NtGlobalFlag
   kernel variable. The !gflag command lists all the flags that are enabled. You can use !gflag -? to
   get the entire list of supported global flags. At the time of this writing, the !gflag extension has
   not been updated to display the content of the NtGlobalFlag2 variable.

   The Image File page requires you to fill in the file name of an executable image. Use this option
to change a set of global flags that apply to an individual image (rather than to the whole system).
The page is shown in Figure 10-47. Notice that the flags are different from the operating system ones
shown in Figure 10-46. Most of the flags and the setting available in the Image File and Silent Process
Exit pages are applied by storing new values in a subkey with the same name as the image file (that is,
notepad.exe for the case shown in Figure 10-47) under the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\
CurrentVersion\Image File Execution Options registry key (also known as the IFEO key). In particular,
the GlobalFlag (and GlobalFlag2) value represents a bitmask of all the available per-image global flags.

      FIGURE 10-47 Setting per-image global flags with GFlags.

          When the loader initializes a new process previously created and loads all the dependent librar-
      ies of the main base executable (see Chapter 3 of Part 1 for more details about the birth of a process),
      the system processes the per-image global flags. The LdrpInitializeExecutionOptions internal function
      opens the IFEO key based on the name of the base image and parses all the per-image settings and
      flags. In particular, after the per-image global flags are retrieved from the registry, they are stored in
      the NtGlobalFlag (and NtGlobalFlag2) field of the process PEB. In this way, they can be easily accessed
      by any image mapped in the process (including Ntdll).

         Most of the available global flags are documented at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
      windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/gflags-flag-table.

         EXPERIMENT: Troubleshooting Windows loader issues
         In the “Watching the image loader” experiment in Chapter 3 of Part 1, you used the GFlags tool
         to display the Windows loader runtime information. That information can be useful for under-
         standing why an application does not start at all (without returning any useful error informa-
         tion). You can retry the same experiment on mspaint.exe by renaming the Msftedit.dll file (the
         Rich Text Edit Control library) located in %SystemRoot%\system32. Indeed, Paint depends on
         that DLL indirectly. The Msftedit library is loaded dynamically by MSCTF.dll. (It is not statically

      linked in the Paint executable.) Open an administrative command prompt window and type the
      following commands:
      cd /d c:\windows\system32
      takeown /f msftedit.dll
      icacls msftedit.dll /grant Administrators:F
      ren msftedit.dll msftedit.disabled

         Then enable the loader snaps using the Gflags tool, as specified in the “Watching the image
      loader” experiment. If you start mspaint.exe using Windbg, the loader snaps would be able to
      highlight the problem almost immediately, returning the following text:
      142c:1e18 @ 00056578 - LdrpInitializeNode - INFO: Calling init routine 00007FFC79258820 for
      DLL "C:\Windows\System32\MSCTF.dll"142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - ENTER: DLL
      name: .\MSFTEDIT.DLL
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - ENTER: DLL name: C:\Program Files\Debugging Tools
      for Windows (x64)\MSFTEDIT.DLL
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - ENTER: DLL name: C:\Windows\system32\MSFTEDIT.DLL
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135
      . . .
      C:\Users\test\AppData\Local\Microsoft\WindowsApps\MSFTEDIT.DLL
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpResolveDllName - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpSearchPath - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpProcessWork - ERROR: Unable to load DLL: "MSFTEDIT.DLL", Parent
      Module: "(null)", Status: 0xc0000135
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrpLoadDllInternal - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135
      142c:133c @ 00229625 - LdrLoadDll - RETURN: Status: 0xc0000135

Kernel shims
   New releases of the Windows operating system can sometime bring issues with old drivers, which
   can have difficulties in operating in the new environment, producing system hangs or blue screens of
   death. To overcome the problem, Windows 8.1 introduced a Kernel Shim engine that’s able to dynami-
   cally modify old drivers, which can continue to run in the new OS release. The Kernel Shim engine is
   implemented mainly in the NT kernel. Driver’s shims are registered through the Windows Registry and
   the Shim Database file. Drivers’ shims are provided by shim drivers. A shim driver uses the exported
   KseRegisterShimEx API to register a shim that can be applied to target drivers that need it. The Kernel
   Shim engine supports mainly two kinds of shims applied to devices or drivers.

   Shim engine initialization
   In early OS boot stages, the Windows Loader, while loading all the boot-loaded drivers, reads and
   maps the driver compatibility database file, located in %SystemRoot%\apppatch\Drvmain.sdb (and, if
   it exists, also in the Drvpatch.sdb file). In phase 1 of the NT kernel initialization, the I/O manager starts
   the two phases of the Kernel Shim engine initialization. The NT kernel copies the binary content of

      the database file(s) in a global buffer allocated from the paged pool (pointed by the internal global
      KsepShimDb variable). It then checks whether Kernel Shims are globally disabled. In case the system
      has booted in Safe or WinPE mode, or in case Driver verifier is enabled, the shim engine wouldn’t
      be enabled. The Kernel Shim engine is controllable also using system policies or through the HKLM\
      System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Compatibility\DisableFlags registry value. The NT kernel then gath-
      ers low-level system information needed when applying device shims, like the BIOS information and
      OEM ID, by checking the System Fixed ACPI Descriptor Table (FADT). The shim engine registers the first
      built-in shim provider, named DriverScope, using the KseRegisterShimEx API. Built-in shims provided by
      Windows are listed in Table 10-21. Some of them are indeed implemented in the NT kernel directly and
      not in any external driver. DriverScope is the only shim registered in phase 0.

      TABLE 10-21 Windows built-in kernel shims

      Shim Name                   GUID                          Purpose                                        Module

      DriverScope                 {BC04AB45-EA7E-4A11-A7BB-     The driver scope shim is used to collect       NT kernel
                                  977615F4CAAE}                 health ETW events for a target driver. Its
                                                                hooks do nothing other than writing an
                                                                ETW event before or after calling the origi-
                                                                nal nonshimmed callbacks.

      Version Lie                 {3E28B2D1-E633-408C-8E9B-     The version lie shim is available for          NT kernel
                                  2AFA6F47FCC3} (7.1)           Windows 7, 8, and 8.1. The shim commu-
                                  (47712F55-BD93-43FC-9248-     nicates a previous version of the OS when
                                  B9A83710066E} (8)             required by a driver in which it is applied.
                                  {21C4FB58-D477-4839-A7EA-
                                  AD6918FBC518} (8.1)

      SkipDriverUnload            {3E8C2CA6-34E2-4DE6-8A1E-     The shim replaces the driver’s unload          NT kernel
                                  9692DD3E316B}                 routine with one that doesn’t do anything
                                                                except logging an ETW event.

      ZeroPool                    {6B847429-C430-4682-B55F-     Replace the ExAllocatePool API with a          NT kernel
                                  FD11A7B55465}                 function that allocates the pool memory
                                                                and zeroes it out.

      ClearPCIDBits               {B4678DFF-BD3E-46C9-          Clear the PCID bits when some antivirus        NT kernel
                                  923B-B5733483B0B3}            drivers are mapping physical memory
                                                                referred by CR3.

      Kaspersky                   {B4678DFF-CC3E-46C9-          Shim created for specific Kaspersky filter     NT kernel
                                  923B-B5733483B0B3}            drivers for masking the real value of the
                                                                UseVtHardware registry value, which could
                                                                have caused bug checks on old versions of
                                                                the antivirus.

      Memcpy                      {8A2517C1-35D6-4CA8-9EC8- Provides a safer (but slower) memory copy          NT kernel
                                  98A12762891B}             implementation that always zeroes out the
                                                            destination buffer and can be used with
                                                            device memory.

      KernelPadSectionsOverride   {4F55C0DB-73D3-43F2-9723-     Prevents discardable sections of any           NT kernel
                                  8A9C7F79D39D}                 kernel module to be freed by the memory
                                                                manager and blocks the loading of the
                                                                target driver (where the shim is applied).

      NDIS Shim                   {49691313-1362-4e75-8c2a-     NDIS version compatibility shim (returns       Ndis.sys
                                  2dd72928eba5}                 6.40 where applied to a driver).

      SrbShim                     {434ABAFD-08FA-4c3d-          SCSI Request Block compatibility shim that     Storport.sys
                                  A88D-D09A88E2AB17}            intercepts the IOCTL_STORAGE_QUERY_
                                                                PROPERTY.

Shim Name                     GUID                        Purpose                                      Module

DeviceIdShim                  {0332ec62-865a-4a39-b48f-   Compatibility shim for RAID devices.         Storport.sys
                              cda6e855f423}

ATADeviceIdShim               {26665d57-2158-4e4b-a959-   Compatibility shim for serial ATA devices.   Storport.sys
                              c917d03a0d7e}

Bluetooth Filter Power shim   {6AD90DAD-C144-4E9D-        Compatibility shim for Bluetooth filter      Bthport.sys
                              A0CF-AE9FCB901EBD}          drivers.

UsbShim                       {fd8fd62e-4d94-4fc7-8a68-   Compatibility shim for old Conexant USB      Usbd.sys
                              bff7865a706b}               modem.

Nokia Usbser Filter Shim      {7DD60997-651F-4ECB-B893-   Compatibility shim for Nokia Usbser filter   Usbd.sys
                              BEC8050F3BD7}               drivers (used by Nokia PC Suite).

   A shim is internally represented through the KSE_SHIM data structure (where KSE stands for Kernel
Shim Engine). The data structure includes the GUID, the human-readable name of the shim, and an
array of hook collection (KSE_HOOK_COLLECTION data structures). Driver shims support different
kinds of hooks: hooks on functions exported by the NT kernel, HAL, and by driver libraries, and on
driver’s object callback functions. In phase 1 of its initialization, the Shim Engine registers the Microsoft-
Windows-Kernel-ShimEngine ETW provider (which has the {0bf2fb94-7b60-4b4d-9766-e82f658df540}
GUID), opens the driver shim database, and initializes the remaining built-in shims implemented in the
NT kernel (refer to Table 10-21).

    To register a shim (through KseRegisterShimEx), the NT kernel performs some initial integrity checks
on both the KSE_SHIM data structure, and each hook in the collection (all the hooks must reside in the
address space of the calling driver). It then allocates and fills a KSE_REGISTERED_SHIM_ENTRY data
structure which, as the name implies, represents the registered shim. It contains a reference counter
and a pointer back to the driver object (used only in case the shim is not implemented in the NT kernel).
The allocated data structure is linked in a global linked list, which keeps track of all the registered shims
in the system.

The shim database
The shim database (SDB) file format was first introduced in the old Windows XP for Application
Compatibility. The initial goal of the file format was to store a binary XML-style database of programs
and drivers that needed some sort of help from the operating system to work correctly. The SDB file
has been adapted to include kernel-mode shims. The file format describes an XML database using tags.
A tag is a 2-byte basic data structure used as unique identifier for entries and attributes in the data-
base. It is made of a 4-bit type, which identifies the format of the data associated with the tag, and a
12-bit index. Each tag indicates the data type, size, and interpretation that follows the tag itself. An SDB
file has a 12-byte header and a set of tags. The set of tags usually defines three main blocks in the shim
database file:

   ■   The INDEX block contains index tags that serve to fast-index elements in the database. Indexes
       in the INDEX block are stored in increasing order. Therefore, searching an element in the index-
       es is a fast operation (using a binary search algorithm). For the Kernel Shim engine, the elements
       are stored in the INDEXES block using an 8-byte key derived from the shim name.

         ■   The DATABASE block contains top-level tags describing shims, drivers, devices, and executables.
             Each top-level tag contains children tags describing properties or inner blocks belonging to the
             root entity.

         ■   The STRING TABLE block contains strings that are referenced by lower-level tags in the
             DATABASE block. Tags in the DATABASE block usually do not directly describe a string but
             instead contain a reference to a tag (called STRINGREF) describing a string located in the string
             table. This allows databases that contain a lot of common strings to be small in size.

         Microsoft has partially documented the SDB file format and the APIs used to read and write it at
      https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/devnotes/application-compatibility-database. All the
      SDB APIs are implemented in the Application Compatibility Client Library (apphelp.dll).

      Driver shims
      The NT memory manager decides whether to apply a shim to a kernel driver at its loading time, using
      the KseDriverLoadImage function (boot-loaded drivers are processed by the I/O manager, as discussed
      in Chapter 12). The routine is called at the correct time of a kernel-module life cycle, before either
      Driver Verifier, Import Optimization, or Kernel Patch protection are applied to it. (This is important;
      otherwise, the system would bugcheck.) A list of the current shimmed kernel modules is stored in a
      global variable. The KsepGetShimsForDriver routine checks whether a module in the list with the same
      base address as the one being loaded is currently present. If so, it means that the target module has
      already been shimmed, so the procedure is aborted. Otherwise, to determine whether the new module
      should be shimmed, the routine checks two different sources:

         ■   Queries the “Shims” multistring value from a registry key named as the module being loaded
             and located in the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Compatibility\Driver root key. The
             registry value contains an array of shims’ names that would be applied to the target module.

         ■   In case the registry value for a target module does not exist, parses the driver compatibility da-
             tabase file, looking for a KDRIVER tag (indexed by the INDEX block), which has the same name
             as the module being loaded. If a driver is found in the SDB file, the NT kernel performs a com-
             parison of the driver version (TAG_SOURCE_OS stored in the KDRIVER root tag), file name, and
             path (if the relative tags exist in the SDB), and of the low-level system information gathered at
             engine initialization time (to determine if the driver is compatible with the system). In case any
             of the information does not match, the driver is skipped, and no shims are applied. Otherwise,
             the shim names list is grabbed from the KSHIM_REF lower-level tags (which is part of the root
             KDRIVER). The tags are reference to the KSHIMs located in the SDB database block.

          If one of the two sources yields one or more shims names to be applied to the target driver, the SDB
      file is parsed again with the goal to validate that a valid KSHIM descriptor exists. If there are no tags
      related to the specified shim name (which means that no shim descriptor exists in the database), the
      procedure is interrupted (this prevents an administrator from applying random non-Microsoft shims to
      a driver). Otherwise, an array of KSE_SHIM_INFO data structure is returned to KsepGetShimsForDriver.

   The next step is to determine if the shims described by their descriptors have been registered in the
system. To do this, the Shim engine searches into the global linked list of registered shims (filled every
time a new shim is registered, as explained previously in the “Shim Engine initialization” section). If a
shim is not registered, the shim engine tries to load the driver that provides it (its name is stored in the
MODULE child tag of the root KSHIM entry) and tries again. When a shim is applied for the first time,
the Shim engine resolves the pointers of all the hooks described by the KSE_HOOK_COLLECTION data
structures’ array belonging to the registered shim (KSE_SHIM data structure). The shim engine allocates
and fills a KSE_SHIMMED_MODULE data structure representing the target module to be shimmed
(which includes the base address) and adds it to the global list checked in the beginning.

   At this stage, the shim engine applies the shim to the target module using the internal
KsepApplyShimsToDriver routine. The latter cycles between each hook described by the KSE_HOOK_
COLLECTION array and patches the import address table (IAT) of the target module, replacing the
original address of the hooked functions with the new ones (described by the hook collection). Note
that the driver’s object callback functions (IRP handlers) are not processed at this stage. They are modi-
fied later by the I/O manager before the DriverInit routine of the target driver is called. The original
driver’s IRP callback routines are saved in the Driver Extension of the target driver. In that way, the
hooked functions have a simple way to call back into the original ones when needed.

   EXPERIMENT: Witnessing kernel shims
   While the official Microsoft Application Compatibility Toolkit distributed with the Windows
   Assessment and Deployment Kit allows you to open, modify, and create shim database files, it
   does not work with system database files (identified through to their internal GUIDs), so it won’t
   be able to parse all the kernel shims that are described by the drvmain.sdb database. Multiple
   third-party SDB parsers exist. One in particular, called SDB explorer, is freely downloadable from
   https://ericzimmerman.github.io/.
   https://ericzimmerman.github.io/

      In this experiment, you get a peek at the drvmain system database file and apply a kernel shim
   to a test driver, ShimDriver, which is available in this book’s downloadable resources. For this experi-
   ment, you need to enable test signing (the ShimDriver is signed with a test self-signed certificate):

        1.   Open an administrative command prompt and type the following command:
             bcdedit /set testsigning on

        2.   Restart your computer, download SDB Explorer from its website, run it, and open the
             drvmain.sdb database located in %SystemRoot%\apppatch.

        3.   From the SDB Explorer main window, you can explore the entire database file, orga-
             nized in three main blocks: Indexes, Databases, and String table. Expand the DATABASES
             root block and scroll down until you can see the list of KSHIMs (they should be located
             after the KDEVICEs). You should see a window similar to the following:

         4.   You will apply one of the Version lie shims to our test driver. First, you should copy the
              ShimDriver to the %SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers. Then you should install it by typ-
              ing the following command in the administrative command prompt (it is assumed that
              your system is 64-bit):
              sc create ShimDriver type= kernel start= demand error= normal binPath= c:\
              Windows\System32\ShimDriver64.sys

         5.   Before starting the test driver, you should download and run the DebugView tool,
              available in the Sysinternals website (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/
              downloads/debugview). This is necessary because ShimDriver prints some debug messages.
              downloads/debugview

         6.   Start the ShimDriver with the following command:
              sc start shimdriver

         7.   Check the output of the DebugView tool. You should see messages like the one shown
              in the following figure. What you see depends on the Windows version in which you run
              the driver. In the example, we run the driver on an insider release version of Windows
              Server 2022:

8.   Now you should stop the driver and enable one of the shims present in the SDB data-
     base. In this example, you will start with one of the version lie shims. Stop the target
     driver and install the shim using the following commands (where ShimDriver64.sys is
     the driver’s file name installed with the previous step):
     sc stop shimdriver
     reg add "HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Compatibility\Driver\
         ShimDriver64.sys" /v Shims /t REG_MULTI_SZ /d
     KmWin81VersionLie /f /reg:64

9.   The last command adds the Windows 8.1 version lie shim, but you can freely choose
     other versions.

10. Now, if you restart the driver, you will see different messages printed by the DebugView
     tool, as shown in the following figure:

11. This is because the shim engine has correctly applied the hooks on the NT APIs used for
     retrieving OS version information (the driver is able to detect the shim, too). You should
     be able to repeat the experiment using other shims, like the SkipDriverUnload or the
     KernelPadSectionsOverride, which will zero out the driver unload routine or prevent the
     target driver from loading, as shown in the following figure:

      Device shims
      Unlike Driver shims, shims applied to Device objects are loaded and applied on demand. The NT kernel
      exports the KseQueryDeviceData function, which allows drivers to check whether a shim needs to be
      applied to a device object. (Note also that the KseQueryDeviceFlags function is exported. The API is just
      a subset of the first one, though.) Querying for device shims is also possible for user-mode applications
      through the NtQuerySystemInformation API used with the SystemDeviceDataInformation information
      class. Device shims are always stored in three different locations, consulted in the following order:

         1.   In the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Compatibility\Device root registry key, using
              a key named as the PNP hardware ID of the device, replacing the \ character with a ! (with the
              goal to not confuse the registry). Values in the device key specify the device’s shimmed data
              being queried (usually flags for a certain device class).

         2.   In the kernel shim cache. The Kernel Shim engine implements a shim cache (exposed through
              the KSE_CACHE data structure) with the goal of speeding up searches for device flags and data.

         3.   In the Shim database file, using the KDEVICE root tag. The root tag, among many others (like
              device description, manufacturer name, GUID and so on), includes the child NAME tag contain-
              ing a string composed as follows: <DataName:HardwareID>. The KFLAG or KDATA children tags
              include the value for the device’s shimmed data.

         If the device shim is not present in the cache but just in the SDB file, it is always added. In that way,
      future interrogation would be faster and will not require any access to the Shim database file.

Conclusion
      In this chapter, we have described the most important features of the Windows operating system
      that provide management facilities, like the Windows Registry, user-mode services, task scheduling,
      UBPM, and Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI). Furthermore, we have discussed how Event
      Tracing for Windows (ETW), DTrace, Windows Error Reporting (WER), and Global Flags (GFlags) provide
      the services that allow users to better trace and diagnose issues arising from any component of the
      OS or user-mode applications. The chapter concluded with a peek at the Kernel Shim engine, which
      helps the system apply compatibility strategies and correctly execute old components that have been
      designed for older versions of the operating system.

         The next chapter delves into the different file systems available in Windows and with the global
      caching available for speeding up file and data access.

