Chapter 4. Interrupt Priorities
Interrupt priorities are small unsigned integers, with a platform-specific maximum number of
supported levels. The priority value 0 is reserved to mean "never interrupt", and interrupt priority
increases with increasing integer values. Each global interrupt source has an associated interrupt
priority held in a memory-mapped register. Different interrupt sources need not support the same
set of priority values. A valid implementation can hardwire all input priority levels. Interrupt
source priority registers should be WARL fields to allow software to determine the number and
position of read-write bits in each priority specification, if any. To simplify discovery of supported
priority values, each priority register must support any combination of values in the bits that are
variable within the register, i.e., if there are two variable bits in the register, all four combinations
of values in those bits must operate as valid priority levels.

If PLIC supports Interrupt Priorities, then each PLIC interrupt source can be assigned a priority by
writing to its 32-bit memory-mapped priority register. A priority value of 0 is reserved to mean
"never interrupt" and effectively disables the interrupt. Priority 1 is the lowest active priority while
the maximum level of priority depends on PLIC implementation. Ties between global interrupts of
the same priority are broken by the Interrupt ID; interrupts with the lowest ID have the highest
effective priority.

The base address of Interrupt Source Priority block within PLIC Memory Map region is fixed at
0x000000.

PLIC             Function            Register Block       Description
Register                             Size in Byte
Block Name

Interrupt        Interrupt Source    1024 * 4 =           This is a continuously memory block which
Source           Priority #0 to      4096(0x1000)         contains PLIC Interrupt Source Priority.
Priority         #1023               bytes                Total 1024 Interrupt Source Priority in this
                                                          memory block. Interrupt Source Priority #0
                                                          is reserved which indicates it does not
                                                          exist.

PLIC Interrupt Source Priority Memory Map

  0x000000: Reserved (interrupt source 0 does not exist)
  0x000004: Interrupt source 1 priority
  0x000008: Interrupt source 2 priority
  ...
  0x000FFC: Interrupt source 1023 priority

