This book has been written with a view to helping you learn the fundamentals of Linux
character device driver development in a practical, hands-on fashion, along with the
necessary theoretical background to give you a well-rounded view of this vast and
interesting topic area. To do the topics justice, that book's scope is deliberately kept limited
to (mostly) learning how to write misc class character device drivers on the Linux OS. This
way, you will be able to deeply imbibe the fundamental and necessary driver author skills
to then be able to tackle different kinds of Linux driver projects with relative ease.

The focus is on hands-on driver development via the powerful Loadable Kernel
Module (LKM) framework; the majority of kernel driver development is done in this
manner. The focus is kept on working hands-on with driver code, understanding at a
sufficiently deep level the internals wherever required, and keeping security in mind.

A recommendation we can't make strongly enough: to really learn and understand the
details well, it's really best that you first read and understand this book's
companion, Linux Kernel Programming. It covers various key areas – building the kernel
from source, writing kernel modules via the LKM framework, kernel internals including
kernel architecture, the memory system, memory alloc/dealloc APIs, CPU scheduling, and
more. The combination of the two books will give you a sure and deep edge.

This book wastes no time – the first chapter has you learning the details of the Linux driver
framework and how to write a simple yet complete misc class character device driver. Next,
you learn how to do something very necessary: efficiently interfacing your driver with user
space processes using various technologies (some of which help as debug/diagnostic aids as
well!). Understanding, and working with, hardware (peripheral chip) I/O memory is then
covered. Detailed coverage of handling hardware interrupts follows. This includes learning
and using several modern driver techniques – using threaded IRQs, leveraging resource-
managed APIs for drivers, I/O resource allocation, and so on. It covers what top/bottom
halves are, working with tasklets and softirqs, and measuring interrupt latencies. Kernel
mechanisms you will typically work with – using kernel timers, setting up delays, creating
and managing kernel threads and workqueues – are covered next.

The remaining two chapters of this book delve into a relatively complex yet critical-to-
understand topic for the modern pro-level driver or kernel developer: understanding and
working with kernel synchronization.

The book uses the latest, at the time of writing, 5.4 Long Term Support (LTS) Linux kernel.
It's a kernel that will be maintained (both bug and security fixes) from November 2019 right
through December 2025! This is a key point, ensuring that this book's content remains
current and valid for years to come!

We very much believe in a hands-on empirical approach: over 20 kernel modules (besides a
few user apps and shell scripts) on this book's GitHub repository make the learning come
alive, making it fun, interesting, and useful.

We really hope you learn from and enjoy this book. Happy reading!

Who this book is for
This book is primarily for Linux programmers beginning to find their way with device
driver development. Linux device driver developers looking to overcome frequent and
common kernel/driver development issues, as well as understanding and learning to
perform common driver tasks – the modern Linux Device Model (LDM) framework, user-
kernel interfaces, performing peripheral I/O, handling hardware interrupts, dealing with
concurrency, and more – will benefit from this book. A basic understanding of Linux kernel
internals (and common APIs), kernel module development, and C programming is
required.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Writing a Simple misc Character Device Driver, first goes through the very basics –
what a driver is supposed to do, the device namespace, the sysfs, and basic tenets of
the LDM. We then delve into the details of writing a simple character device driver; along
the way, you will learn about the framework – in effect, the internal implementation of the
"if it's not a process, it's a file" philosophy/architecture! You'll learn how to implement a
misc class character device driver with various methods; several code examples help
harden the concepts. Basic copying of data between the user-kernel space and vice versa is
covered. Also covered are key security concerns and how to address them (in this context);
a "bad" driver giving rise to a privilege escalation issue is actually demonstrated!

Chapter 2, User-Kernel Communication Pathways, covers how to communicate between the
kernel and the user space, which is critical to you, as a kernel module/driver author. Here,
you'll learn about various communication interfaces, or pathways. This is an important
aspect of writing kernel/driver code. Several techniques are employed: communication via
traditional procfs, the better way for drivers via sysfs, and several others, via debugfs,
netlink sockets, and the ioctl(2) system call.

                                             [2]

Chapter 3, Working with Hardware I/O Memory, covers a key aspect of driver writing – the
issue with (and the solution to) accessing hardware memory (mapped memory I/O) from a
peripheral device or chip. We cover using the common memory-mapped I/O (MMIO)
technique as well as the (typically on x86) port I/O (PIO) techniques for hardware I/O
memory access and manipulation. Several examples from existing kernel drivers are shown
as well.

Chapter 4, Handling Hardware Interrupts, shows how to handle and work with hardware
interrupts in great detail. We start with a brief on how the kernel works with hardware
interrupts, then move on to how you're expected to "allocate" an IRQ line (covering modern
resource-managed APIs), and how to correctly implement the interrupt handler routine.
The modern approach of using threaded handlers (and the why of it), the Non-Maskable
Interrupt (NMI), and more, are then covered. The reasons for and using both "top half" and
"bottom half" interrupt mechanisms (hardirq, tasklet, and softirqs) in code, as well as key
information regarding the dos and don'ts of hardware interrupt handling are covered.
Measuring interrupt latencies with the modern [e]BPF toolset, as well as with Ftrace,
concludes this key chapter.

Chapter 5, Working with Kernel Timers, Threads, and Workqueues, covers how to use some
useful (and often employed by drivers) kernel mechanisms – delays, timers, kernel threads,
and workqueues. They come in handy in many real-world situations. How to perform both
blocking and non-blocking delays (as the situation warrants), setting up and using kernel
timers, creating and working with kernel threads, and understanding and using kernel
workqueues are all covered here. Several example modules, including three versions of
a simple encrypt decrypt (sed) example driver, serve to illustrate the concepts learned in
code.

Chapter 6, Kernel Synchronization – Part 1, first covers the key concepts regarding critical
sections, atomicity, what a lock conceptually achieves, and, very importantly, the why of all
this. We then cover concurrency concerns when working within the Linux kernel; this
moves us naturally on to important locking guidelines, what deadlock means, and key
approaches to preventing deadlock. Two of the most popular kernel locking technologies –
the mutex lock and the spinlock – are then discussed in depth, along with several (driver)
code examples.

                                             [3]

Chapter 7, Kernel Synchronization – Part 2, continues the journey on kernel synchronization.
Here, you'll learn about key locking optimizations – using lightweight atomic and (the
more recent) refcount operators to safely operate on integers, using RMW bit operators to
safely perform bit ops, and using the reader-writer spinlock over the regular one. Inherent
risks, such as cache "false sharing," are discussed as well. An overview of lock-free
programming techniques (with an emphasis on per-CPU variables and their usage, along
with examples) is then covered. A critical topic, lock debugging techniques, including the
usage of the kernel's powerful lockdep lock validator, is then covered. The chapter is
rounded off with a brief look at memory barriers (along with an existing kernel network
driver's usage of memory barriers).

We again stress that this book is for kernel programmers who are new to writing device
drivers; several Linux driver topics are beyond this book's scope and are not covered. This
includes other types of device drivers (besides character), working with the device tree, and
so on. Packt offers other valuable guides to help you gain traction on these topic areas. This
book would be an excellent start.

To get the most out of this book
To get the most out of this book, we expect you to have knowledge and experience of the
following:

          Know your way around a Linux system, on the command line (the shell).
          The C programming language.
          Know how to write simple kernel modules via the Loadable Kernel Module
          (LKM) framework
          Understand (at least the basics) of key Linux kernel internals concepts: kernel
          architecture, memory management (plus common dynamic memory alloc/de-
          alloc APIs), and CPU scheduling.
          It's not mandatory, but experience with Linux kernel programming concepts and
          technologies will help greatly.

Ideally, we highly recommend reading this book's companion, Linux Kernel
Programming, first.

                                            [4]

The details on hardware and software requirements for this book, as well as their
installation, are shown here:

Chapter Software required        Free /      Download links to Hardware                  OS
number (with version)            proprietary the software      specifications            required

         A recent Linux
                                                                 Required: a modern
         distribution; we use
                                                                 relatively powerful
         Ubuntu 18.04 LTS (as               Ubuntu               PC or laptop            Linux VM
         well as Fedora 31 /                (desktop): https:/​/ equipped with 4 GB      on a
         Ubuntu 20.04 LTS);                 ubuntu.​com/         RAM (minimally; the     Windows
         any of these will be               download/​desktop
All                              Free (open                      more the better), 25    host
         suitable. Recommend                Oracle
chapters                         source)                         GB free disk space,     -OR-
         you install the Linux              VirtualBox: https:/
                                                                 and a good internet     Linux as a
         OS as a virtual                    /​www.​virtualbox.
                                                                 connection.             stand-alone
         machine (VM), using                org/​wiki/
                                                                 Optional: we also use   OS
         Oracle VirtualBox 6.x              Downloads
                                                                 the Raspberry Pi 3B+
         (or later) as the
                                                                 as a test bed.
         hypervisor

Detailed installation steps (software-wise):

          1. Install Linux as a VM on a host Windows system; follow one of these tutorials:
                        Install Linux Inside Windows Using VirtualBox, Abhishek Prakash (It's
                        FOSS!, August 2019): https:/​/​itsfoss.​com/​install-​linux-​in-
                       virtualbox/​
                       Alternately, here's another tutorial to help you do the same: Install
                       Ubuntu on Oracle VirtualBox : https:/​/​brb.​nci.​nih.​gov/​seqtools/
                       installUbuntu.​html

                                               [5]

          2. Install the required software packages on the Linux VM:
                      1. Log in to your Linux guest VM and first run the following
                         commands within a Terminal window (on a shell):

                               sudo apt update
                               sudo apt install gcc make perl

                    2. Install the Oracle VirtualBox Guest Additions now. Reference: How to
                       Install VirtualBox Guest Additions in Ubuntu: https:/​/​www.​tecmint.
                        com/​install-​virtualbox-​guest-​additions-​in-​ubuntu/​
                       (This step only applies if you are running Ubuntu as a VM using
                       Oracle VirtualBox as the hypervisor app.)
                    3. To install the packages, take the following steps:
                               1. Within the Ubuntu VM, first run the sudo apt update
                                   command
                               2. Now, run the sudo apt install git fakeroot build-
                                   essential tar ncurses-dev tar xz-utils libssl-
                                   dev bc stress python3-distutils libelf-dev
                                   linux-headers-$(uname -r) bison flex
                                   libncurses5-dev util-linux net-tools linux-
                                   tools-$(uname -r) exuberant-ctags cscope
                                   sysfsutils curl perf-tools-unstable gnuplot rt-
                                   tests indent tree pstree smem hwloc bpfcc-tools
                                   sparse flawfinder cppcheck tuna hexdump trace-
                                   cmd virt-what command in a single line.
          3. Useful resources:
                       The Linux kernel official online documentation: https:/​/​www.​kernel.
                       org/​doc/​html/​latest/​.
                       The Linux Driver Verification (LDV) project, particularly the Online
                       Linux Driver Verification Service page: http:/​/​linuxtesting.​org/​ldv/
                       online?​action=​rules.
                       SEALS - Simple Embedded ARM Linux System: https:/​/​github.​com/
                       kaiwan/​seals/​.
                       Every chapter of this book has a very useful Further reading section as
                       well, detailing more resources.
          4. Detailed instructions, as well as additional useful projects, installing a cross-
             toolchain for ARM, and more, are described in Chapter 1, Kernel Workspace
             Setup, of this book's companion guide, Linux Kernel Programming, Kaiwan N
             Billimoria, Packt Publishing.

                                                [6]

We have tested all the code in this book (it has its own GitHub repository as well) on these
platforms:

          x86_64 Ubuntu 18.04 LTS guest OS (running on Oracle VirtualBox 6.1)
          x86_64 Ubuntu 20.04.1 LTS guest OS (running on Oracle VirtualBox 6.1)
          x86_64 Ubuntu 20.04.1 LTS native OS
          ARM Raspberry Pi 3B+ (running both its distro kernel as well as our custom 5.4
          kernel); lightly tested.

If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself
or, better, access the code via the GitHub repository (link available in the next section).
Doing so will help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of
code.

For this book, we'll log in as the user named llkd. I strongly recommend that you follow
the empirical approach: not taking anyone's word on anything at all, but trying it out and
experiencing it for yourself. Hence, this book gives you many hands-on experiments and
kernel driver code examples that you can and must try out yourself; this will greatly aid
you in making real progress and deeply learning and understanding various aspects of
Linux driver/kernel development.

Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at https:/​/​github.
com/​PacktPublishing/​Linux-​Kernel-​Programming-​Part-​2. In case there's an update to the
code, it will be updated on the existing GitHub repository.

We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available
at https:/​/​github.​com/​PacktPublishing/​. Check them out!

Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams used in this
book. You can download it here: http:/​/​www.​packtpub.​com/​sites/​default/​files/
downloads/​9781801079518_​ColorImages.​pdf.

                                            [7]

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.

CodeInText: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames,
file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an
example: "The ioremap() API returns a KVA of the void * type (since it's an address
location)."

A block of code is set as follows:
    static int __init miscdrv_init(void)
    {
        int ret;
        struct device *dev;

When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines
or items are set in bold:
    #define pr_fmt(fmt) "%s:%s(): " fmt, KBUILD_MODNAME, __func__
    [...]
    #include <linux/miscdevice.h>
    #include <linux/fs.h>
    [...]

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
    pi@raspberrypi:~ $ sudo cat /proc/iomem

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For
example, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in the text like this. Here is an example:
"Select System info from the Administration panel."

              Warnings or important notes appear like this.

              Tips and tricks appear like this.

                                             [8]

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.

General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, mention the book
title in the subject of your message and email us at customercare@packtpub.com.

Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes
do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would
report this to us. Please visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata, selecting your book,
clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering the details.

Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, we
would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name.
Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.

If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in
and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please
visit authors.packtpub.com.

Reviews
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not leave a review on
the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers can then see and use your unbiased
opinion to make purchase decisions, we at Packt can understand what you think about our
products, and our authors can see your feedback on their book. Thank you!

For more information about Packt, please visit packt.com.

                                            [9]
