Preface

This book is designed both for people who are learning computer graphics
through OpenGL and for people who may already know about graphics but
want to learn about OpenGL. The intended audience is students of computer
science, computer graphics, or game design; professional software engineers;
or simply just hobbyists and people who are interested in learning something
new. We begin by assuming that the reader knows nothing about either
computer graphics or OpenGL. The reader should be familiar with computer
programming in C++, however.
One of our goals with this book was to ensure that there were as few forward
references as possible and to require little or no assumed knowledge. The
book is accessible and readable, and if you start from the beginning and read
all the way through, you should come away with a good comprehension of
how OpenGL works and how to use it effectively in your applications. After
reading and understanding the content of this book, you will be well
positioned to read and learn from more advanced computer graphics research
articles and confident that you can take the principles that they cover and
implement them in OpenGL.
It is not a goal of this book to cover every last feature of OpenGL—that is, to
mention every function in the specification or every value that can be passed
to a command. Rather, we intend to provide a solid understanding of
OpenGL, introduce the fundamentals, and explore some of its more advanced
features. After reading this book, readers should be comfortable looking up
finer details in the OpenGL specification, experimenting with OpenGL on
their own machines, and using extensions (bonus features that add
capabilities to OpenGL not required by the main specification).
The Architecture of the Book
This book is subdivided into three parts. In Part I, “Foundations,” we explain
what OpenGL is and how it connects to the graphics pipeline, and we give
minimal working examples that are sufficient to demonstrate each section of
it without requiring much, if any, knowledge of any other part of the whole
system. We lay a foundation for the math behind three-dimensional computer
graphics, and describe how OpenGL manages the large amounts of data that
are required to provide a compelling experience to the users of such
applications. We also describe the programming model for shaders, which
form a core part of any OpenGL application.
In Part II, “In Depth,” we introduce features of OpenGL that require some
knowledge of multiple parts of the graphics pipeline and may refer to
concepts mentioned in Part I. This allows us to cover more complex topics
without glossing over details or telling you to skip forward in the book to
find out how something really works. By taking a second pass over the
OpenGL system, we are able to delve into where data goes as it leaves each
part of OpenGL, as you’ll already have been (at least briefly) introduced to
its destination.
Finally, in Part III, “In Practice,” we dive deeper into the graphics pipeline,
cover some more advanced topics, and give a number of examples that use
multiple features of OpenGL. We provide a number of worked examples that
implement various rendering techniques, give a series of suggestions and
advice on OpenGL best practices and performance considerations, and end
up with a practical overview of OpenGL on several popular platforms,
including mobile devices.
In Part I, we start gently and then blast through OpenGL to give you a taste of
what’s to come. Then, we lay the groundwork of knowledge that will be
essential to you as you progress through the rest of the book. In this part, you
will find the following chapters:
     • Chapter 1, “Introduction,” provides a brief introduction to OpenGL,
       including its origins, history, and current state.
     • Chapter 2, “Our First OpenGL Program,” jumps right into OpenGL and
       shows you how to create a simple OpenGL application using the source
       code provided with this book.
     • Chapter 3, “Following the Pipeline,” takes a more careful look at
       OpenGL and its various components, introducing each in a little more
       detail and adding to the simple example presented in the previous
       chapter.
     • Chapter 4, “Math for 3D Graphics,” introduces the foundations of math
       that is essential for effective use of OpenGL and the creation of
       interesting 3D graphics applications.
     • Chapter 5, “Data,” provides you with the tools necessary to manage
       data that will be consumed and produced by OpenGL.
     • Chapter 6, “Shaders and Programs,” takes a deeper look at shaders,
       which are fundamental to the operation of modern graphics
       applications.
In Part II, we take a more detailed look at several of the topics introduced in
the first chapters. We dig deeper into each of the major parts of OpenGL and
our example applications start to become a little more complex and
interesting. In this part, you will find these six chapters:
     • Chapter 7, “Vertex Processing and Drawing Commands,” covers the
       inputs to OpenGL and the mechanisms by which semantics are applied
       to the raw data you provide.
     • Chapter 8, “Primitive Processing,” covers some higher-level concepts
       in OpenGL, including connectivity information, higher-order surfaces,
       and tessellation.
     • Chapter 9, “Fragment Processing and the Framebuffer,” looks at how
       high-level 3D graphics information is transformed by OpenGL into 2D
       images, and how your applications can determine the appearance of
       objects on the screen.
     • Chapter 10, “Compute Shaders,” illustrates how your applications can
       harness OpenGL for more than just graphics and make use of the
       incredible computing power locked up in a modern graphics card.
     • Chapter 11, “Advanced Data Management,” discusses topics related to
       managing large data sets, loading data efficiently, and arbitrating
       access to that data once loaded.
     • Chapter 12, “Controlling and Monitoring the Pipeline,” shows you how
       to get a glimpse into how OpenGL executes the commands you give it
        —including how long they take to execute, and how much data they
        produce.
In Part III, we build on the knowledge that you will have gained in reading
the first two parts of the book and use it to construct example applications
that touch on multiple aspects of OpenGL. We also get into the practicalities
of building larger OpenGL applications and deploying them across multiple
platforms. In this part, you will find three chapters:
      • Chapter 13, “Rendering Techniques,” covers several applications of
        OpenGL for graphics rendering, including simulation of light, artistic
        methods and even some nontraditional techniques.
      • Chapter 14, “High-Performance OpenGL,” digs into some topics
        related to getting the highest possible performance from OpenGL.
      • Chapter 15, “Debugging and Stability,” provides advice and tips on
        how to get your applications running without errors and how to debug
        problems with your programs.
Finally, several appendices are provided that describe the tools and file
formats used in this book, discuss which versions of OpenGL support which
features and list which extensions introduced those features, and give
pointers to more useful OpenGL resources.

What’s New in This Edition
In this book, we have expanded on the sixth edition to cover new features and
topics introduced in OpenGL in versions 4.4 and 4.5 of the API. In the
previous edition, we did not cover extensions—features that are entirely
optional and not a mandatory part of the OpenGL core—and so left out a
number of interesting topics. Since the release of the sixth edition of this
book, some of these extensions have become fairly ubiquitous; in turn, we
have decided to cover the ARB and KHR extensions. Thus extensions that
have been ratified by Khronos (the OpenGL governing body) are part of this
book.
We have built on the previous edition by expanding the book’s application
framework and adding new chapters and appendices that provide further
insight and cover new topics. One important set of features enabled by the
extensions that are now part of the book are the AZDO (Approaching Zero
Driver Overhead) features, which are a way of using OpenGL that produces
very low software overhead and correspondingly high performance. These
features include persistent maps and bindless textures.
To make room for the new content, we decided to remove the chapter on
platform specifics, which covered per-platform window system bindings.
Also gone is official support for the Apple Mac platform. Almost all of the
new content in this edition requires features introduced with OpenGL 4.4 or
4.5, or recent OpenGL extensions—none of which were supported by OS X
at the time of writing. There is no expectation that Apple will further invest
in its OpenGL implementation, so we encourage our readers to move away
from the platform. To support multiple platforms, we recommend the use of
cross-platform toolkits such as the excellent SDL
(https://www.libsdl.org/) or glfw
(http://www.glfw.org/) libraries. In fact, this book’s framework is
built on glfw, and it works well for us.
This book includes several new example applications, including
demonstrations of new features, a texture compressor, text drawing, font
rendering using distance fields, high-quality texture filtering, and multi-
threaded programs using OpenMP. We also tried to address all of the errata
and feedback we’ve received from our readers since the publication of the
previous edition. We believe this to be the best update yet to the OpenGL®
SuperBible yet.
We hope you enjoy it.

How to Build the Examples
Retrieve the sample code from the book’s companion Web site,
http://www.openglsuperbible.com, unpack the archive to a
directory on your computer, and follow the instructions in the included
HOWTOBUILD.TXT file for your platform of choice. The book’s source
code has been built and tested on Microsoft Windows (Windows 7 or later is
required) and Linux (several major distributions). It is recommended that you
install any available operating system updates and obtain the most recent
graphics drivers from your graphics card manufacturer.
You may notice some minor discrepancies between the source code printed
in this book and that in the source files. There are a number of reasons for
this:
    • This book is about OpenGL 4.5—the most recent version at the time of
      writing. The examples printed in the book are written assuming that
      OpenGL 4.5 is available on the target platform. However, we
      understand that in practice, operating systems, graphics drivers, and
      platforms may not have the latest and greatest available.
      Consequently, where possible, we’ve made minor modifications to the
      example applications to allow them to run on earlier versions of
      OpenGL.
    • Several months passed between when this book’s text was finalized for
      printing and when the sample applications were packaged and posted
      to the Web. In that time, we discovered opportunities for improvement,
      whether that was uncovering new bugs, platform dependencies, or
      optimizations. The latest version of the source code on the Web will
      have those fixes and tweaks applied and will therefore deviate from the
      necessarily static copy printed in the book.
    • There is not necessarily a one-to-one mapping of listings in the book’s
      text and example applications in the Web package. Some example
      applications demonstrate more than one concept, some aren’t
      mentioned in the book at all, and some listings in the book don’t have
      an equivalent example application. Where possible, we’ve mentioned
      which of the example applications correspond to the listings in the
      book. We recommend that the reader take a close look at the example
      application package, as it includes some nuggets that may not be
      mentioned in the book.

Errata
We made a bunch of mistakes—we’re certain of it. It’s incredibly frustrating
as an author to spot an error that you made and know that it has been printed,
in books that your readers paid for, thousands and thousands of times. We
have to accept that this will happen, though, and do our best to correct issues
as we are able. If you think you see something that doesn’t quite gel, check
the book’s Web site for errata:
http://www.openglsuperbible.com
Note from the Publisher
Some of the figures in the print edition of the book are dark due to the nature
of the images themselves. To assist readers, color PDFs of figures are freely
available at http://www.openglsuperbible.com and
http://informit.com/title/9780672337475. In addition, PowerPoint slides of
the figures for professors’ classroom use are available at
www.pearsonhighered.com/educator/product/OpenGL-Superbible-
Comprehensive-Tutorial-and-Reference/9780672337475.page.
Acknowledgments

First, thanks to you—the reader. The best part of what I do is knowing that
someone I’ve never met might benefit from all this. It’s the biggest thrill, and
the reason why people like me do this. I appreciate that you’re reading this
now and hope you get as much out of this book as I put into it.
I’d like to thank my wonderful wife, Chris, who’s put up with me
disappearing into my office for three editions of this book now. She’s worked
around my deadlines and cheered me on as I made (sometimes slow and
painful) progress. I couldn’t have done this without her. Thanks, too, to my
kids, Jeremy and Emily. The answer to “What are you doing, dad?” is almost
always “Working”—and you’ve always taken it in stride.
Thanks to my coauthors, Richard and Nick. You’ve let me run alone on this
edition, but your names are on the cover because of your contributions—your
fingerprints are etched into this book. Many thanks to Matías Goldberg, who
performed a thorough technical review of the book on short notice.
Thanks again to Laura Lewin and Olivia Basegio and the Pearson team for
letting me be me and just dropping random files and documents off whenever
I felt like it. I don’t work well with a plan, but seem to relish pressure and
am really excellent at procrastination. I’m glad you guys put up with me.
                                                             Graham Sellers
About the Author

Graham Sellers is a classic geek. His family got their first computer (a BBC
Model B) right before his sixth birthday. After his mum and dad stayed up all
night programming it to play “Happy Birthday,” he was hooked and
determined to figure out how it worked. Next came basic programming and
then assembly language. His first real exposure to graphics was via “demos”
in the early 1990s, and then through Glide, and finally OpenGL in the late
1990s. Graham holds a master’s in engineering from the University of
Southampton, England.
Currently, Graham is a software architect at AMD. He represents AMD at the
OpenGL ARB and has contributed to many extensions and to the core
OpenGL Specification. Prior to that, he was a team lead at Epson,
implementing OpenGL-ES and OpenVG drivers for embedded products.
Graham holds several patents in the fields of computer graphics and image
processing. When he’s not working on OpenGL, he likes to disassemble and
reverse-engineer old video game consoles (just to see how they work and
what he can make them do). Originally from England, Graham now lives in
Orlando, Florida, with his wife and two children.
