Chapter 3. Following the Pipeline

What You’ll Learn in This Chapter
     • What each of the stages in the OpenGL pipeline does.
     • How to connect your shaders to the fixed-function pipeline stages.
     • How to create a program that uses every stage of the graphics pipeline
       simultaneously.
In this chapter, we will walk all the way along the OpenGL pipeline from start
to finish, providing insight into each of the stages, which include fixed-
function blocks and programmable shader blocks. You have already read a
whirlwind introduction to the vertex and fragment shader stages. However, the
application that you constructed simply drew a single triangle at a fixed
position. If we want to render anything interesting with OpenGL, we’re going
to have to learn a lot more about the pipeline and all of the things you can do
with it. This chapter introduces every part of the pipeline, hooks them up to
one another, and provides an example shader for each stage.

Passing Data to the Vertex Shader
The vertex shader is the first programmable stage in the OpenGL pipeline and
has the distinction of being the only mandatory stage in the graphics pipeline.
However, before the vertex shader runs, a fixed-function stage known as
vertex fetching, or sometimes vertex pulling, is run. This automatically
provides inputs to the vertex shader.
Vertex Attributes
In GLSL, the mechanism for getting data in and out of shaders is to declare
global variables with the in and out storage qualifiers. You were briefly
introduced to the out qualifier in Chapter 2, “Our First OpenGL Program,”
when Listing 2.4 used it to output a color from the fragment shader. At the start
of the OpenGL pipeline, we use the in keyword to bring inputs into the vertex
shader. Between stages, in and out can be used to form conduits from
shader to shader and pass data between them. We’ll get to that shortly. For
now, consider the input to the vertex shader and what happens if you declare a
variable with an in storage qualifier. This marks the variable as an input to
the vertex shader, which means that it is essentially an input to the OpenGL
graphics pipeline. It is automatically filled in by the fixed-function vertex
fetch stage. The variable becomes known as a vertex attribute.
Vertex attributes are how vertex data is introduced into the OpenGL pipeline.
To declare a vertex attribute, you declare a variable in the vertex shader using
the in storage qualifier. An example of this is shown in Listing 3.1, where we
declare the variable offset as an input attribute.
   #version 450 core

   // 'offset' is an input vertex attribute
   layout (location = 0) in vec4 offset;

   void main(void)
   {
       const vec4 vertices[3] = vec4[3](vec4(0.25, -0.25, 0.5, 1.0),
                                        vec4(-0.25, -0.25, 0.5,
   1.0),
                                        vec4(0.25, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0));

         // Add 'offset' to our hard-coded vertex position
         gl_Position = vertices[gl_VertexID] + offset;
   }

Listing 3.1: Declaration of a vertex attribute

In Listing 3.1, we have added the variable offset as an input to the vertex
shader. As it is an input to the first shader in the pipeline, it will be filled
automatically by the vertex fetch stage. We can tell this stage what to fill the
variable with by using one of the many variants of the vertex attribute
functions, glVertexAttrib*(). The prototype for
glVertexAttrib4fv(), which we use in this example, is
   void glVertexAttrib4fv(GLuint index,
                          const GLfloat * v);

Here, the parameter index is used to reference the attribute and v is a
pointer to the new data to put into the attribute. You may have noticed the
layout (location = 0) code in the declaration of the offset
attribute. This is a layout qualifier, which we have used to set the location of
the vertex attribute to zero. This location is the value we’ll pass in index to
refer to the attribute.
Each time we call one of the glVertexAttrib*() functions (of which
there are many), it will update the value of the vertex attribute that is passed
to the vertex shader. We can use this approach to animate our one triangle.
Listing 3.2 shows an updated version of our rendering function that updates
the value of offset in each frame.

   // Our rendering function
   virtual void render(double currentTime)
   {
       const GLfloat color[] = { (float)sin(currentTime) * 0.5f +
   0.5f,
                                 (float)cos(currentTime) * 0.5f +
   0.5f,
                                 0.0f, 1.0f };
       glClearBufferfv(GL_COLOR, 0, color);

         // Use the program object we created earlier for rendering
         glUseProgram(rendering_program);

         GLfloat attrib[] = { (float)sin(currentTime) * 0.5f,
                              (float)cos(currentTime) * 0.6f,
                              0.0f, 0.0f };
         // Update the value of input attribute 0
         glVertexAttrib4fv(0, attrib);

         // Draw one triangle
         glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 3);
   }

Listing 3.2: Updating a vertex attribute
When we run the program with the rendering function of Listing 3.2, the
triangle will move in a smooth oval shape around the window.

Passing Data from Stage to Stage
So far, you have seen how to pass data into a vertex shader by creating a
vertex attribute using the in keyword, how to communicate with fixed-
function blocks by reading and writing built-in variables such as
gl_VertexID and gl_Position, and how to output data from the
fragment shader using the out keyword. However, it’s also possible to send
your own data from shader stage to shader stage using the same in and out
keywords. Just as you used the out keyword in the fragment shader to create
the output variable to which it writes its color values, so you can also create
an output variable in the vertex shader by using the out keyword. Anything
you write to an output variable in one shader is sent to a similarly named
variable declared with the in keyword in the subsequent stage. For example,
if your vertex shader declares a variable called vs_color using the out
keyword, it would match up with a variable named vs_color declared with
the in keyword in the fragment shader stage (assuming no other stages were
active in between).
If we modify our simple vertex shader as shown in Listing 3.3 to include
vs_color as an output variable, and correspondingly modify our simple
fragment shader to include vs_color as an input variable as shown in
Listing 3.4, we can pass a value from the vertex shader to the fragment shader.
Then, rather than outputting a hard-coded value, the fragment can simply
output the color passed to it from the vertex shader.

   #version 450 core

   // 'offset' and 'color' are input vertex attributes
   layout (location = 0) in vec4 offset;
   layout (location = 1) in vec4 color;

   // 'vs_color' is an output that will be sent to the next shader
   stage
   out vec4 vs_color;

   void main(void)
   {
       const vec4 vertices[3] = vec4[3](vec4(0.25, -0.25, 0.5, 1.0),
                                        vec4(-0.25, -0.25, 0.5,
   1.0),
                                              vec4(0.25, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0));

         // Add 'offset' to our hard-coded vertex position
         gl_Position = vertices[gl_VertexID] + offset;

         // Output a fixed value for vs_color
         vs_color = color;
   }

Listing 3.3: Vertex shader with an output

As you can see in Listing 3.3, we declare a second input to our vertex shader,
color (this time at location 1), and write its value to the vs_output
output. This is picked up by the fragment shader of Listing 3.4 and written to
the framebuffer. This allows us to pass a color all the way from a vertex
attribute that we can set with glVertexAttrib*() through the vertex
shader, into the fragment shader, and out to the framebuffer. As a consequence,
we can draw different-colored triangles!
   #version 450 core

   // Input from the vertex shader
   in vec4 vs_color;

   // Output to the framebuffer
   out vec4 color;

   void main(void)
   {
      // Simply assign the color we were given by the vertex shader
   to our output
      color = vs_color;
   }

Listing 3.4: Fragment shader with an input
Interface Blocks
Declaring interface variables one at a time is possibly the simplest way to
communicate data between shader stages. However, in most nontrivial
applications, you will likely want to communicate a number of different
pieces of data between stages; these may include arrays, structures, and other
complex arrangements of variables. To achieve this, we can group together a
number of variables into an interface block. The declaration of an interface
block looks a lot like a structure declaration, except that it is declared using
the in or out keyword depending on whether it is an input to or output from
the shader. An example interface block definition is shown in Listing 3.5.

   #version 450 core

   // 'offset' is an input vertex attribute

   layout (location = 0) in vec4 offset;
   layout (location = 1) in vec4 color;

   // Declare VS_OUT as an output interface block
   out VS_OUT
   {
       vec4 color;     // Send color to the next stage
   } vs_out;

   void main(void)
   {
        const vec4 vertices[3] = vec4[3](vec4(0.25, -0.25, 0.5,
   1.0),
                                         vec4(-0.25, -0.25, 0.5,
   1.0),
                                         vec4(0.25, 0.25, 0.5,
   1.0));

          // Add 'offset' to our hard-coded vertex position
          gl_Position = vertices[gl_VertexID] + offset;

          // Output a fixed value for vs_color
          vs_out.color = color;
   }

Listing 3.5: Vertex shader with an output interface block
Note that the interface block in Listing 3.5 has both a block name (VS_OUT,
uppercase) and an instance name (vs_out, lowercase). Interface blocks are
matched between stages using the block name (VS_OUT in this case), but are
referenced in shaders using the instance name. Thus, modifying our fragment
shader to use an interface block gives the code shown in Listing 3.6.

   #version 450 core

   // Declare VS_OUT as an input interface block
   in VS_OUT
   {
       vec4 color;     // Send color to the next stage
   } fs_in;

   // Output to the framebuffer
   out vec4 color;

   void main(void)
   {
       // Simply assign the color we were given by the vertex shader
   to our output
       color = fs_in.color;
   }

Listing 3.6: Fragment shader with an input interface block

Matching interface blocks by block name but allowing block instances to have
different names in each shader stage serves two important purposes. First, it
allows the name by which you refer to the block to be different in each stage,
thereby avoiding confusing things such as having to use vs_out in a fragment
shader. Second, it allows interfaces to go from being single items to arrays
when crossing between certain shader stages, such as the vertex and
tessellation or geometry shader stages, as we will see in a short while. Note
that interface blocks are only for moving data from shader stage to shader
stage—you can’t use them to group together inputs to the vertex shader or
outputs from the fragment shader.
Tessellation
Tessellation is the process of breaking a high-order primitive (which is
known as a patch in OpenGL) into many smaller, simpler primitives such as
triangles for rendering. OpenGL includes a fixed-function, configurable
tessellation engine that is able to break up quadrilaterals, triangles, and lines
into a potentially large number of smaller points, lines, or triangles that can be
directly consumed by the normal rasterization hardware further down the
pipeline. Logically, the tessellation phase sits directly after the vertex shading
stage in the OpenGL pipeline and is made up of three parts: the tessellation
control shader, the fixed-function tessellation engine, and the tessellation
evaluation shader.

Tessellation Control Shaders
The first of the three tessellation phases is the tessellation control shader
(TCS; sometimes known as simply the control shader). This shader takes its
input from the vertex shader and is primarily responsible for two things: the
determination of the level of tessellation that will be sent to the tessellation
engine, and the generation of data that will be sent to the tessellation
evaluation shader that is run after tessellation has occurred.
Tessellation in OpenGL works by breaking down high-order surfaces known
as patches into points, lines, or triangles. Each patch is formed from a number
of control points. The number of control points per patch is configurable and
set by calling glPatchParameteri() with pname set to
GL_PATCH_VERTICES and value set to the number of control points that
will be used to construct each patch. The prototype of
glPatchParameteri() is
   void glPatchParameteri(GLenum pname,
                          GLint value);

By default, the number of control points per patch is three. Thus, if this is
what you want (as in our example application), you don’t need to call it at all.
The maximum number of control points that can be used to form a single patch
is implementation defined, but is guaranteed to be at least 32.
When tessellation is active, the vertex shader runs once per control point,
while the tessellation control shader runs in batches on groups of control
points where the size of each batch is the same as the number of vertices per
patch. That is, vertices are used as control points and the result of the vertex
shader is passed in batches to the tessellation control shader as its input. The
number of control points per patch can be changed such that the number of
control points that is output by the tessellation control shader can differ from
the number of control points that it consumes. The number of control points
produced by the control shader is set using an output layout qualifier in the
control shader’s source code. Such a layout qualifier looks like this:
   layout (vertices = N) out;

Here, N is the number of control points per patch. The control shader is
responsible for calculating the values of the output control points and for
setting the tessellation factors for the resulting patch that will be sent to the
fixed-function tessellation engine. The output tessellation factors are written
to the gl_TessLevelInner and gl_TessLevelOuter built-in output
variables, whereas any other data that is passed down the pipeline is written
to user-defined output variables (those declared using the out keyword, or
the special built-in gl_out array) as normal.
Listing 3.7 shows a simple tessellation control shader. It sets the number of
output control points to three (the same as the default number of input control
points) using the layout (vertices = 3) out; layout qualifier,
copies its input to its output (using the built-in variables gl_in and
gl_out), and sets the inner and outer tessellation level to 5. Higher numbers
would produce a more densely tessellated output, and lower numbers would
yield a more coarsely tessellated output. Setting the tessellation factor to 0
will cause the whole patch to be thrown away.
The built-in input variable gl_InvocationID is used as an index into the
gl_in and gl_out arrays. This variable contains the zero-based index of
the control point within the patch being processed by the current invocation of
the tessellation control shader.

   #version 450 core

   layout (vertices = 3) out;

   void main(void)
   {
       // Only if I am invocation 0 ...
       if (gl_InvocationID == 0)
       {
             gl_TessLevelInner[0] = 5.0;
             gl_TessLevelOuter[0] = 5.0;
             gl_TessLevelOuter[1] = 5.0;
             gl_TessLevelOuter[2] = 5.0;
        }
        // Everybody copies their input to their output
        gl_out[gl_InvocationID].gl_Position =
            gl_in[gl_InvocationID].gl_Position;
   }

Listing 3.7: Our first tessellation control shader

The Tessellation Engine
The tessellation engine is a fixed-function part of the OpenGL pipeline that
takes high-order surfaces represented as patches and breaks them down into
simpler primitives such as points, lines, or triangles. Before the tessellation
engine receives a patch, the tessellation control shader processes the
incoming control points and sets tessellation factors that are used to break
down the patch. After the tessellation engine produces the output primitives,
the vertices representing them are picked up by the tessellation evaluation
shader. The tessellation engine is responsible for producing the parameters
that are fed to the invocations of the tessellation evaluation shader, which it
then uses to transform the resulting primitives and get them ready for
rasterization.

Tessellation Evaluation Shaders
Once the fixed-function tessellation engine has run, it produces a number of
output vertices representing the primitives it has generated. These are passed
to the tessellation evaluation shader. The tessellation evaluation shader (TES;
also called simply the evaluation shader) runs an invocation for each vertex
produced by the tessellator. When the tessellation levels are high, the
tessellation evaluation shader could run an extremely large number of times.
For this reason, you should be careful with complex evaluation shaders and
high tessellation levels.
Listing 3.8 shows a tessellation evaluation shader that accepts input vertices
produced by the tessellator as a result of running the control shader shown in
Listing 3.7. At the beginning of the shader is a layout qualifier that sets the
tessellation mode. In this case, we selected the mode to be triangles. Other
qualifiers, equal_spacing and cw, indicate that new vertices should be
generated equally spaced along the tessellated polygon edges and that a
clockwise vertex winding order should be used for the generated triangles.
We will cover the other possible choices in the “Tessellation” section in
Chapter 8.
The remainder of the shader assigns a value to gl_Position just like a
vertex shader does. It calculates this using the contents of two more built-in
variables. The first is gl_TessCoord, which is the barycentric coordinate
of the vertex generated by the tessellator. The second is the gl_Position
member of the gl_in[] array of structures. This matches the gl_out
structure written to in the tessellation control shader given in Listing 3.7. This
shader essentially implements pass-through tessellation. That is, the
tessellated output patch is exactly the same shape as the original, incoming
triangular patch.

   #version 450 core

   layout (triangles, equal_spacing, cw) in;

   void main(void)
   {
       gl_Position = (gl_TessCoord.x * gl_in[0].gl_Position +
                      gl_TessCoord.y * gl_in[1].gl_Position +
                      gl_TessCoord.z * gl_in[2].gl_Position);
   }

Listing 3.8: Our first tessellation evaluation shader

To see the results of the tessellator, we need to tell OpenGL to draw only the
outlines of the resulting triangles. To do this, we call glPolygonMode(),
whose prototype is
   void glPolygonMode(GLenum face,
                      GLenum mode);

The face parameter specifies which type of polygons we want to affect.
Because we want to affect everything, we set it to GL_FRONT_AND_BACK.
The other modes will be explained shortly. mode says how we want our
polygons to be rendered. As we want to render in wireframe mode (i.e.,
lines), we set this to GL_LINE. The result of rendering our one triangle
example with tessellation enabled and the two shaders of Listing 3.7 and
Listing 3.8 is shown in Figure 3.1.

                   Figure 3.1: Our first tessellated triangle
Geometry Shaders
The geometry shader is logically the last shader stage in the front end, sitting
after the vertex and tessellation stages and before the rasterizer. The geometry
shader runs once per primitive and has access to all of the input vertex data
for all of the vertices that make up the primitive being processed. The
geometry shader is also unique among the shader stages in that it is able to
increase or reduce the amount of data flowing through the pipeline in a
programmatic way. Tessellation shaders can also increase or decrease the
amount of work in the pipeline, but only implicitly by setting the tessellation
level for the patch. Geometry shaders, in contrast, include two functions—
EmitVertex() and EndPrimitive()—that explicitly produce vertices
that are sent to primitive assembly and rasterization.
Another unique feature of geometry shaders is that they can change the
primitive mode mid-pipeline. For example, they can take triangles as input
and produce a bunch of points or lines as output, or even create triangles from
independent points. An example geometry shader is shown in Listing 3.9.

   #version 450 core

   layout (triangles) in;
   layout (points, max_vertices = 3) out;

   void main(void)
   {
       int i;

         for (i = 0; i < gl_in.length(); i++)
         {
             gl_Position = gl_in[i].gl_Position;
             EmitVertex();
         }
   }

Listing 3.9: Our first geometry shader

The shader shown in Listing 3.9 acts as another simple pass-through shader
that converts triangles into points so that we can see their vertices. The first
layout qualifier indicates that the geometry shader is expecting to see triangles
as its input. The second layout qualifier tells OpenGL that the geometry shader
will produce points and that the maximum number of points that each shader
will produce will be three. In the main function, a loop runs through all of
the members of the gl_in array, which is determined by calling its
.length() function.
We actually know that the length of the array will be three because we are
processing triangles and every triangle has three vertices. The outputs of the
geometry shader are again similar to those of a vertex shader. In particular,
we write to gl_Position to set the position of the resulting vertex. Next,
we call EmitVertex(), which produces a vertex at the output of the
geometry shader. Geometry shaders automatically call EndPrimitive()
at the end of your shader, so calling this function explicitly is not necessary in
this example. As a result of running this shader, three vertices will be
produced and rendered as points.
By inserting this geometry shader into our simple one tessellated triangle
example, we obtain the output shown in Figure 3.2. To create this image, we
set the point size to 5.0 by calling glPointSize(). This makes the points
large and highly visible.
        Figure 3.2: Tessellated triangle after adding a geometry shader

Primitive Assembly, Clipping, and Rasterization
After the front end of the pipeline has run (which includes vertex shading,
tessellation, and geometry shading), a fixed-function part of the pipeline
performs a series of tasks that take the vertex representation of our scene and
convert it into a series of pixels, which in turn need to be colored and written
to the screen. The first step in this process is primitive assembly, which is the
grouping of vertices into lines and triangles. Primitive assembly still occurs
for points, but it is trivial in that case.
Once primitives have been constructed from their individual vertices, they are
clipped against the displayable region, which usually means the window or
screen, but can also be a smaller area known as the viewport. Finally, the
parts of the primitive that are determined to be potentially visible are sent to a
fixed-function subsystem called the rasterizer. This block determines which
pixels are covered by the primitive (point, line, or triangle) and sends the list
of pixels on to the next stage—that is, fragment shading.

Clipping
As vertices exit the front end of the pipeline, their position is said to be in
clip space. This is one of the many coordinate systems that can be used to
represent positions. You may have noticed that the gl_Position variable
that we have written to in our vertex, tessellation, and geometry shaders has a
vec4 type, and that the positions we have produced by writing to it are all
four-component vectors. This is what is known as a homogeneous coordinate.
The homogeneous coordinate system is used in projective geometry because
much of the math ends up being simpler in homogeneous coordinate space than
it does in regular Cartesian space. Homogeneous coordinates have one more
component than their equivalent Cartesian coordinate, which is why our three-
dimensional position vector is represented as a four-component variable.
Although the output of the front end is a four-component homogeneous
coordinate, clipping occurs in Cartesian space. Thus, to convert from
homogeneous coordinates to Cartesian coordinates, OpenGL performs a
perspective division, which involves dividing all four components of the
position by the last, w component. This has the effect of projecting the vertex
from the homogeneous space to the Cartesian space, leaving w as 1.0. In all of
the examples so far, we have set the w component of gl_Position as 1.0,
so this division has not had any effect. When we explore projective geometry
in a short while, we will discuss the effect of setting w to values other than
1.0.
After the projective division, the resulting position is in normalized device
space. In OpenGL, the visible region of normalized device space is the
volume that extends from −1.0 to 1.0 in the x and y dimensions and from 0.0 to
1.0 in the z dimension. Any geometry that is contained in this region may
become visible to the user and anything outside of it should be discarded. The
six sides of this volume are formed by planes in three-dimensional space. As
a plane divides a coordinate space in two, the volumes on each side of the
plane are called half-spaces.
Before passing primitives on to the next stage, OpenGL performs clipping by
determining which side of each of these planes the vertices of each primitive
lie on. Each plane effectively has an “outside” and an “inside.” If a
primitive’s vertices all lie on the “outside” of any one plane, then the whole
thing is thrown away. If all of primitive’s vertices are on the “inside” of all
the planes (and therefore inside the view volume), then it is passed through
unaltered. Primitives that are partially visible (which means that they cross
one of the planes) must be handled specially. More details about how this
works is given in the “Clipping” section in Chapter 7.

Viewport Transformation
After clipping, all of the vertices of the geometry have coordinates that lie
between −1.0 and 1.0 in the x and y dimensions. Along with a z coordinate
that lies between 0.0 and 1.0, these are known as normalized device
coordinates. However, the window that you’re drawing to has coordinates
that usually1 start from (0, 0) at the bottom left and range to (w − 1,h − 1),
where w and h are the width and height of the window in pixels, respectively.
To place your geometry into the window, OpenGL applies the viewport
transform, which applies a scale and offset to the vertices’ normalized device
coordinates to move them into window coordinates. The scale and bias to
apply are determined by the viewport bounds, which you can set by calling
glViewport() and glDepthRange(). Their prototypes are
  1. It’s possible to change the coordinate convention such that the (0, 0) origin is at the upper-left
     corner of the window, which matches the convention used in some other graphics systems.

   void glViewport(GLint x, GLint y, GLsizei width, GLsizei height);

and

   void glDepthRange(GLdouble nearVal, GLdouble farVal);

This transform takes the following form:

Here, xw, yw, and zw are the resulting coordinates of the vertex in window
space, and xd, yd, and zd are the incoming coordinates of the vertex in
normalized device space. px and py are the width and height of the viewport in
pixels, and n and f are the near and far plane distances in the z coordinate,
respectively. Finally, ox, oy, and oz are the origins of the viewport.

Culling
Before a triangle is processed further, it may be optionally passed through a
stage called culling, which determines whether the triangle faces toward or
away from the viewer and can decide whether to actually go ahead and draw
it based on the result of this computation. If the triangle faces toward the
viewer, then it is considered to be front-facing; otherwise, it is said to be
back-facing. It is very common to discard triangles that are back-facing
because when an object is closed, any back-facing triangle will be hidden by
another front-facing triangle.
To determine whether a triangle is front- or back-facing, OpenGL will
determine its signed area in window space. One way to determine the area of
a triangle is to take the cross product of two of its edges. The equation for this
is

Here,      and    are the coordinates of the ith vertex of the triangle in window
space and i ⊕ 1 is (i +1) mod 3. If the area is positive, then the triangle is
considered to be front-facing; if it is negative, then it is considered to be
back-facing. The sense of this computation can be reversed by calling
glFrontFace() with dir set to either GL_CW or GL_CCW (where CW
and CCW stand for clockwise and counterclockwise, respectively). This is
known as the winding order of the triangle, and the clockwise or
counterclockwise terms refer to the order in which the vertices appear in
window space. By default, this state is set to GL_CCW, indicating that
triangles whose vertices are in counterclockwise order are considered to be
front-facing and those whose vertices are in clockwise order are considered
to be back-facing. If the state is GL_CW, then a is simply negated before being
used in the culling process. Figure 3.3 shows this pictorially for the purpose
of illustration.
   Figure 3.3: Clockwise (left) and counterclockwise (right) winding order
Once the direction that the triangle is facing has been determined, OpenGL is
capable of discarding either front-facing, back-facing, or even both types of
triangles. By default, OpenGL will render all triangles, regardless of which
way they face. To turn on culling, call glEnable() with cap set to
GL_CULL_FACE. When you enable culling, OpenGL will cull back-facing
triangles by default. To change which types of triangles are culled, call
glCullFace() with face set to GL_FRONT, GL_BACK, or
GL_FRONT_AND_BACK.
As points and lines don’t have any geometric area,2 this facing calculation
doesn’t apply to them and they can’t be culled at this stage.
  2. Obviously, once they are rendered to the screen, points and lines have area; otherwise, we wouldn’t
     be able to see them. However, this area is artificial and can’t be calculated directly from their
     vertices.

Rasterization
Rasterization is the process of determining which fragments might be covered
by a primitive such as a line or a triangle. There are myriad algorithms for
doing this, but most OpenGL systems will settle on a half-space–based
method for triangles, as it lends itself well to parallel implementation.
Essentially, OpenGL will determine a bounding box for the triangle in
window coordinates and test every fragment inside it to determine whether it
is inside or outside the triangle. To do this, it treats each of the triangle’s three
edges as a half-space that divides the window in two.
Fragments that lie on the interior of all three edges are considered to be inside
the triangle and fragments that lie on the exterior of any of the three edges are
considered to be outside the triangle. Because the algorithm to determine
which side of a line a point lies on is relatively simple and is independent of
anything besides the position of the line’s endpoints and of the point being
tested, many tests can be performed concurrently, providing the opportunity
for massive parallelism.

Fragment Shaders
The fragment3 shader is the last programmable stage in OpenGL’s graphics
pipeline. This stage is responsible for determining the color of each fragment
before it is sent to the framebuffer for possible composition into the window.
After the rasterizer processes a primitive, it produces a list of fragments that
need to be colored and passes this list to the fragment shader. Here, an
explosion in the amount of work in the pipeline occurs, as each triangle could
produce hundreds, thousands, or even millions of fragments.
  3. The term fragment is used to describe an element that may ultimately contribute to the final color
     of a pixel. The pixel may not end up being the color produced by any particular invocation of the
     fragment shader due to a number of other effects such as depth or stencil tests, blending, and multi-
     sampling, all of which will be covered later in the book.
Listing 2.4 in Chapter 2 contains the source code of our first fragment shader.
It’s an extremely simple shader that declares a single output and then assigns a
fixed value to it. In a real-world application, the fragment shader would
normally be substantially more complex and be responsible for performing
calculations related to lighting, applying materials, and even determining the
depth of the fragment. Available as input to the fragment shader are several
built-in variables such as gl_FragCoord, which contains the position of
the fragment within the window. It is possible to use these variables to
produce a unique color for each fragment.
Listing 3.10 provides a shader that derives its output color from
gl_FragCoord. Figure 3.4 shows the output of running our original single-
triangle program with this shader installed.

   #version 450 core

   out vec4 color;

   void main(void)
   {
       color = vec4(sin(gl_FragCoord.x * 0.25) * 0.5 + 0.5,
                    cos(gl_FragCoord.y * 0.25) * 0.5 + 0.5,
                    sin(gl_FragCoord.x * 0.15) * cos(gl_FragCoord.y
   * 0.15),
                    1.0);
   }

Listing 3.10: Deriving a fragment’s color from its position

                      Figure 3.4: Result of Listing 3.10
As you can see, the color of each pixel in Figure 3.4 is now a function of its
position and a simple screen-aligned pattern has been produced. The shader
of Listing 3.10 created the checkered patterns in the output.
The gl_FragCoord variable is one of the built-in variables available to
the fragment shader. However, just as with other shader stages, we can define
our own inputs to the fragment shader, which will be filled in based on the
outputs of whichever stage is last before rasterization. For example, if we
have a simple program with only a vertex shader and fragment shader in it, we
can pass data from the fragment shader to the vertex shader.
The inputs to the fragment shader are somewhat unlike inputs to other shader
stages, in that OpenGL interpolates their values across the primitive that’s
being rendered. To demonstrate, we take the vertex shader of Listing 3.3 and
modify it to assign a different, fixed color for each vertex, as shown in Listing
3.11.

   #version 450 core

   // 'vs_color' is an output that will be sent to the next shader
   stage
   out vec4 vs_color;

   void main(void)
   {
       const vec4 vertices[3] = vec4[3](vec4(0.25, -0.25, 0.5, 1.0),
                                        vec4(-0.25, -0.25, 0.5,
   1.0),
                                        vec4(0.25, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0));
       const vec4 colors[] = vec4[3](vec4(1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0),
                                     vec4(0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 1.0),
                                     vec4(0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0));

         // Add 'offset' to our hard-coded vertex position
         gl_Position = vertices[gl_VertexID] + offset;

         // Output a fixed value for vs_color
         vs_color = color[gl_VertexID];
   }

Listing 3.11: Vertex shader with an output

As you can see, in Listing 3.11 we added a second constant array that contains
colors and index into it using gl_VertexID, writing its content to the
vs_color output. In Listing 3.12 we modify our simple fragment shader to
include the corresponding input and write its value to the output.
   #version 450 core

   // 'vs_color' is the color produced by the vertex shader
   in vec4 vs_color;

   out vec4 color;

   void main(void)
   {
       color = vs_color;
   }

Listing 3.12: Deriving a fragment’s color from its position

The result of using this new pair of shaders is shown in Figure 3.5. As you
can see, the color changes smoothly across the triangle.

                      Figure 3.5: Result of Listing 3.12
Framebuffer Operations
The framebuffer is the last stage of the OpenGL graphics pipeline. It can
represent the visible content of the screen and a number of additional regions
of memory that are used to store per-pixel values other than color. On most
platforms, this means the window you see on your desktop (or possibly the
whole screen if your application covers it), which is owned by the operating
system (or windowing system to be more precise). The framebuffer provided
by the windowing system is known as the default framebuffer, but it is
possible to provide your own if you wish to do things like render into off-
screen areas. The state held by the framebuffer includes information such as
where the data produced by your fragment shader should be written, what the
format of that data should be, and so on. This state is stored in a framebuffer
object. Also considered part of the framebuffer, but not stored per framebuffer
object, is the pixel operation state.

Pixel Operations
After the fragment shader has produced an output, several things may happen
to the fragment before it is written to the window, such as a determination of
whether it even belongs in the window. Each of these things may be turned on
or off by your application. The first thing that could happen is the scissor test,
which tests your fragment against a rectangle that you can define. If it’s inside
the rectangle, then it will be processed further; if it’s outside, it will be
thrown away.
Next comes the stencil test. This compares a reference value provided by
your application with the contents of the stencil buffer, which stores a single4
value per pixel. The content of the stencil buffer has no particular semantic
meaning and can be used for any purpose.
  4. It’s possible for a framebuffer to store multiple depth, stencil, or color values per pixel when a
     technique called multi-sampling is employed. We’ll dig into this later in the book.
After the stencil test has been performed, the depth test is performed. The
depth test is an operation that compares the fragment’s z coordinate against the
contents of the depth buffer. The depth buffer is a region of memory that, like
the stencil buffer, is part of the framebuffer with enough space for a single
value for each pixel; it contains the depth (which is related to distance from
the viewer) of each pixel.
Normally, the values in the depth buffer range from 0 to 1, with 0 being the
closest possible point in the depth buffer and 1 being the furthest possible
point in the depth buffer. To determine whether a fragment is closer than other
fragments that have already been rendered in the same place, OpenGL can
compare the z component of the fragment’s window-space coordinate against
the value already in the depth buffer. If this value is less than what’s already
there, then the fragment is visible. The sense of this test can also be changed.
For example, you can ask OpenGL to let fragments through that have a z
coordinate that is greater than, equal to, or not equal to the content of the depth
buffer. The result of the depth test also affects what OpenGL does to the
stencil buffer.
Next, the fragment’s color is sent to either the blending or logical operation
stage, depending on whether the framebuffer is considered to store floating-
point, normalized, or integer values. If the content of the framebuffer is either
floating-point or normalized integer values, then blending is applied. Blending
is a highly configurable stage in OpenGL and will be covered in detail in its
own section.
In short, OpenGL is capable of using a wide range of functions that take
components of the output of your fragment shader and of the current content of
the framebuffer and calculate new values that are written back to the
framebuffer. If the framebuffer contains unnormalized integer values, then
logical operations such as logical AND, OR, and XOR can be applied to the
output of your shader and the value currently in the framebuffer to produce a
new value that will be written back into the framebuffer.

Compute Shaders
The first sections of this chapter describe the graphics pipeline in OpenGL.
However, OpenGL also includes the compute shader stage, which can almost
be thought of as a separate pipeline that runs indepdendently of the other
graphics-oriented stages.
Compute shaders are a way of getting at the computational power possessed
by the graphics processor in the system. Unlike the graphics-centric vertex,
tessellation, geometry, and fragment shaders, compute shaders could be
considered as a special, single-stage pipeline all on their own. Each compute
shader operates on a single unit of work known as a work item; these items
are, in turn, collected together into small groups called local workgroups.
Collections of these workgroups can be sent into OpenGL’s compute pipeline
to be processed. The compute shader doesn’t have any fixed inputs or outputs
besides a handful of built-in variables to tell the shader which item it is
working on. All processing performed by a compute shader is explicitly
written to memory by the shader itself, rather than being consumed by a
subsequent pipeline stage. A very basic compute shader is shown in Listing
3.13.
   #version 450 core

   layout (local_size_x = 32, local_size_y = 32) in;

   void main(void)
   {
       // Do nothing
   }

Listing 3.13: Simple do-nothing compute shader

Compute shaders are otherwise just like any other shader stage in OpenGL.
To compile one, you create a shader object with the type
GL_COMPUTE_SHADER, attach your GLSL source code to it with
glShaderSource(), compile it with glCompileShader(), and then
link it into a program with glAttachShader() and
glLinkProgram(). The result is a program object with a compiled
compute shader in it that can be launched to do work for you.
The shader in Listing 3.13 tells OpenGL that the size of the local workgroup
will be 32 by 32 work items, but then proceeds to do nothing. To create a
compute shader that actually does something useful, you need to know a bit
more about OpenGL—so we’ll revisit this topic later in the book.

Using Extensions in OpenGL
All of the examples shown in this book so far have relied on the core
functionality of OpenGL. However, one of OpenGL’s greatest strengths is that
it can be extended and enhanced by hardware manufacturers, operating system
vendors, and even publishers of tools and debuggers. Extensions can have
many different effects on OpenGL functionality.
An extension is any addition to a core version of OpenGL. Extensions are
listed in the OpenGL extension registry5 on the OpenGL Web site. These
extensions are written as a list of differences from a particular version of the
OpenGL specification, and note what that version of OpenGL is. That means
the text of the extensions describes how the core OpenGL specification must
be changed if the extension is supported. However, popular and generally
useful extensions are normally “promoted” into the core versions of OpenGL;
thus, if you are running the latest and greatest version of OpenGL, there might
not be that many extensions that are interesting but not part of the core profile.
A complete list of the extensions that were promoted to each version of
OpenGL and a brief synopsis of what they do is included in Appendix C,
“OpenGL Features and Versions.”
  5. Find the OpenGL extension registry at http://www.opengl.org/registry/.
There are three major classifications of extensions: vendor, EXT, and ARB.
Vendor extensions are written and implemented on one vendor’s hardware.
Initials representing the specific vendor are usually part of the extension name
—“AMD” for Advanced Micro Devices or “NV” for NVIDIA, for example. It
is possible that more than one vendor might support a specific vendor
extension, especially if it becomes widely accepted. EXT extensions are
written together by two or more vendors. They often start their lives as
vendor-specific extensions, but if another vendor is interested in
implementing the extension, perhaps with minor changes, it may collaborate
with the original authors to produce an EXT version. ARB extensions are an
official part of OpenGL because they are approved by the OpenGL governing
body, the Architecture Review Board (ARB). These extensions are often
supported by most or all major hardware vendors and may also have started
out as vendor or EXT extensions.
This extension process may sound confusing at first. Hundreds of extensions
currently are available! But new versions of OpenGL are often constructed
from extensions programmers have found useful. In this way each extension
gets its time in the sun. The ones that shine can be promoted to core; the ones
that are less useful are not considered. This “natural selection” process helps
to ensure only the most useful and important new features make it into a core
version of OpenGL.
A useful tool to determine which extensions are supported in your computer’s
OpenGL implementation is Realtech VR’s OpenGL Extensions Viewer. It is
freely available from the Realtech VR Web site (see Figure 3.6).
             Figure 3.6: Realtech VR’s OpenGL Extensions Viewer

Enhancing OpenGL with Extensions
Before using any extensions, you must make sure that they’re supported by the
OpenGL implementation that your application is running on. To find out which
extensions OpenGL supports, there are two functions that you can use. First, to
determine the number of supported extensions, you can call
glGetIntegerv() with the GL_NUM_EXTENSIONS parameter. Next,
you can find out the name of each of the supported extensions by calling
   const GLubyte* glGetStringi(GLenum name,
                               GLuint index);

You should pass GL_EXTENSIONS as the name parameter, and a value
between 0 and 1 less than the number of supported extensions in index. The
function returns the name of the extension as a string. To see if a specific
extension is supported, you can simply query the number of extensions, and
then loop through each supported extension and compare its name to the one
you’re looking for. The book’s source code comes with a simple function that
does this for you. sb7IsExtensionSupported() has the prototype
   int sb7IsExtensionSupported(const char * extname);

This function is declared in the <sb7ext.h> header, takes the name of an
extension, and returns non-zero if it is supported by the current OpenGL
context and zero if it is not. Your application should always check for support
for extensions you wish to use before using them.
Extensions generally add to OpenGL in some combination of four different
ways:
     • They can make things legal that weren’t before, by simply removing
       restrictions from the OpenGL specification.
     • They can add tokens or extend the range of values that can be passed as
       parameters to existing functions.
     • They can extend GLSL to add functionality, built-in functions, variables,
       or data types.
     • They can add entirely new functions to OpenGL itself.
In the first case, where things that once were considered errors no longer are,
your application doesn’t need to do anything besides start using the newly
allowed behavior (once you have determined that the extension is supported,
of course). Likewise, for the second case, you can just start using the new
token values in the relevant functions, presuming that you have their values.
The values of the tokens are in the extension specifications, so you can look
them up there if they are not included in your system’s header files.
To enable use of extensions in GLSL, you must first include a line at the
beginning of shaders that use them to tell the compiler that you’re going to
need their features. For example, to enable the hypothetical
GL_ABC_foobar_feature extension in GLSL, include the following in
the beginning of your shader:
   #extension GL_ABC_foobar_feature : enable
This tells the compiler that you intend to use the extension in your shader. If
the compiler knows about the extension, it will let you compile the shader,
even if the underlying hardware doesn’t support the feature. If this is the case,
the compiler should issue a warning if it sees that the extension is actually
being used. Typically, extensions to GLSL will add preprocessor tokens to
indicate their presence. For example, GL_ABC_foobar_feature will
implicitly include
   #define GL_ABC_foobar_feature 1

This means that you could write code such as
   #if GL_ABC_foobar_feature
       // Use functions from the foobar extension
   #else
       // Emulate or otherwise work around the missing functionality
   #endif

This allows you to conditionally compile or execute functionality that is part
of an extension that may or may not be supported by the underlying OpenGL
implementation. If your shader absolutely requires support for an extension
and will not work at all without it, you can instead include this more assertive
code:

   #extension GL_ABC_foobar_feature : require

If the OpenGL implementation does not support the
GL_ABC_foobar_feature extension, then it will fail to compile the
shader and report an error on the line including the #extension directive.
In effect, GLSL extensions are opt-in features, and applications must6 tell
compilers up front which extensions they intend to use.
  6. In practice, many implementations enable functionality included in some extensions by default and
     don’t require that your shaders include these directives. However, if you rely on this behavior, your
     application is likely to not work on other OpenGL drivers. Because of this risk, you should always
     explicitly enable the extensions that you plan to use.
Next we come to extensions that introduce new functions to OpenGL. On most
platforms, you don’t have direct access to the OpenGL driver and extension
functions don’t just magically appear as available to your applications to call.
Rather, you must ask the OpenGL driver for a function pointer that represents
the function you want to call. Function pointers are generally declared in two
parts; the first is the definition of the function pointer type, and the second is
the function pointer variable itself. Consider this code as an example:
   typedef void
   (APIENTRYP PFNGLDRAWTRANSFORMFEEDBACKPROC) (GLenum mode,
                                               GLuint id);
   PFNGLDRAWTRANSFORMFEEDBACKPROC glDrawTransformFeedback = NULL;

This declares the PFNGLDRAWTRANSFORMFEEDBACKPROC type as a
pointer to a function taking GLenum and GLuint parameters. Next, it
declares the glDrawTransformFeedback variable as an instance of this
type. In fact, on many platforms, the declaration of the
glDrawTransformFeedback() function is actually just like this. This
seems pretty complicated, but fortunately the following header files include
declarations of all of the function prototypes, function pointer types, and token
values introduced by all registered OpenGL extensions:
   #include <glext.h>
   #include <glxext.h>
   #include <wglext.h>

These files can be found at the OpenGL extension registry Web site. The
glext.h header contains both standard OpenGL extensions and many
vendor-specific OpenGL extensions, the wglext.h header contains a
number of extensions that are Windows specific, and the glxext.h header
contains definitions that are X specific (X is the windowing system used on
Linux and many other UNIX derivatives and implementations).
The method for querying the address of extension functions is actually
platform specific. The book’s application framework wraps up these
intricacies into a handy function that is declared in the <sb7ext.h> header
file. The function sb7GetProcAddress() has this prototype:
   void * sb7GetProcAddress(const char * funcname);

Here, funcname is the name of the extension function that you wish to use.
The return value is the address of the function, if it’s supported, and NULL
otherwise. Even if OpenGL returns a valid function pointer for a function
that’s part of the extension you want to use, that doesn’t mean the extension is
present. Sometimes the same function is part of more than one extension, and
sometimes vendors ship drivers with partial implementations of extensions
present. Always check for support for extensions using the official
mechanisms or the sb7IsExtensionSupported() function.

Summary
In this chapter, you have taken a whirlwind trip down OpenGL’s graphics
pipeline. You have been (very) briefly introduced to each major stage and
have created a program that uses each one of them, if only to do nothing
impressive. We’ve glossed over or even neglected to mention several useful
features of OpenGL with the intention of getting you from zero to rendering in
as few pages as possible. You’ve also seen how OpenGL’s pipeline and
functionality can be enhanced by using extensions, which some of the
examples later in the book will rely on. Over the next few chapters, you’ll
learn more fundamentals of computer graphics and of OpenGL, and then we’ll
take a second trip down the pipeline, dig deeper into the topics from this
chapter, and get into some of the things we skipped in this preview of what
OpenGL can do.
