Introduction

   W     indows Internals, Seventh Edition is intended for advanced computer professionals
         (developers, security researchers, and system administrators) who want to under-
   stand how the core components of the Microsoft Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016
   operating systems work internally. With this knowledge, developers can better com-
   prehend the rationale behind design choices when building applications specific to the
   Windows platform. Such knowledge can also help developers debug complex problems.
   System administrators can benefit from this information as well, because understand-
   ing how the operating system works “under the hood” facilitates an understanding of
   the performance behavior of the system and makes troubleshooting system problems
   much easier when things go wrong. Security researchers can figure out how software
   applications and the operating system can misbehave and be misused, causing undesir-
   able behavior, while also understanding the mitigations and security features modern
   Windows offers against such scenarios. After reading this book, you should have a better
   understanding of how Windows works and why it behaves as it does.

History of the book
   This is the seventh edition of a book that was originally called Inside Windows NT (Micro-
   soft Press, 1992), written by Helen Custer (prior to the initial release of Microsoft Windows
   NT 3.1). Inside Windows NT was the first book ever published about Windows NT and
   provided key insights into the architecture and design of the system. Inside Windows NT,
   Second Edition (Microsoft Press, 1998) was written by David Solomon. It updated the origi-
   nal book to cover Windows NT 4.0 and had a greatly increased level of technical depth.

      Inside Windows 2000, Third Edition (Microsoft Press, 2000) was authored by David
   Solomon and Mark Russinovich. It added many new topics, such as startup and shut-
   down, service internals, registry internals, file-system drivers, and networking. It also
   covered kernel changes in Windows 2000, such as the Windows Driver Model (WDM),
   Plug and Play, power management, Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI),
   encryption, the job object, and Terminal Services. Windows Internals, Fourth Edition
   (Microsoft Press, 2004) was the Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 update and
   added more content focused on helping IT professionals make use of their knowledge
   of Windows internals, such as using key tools from Windows SysInternals and analyzing
   crash dumps.

      Windows Internals, Fifth Edition (Microsoft Press, 2009) was the update for Windows
   Vista and Windows Server 2008. It saw Mark Russinovich move on to a full-time job at

 xi
		
                 Microsoft (where he is now the Azure CTO) and the addition of a new co-author, Alex
                 Ionescu. New content included the image loader, user-mode debugging facility, Advanced
                 Local Procedure Call (ALPC), and Hyper-V. The next release, Windows Internals, Sixth
                 Edition (Microsoft Press, 2012), was fully updated to address the many kernel changes
                 in Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2, with many new hands-on experiments to
                 reflect changes in the tools as well.

           Seventh edition changes
                 Since this book’s last update, Windows has gone through several releases, coming up
                 to Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016. Windows 10 itself, being the current going-
                 forward name for Windows, has had several releases since its initial release to manufac-
                 turing (RTM). Each is labeled with a four-digit version number indicating the year and
                 month of release, such as Windows 10, version 1703, which was completed in March 2017.
                 This implies that Windows has gone through at least six versions since Windows 7 (at the
                 time of this writing).

                    Starting with Windows 8, Microsoft began a process of OS convergence, which is
                 beneficial from a development perspective as well as for the Windows engineering team.
                 Windows 8 and Windows Phone 8 had converged kernels, with modern app convergence
                 arriving in Windows 8.1 and Windows Phone 8.1. The convergence story was complete
                 with Windows 10, which runs on desktops/laptops, servers, XBOX One, phones (Windows
                 Mobile 10), HoloLens, and various Internet of Things (IoT) devices.

                    With this grand unification completed, the time was right for a new edition of the
                 series, which could now finally catch up with almost half a decade of changes in what will
                 now be a more stable kernel architecture going forward. As such, this latest book covers
                 aspects of Windows from Windows 8 to Windows 10, version 1703. Additionally, this edi-
                 tion welcomes Pavel Yosifovich as its new co-author.

           Hands-on experiments
                 Even without access to the Windows source code, you can glean much about Windows
                 internals from the kernel debugger, tools from SysInternals, and the tools developed
                 specifically for this book. When a tool can be used to expose or demonstrate some as-
                 pect of the internal behavior of Windows, the steps for trying the tool yourself are listed
                 in special “EXPERIMENT” sections. These appear throughout the book, and we encourage
                 you to try them as you’re reading. Seeing visible proof of how Windows works internally
                 will make much more of an impression on you than just reading about it will.

xii   Introduction
Topics not covered
   Windows is a large and complex operating system. This book doesn’t cover everything
   relevant to Windows internals but instead focuses on the base system components. For
   example, this book doesn’t describe COM+, the Windows distributed object-oriented
   programming infrastructure, or the Microsoft .NET Framework, the foundation of man-
   aged code applications. Because this is an “internals” book and not a user, programming,
   or system-administration book, it doesn’t describe how to use, program, or configure
   Windows.

A warning and a caveat
   Because this book describes undocumented behavior of the internal architecture and the
   operation of the Windows operating system (such as internal kernel structures and func-
   tions), this content is subject to change between releases.

       By “subject to change,” we don’t necessarily mean that details described in this book
   will change between releases, but you can’t count on them not changing. Any software
   that uses these undocumented interfaces, or insider knowledge about the operating
   system, might not work on future releases of Windows. Even worse, software that runs
   in kernel mode (such as device drivers) and uses these undocumented interfaces might
   experience a system crash when running on a newer release of Windows, resulting in
   potential loss of data to users of such software.

      In short, you should never use any internal Windows functionality, registry key,
   behavior, API, or other undocumented detail mentioned in this book during the devel-
   opment of any kind of software designed for end-user systems, or for any other purpose
   other than research and documentation. Always check with the Microsoft Software
   Development Network (MSDN) for official documentation on a particular topic first.

Assumptions about you
   The book assumes the reader is comfortable with working on Windows at a power-user
   level, and has a basic understanding of operating system and hardware concepts, such
   as CPU registers, memory, processes, and threads. Basic understanding of functions,
   pointers, and similar C programming language constructs is beneficial in some sections.

                                                                                   Introduction   xiii
           Organization of this book
                 The book is divided into two parts (as was the sixth edition), the first of which you’re
                 holding in your hands.

                     ■■   Chapter 1, “Concepts and tools,” provides a general introduction to Windows
                          internals concepts and introduces the main tools used throughout the book. It’s
                          critical to read this chapter first, as it provides the necessary background needed
                          for the rest of the book.

                     ■■   Chapter 2, “System architecture,” shows the architecture and main components
                          that comprise Windows and discusses them in some depth. Several of these con-
                          cepts are dealt with in greater detail in subsequent chapters.

                     ■■   Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs,” details how processes are implemented in
                          Windows and the various ways of manipulating them. Jobs are also discussed
                          as a means for controlling a set of processes and enabling Windows Container
                          support.

                     ■■   Chapter 4, “Threads,” details how threads are managed, scheduled, and other-
                          wise manipulated in Windows.

                     ■■   Chapter 5, “Memory management,” shows how the memory manager uses physi-
                          cal and virtual memory, and the various ways that memory can be manipulated
                          and used by processes and drivers alike.

                     ■■   Chapter 6, “I/O system,” shows how the I/O system in Windows works and
                          integrates with device drivers to provide the mechanisms for working with I/O
                          peripherals.

                     ■■   Chapter 7, “Security,” details the various security mechanisms built into Windows,
                          including mitigations that are now part of the system to combat exploits.

           Conventions
                 The following conventions are used in this book:

                     ■■   Boldface type is used to indicate text that you type as well as interface items that
                          you are instructed to click or buttons that you are instructed to press.

                     ■■   Italic type is used to indicate new terms.

                     ■■   Code elements appear in a monospaced font.

xiv   Introduction
      ■■   The first letters of the names of dialog boxes and dialog box elements are
           capitalized—for example, the Save As dialog box.

      ■■   Keyboard shortcuts are indicated by a plus sign (+) separating the key names.
           For example, Ctrl+Alt+Delete mean that you press Ctrl, Alt, and Delete keys at
           the same time.

About the companion content
   We have included companion content to enrich your learning experience. The companion
   content for this book can be downloaded from the following page:

      https://aka.ms/winint7ed/downloads

      We have also placed the source code for the tools written specifically for this book at
   https://github.com/zodiacon/windowsinternals.

Acknowledgments
   First, thanks to Pavel Yosifovich for joining us on this project. His involvement with the
   book was crucial to its release, and his many nights spent studying Windows details and
   writing about six releases’ worth of changes is the reason this book exists.

       This book wouldn’t contain the depth of technical detail or the level of accuracy it
   has without the review, input, and support of key members of the Microsoft Windows
   development team and other experts at Microsoft. Therefore, we want to thank the fol-
   lowing people, who provided technical review and/or input to the book, or were simply
   a source of support and help to the authors: Akila Srinivasan, Alessandro Pilotti, Andrea
   Allievi, Andy Luhrs, Arun Kishan, Ben Hillis, Bill Messmer, Chris Kleynhans, Deepu Thomas,
   Eugene Bak, Jason Shirk, Jeremiah Cox, Joe Bialek, John Lambert, John Lento, Jon Berry,
   Kai Hsu, Ken Johnson, Landy Wang, Logan Gabriel, Luke Kim, Matt Miller, Matthew
   Woolman, Mehmet Iyigun, Michelle Bergeron, Minsang Kim, Mohamed Mansour, Nate
   Warfield, Neeraj Singh, Nick Judge, Pavel Lebedynskiy, Rich Turner, Saruhan Karademir,
   Simon Pope, Stephen Finnigan, and Stephen Hufnagel.

      We would like to again thank Ilfak Guilfanov of Hex-Rays (http://www.hex-rays.com)
   for the IDA Pro Advanced and Hex-Rays licenses they granted to Alex Ionescu more than
   a decade ago, so that he could speed up his reverse engineering of the Windows kernel,
   and for the continued support and development of decompiler features which make
   writing such a book possible without source code access.

                                                                                    Introduction   xv
                     Finally, the authors would like to thank the great staff at Microsoft Press who have been
                 behind turning this book into a reality. Devon Musgrave served his last tour as our acqui-
                 sitions editor, while Kate Shoup oversaw the title as its project editor. Shawn Morningstar,
                 Kelly Talbot, and Corina Lebegioara also contributed to the quality of this book.

           Errata and book support
                 We have made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this book and its companion con-
                 tent. Any errors that have been reported since this book was published are listed on our
                 Microsoft Press site at:

                     https://aka.ms/winint7ed/errata

                   If you find an error that is not already listed, you can report it to us through the same
                 page.

                    If you need additional support, email Microsoft Press Book Support at mspinput@
                 microsoft.com.

                   Please note that product support for Microsoft software is not offered through the
                 addresses above.

           We want to hear from you
                 At Microsoft Press, your satisfaction is our top priority and your feedback our most valu-
                 able asset. Please tell us what you think of this book at:

                     https://aka.ms/tellpress

                   The survey is short, and we read every one of your comments and ideas. Thanks in
                 advance for your input!

           Stay in touch
                 Let’s keep the conversation going! We’re on Twitter: @MicrosoftPress.

xvi   Introduction
