CHAPTER 2

System architecture

  N     ow that you’ve learned the terms, concepts, and tools you need to be familiar with, it’s time to
        start exploring the internal design goals and structure of the Microsoft Windows operating system
   (OS). This chapter explains the overall architecture of the system—the key components, how they inter-
   act with each other, and the context in which they run. To provide a framework for understanding the
   internals of Windows, let’s first review the requirements and goals that shaped the original design and
   specification of the system.

Requirements and design goals
   The following requirements drove the specification of Windows NT back in 1989:

      ■■   Provide a true 32-bit, preemptive, reentrant, virtual memory OS.

      ■■   Run on multiple hardware architectures and platforms.

      ■■   Run and scale well on symmetric multiprocessing systems.

      ■■   Be a great distributed computing platform, both as a network client and as a server.

      ■■   Run most existing 16-bit MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows 3.1 applications.

      ■■   Meet government requirements for POSIX 1003.1 compliance.

      ■■   Meet government and industry requirements for OS security.

      ■■   Be easily adaptable to the global market by supporting Unicode.

     To guide the thousands of decisions that had to be made to create a system that met these require-
   ments, the Windows NT design team adopted the following design goals at the beginning of the project:

      ■■   Extensibility The code must be written to comfortably grow and change as market require-
           ments change.

      ■■   Portability The system must be able to run on multiple hardware architectures and must be
           able to move with relative ease to new ones as market demands dictate.

      ■■   Reliability and robustness The system should protect itself from both internal malfunction
           and external tampering. Applications should not be able to harm the OS or other applications.

		
        ■■   Compatibility Although Windows NT should extend existing technology, its user interface
             and APIs should be compatible with older versions of Windows and with MS-DOS. It should also
             interoperate well with other systems, such as UNIX, OS/2, and NetWare.

        ■■   Performance Within the constraints of the other design goals, the system should be as fast
             and responsive as possible on each hardware platform.

        As we explore the details of the internal structure and operation of Windows, you’ll see how these
     original design goals and market requirements were woven successfully into the construction of the
     system. But before we start that exploration, let’s examine the overall design model for Windows and
     compare it with other modern operating systems.

Operating system model
     In most multiuser operating systems, applications are separated from the OS itself. The OS kernel code
     runs in a privileged processor mode (referred to as kernel mode in this book), with access to system
     data and to the hardware. Application code runs in a non-privileged processor mode (called user mode),
     with a limited set of interfaces available, limited access to system data, and no direct access to hardware.
     When a user-mode program calls a system service, the processor executes a special instruction that
     switches the calling thread to kernel mode. When the system service completes, the OS switches the
     thread context back to user mode and allows the caller to continue.

        Windows is similar to most UNIX systems in that it’s a monolithic OS in the sense that the bulk of
     the OS and device driver code shares the same kernel-mode protected memory space. This means
     that any OS component or device driver can potentially corrupt data being used by other OS system
     components. However, as you saw in Chapter 1, “Concepts and tools,” Windows addresses this through
     attempts to strengthen the quality and constrain the provenance of third-party drivers through
     programs such as WHQL and enforcement through KMCS, while also incorporating additional kernel
     protection technologies such as virtualization-based security and the Device Guard and Hyper Guard
     features. Although you’ll see how these pieces fit together in this section, more details will follow in
     Chapter 7, “Security,” and in Chapter 8, “System mechanisms,” in Windows Internals Part 2.

        All these OS components are, of course, fully protected from errant applications because applica-
     tions don’t have direct access to the code and data of the privileged part of the OS (although they can
     quickly call other kernel services). This protection is one of the reasons that Windows has the reputa-
     tion for being both robust and stable as an application server and as a workstation platform, yet fast
     and nimble from the perspective of core OS services, such as virtual memory management, file I/O,
     networking, and file and print sharing.

        The kernel-mode components of Windows also embody basic object-oriented design principles.
     For example, in general they don’t reach into one another’s data structures to access information main-
     tained by individual components. Instead, they use formal interfaces to pass parameters and access
     and/or modify data structures.

      Despite its pervasive use of objects to represent shared system resources, Windows is not an object-
   oriented system in the strict sense. Most of the kernel-mode OS code is written in C for portability. The
   C programming language doesn’t directly support object-oriented constructs such as polymorphic
   functions or class inheritance. Therefore, the C-based implementation of objects in Windows borrows
   from, but doesn’t depend on, features of particular object-oriented languages.

Architecture overview
   With this brief overview of the design goals and packaging of Windows, let’s take a look at the key
   system components that make up its architecture. A simplified version of this architecture is shown in
Figure 2-1. Keep in mind that this diagram is basic. It doesn’t show everything. For example, the net-
   working components and the various types of device driver layering are not shown.

   FIGURE 2-1   Simplified Windows architecture.

      In Figure 2-1, first notice the line dividing the user-mode and kernel-mode parts of the Windows
   OS. The boxes above the line represent user-mode processes, and the components below the line are
   kernel-mode OS services. As mentioned in Chapter 1, user-mode threads execute in a private process
   address space (although while they are executing in kernel mode, they have access to system space).
   Thus, system processes, service processes, user processes, and environment subsystems each have their
   own private process address space. A second dividing line between kernel-mode parts of Windows
   and the hypervisor is also visible. Strictly speaking, the hypervisor still runs with the same CPU privilege
   level (0) as the kernel, but because it uses specialized CPU instructions (VT-x on Intel, SVM on AMD), it
   can both isolate itself from the kernel while also monitoring it (and applications). For these reasons, you
   may often hear the term ring -1 thrown around (which is inaccurate).

        The four basic types of user-mode processes are described as follows:

        ■■   User processes These processes can be one of the following types: Windows 32-bit or 64-bit
             (Windows Apps running on top of the Windows Runtime in Windows 8 and later are included
             in this category), Windows 3.1 16-bit, MS-DOS 16-bit, or POSIX 32-bit or 64-bit. Note that 16-bit
             applications can be run only on 32-bit Windows, and that POSIX applications are no longer sup-
             ported as of Windows 8.

        ■■   Service processes These are processes that host Windows services, such as the Task Sched-
             uler and Print Spooler services. Services generally have the requirement that they run indepen-
             dently of user logons. Many Windows server applications, such as Microsoft SQL Server and
             Microsoft Exchange Server, also include components that run as services. Chapter 9, “Manage-
             ment mechanisms,” in Part 2 describes services in detail.

        ■■   System processes These are fixed, or hardwired, processes, such as the logon process and
             the Session Manager, that are not Windows services. That is, they are not started by the Service
             Control Manager.

        ■■   Environment subsystem server processes These implement part of the support for the OS
             environment, or personality, presented to the user and programmer. Windows NT originally
             shipped with three environment subsystems: Windows, POSIX, and OS/2. However, the OS/2
             subsystem last shipped with Windows 2000 and POSIX last shipped with Windows XP. The Ulti-
             mate and Enterprise editions of Windows 7 client as well as all of the server versions of Windows
             2008 R2 include support for an enhanced POSIX subsystem called Subsystem for UNIX-based
             Applications (SUA). The SUA is now discontinued and is no longer offered as an optional part of
             Windows (either client or server).

        Note Windows 10 Version 1607 includes a Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) in beta
        state for developers only. However, this is not a true subsystem as described in this section.
        This chapter will discuss WSL and the related Pico providers in more detail. For information
        about Pico processes, see Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs.”

        In Figure 2-1, notice the Subsystem DLLs box below the Service Processes and User Processes boxes.
     Under Windows, user applications don’t call the native Windows OS services directly. Rather, they go
     through one or more subsystem dynamic-link libraries (DLLs). The role of subsystem DLLs is to translate
     a documented function into the appropriate internal (and generally undocumented) native system
     service calls implemented mostly in Ntdll.dll. This translation might or might not involve sending a
     message to the environment subsystem process that is serving the user process.

        The kernel-mode components of Windows include the following:

        ■■   Executive The Windows executive contains the base OS services, such as memory management,
             process and thread management, security, I/O, networking, and inter-process communication.

   ■■     The Windows kernel This consists of low-level OS functions, such as thread scheduling,
          interrupt and exception dispatching, and multiprocessor synchronization. It also provides a
          set of routines and basic objects that the rest of the executive uses to implement higher-level
          constructs.

   ■■     Device drivers This includes both hardware device drivers, which translate user I/O function
          calls into specific hardware device I/O requests, and non-hardware device drivers, such as file
          system and network drivers.

   ■■     The Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL) This is a layer of code that isolates the kernel, the
          device drivers, and the rest of the Windows executive from platform-specific hardware differ-
          ences (such as differences between motherboards).

   ■■     The windowing and graphics system This implements the graphical user interface (GUI)
          functions (better known as the Windows USER and GDI functions), such as dealing with windows,
          user interface controls, and drawing.

   ■■     The hypervisor layer This is composed of a single component: the hypervisor itself. There are
          no drivers or other modules in this environment. That being said, the hypervisor is itself com-
          posed of multiple internal layers and services, such as its own memory manager, virtual proces-
          sor scheduler, interrupt and timer management, synchronization routines, partitions (virtual
          machine instances) management and inter-partition communication (IPC), and more.

    Table 2-1 lists the file names of the core Windows OS components. (You’ll need to know these file
names because we’ll be referring to some system files by name.) Each of these components is covered
in greater detail both later in this chapter and in the chapters that follow.

TABLE 2-1    Core Windows System Files
File Name                                           Components

Ntoskrnl.exe                                        Executive and kernel

Hal.dll                                             HAL

Win32k.sys                                          Kernel-mode part of the Windows subsystem (GUI)

Hvix64.exe (Intel), Hvax64.exe (AMD)                Hypervisor

.sys files in \SystemRoot\System32\Drivers          Core driver files, such as Direct X, Volume Manager, TCP/IP, TPM, and
                                                    ACPI support

Ntdll.dll                                           Internal support functions and system service dispatch stubs to ex-
                                                    ecutive functions

Kernel32.dll, Advapi32.dll, User32.dll, Gdi32.dll   Core Windows subsystem DLLs

   Before we dig into the details of these system components, though, let’s examine some basics about
the Windows kernel design, starting with how Windows achieves portability across multiple hardware
architectures.

     Portability
     Windows was designed to run on a variety of hardware architectures. The initial release of Windows NT
     supported the x86 and MIPS architectures. Support for the Digital Equipment Corporation (which was
     bought by Compaq, which later merged with Hewlett-Packard) Alpha AXP was added shortly thereaf-
     ter. (Although Alpha AXP was a 64-bit processor, Windows NT ran in 32-bit mode. During the develop-
     ment of Windows 2000, a native 64-bit version was running on Alpha AXP, but this was never released.)
     Support for a fourth processor architecture, the Motorola PowerPC, was added in Windows NT 3.51.
     Because of changing market demands, however, support for the MIPS and PowerPC architectures was
     dropped before development began on Windows 2000. Later, Compaq withdrew support for the Alpha
     AXP architecture, resulting in Windows 2000 being supported only on the x86 architecture. Windows
     XP and Windows Server 2003 added support for two 64-bit processor families: the Intel Itanium IA-64
     family and the AMD64 family with its equivalent Intel 64-bit Extension Technology (EM64T). These
     latter two implementations are called 64-bit extended systems and in this book are referred to as x64.
     (How Windows runs 32-bit applications on 64-bit Windows is explained in Chapter 8 in Part 2.) Addi-
     tionally, as of Server 2008 R2, IA-64 systems are no longer supported by Windows.

        Newer editions of Windows support the ARM processor architecture. For example, Windows RT was
     a version of Windows 8 that ran on ARM architecture, although that edition has since been discontinued.
     Windows 10 Mobile—the successor for Windows Phone 8.x operating systems—runs on ARM based
     processors, such as Qualcomm Snapdragon models. Windows 10 IoT runs on both x86 and ARM devices
     such as Raspberry Pi 2 (which uses an ARM Cortex-A7 processor) and Raspberry Pi 3 (which uses the
     ARM Cortex-A53). As ARM hardware has advanced to 64-bit, a new processor family called AArch64,
     or ARM64, may also at some point be supported, as an increasing number of devices run on it.

        Windows achieves portability across hardware architectures and platforms in two primary ways:

        ■■   By using a layered design Windows has a layered design, with low-level portions of the
             system that are processor-architecture–specific or platform-specific isolated into separate
             modules so that upper layers of the system can be shielded from the differences between
             architectures and among hardware platforms. The two key components that provide OS por-
             tability are the kernel (contained in Ntoskrnl.exe) and the HAL (contained in Hal.dll). Both these
             components are described in more detail later in this chapter. Functions that are architecture-
             specific, such as thread context switching and trap dispatching, are implemented in the kernel.
             Functions that can differ among systems within the same architecture (for example, different
             motherboards) are implemented in the HAL. The only other component with a significant
             amount of architecture-specific code is the memory manager, but even that is a small amount
             compared to the system as a whole. The hypervisor follows a similar design, with most parts
             shared between the AMD (SVM) and Intel (VT-x) implementation, and some specific parts for
             each processor—hence the two file names on disk you saw in Table 2-1.

        ■■   By using C The vast majority of Windows is written in C, with some portions in C++. Assembly
             language is used only for those parts of the OS that need to communicate directly with system
             hardware (such as the interrupt trap handler) or that are extremely performance-sensitive (such
             as context switching). Assembly language code exists not only in the kernel and the HAL but
             also in a few other places within the core OS (such as the routines that implement interlocked

       instructions as well as one module in the local procedure call facility), in the kernel-mode part
       of the Windows subsystem, and even in some user-mode libraries, such as the process startup
       code in Ntdll.dll (a system library explained later in this chapter).

Symmetric multiprocessing
Multitasking is the OS technique for sharing a single processor among multiple threads of execution.
When a computer has more than one processor, however, it can execute multiple threads simultane-
ously. Thus, whereas a multitasking OS only appears to execute multiple threads at the same time, a
multiprocessing OS actually does it, executing one thread on each of its processors.

    As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, one of the key design goals for Windows was that
it had to run well on multiprocessor computer systems. Windows is a symmetric multiprocessing
(SMP) OS. There is no master processor—the OS as well as user threads can be scheduled to run on
any processor. Also, all the processors share just one memory space. This model contrasts with asym-
metric multiprocessing (ASMP), in which the OS typically selects one processor to execute OS kernel
code while other processors run only user code. The differences in the two multiprocessing models are
illustrated in Figure 2-2.

FIGURE 2-2   Symmetric vs. asymmetric multiprocessing.

  Windows also supports four modern types of multiprocessor systems: multicore, simultaneous
multi-threaded (SMT), heterogeneous, and non-uniform memory access (NUMA). These are briefly
mentioned in the following paragraphs. (For a complete, detailed description of the scheduling sup-
port for these systems, see the section on thread scheduling in Chapter 4, “Threads.”)

   SMT was first introduced to Windows systems by adding support for Intel’s Hyper-Threading Tech-
nology, which provides two logical processors for each physical core. Newer AMD processors under the
Zen micro-architecture implement a similar SMT technology, also doubling the logical processor count.

     Each logical processor has its own CPU state, but the execution engine and onboard cache are shared.
     This permits one logical CPU to make progress while the other logical CPU is stalled (such as after a
     cache miss or branch misprediction). Confusingly, the marketing literature for both companies refers
     to these additional cores as threads, so you’ll often see claims such as “four cores, eight threads.” This
     indicates that up to eight threads can be scheduled, hence, the existence of eight logical processors.
     The scheduling algorithms are enhanced to make optimal use of SMT-enabled machines, such as by
     scheduling threads on an idle physical processor versus choosing an idle logical processor on a physical
     processor whose other logical processors are busy. For more details on thread scheduling, see Chapter 4.

        In NUMA systems, processors are grouped in smaller units called nodes. Each node has its own
     processors and memory and is connected to the larger system through a cache-coherent interconnect
     bus. Windows on a NUMA system still runs as an SMP system, in that all processors have access to all
     memory. It’s just that node-local memory is faster to reference than memory attached to other nodes.
     The system attempts to improve performance by scheduling threads on processors that are in the same
     node as the memory being used. It attempts to satisfy memory-allocation requests from within the
     node, but it will allocate memory from other nodes if necessary.

        Naturally, Windows also natively supports multicore systems. Because these systems have real
     physical cores (simply on the same package), the original SMP code in Windows treats them as discrete
     processors, except for certain accounting and identification tasks (such as licensing, described shortly)
     that distinguish between cores on the same processor and cores on different sockets. This is especially
     important when dealing with cache topologies to optimize data-sharing.

        Finally, ARM versions of Windows also support a technology known as heterogeneous multi-pro-
     cessing, whose implementation on such processors is called big.LITTLE. This type of SMP-based design
     differs from traditional ones in that not all processor cores are identical in their capabilities, yet unlike
     pure heterogeneous multi-processing, they are still able to execute the same instructions. The differ-
     ence, then, comes from the clock speed and respective full load/idle power draws, allowing for a col-
     lection of slower cores to be paired with faster ones.

        Think of sending an e-mail on an older dual-core 1 GHz system connected to a modern Internet
     connection. It’s unlikely this will be any slower than on an eight-core 3.6 GHz machine because bottle-
     necks are mostly caused by human input typing speed and network bandwidth, not raw processing
     power. Yet even in its deepest power-saving mode, such a modern system is likely to use significantly
     more power than the legacy system. Even if it could regulate itself down to 1 GHz, the legacy system
     has probably set itself to 200 MHz, for example.

         By being able to pair such legacy mobile processors with top-of-the-line ones, ARM-based plat-
     forms paired with a compatible OS kernel scheduler can maximize processing power when needed (by
     turning on all cores), strike a balance (by having certain big cores online and other little ones for other
     tasks), or run in extremely low power modes (by having only a single little core online—enough for
     SMS and push e-mail). By supporting what are called heterogeneous scheduling policies, Windows 10
     allows threads to pick and choose between a policy that satisfies their needs, and will interact with the
     scheduler and power manager to best support it. You’ll learn more about these policies in Chapter 4.

        Windows was not originally designed with a specific processor number limit in mind, other than
     the licensing policies that differentiate the various Windows editions. However, for convenience and

efficiency, Windows does keep track of processors (total number, idle, busy, and other such details) in
a bitmask (sometimes called an affinity mask) that is the same number of bits as the native data type
of the machine (32-bit or 64-bit). This allows the processor to manipulate bits directly within a regis-
ter. Due to this fact, Windows systems were originally limited to the number of CPUs in a native word,
because the affinity mask couldn’t arbitrarily be increased. To maintain compatibility, as well as support
larger processor systems, Windows implements a higher-order construct called a processor group. The
processor group is a set of processors that can all be defined by a single affinity bitmask, and the kernel
as well as the applications can choose which group they refer to during affinity updates. Compatible
applications can query the number of supported groups (currently limited to 20; the maximum number
of logical processors is currently limited to 640) and then enumerate the bitmask for each group.
Meanwhile, legacy applications continue to function by seeing only their current group. For more
information on how exactly Windows assigns processors to groups (which is also related to NUMA) and
legacy processes to groups, see Chapter 4.

    As mentioned, the actual number of supported licensed processors depends on the edition of Win-
dows being used. (See Table 2-2 later in this chapter.) This number is stored in the system license policy
file (essentially a set of name/value pairs) %SystemRoot%\ServiceProfiles\LocalService\AppData\Local\
Microsoft\WSLicense\tokens.dat in the variable kernel-RegisteredProcessors.

Scalability
One of the key issues with multiprocessor systems is scalability. To run correctly on an SMP system, OS
code must adhere to strict guidelines and rules. Resource contention and other performance issues are
more complicated in multiprocessing systems than in uniprocessor systems and must be accounted
for in the system’s design. Windows incorporates several features that are crucial to its success as a
multiprocessor OS:

   ■■   The ability to run OS code on any available processor and on multiple processors at the same time

   ■■   Multiple threads of execution within a single process, each of which can execute simultaneously
        on different processors

   ■■   Fine-grained synchronization within the kernel (such as spinlocks, queued spinlocks, and
        pushlocks, described in Chapter 8 in Part 2) as well as within device drivers and server processes,
        which allows more components to run concurrently on multiple processors

   ■■   Programming mechanisms such as I/O completion ports (described in Chapter 6, “I/O system”)
        that facilitate the efficient implementation of multithreaded server processes that can scale well
        on multiprocessor systems

    The scalability of the Windows kernel has evolved over time. For example, Windows Server 2003 in-
troduced per-CPU scheduling queues with a fine-grained lock, permitting thread-scheduling decisions
to occur in parallel on multiple processors. Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 eliminated global
scheduler locking during wait-dispatching operations. This stepwise improvement of the granularity
of locking has also occurred in other areas, such as the memory manager, cache manager, and object
manager.

     Differences between client and server versions
     Windows ships in both client and server retail packages. There are six desktop client versions of Windows
     10: Windows 10 Home, Windows 10 Pro, Windows 10 Education, Windows 10 Pro Education, Windows 10
     Enterprise, and Windows 10 Enterprise Long Term Servicing Branch (LTSB). Other non-desktop editions
     include Windows 10 Mobile, Windows 10 Mobile Enterprise, and Windows 10 IoT Core, IoT Core Enter-
     prise, and IoT Mobile Enterprise. Still more variants exist that target world regions with specific needs,
     such as the N series.

        There are six different versions of Windows Server 2016: Windows Server 2016 Datacenter, Windows
     Server 2016 Standard, Windows Server 2016 Essentials, Windows Server 2006 MultiPoint Premium
     Server, Windows Storage Server 2016, and Microsoft Hyper-V Server 2016.

        These versions differ as follows:

        ■■   Core-based (rather than socket-based) pricing for the Server 2016 Datacenter and Standard
             edition

        ■■   The number of total logical processors supported

        ■■   For server systems, the number of Hyper-V containers allowed to run (client systems support
             only namespace-based Windows containers)

        ■■   The amount of physical memory supported (actually highest physical address usable for RAM;
             see Chapter 5, “Memory management,” for more information on physical memory limits)

        ■■   The number of concurrent network connections supported (for example, a maximum of 10 con-
             current connections are allowed to the file and print services in client versions)

        ■■   Support for multi-touch and Desktop Composition

        ■■   Support for features such as BitLocker, VHD booting, AppLocker, Hyper-V, and more than 100
             other configurable licensing policy values

        ■■   Layered services that come with Windows Server editions that don’t come with the client edi-
             tions (for example, directory services, Host Guardian, Storage Spaces Direct, shielded virtual
             machines, and clustering)

        Table 2-2 lists the differences in memory and processor support for some Windows 10, Windows
     Server 2012 R2, and Windows Server 2016 editions. For a detailed comparison chart of the different
     editions of Windows Server 2012 R2, see https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=41703.
     For Windows 10 and Server 2016 editions and earlier OS memory limits, see https://msdn.microsoft.com/
     en-us/library/windows/desktop/aa366778.aspx.

        Although there are several client and server retail packages of the Windows OS, they share a common
     set of core system files, including the kernel image, Ntoskrnl.exe (and the PAE version, Ntkrnlpa.exe),
     the HAL libraries, the device drivers, and the base system utilities and DLLs.

TABLE 2-2    Processor and memory limits for some Windows editions

                                                               Number of Logical           Physical
                      Number of            Physical Memory
                                                               Processors/Sockets          Memory
                      Sockets Supported    Supported
                                                               Supported                   Supported
                      (32-Bit Edition)     (32-Bit Edition)
                                                               (64-Bit Edition)            (x64 Editions)

Windows 10 Home       1                    4 GB                1 socket                    128 GB

Windows 10 Pro        2                    4 GB                2 sockets                   2 TB

Windows 10            2                    4 GB                2 sockets                   2 TB
Enterprise

Windows Server        Not available        Not available       2 sockets                   64 GB
2012 R2 Essentials

Windows Server        Not available        Not available       512 logical processors      24 TB
2016 Standard

Windows Server        Not available        Not available       512 logical processors      24 TB
2016 Datacenter

    With so many different editions of Windows and each having the same kernel image, how does the
system know which edition is booted? By querying the registry values ProductType and ProductSuite
under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\ProductOptions key. ProductType is used to
distinguish whether the system is a client system or a server system (of any flavor). These values are
loaded into the registry based on the licensing policy file described earlier. The valid values are listed
in Table 2-3. This can be queried from the user-mode VerifyVersionInfo function or from a device
driver using the kernel-mode support function RtlGetVersion and RtlVerifyVersionInfo, both
documented in the Windows Driver Kit (WDK).

TABLE 2-3    ProductType registry values

Edition of Windows                          Value of ProductType

Windows client                              WinNT

Windows server (domain controller)          LanmanNT

Windows server (server only)                ServerNT

    A different registry value, ProductPolicy, contains a cached copy of the data inside the tokens.dat
file, which differentiates between the editions of Windows and the features that they enable.

   So if the core files are essentially the same for the client and server versions, how do the systems
differ in operation? In short, server systems are optimized by default for system throughput as high-
performance application servers, whereas the client version (although it has server capabilities) is op-
timized for response time for interactive desktop use. For example, based on the product type, several
resource-allocation decisions are made differently at system boot time, such as the size and number
of OS heaps (or pools), the number of internal system worker threads, and the size of the system data
cache. Also, run-time policy decisions, such as the way the memory manager trades off system and
process memory demands, differ between the server and client editions. Even some thread-scheduling

     details have different default behavior in the two families (the default length of the time slice, or thread
     quantum; see Chapter 4 for details). Where there are significant operational differences in the two
     products, these are highlighted in the pertinent chapters throughout the rest of this book. Unless
     otherwise noted, everything in this book applies to both the client and server versions.

        EXPERIMENT: Determining features enabled by licensing policy
        As mentioned, Windows supports more than 100 different features that can be enabled through
        the software licensing mechanism. These policy settings determine the various differences not
        only between a client and server installation, but also between each edition (or SKU) of the OS,
        such as BitLocker support (available on Windows server as well as the Pro and Enterprise editions
        of Windows client). You can use the SlPolicy tool from the downloads available for the book to
        display many of these policy values.

           Policy settings are organized by a facility, which represents the owner module for which the
        policy applies. You can display a list of all facilities known to the tool by running Slpolicy.exe with
        the –f switch:
        C:\>SlPolicy.exe -f
        Software License Policy Viewer Version 1.0 (C)2016 by Pavel Yosifovich
        Desktop Windows Manager
        Explorer
        Fax
        Kernel
        IIS
        …

           You can then add the name of any facility after the switch to display the policy value for that
        facility. For example, to look at the limitations on CPUs and available memory, use the Kernel
        facility. Here’s the expected output on a machine running Windows 10 Pro:
        C:\>SlPolicy.exe -f Kernel
        Software License Policy Viewer Version 1.0 (C)2016 by Pavel Yosifovich
        Kernel
        ------
        Maximum allowed processor sockets: 2
        Maximum memory allowed in MB (x86): 4096
        Maximum memory allowed in MB (x64): 2097152
        Maximum memory allowed in MB (ARM64): 2097152
        Maximum physical page in bytes: 4096
        Device Family ID: 3
        Native VHD boot: Yes
        Dynamic Partitioning supported: No
        Virtual Dynamic Partitioning supported: No
        Memory Mirroring supported: No
        Persist defective memory list: No

           As another example, the output for the kernel facility for a Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter
        edition would look something like this:

   Kernel
   ------
   Maximum allowed processor sockets: 64
   Maximum memory allowed in MB (x86): 4096
   Maximum memory allowed in MB (x64): 4194304
   Add physical memory allowed: Yes
   Add VM physical memory allowed: Yes
   Maximum physical page in bytes: 0
   Native VHD boot: Yes
   Dynamic Partitioning supported: Yes
   Virtual Dynamic Partitioning supported: Yes
   Memory Mirroring supported: Yes
   Persist defective memory list: Yes

Checked build
There is a special internal debug version of Windows called the checked build (externally available only
for Windows 8.1 and earlier with an MSDN Operating Systems subscription). It is a recompilation of the
Windows source code with a compile-time flag defined called DBG, which causes compile time, condi-
tional debugging, and tracing code to be included. Also, to make it easier to understand the machine
code, the post-processing of the Windows binaries to optimize code layout for faster execution is not
performed. (See the section “Debugging performance-optimized code” in the Debugging Tools for
Windows help file.)

    The checked build was provided primarily to aid device driver developers because it performs more
stringent error-checking on kernel-mode functions called by device drivers or other system code. For
example, if a driver (or some other piece of kernel-mode code) makes an invalid call to a system func-
tion that is checking parameters (such as acquiring a spinlock at the wrong interrupt request level),
the system will stop execution when the problem is detected rather than allow some data structure to
be corrupted and the system to possibly crash at a later time. Because a full checked build was often
unstable and impossible to run in most environments, Microsoft provides a checked kernel and HAL
only for Windows 10 and later. This enables developers to obtain the same level of usefulness from the
kernel and HAL code they interact with without dealing with the issues that a full checked build would
cause. This checked kernel and HAL pair is freely available through the WDK, in the \Debug directory of
the root installation path. For detailed instructions on how to do this, see the section “Installing Just the
Checked Operating System and HAL” in the WDK documentation.

   EXPERIMENT: Determining if you are running the checked build
   There is no built-in tool to display whether you are running the checked build or the retail build
   (called the free build) of the kernel. However, this information is available through the Debug
   property of the Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) Win32_OperatingSystem class.

        The following PowerShell script displays this property. (You can try this by opening a PowerShell
        script host.)
        PS C:\Users\pavely> Get-WmiObject win32_operatingsystem | select debug
        debug
        -----
        False

           This system is not running the checked build, because the Debug property shown here says False.

        Much of the additional code in the checked-build binaries is a result of using the ASSERT and/or
     NT_ASSERT macros, which are defined in the WDK header file Wdm.h and documented in the WDK
     documentation. These macros test a condition, such as the validity of a data structure or parameter. If
     the expression evaluates to FALSE, the macros either call the kernel-mode function RtlAssert, which
     calls DbgPrintEx to send the text of the debug message to a debug message buffer, or issue an asser-
     tion interrupt, which is interrupt 0x2B on x64 and x86 systems. If a kernel debugger is attached and the
     appropriate symbols are loaded, this message is displayed automatically followed by a prompt asking
     the user what to do about the assertion failure (breakpoint, ignore, terminate process, or terminate
     thread). If the system wasn’t booted with the kernel debugger (using the debug option in the Boot
     Configuration Database) and no kernel debugger is currently attached, failure of an assertion test will
     bug-check (crash) the system. For a small list of assertion checks made by some of the kernel support
     routines, see the section “Checked Build ASSERTs” in the WDK documentation (although note this list is
     unmaintained and outdated).

        The checked build is also useful for system administrators because of the additional detailed
     informational tracing that can be enabled for certain components. (For detailed instructions, see the
     Microsoft Knowledge Base Article number 314743, titled “HOWTO: Enable Verbose Debug Tracing in
     Various Drivers and Subsystems.”) This information output is sent to an internal debug message buffer
     using the DbgPrintEx function referred to earlier. To view the debug messages, you can either attach a
     kernel debugger to the target system (which requires booting the target system in debugging mode),
     use the !dbgprint command while performing local kernel debugging, or use the Dbgview.exe tool
     from Sysinternals. Most recent versions of Windows have moved away from this type of debug output,
     however, and use a combination of either Windows preprocessor (WPP) tracing or TraceLogging
     technology, both of which are built on top of Event Tracing for Windows (ETW). The advantage of these
     new logging mechanisms is that they are not solely limited to the checked versions of components
     (especially useful now that a full checked build is no longer available), and can be seen by using tools
     such as the Windows Performance Analyzer (WPA), formerly known as XPerf or Windows Perfomance
     Toolkit, TraceView (from the WDK), or the !wmiprint extension command in the kernel debugger.

        Finally, the checked build can also be useful for testing user-mode code only because the timing of
     the system is different. (This is because of the additional checking taking place within the kernel and
     the fact that the components are compiled without optimizations.) Often, multithreaded synchroni-
     zation bugs are related to specific timing conditions. By running your tests on a system running the
     checked build (or at least the checked kernel and HAL), the fact that the timing of the whole system is
     different might cause latent timing bugs to surface that do not occur on a normal retail system.

Virtualization-based security architecture overview
   As you saw in Chapter 1 and again in this chapter, the separation between user mode and kernel
   mode provides protection for the OS from user-mode code, whether malicious or not. However, if an
   unwanted piece of kernel-mode code makes it into the system (because of some yet-unpatched kernel
   or driver vulnerability or because the user was tricked into installing a malicious or vulnerable driver),
   the system is essentially compromised because all kernel-mode code has complete access to the entire
   system. The technologies outlined in Chapter 1, which leverage the hypervisor to provide additional
   guarantees against attacks, make up a set of virtualization-based security (VBS) capabilities, extend-
   ing the processor’s natural privilege-based separation through the introduction of Virtual Trust Levels
   (VTLs). Beyond simply introducing a new orthogonal way of isolating access to memory, hardware,
   and processor resources, VTLs also require new code and components to manage the higher levels of
   trust. The regular kernel and drivers, running in VTL 0, cannot be permitted to control and define VTL 1
   resources; this would defeat the purpose.

      Figure 2-3 shows the architecture of Windows 10 Enterprise and Server 2016 when VBS is active.
   (You’ll also sometimes see the term Virtual Secure Mode, or VSM, used.) With Windows 10 version 1607
   and Server 2016 releases, it’s always active by default if supported by hardware. For older versions of
   Windows 10, you can activate it by using a policy or with the Add Windows Features dialog box (select
   the Isolated User Mode option).

   FIGURE 2-3   Windows 10 and Server 2016 VBS architecture.

      As shown in Figure 2-3, the user/kernel code discussed earlier is running on top of a Hyper-V hyper-
   visor, just like in Figure 2-1. The difference is that with VBS enabled, a VTL of 1 is now present, which
   contains its own secure kernel running in the privileged processor mode (that is, ring 0 on x86/x64).
   Similarly, a run-time user environment mode, called the Isolated User Mode (IUM), now exists, which
   runs in unprivileged mode (that is, ring 3).

         In this architecture, the secure kernel is its own separate binary, which is found under the name se-
     curekernel.exe on disk. As for IUM, it’s both an environment that restricts the allowed system calls that
     regular user-mode DLLs can make (thus limiting which of these DLLs can be loaded) and a framework
     that adds special secure system calls that can execute only under VTL 1. These additional system calls
     are exposed in a similar way as regular system calls: through an internal system library named Iumdll.dll
     (the VTL 1 version of Ntdll.dll) and a Windows subsystem–facing library named Iumbase.dll (the VTL 1
     version of Kernelbase.dll). This implementation of IUM, mostly sharing the same standard Win32 API
     libraries, allows for the reduction of the memory overhead of VTL 1 user-mode applications because
     essentially, the same user-mode code is present as in their VTL 0 counterparts. As an important note,
     copy-on-write mechanisms, which you’ll learn more about in Chapter 5, prevent VTL 0 applications
     from making changes to binaries used by VTL 1.

        With VBS, the regular user versus kernel rules apply, but are now augmented by VTL considerations.
     In other words, kernel-mode code running at VTL 0 cannot touch user mode running at VTL 1 because
     VTL 1 is more privileged. Yet, user-mode code running at VTL 1 cannot touch kernel mode running at
     VTL 0 either because user (ring 3) cannot touch kernel (ring 0). Similarly, VTL 1 user-mode applications
     must still go through regular Windows system calls and their respective access checks if they wish to
     access resources.

         A simple way of thinking about this is as follows: privilege levels (user versus kernel) enforce power.
     VTLs, on the other hand, enforce isolation. Although a VTL 1 user-mode application is not more power-
     ful than a VTL 0 application or driver, it is isolated from it. In fact, VTL 1 applications aren’t just not
     more powerful; in many cases, they’re much less so. Because the secure kernel does not implement
     a full range of system capabilities, it hand-picks which system calls it will forward to the VTL 0 kernel.
     (Another name for secure kernel is proxy kernel.) Any kind of I/O, including file, network, and registry-
     based, is completely prohibited. Graphics, as another example, are out of the question. Not a single
     driver is allowed to be communicated with.

        The secure kernel however, by both running at VTL 1 and being in kernel mode, does have complete
     access to VTL 0 memory and resources. It can use the hypervisor to limit the VTL 0 OS access to certain
     memory locations by leveraging CPU hardware support known as Second Level Address Translation
     (SLAT). SLAT is the basis of Credential Guard technology, which can store secrets in such locations.
     Similarly, the secure kernel can use SLAT technology to interdict and control execution of memory
     locations, a key covenant of Device Guard.

        To prevent normal device drivers from leveraging hardware devices to directly access memory, the
     system uses another piece of hardware known as the I/O memory management unit (MMU), which
     effectively virtualizes memory access for devices. This can be used to prevent device drivers from using
     direct memory access (DMA) to directly access the hypervisor or secure kernel’s physical regions of
     memory. This would bypass SLAT because no virtual memory is involved.

         Because the hypervisor is the first system component to be launched by the boot loader, it can pro-
     gram the SLAT and I/O MMU as it sees fit, defining the VTL 0 and 1 execution environments. Then, while
     in VTL 1, the boot loader runs again, loading the secure kernel, which can configure the system further
     to its needs. Only then is the VTL dropped, which will see the execution of the normal kernel, now living
     in its VTL 0 jail, unable to escape.

      Because user-mode processes running in VTL 1 are isolated, potentially malicious code—while not
   able to exert greater influence over the system—could run surreptitiously, attempt secure system calls
   (which would allow it to seal/sign its own secrets), and potentially cause bad interactions with other VTL
   1 processes or the smart kernel. As such, only a special class of specially signed binaries, called Trustlets,
   are allowed to execute in VTL 1. Each Trustlet has a unique identifier and signature, and the secure ker-
   nel has hard-coded knowledge of which Trustlets have been created so far. As such, it is impossible to
   create new Trustlets without access to the secure kernel (which only Microsoft can touch), and existing
   Trustlets cannot be patched in any way (which would void the special Microsoft signature). For more
   information on Trustlets, see Chapter 3.

       The addition of the secure kernel and VBS is an exciting step in modern OS architecture. With ad-
   ditional hardware changes to various buses such as PCI and USB, it will soon be possible to support an
   entire class of secure devices, which, when combined with a minimalistic secure HAL, secure Plug-and-
   Play manager, and secure User-Mode Device Framework, could allow certain VTL 1 applications direct
   and segregated access to specially designated devices, such as for biometric or smartcard input. New
   versions of Windows 10 are likely to leverage such advances.

Key system components
   Now that we’ve looked at the high-level architecture of Windows, let’s delve deeper into the internal
   structure and the role each key OS component plays. Figure 2-4 is a more detailed and complete
   diagram of the core Windows system architecture and components than was shown in Figure 2-1. Note
   that it still does not show all components (networking in particular, which is explained in Chapter 10,
   “Networking,” in Part 2).

   FIGURE 2-4   Windows architecture.

        The following sections elaborate on each major element of this diagram. Chapter 8 in Part 2 explains
     the primary control mechanisms the system uses (such as the object manager, interrupts, and so forth).
     Chapter 11, “Startup and shutdown,” in Part 2 describes the process of starting and shutting down Win-
     dows, and Chapter 9 in Part 2 details management mechanisms such as the registry, service processes
     and WMI. Other chapters explore in even more detail the internal structure and operation of key areas
     such as processes and threads, memory management, security, the I/O manager, storage management,
     the cache manager, the Windows file system (NTFS), and networking.

     Environment subsystems and subsystem DLLs
     The role of an environment subsystem is to expose some subset of the base Windows executive system
     services to application programs. Each subsystem can provide access to different subsets of the na-
     tive services in Windows. That means that some things can be done from an application built on one
     subsystem that can’t be done by an application built on another subsystem. For example, a Windows
     application can’t use the SUA fork function.

         Each executable image (.exe) is bound to one and only one subsystem. When an image is run, the
     process creation code examines the subsystem type code in the image header so that it can notify the
     proper subsystem of the new process. This type code is specified with the /SUBSYSTEM linker option of
     the Microsoft Visual Studio linker (or through the SubSystem entry in the Linker/System property page
     in the project’s properties).

         As mentioned, user applications don’t call Windows system services directly. Instead, they go through
     one or more subsystem DLLs. These libraries export the documented interface that the programs linked
     to that subsystem can call. For example, the Windows subsystem DLLs (such as Kernel32.dll, Advapi32.dll,
     User32.dll, and Gdi32.dll) implement the Windows API functions. The SUA subsystem DLL (Psxdll.dll)
     is used to implement the SUA API functions (on Windows versions that supported POSIX).

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing the image subsystem type
        You can see the image subsystem type by using the Dependency Walker tool (Depends.exe). For
        example, notice the image types for two different Windows images, Notepad.exe (the simple text
        editor) and Cmd.exe (the Windows command prompt):

     This shows that Notepad is a GUI program, while Cmd is a console, or character-based,
  program. Although this implies there are two different subsystems for GUI and character-based
  programs, there is just one Windows subsystem, and GUI programs can have consoles (by calling
  the AllocConsole function), just like console programs can display GUIs.

  When an application calls a function in a subsystem DLL, one of three things can occur:

   ■■   The function is entirely implemented in user mode inside the subsystem DLL. In other words,
        no message is sent to the environment subsystem process, and no Windows executive system
        services are called. The function is performed in user mode, and the results are returned to the
        caller. Examples of such functions include GetCurrentProcess (which always returns -1, a value
        that is defined to refer to the current process in all process-related functions) and GetCurrent-
        ProcessId. (The process ID doesn’t change for a running process, so this ID is retrieved from a
        cached location, thus avoiding the need to call into the kernel.)

   ■■   The function requires one or more calls to the Windows executive. For example, the Windows
        ReadFile and WriteFile functions involve calling the underlying internal (and undocumented
        for user-mode use) Windows I/O system services NtReadFile and NtWriteFile, respectively.

   ■■   The function requires some work to be done in the environment subsystem process. (The
        environment subsystem processes, running in user mode, are responsible for maintaining the
        state of the client applications running under their control.) In this case, a client/server request
        is made to the environment subsystem via an ALPC (described in Chapter 8 in Part 2) message
        sent to the subsystem to perform some operation. The subsystem DLL then waits for a reply
        before returning to the caller.

  Some functions can be a combination of the second and third items just listed, such as the Windows
CreateProcess and ExitWindowsEx functions.

Subsystem startup
Subsystems are started by the Session Manager (Smss.exe) process. The subsystem startup information
is stored under the registry key HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\SubSystems.
Figure 2-5 shows the values under this key (Windows 10 Pro snapshot).

     FIGURE 2-5   Registry Editor showing Windows subsystem information.

        The Required value lists the subsystems that load when the system boots. The value has two strings:
     Windows and Debug. The Windows value contains the file specification of the Windows subsystem,
     Csrss.exe, which stands for Client/Server Runtime Subsystem. Debug is blank (this value has not been
     needed since Windows XP, but the registry value is kept for compatibility) and therefore does nothing.
     The Optional value indicates optional subsystems, which in this case is blank as well because SUA is no
     longer available on Windows 10. If it was, a data value of Posix would point to another value pointing to
     Psxss.exe (the POSIX subsystem process). A value of Optional means “loaded on demand,” which means
     the first time a POSIX image is encountered. The registry value Kmode contains the file name of the
     kernel-mode portion of the Windows subsystem, Win32k.sys (explained later in this chapter).

        Let’s take a closer look at the Windows environment subsystems.

     Windows subsystem
     Although Windows was designed to support multiple independent environment subsystems, from a
     practical perspective, having each subsystem implement all the code to handle windowing and display
     I/O would result in a large amount of duplication of system functions that, ultimately, would negatively
     affect both system size and performance. Because Windows was the primary subsystem, the Windows
     designers decided to locate these basic functions there and have the other subsystems call on the
     Windows subsystem to perform display I/O. Thus, the SUA subsystem calls services in the Windows
     subsystem to perform display I/O.

        As a result of this design decision, the Windows subsystem is a required component for any Windows
     system, even on server systems with no interactive users logged in. Because of this, the process is
     marked as a critical process (which means if it exits for any reason, the system crashes).

The Windows subsystem consists of the following major components:

■■   For each session, an instance of the environment subsystem process (Csrss.exe) loads four DLLs
     (Basesrv.dll, Winsrv.dll, Sxssrv.dll, and Csrsrv.dll) that contain support for the following:

     • Various housekeeping tasks related to creating and deleting processes and threads
     • Shutting down Windows applications (through the ExitWindowsEx API)
     • Containing .ini file to registry location mappings for backward compatibility
     • Sending certain kernel notification messages (such as those from the Plug-and-Play
        manager) to Windows applications as Window messages (WM_DEVICECHANGE)

     • Portions of the support for 16-bit virtual DOS machine (VDM) processes (32-bit Windows only)
     • Side-by-Side (SxS)/Fusion and manifest cache support
     • Several natural language support functions, to provide caching

Note Perhaps most critically, the kernel mode code that handles the raw input thread
and desktop thread (responsible for the mouse cursor, keyboard input, and handling of
the desktop window) is hosted inside threads running inside Winsrv.dll. Additionally, the
Csrss.exe instances associated with interactive user sessions contain a fifth DLL called the
Canonical Display Driver (Cdd.dll). CDD is responsible for communicating with the DirectX
support in the kernel (see the upcoming discussion) on each vertical refresh (VSync) to draw
the visible desktop state without traditional hardware-accelerated GDI support.

■■   A kernel-mode device driver (Win32k.sys) that contains the following:

     • The window manager, which controls window displays; manages screen output; collects
        input from keyboard, mouse, and other devices; and passes user messages to applications

     • The Graphics Device Interface (GDI), which is a library of functions for graphics output de-
        vices and includes functions for line, text, and figure drawing and for graphics manipulation

     • Wrappers for DirectX support that is implemented in another kernel driver (Dxgkrnl.sys)
■■   The console host process (Conhost.exe), which provides support for console (character cell)
     applications

■■   The Desktop Window Manager (Dwm.exe), which allows for compositing visible window ren-
     dering into a single surface through the CDD and DirectX

■■   Subsystem DLLs (such as Kernel32.dll, Advapi32.dll, User32.dll, and Gdi32.dll) that translate
     documented Windows API functions into the appropriate and undocumented (for user-mode)
     kernel-mode system service calls in Ntoskrnl.exe and Win32k.sys

■■   Graphics device drivers for hardware-dependent graphics display drivers, printer drivers, and
     video miniport drivers

        Note As part of a refactoring effort in the Windows architecture called MinWin, the subsys-
        tem DLLs are now generally composed of specific libraries that implement API Sets, which
        are then linked together into the subsystem DLL and resolved using a special redirection
        scheme. For more information on this refactoring, see the “Image loader” section in Chapter 3.

     Windows 10 and Win32k.sys
     The basic window-management requirements for Windows 10–based devices vary considerably de-
     pending on the device in question. For example, a full desktop running Windows needs all the win-
     dow manager’s capabilities, such as resizable windows, owner windows, child windows and so forth.
     Windows Mobile 10 running on phones or small tablets doesn’t need many of these features because
     there’s only one window in the foreground and it cannot be minimized or resized, etc. The same goes
     for IoT devices, which may not even have a display at all.

         For these reasons, the functionality of Win32K.sys has been split among several kernel modules so
     that not all modules may be required on a specific system. This significantly reduces the attack surface
     of the window manager by reducing the complexity of the code and eliminating many of its legacy
     pieces. Here are some examples:

        ■■   On phones (Windows Mobile 10) Win32k.sys loads Win32kMin.sys and Win32kBase.sys.

        ■■   On full desktop systems Win32k.sys loads Win32kBase.sys and Win32kFull.sys.

        ■■   On certain IoT systems, Win32k.sys might only need Win32kBase.sys.

        Applications call the standard USER functions to create user-interface controls, such as windows and
     buttons, on the display. The window manager communicates these requests to the GDI, which passes
     them to the graphics device drivers, where they are formatted for the display device. A display driver is
     paired with a video miniport driver to complete video display support.

         The GDI provides a set of standard two-dimensional functions that let applications communicate with
     graphics devices without knowing anything about the devices. GDI functions mediate between appli-
     cations and graphics devices such as display drivers and printer drivers. The GDI interprets application
     requests for graphic output and sends the requests to graphics display drivers. It also provides a standard
     interface for applications to use varying graphics output devices. This interface enables application code
     to be independent of the hardware devices and their drivers. The GDI tailors its messages to the capa-
     bilities of the device, often dividing the request into manageable parts. For example, some devices can
     understand directions to draw an ellipse; others require the GDI to interpret the command as a series of
     pixels placed at certain coordinates. For more information about the graphics and video driver architec-
     ture, see the “Design Guide” section of the “Display (Adapters and Monitors)” chapter in the WDK.

         Because much of the subsystem—in particular, display I/O functionality—runs in kernel mode, only
     a few Windows functions result in sending a message to the Windows subsystem process: process and
     thread creation and termination and DOS device drive letter mapping (such as through subst.exe).

In general, a running Windows application won’t cause many, if any, context switches to the Windows
subsystem process, except as needed to draw the new mouse cursor position, handle keyboard input,
and render the screen through CDD.

  Console window host
  In the original Windows subsystem design, the subsystem process (Csrss.exe) was responsible
  for managing console windows and each console application (such as Cmd.exe, the command
  prompt) communicated with Csrss.exe. Starting with Windows 7, a separate process is used for
  each console window on the system: the console window host (Conhost.exe). (A single console
  window can be shared by multiple console applications, such as when you launch a command
  prompt from the command prompt. By default, the second command prompt shares the console
  window of the first.) The details of the Windows 7 console host are explained in Chapter 2 of the
  sixth edition of this book.

      With Windows 8 and later, the console architecture changed yet again. The Conhost.exe pro-
  cess remains, but is now spawned from the console-based process (rather than from Csrss.exe,
  as in Windows 7) by the console driver (\Windows\System32\Drivers\ConDrv.sys). The process
  in question communicates with Conhost.exe using the console driver (ConDrv.sys), by sending
  read, write, I/O control and other I/O request types. Conhost.exe is designated as a server and
  the process using the console is the client. This change obviates the need for Csrss.exe to receive
  keyboard input (as part of the raw input thread), send it through Win32k.sys to Conhost.exe, and
  then use ALPC to send it to Cmd.exe. Instead, the command-line application can directly receive
  input from the console driver through read/write I/Os, avoiding needless context switching.

     The following Process Explorer screen shows the handle Conhost.exe holds open to the device
  object exposed by ConDrv.sys named \Device\ConDrv. (For more details on device names and
  I/O, see Chapter 6.)

      Notice that Conhost.exe is a child process of the console process (in this case, Cmd.exe).
  Conhost creation is initiated by the image loader for Console subsystem images or on demand
  if a GUI subsystem image calls the AllocConsole Windows API. (Of course, GUI and Console
  are essentially the same in the sense both are variants of the Windows subsystem type.) The real
  workhorse of Conhost.exe is a DLL it loads (\Windows\System32\ConhostV2.dll) that includes the
  bulk of code that communicates with the console driver.

     Other subsystems
     As mentioned, Windows originally supported POSIX and OS/2 subsystems. Because these subsystems
     are no longer provided with Windows, they are not covered in this book. The general concept of sub-
     systems remains, however, making the system extensible to new subsystems if such a need arises in the
     future.

     Pico providers and the Windows subsystem for Linux
     The traditional subsystem model, while extensible and clearly powerful enough to have supported
     POSIX and OS/2 for a decade, has two important technical disadvantages that made it hard to reach
     broad usage of non-Windows binaries beyond a few specialized use cases:

        ■■   As mentioned, because subsystem information is extracted from the Portable Executable (PE)
             header, it requires the source code of the original binary to rebuild it as a Windows PE ex-
             ecutable file (.exe). This will also change any POSIX-style dependencies and system calls into
             Windows-style imports of the Psxdll.dll library.

        ■■   It is limited by the functionality provided either by the Win32 subsystem (on which it sometimes
             piggybacks) or the NT kernel. Therefore, the subsystem wraps, instead of emulates, the behav-
             ior required by the POSIX application. This can sometimes lead to subtle compatibility flaws.

        Finally, it’s also important to point out, that as the name says, the POSIX subsystem/SUA was de-
     signed with POSIX/UNIX applications in mind, which dominated the server market decades ago, not
     true Linux applications, which are common today.

         Solving these issues required a different approach to building a subsystem—one that did not
     require the traditional user-mode wrapping of the other environments’ system call and the execution
     of traditional PE images. Luckily, the Drawbridge project from Microsoft Research provided the perfect
     vehicle for an updated take on subsystems. It resulted in the implementation of the Pico model.

         Under this model, the idea of a Pico provider is defined, which is a custom kernel-mode driver that
     receives access to specialized kernel interfaces through the PsRegisterPicoProvider API. The ben-
     efits of these specialized interfaces are two-fold:

        ■■   They allow the provider to create Pico processes and threads while customizing their execution
             contexts, segments, and store data in their respective EPROCESS and ETHREAD structures (see
             Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 for more on these structures).

        ■■   They allow the provider to receive a rich set of notifications whenever such processes or threads
             engage in certain system actions such as system calls, exceptions, APCs, page faults, termination,
             context changes, suspension/resume, etc.

        With Windows 10 version 1607, one such Pico provider is present: Lxss.sys and its partner Lxcore.sys.
     As the name suggests, this refers to the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) component, and these
     drivers make up the Pico provider interface for it.

    Because the Pico provider receives almost all possible transitions to and from user and kernel mode
(be they system calls or exceptions, for example), as long as the Pico process (or processes) running
underneath it has an address space that it can recognize, and has code that can natively execute
within it, the “true” kernel below doesn’t really matter as long as these transitions are handled in a fully
transparent way. As such, Pico processes running under the WSL Pico provider, as you’ll see in Chapter
3, are very different from normal Windows processes—lacking, for example, the Ntdll.dll that is always
loaded into normal processes. Instead, their memory contains structures such as a vDSO, a special im-
age seen only on Linux/BSD systems.

    Furthermore, if the Linux processes are to run transparently, they must be able to execute without
requiring recompilation as PE Windows executables. Because the Windows kernel does not know how
to map other image types, such images cannot be launched through the CreateProcess API by a Win-
dows process, nor do they ever call such APIs themselves (because they have no idea they are running
on Windows). Such interoperability support is provided both by the Pico provider and the LXSS Manag-
er, which is a user-mode service. The former implements a private interface that it uses to communicate
with the LXSS Manager. The latter implements a COM-based interface that it uses to communicate with
a specialized launcher process, currently known as Bash.exe, and with a management process, called
Lxrun.exe. The following diagram shows an overview of the components that make up WSL.

    Providing support for a wide variety of Linux applications is a massive undertaking. Linux has
hundreds of system calls—about as many as the Windows kernel itself. Although the Pico provider can
leverage existing features of Windows—many of which were built to support the original POSIX sub-
system, such as fork() support—in some cases, it must re-implement functionality on its own. For ex-
ample, even though NTFS is used to store the actual file system (and not EXTFS), the Pico provider has
an entire implementation of the Linux Virtual File System (VFS), including support for inodes, inotify(),
and /sys, /dev, and other similar Linux-style file-system–based namespaces with corresponding behav-
iors. Similarly, while the Pico provider can leverage Windows Sockets for Kernel (WSK) for networking,
it has complex wrapping around actual socket behavior, such that it can support UNIX domain sockets,
Linux NetLink sockets, and standard Internet sockets.

    In other cases, existing Windows facilities were simply not adequately compatible, sometimes in subtle
ways. For example, Windows has a named pipe driver (Npfs.sys) that supports the traditional pipe IPC
mechanism. Yet, it’s subtly different enough from Linux pipes that applications would break. This required
a from-scratch implementation of pipes for Linux applications, without using the kernel’s Npfs.sys driver.

        As the feature is still officially in beta at the time of this writing and subject to significant change, we
     won’t cover the actual internals of the subsystem in this book. We will, however, take another look at
     Pico processes in Chapter 3. When the subsystem matures beyond beta, you will probably see official
     documentation on MSDN and stable APIs for interacting with Linux processes from Windows.

     Ntdll.dll
     Ntdll.dll is a special system support library primarily for the use of subsystem DLLs and native applica-
     tions. (Native in this context refers to images that are not tied to any particular subsystem.) It contains
     two types of functions:

        ■■    System service dispatch stubs to Windows executive system services

        ■■    Internal support functions used by subsystems, subsystem DLLs, and other native images

        The first group of functions provides the interface to the Windows executive system services that
     can be called from user mode. There are more than 450 such functions, such as NtCreateFile, Nt-
     SetEvent, and so on. As noted, most of the capabilities of these functions are accessible through the
     Windows API. (A number are not, however, and are for use only by specific OS-internal components.)

         For each of these functions, Ntdll.dll contains an entry point with the same name. The code inside
     the function contains the architecture-specific instruction that causes a transition into kernel mode
     to invoke the system service dispatcher. (This is explained in more detail in Chapter 8 in Part 2.) After
     verifying some parameters, this system service dispatcher calls the actual kernel-mode system service
     that contains the real code inside Ntoskrnl.exe. The following experiment shows what these functions
     look like.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing the system service dispatcher code
        Open the version of WinDbg that corresponds to your system’s architecture (for example the x64
        version bit on 64 bit Windows). Then open the File menu and select Open Executable. Navigate
        to %SystemRoot%\System32 and select Notepad.exe.

           Notepad should launch and the debugger should break in the initial breakpoint. This is very
        early in the life of the process, which you can witness by executing the k (call stack) command.
        You should see a few functions starting with Ldr, which indicates the image loader. The main
        function for Notepad has not executed yet, which means you won’t see Notepad’s window.

             Set a breakpoint in the NtCreateFile inside Ntdll.dll (the debuggers are not case sensitive):
        bp ntdll!ntcreatefile

           Enter the g (go) command or press F5 to let Notepad continue execution. The debugger
        should break almost immediately, showing something like this (x64):
        Breakpoint 0 hit
        ntdll!NtCreateFile:
        00007ffa'9f4e5b10 4c8bd1                  mov       r10,rcx

      You may see the function name as ZwCreateFile. ZwCreateFile and NtCreateFile refer to
   the same symbol in user mode. Now enter the u (unassembled) command to see a few instructions
   ahead:
   00007ffa'9f4e5b10 4c8bd1          mov     r10,rcx
   00007ffa'9f4e5b13 b855000000      mov     eax,55h
   00007ffa'9f4e5b18 f604250803fe7f01 test    byte ptr [SharedUserData+0x308
   (00000000'7ffe0308)],1
   00007ffa'9f4e5b20 7503            jne     ntdll!NtCreateFile+0x15
   (00007ffa'9f4e5b25)
   00007ffa'9f4e5b22 0f05            syscall
   00007ffa'9f4e5b24 c3              ret
   00007ffa'9f4e5b25 cd2e            int     2Eh
   00007ffa'9f4e5b27 c3              ret

       The EAX register is set with the system service number (55 hex in this case). This is the system
   service number on this OS (Windows 10 Pro x64). Then notice the syscall instruction. This is
   the one causing the processor to transition to kernel mode, jumping to the system service dis-
   patcher, where that EAX is used to select the NtCreateFile executive service. You’ll also notice
   a check for a flag (1) at offset 0x308 in the Shared User Data (more information on this structure
   is available in Chapter 4). If this flag is set, execution will take another path, by using the int 2Eh
   instruction instead. If you enable the specific Credential Guard VBS feature that is described in
   Chapter 7, this flag will be set on your machine, because the hypervisor can react to the int in-
   struction in a more efficient fashion than the syscall instruction, and this behavior is beneficial
   to Credential Guard.

      As mentioned, more details about this mechanism (and the behavior of both syscall and
   int) are provided in Chapter 8 in Part 2. For now, you can try to locate other native services such
   as NtReadFile, NtWriteFile and NtClose.

   You saw in the “Virtualization-based security architecture overview” section that IUM applications
can leverage another binary similar to Ntdll.dll, called IumDll.dll. This library also contains system calls,
but their indices will be different. If you have a system with Credential Guard enabled, you can repeat
the preceding experiment by opening the File menu in WinDbg, choosing Open Crash Dump, and
choosing IumDll.dll as the file. Note how in the following output, the system call index has the high bit
set, and no SharedUserData check is done; syscall is always the instruction used for these types of
system calls, which are called secure system calls:

0:000> u iumdll!IumCrypto
iumdll!IumCrypto:
00000001'80001130 4c8bd1                 mov     r10,rcx
00000001'80001133 b802000008             mov     eax,8000002h
00000001'80001138 0f05                   syscall
00000001'8000113a c3                     ret

   Ntdll.dll also contains many support functions, such as the image loader (functions that start with
Ldr), the heap manager, and Windows subsystem process communication functions (functions that

     start with Csr). Ntdll.dll also includes general run-time library routines (functions that start with Rtl),
     support for user-mode debugging (functions that start with DbgUi), Event Tracing for Windows (func-
     tions starting in Etw), and the user-mode asynchronous procedure call (APC) dispatcher and exception
     dispatcher. (APCs are explained briefly in Chapter 6 and in more detail in Chapter 8 in Part 2, as well as
     exceptions.)

        Finally, you’ll find a small subset of the C Run-Time (CRT) routines in Ntdll.dll, limited to those routines
     that are part of the string and standard libraries (such as memcpy, strcpy, sprintf, and so on); these
     are useful for native applications, described next.

     Native images
     Some images (executables) don’t belong to any subsystem. In other words, they don’t link against a set
     of subsystem DLLs, such as Kernel32.dll for the Windows subsystem. Instead, they link only to Ntdll.dll,
     which is the lowest common denominator that spans subsystems. Because the native API exposed
     by Ntdll.dll is mostly undocumented, these kind of images are typically built only by Microsoft. One
     example is the Session Manager process (Smss.exe, described in more detail later in this chapter).
     Smss.exe is the first user-mode process created (directly by the kernel), so it cannot be dependent
     on the Windows subsystem because Csrss.exe (the Windows subsystem process) has not started yet.
     In fact, Smss.exe is responsible for launching Csrss.exe. Another example is the Autochk utility that
     sometimes runs at system startup to check disks. Because it runs relatively early in the boot process
     (launched by Smss.exe, in fact), it cannot depend on any subsystem.

       Here is a screenshot of Smss.exe in Dependency Walker, showing its dependency on Ntdll.dll only.
     Notice the subsystem type is indicated by Native.

     Executive
     The Windows executive is the upper layer of Ntoskrnl.exe. (The kernel is the lower layer.) The executive
     includes the following types of functions:

        ■■   Functions that are exported and callable from user mode These functions are called
             system services and are exported via Ntdll.dll (such as NtCreateFile from the previous experi-
             ment). Most of the services are accessible through the Windows API or the APIs of another
             environment subsystem. A few services, however, aren’t available through any documented
             subsystem function. (Examples include ALPC and various query functions such as NtQuery-
             InformationProcess, specialized functions such as NtCreatePagingFile, and so on.)

   ■■   Device driver functions that are called through the DeviceIoControl function This provides a
        general interface from user mode to kernel mode to call functions in device drivers that are not
        associated with a read or write. The driver used for Process Explorer and Process Monitor from
        Sysinternals are good examples of that as is the console driver (ConDrv.sys) mentioned earlier.

   ■■   Functions that can be called only from kernel mode that are exported and documented
        in the WDK These include various support routines, such as the I/O manager (start with Io),
        general executive functions (Ex) and more, needed for device driver developers.

   ■■   Functions that are exported and can be called from kernel mode but are not documented
        in the WDK These include the functions called by the boot video driver, which start with Inbv.

   ■■   Functions that are defined as global symbols but are not exported These include internal
        support functions called within Ntoskrnl.dll, such as those that start with Iop (internal I/O man-
        ager support functions) or Mi (internal memory management support functions).

   ■■   Functions that are internal to a module that are not defined as global symbols             These
        functions are used exclusively by the executive and kernel.

   The executive contains the following major components, each of which is covered in detail in a sub-
sequent chapter of this book:

   ■■   Configuration manager The configuration manager, explained in Chapter 9 in Part 2, is
        responsible for implementing and managing the system registry.

   ■■   Process manager The process manager, explained in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4, creates and
        terminates processes and threads. The underlying support for processes and threads is imple-
        mented in the Windows kernel; the executive adds additional semantics and functions to these
        lower-level objects.

   ■■   Security Reference Monitor (SRM) The SRM, described in Chapter 7, enforces security
        policies on the local computer. It guards OS resources, performing run-time object protection
        and auditing.

   ■■   I/O manager The I/O manager, discussed in Chapter 6, implements device-independent I/O
        and is responsible for dispatching to the appropriate device drivers for further processing.

   ■■   Plug and Play (PnP) manager The PnP manager, covered in Chapter 6, determines which driv-
        ers are required to support a particular device and loads those drivers. It retrieves the hardware
        resource requirements for each device during enumeration. Based on the resource requirements
        of each device, the PnP manager assigns the appropriate hardware resources such as I/O ports,
        IRQs, DMA channels, and memory locations. It is also responsible for sending proper event notifi-
        cation for device changes (the addition or removal of a device) on the system.

   ■■   Power manager The power manager (explained in Chapter 6), processor power management
        (PPM), and power management framework (PoFx) coordinate power events and generate
        power management I/O notifications to device drivers. When the system is idle, the PPM can
        be configured to reduce power consumption by putting the CPU to sleep. Changes in power

             consumption by individual devices are handled by device drivers but are coordinated by the
             power manager and PoFx. On certain classes of devices, the terminal timeout manager also
             manages physical display timeouts based on device usage and proximity.

        ■■   Windows Driver Model (WDM) Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) routines
             These routines, discussed in Chapter 9 in Part 2, enable device drivers to publish performance
             and configuration information and receive commands from the user-mode WMI service.
             Consumers of WMI information can be on the local machine or remote across the network.

        ■■   Memory manager The memory manager, discussed in Chapter 5, implements virtual
             memory, a memory management scheme that provides a large private address space for each
             process that can exceed available physical memory. The memory manager also provides the
             underlying support for the cache manager. It is assisted by the prefetcher and Store Manager,
             also explained in Chapter 5.

        ■■   Cache manager The cache manager, discussed in Chapter 14, “Cache manager,” in Part 2,
             improves the performance of file-based I/O by causing recently referenced disk data to reside
             in main memory for quick access. It also achieves this by deferring disk writes by holding the
             updates in memory for a short time before sending them to the disk. As you’ll see, it does this
             by using the memory manager’s support for mapped files.

        In addition, the executive contains four main groups of support functions that are used by the
     executive components just listed. About a third of these support functions are documented in the WDK
     because device drivers also use them. These are the four categories of support functions:

        ■■   Object manager The object manager creates, manages, and deletes Windows executive ob-
             jects and abstract data types that are used to represent OS resources such as processes, threads,
             and the various synchronization objects. The object manager is explained in Chapter 8 in Part 2.

        ■■   Asynchronous LPC (ALPC) facility The ALPC facility, explained in Chapter 8 in Part 2, passes
             messages between a client process and a server process on the same computer. Among other
             things, ALPC is used as a local transport for remote procedure call (RPC), the Windows imple-
             mentation of an industry-standard communication facility for client and server processes across
             a network.

        ■■   Run-time library functions These include string processing, arithmetic operations, data type
             conversion, and security structure processing.

        ■■   Executive support routines These include system memory allocation (paged and non-paged
             pool), interlocked memory access, as well as special types of synchronization mechanisms such
             as executive resources, fast mutexes, and pushlocks.

        The executive also contains a variety of other infrastructure routines, some of which are mentioned
     only briefly in this book:

        ■■   Kernel debugger library This allows debugging of the kernel from a debugger supporting
             KD, a portable protocol supported over a variety of transports such as USB, Ethernet, and IEEE
             1394, and implemented by WinDbg and the Kd.exe debuggers.

   ■■   User-Mode Debugging Framework This is responsible for sending events to the user-mode
        debugging API and allowing breakpoints and stepping through code to work, as well as for
        changing contexts of running threads.

   ■■   Hypervisor library and VBS library These provide kernel support for the secure virtual
        machine environment and optimize certain parts of the code when the system knows it’s
        running in a client partition (virtual environment).

   ■■   Errata manager The errata manager provides workarounds for nonstandard or noncompliant
        hardware devices.

   ■■   Driver Verifier The Driver Verifier implements optional integrity checks of kernel-mode
        drivers and code (described in Chapter 6).

   ■■   Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) ETW provides helper routines for system-wide event
        tracing for kernel-mode and user-mode components.

   ■■   Windows Diagnostic Infrastructure (WDI)          The WDI enables intelligent tracing of system
        activity based on diagnostic scenarios.

   ■■   Windows Hardware Error Architecture (WHEA) support routines               These routines provide
        a common framework for reporting hardware errors.

   ■■   File-System Runtime Library (FSRTL)        The FSRTL provides common support routines for file
        system drivers.

   ■■   Kernel Shim Engine (KSE) The KSE provides driver-compatibility shims and additional device
        errata support. It leverages the shim infrastructure and database described in Chapter 8 in Part 2.

Kernel
The kernel consists of a set of functions in Ntoskrnl.exe that provides fundamental mechanisms. These
include thread-scheduling and synchronization services, used by the executive components, and low-
level hardware architecture–dependent support, such as interrupt and exception dispatching, which is
different on each processor architecture. The kernel code is written primarily in C, with assembly code
reserved for those tasks that require access to specialized processor instructions and registers not eas-
ily accessible from C.

   Like the various executive support functions mentioned in the preceding section, a number of func-
tions in the kernel are documented in the WDK (and can be found by searching for functions beginning
with Ke) because they are needed to implement device drivers.

Kernel objects
The kernel provides a low-level base of well-defined, predictable OS primitives and mechanisms that
allow higher-level components of the executive to do what they need to do. The kernel separates itself
from the rest of the executive by implementing OS mechanisms and avoiding policy making. It leaves
nearly all policy decisions to the executive, with the exception of thread scheduling and dispatching,
which the kernel implements.

         Outside the kernel, the executive represents threads and other shareable resources as objects. These
     objects require some policy overhead, such as object handles to manipulate them, security checks to
     protect them, and resource quotas to be deducted when they are created. This overhead is eliminated
     in the kernel, which implements a set of simpler objects, called kernel objects, that help the kernel
     control central processing and support the creation of executive objects. Most executive-level objects
     encapsulate one or more kernel objects, incorporating their kernel-defined attributes.

        One set of kernel objects, called control objects, establishes semantics for controlling various OS
     functions. This set includes the Asynchronous Procedure Call (APC) object, the Deferred Procedure
     Call (DPC) object, and several objects the I/O manager uses, such as the interrupt object.

         Another set of kernel objects, known as dispatcher objects, incorporates synchronization capabili-
     ties that alter or affect thread scheduling. The dispatcher objects include the kernel thread, mutex
     (called mutant in kernel terminology), event, kernel event pair, semaphore, timer, and waitable timer.
     The executive uses kernel functions to create instances of kernel objects, to manipulate them, and to
     construct the more complex objects it provides to user mode. Objects are explained in more detail in
     Chapter 8 in Part 2, and processes and threads are described in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4, respectively.

     Kernel processor control region and control block
     The kernel uses a data structure called the kernel processor control region (KPCR) to store processor-
     specific data. The KPCR contains basic information such as the processor’s interrupt dispatch table
     (IDT), task state segment (TSS), and global descriptor table (GDT). It also includes the interrupt con-
     troller state, which it shares with other modules, such as the ACPI driver and the HAL. To provide easy
     access to the KPCR, the kernel stores a pointer to it in the fs register on 32-bit Windows and in the gs
     register on an x64 Windows system.

        The KPCR also contains an embedded data structure called the kernel processor control block
     (KPRCB). Unlike the KPCR, which is documented for third-party drivers and other internal Windows
     kernel components, the KPRCB is a private structure used only by the kernel code in Ntoskrnl.exe. It
     contains the following:

        ■■   Scheduling information such as the current, next, and idle threads scheduled for execution on
             the processor

        ■■   The dispatcher database for the processor, which includes the ready queues for each priority
             level

        ■■   The DPC queue

        ■■   CPU vendor and identifier information, such as the model, stepping, speed, and feature bits

        ■■   CPU and NUMA topology, such as node information, cores per package, logical processors per
             core, and so on

        ■■   Cache sizes

        ■■   Time accounting information, such as the DPC and interrupt time.

   The KPRCB also contains all the statistics for the processor, such as:

   ■■   I/O statistics

   ■■   Cache manager statistics (see Chapter 14 in Part 2 for a description of these)

   ■■   DPC statistics

   ■■   Memory manager statistics (see Chapter 5 for more information)

   Finally, the KPRCB is sometimes used to store cache-aligned, per-processor structures to optimize
memory access, especially on NUMA systems. For example, the non-paged and paged-pool system
look-aside lists are stored in the KPRCB.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the KPCR and KPRCB
   You can view the contents of the KPCR and KPRCB by using the !pcr and !prcb kernel debugger
   commands. For the latter, if you don’t include flags, the debugger will display information for CPU 0
   by default. Otherwise, you can specify a CPU by adding its number after the command—for
   example, !prcb 2. The former command, on the other hand, will always display information on the
   current processor, which you can change in a remote debugging session. If doing local debugging,
   you can obtain the address of the KPCR by using the !pcr extension, followed by the CPU number,
   then replacing @$pcr with that address. Do not use any of the other output shown in the !pcr
   command. This extension is deprecated and shows incorrect data. The following example shows
   what the output of the dt nt!_KPCR @$pcr and !prcb commands looks like (Windows 10 x64):
   lkd> dt nt!_KPCR @$pcr
      +0x000 NtTib            : _NT_TIB
      +0x000 GdtBase          : 0xfffff802'a5f4bfb0 _KGDTENTRY64
      +0x008 TssBase          : 0xfffff802'a5f4a000 _KTSS64
      +0x010 UserRsp          : 0x0000009b'1a47b2b8
      +0x018 Self             : 0xfffff802'a280a000 _KPCR
      +0x020 CurrentPrcb      : 0xfffff802'a280a180 _KPRCB
      +0x028 LockArray        : 0xfffff802'a280a7f0 _KSPIN_LOCK_QUEUE
      +0x030 Used_Self        : 0x0000009b'1a200000 Void
      +0x038 IdtBase          : 0xfffff802'a5f49000 _KIDTENTRY64
      +0x040 Unused           : [2] 0
      +0x050 Irql             : 0 ''
      +0x051 SecondLevelCacheAssociativity : 0x10 ''
      +0x052 ObsoleteNumber   : 0 ''
      +0x053 Fill0            : 0 ''
      +0x054 Unused0          : [3] 0
      +0x060 MajorVersion     : 1
      +0x062 MinorVersion     : 1
      +0x064 StallScaleFactor : 0x8a0
      +0x068 Unused1          : [3] (null)
      +0x080 KernelReserved   : [15] 0
      +0x0bc SecondLevelCacheSize : 0x400000
      +0x0c0 HalReserved      : [16] 0x839b6800
      +0x100 Unused2          : 0
      +0x108 KdVersionBlock   : (null)

           +0x110 Unused3          : (null)
           +0x118 PcrAlign1        : [24] 0
           +0x180 Prcb             : _KPRCB
        lkd> !prcb
        PRCB for Processor 0 at fffff803c3b23180:
        Current IRQL -- 0
        Threads-- Current ffffe0020535a800 Next 0000000000000000 Idle fffff803c3b99740
        Processor Index 0 Number (0, 0) GroupSetMember 1
        Interrupt Count -- 0010d637
        Times -- Dpc    000000f4 Interrupt 00000119
                 Kernel 0000d952 User       0000425d

          You can also use the dt command to directly dump the _KPRCB data structures because the
        debugger command gives you the address of the structure (shown in bold for clarity in the previ-
        ous output). For example, if you wanted to determine the speed of the processor as detected at
        boot, you could look at the MHz field with the following command:
        lkd> dt nt!_KPRCB fffff803c3b23180 MHz
           +0x5f4 MHz : 0x893
        lkd> ? 0x893
        Evaluate expression: 2195 = 00000000'00000893

           On this machine, the processor was running at about 2.2 GHz during boot-up.

     Hardware support
     The other major job of the kernel is to abstract or isolate the executive and device drivers from varia-
     tions between the hardware architectures supported by Windows. This job includes handling variations
     in functions such as interrupt handling, exception dispatching, and multiprocessor synchronization.

        Even for these hardware-related functions, the design of the kernel attempts to maximize the
     amount of common code. The kernel supports a set of interfaces that are portable and semantically
     identical across architectures. Most of the code that implements these portable interfaces is also identi-
     cal across architectures.

        Some of these interfaces are implemented differently on different architectures or are partially
     implemented with architecture-specific code. These architecturally independent interfaces can be
     called on any machine, and the semantics of the interface will be the same regardless of whether the
     code varies by architecture. Some kernel interfaces, such as spinlock routines, described in Chapter 8 in
     Part 2, are actually implemented in the HAL (described in the next section) because their implementation
     can vary for systems within the same architecture family.

        The kernel also contains a small amount of code with x86-specific interfaces needed to support
     old 16-bit MS-DOS programs (on 32-bit systems). These x86 interfaces aren’t portable in the sense
     that they can’t be called on a machine based on any other architecture; they won’t be present. This
     x86-specific code, for example, supports calls to use Virtual 8086 mode, required for the emulation
     of certain real-mode code on older video cards.

   Other examples of architecture-specific code in the kernel include the interfaces to provide transla-
tion buffer and CPU cache support. This support requires different code for the different architectures
because of the way caches are implemented.

    Another example is context switching. Although at a high level the same algorithm is used for
thread selection and context switching (the context of the previous thread is saved, the context of the
new thread is loaded, and the new thread is started), there are architectural differences among the
implementations on different processors. Because the context is described by the processor state (reg-
isters and so on), what is saved and loaded varies depending on the architecture.

Hardware abstraction layer
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, one of the crucial elements of the Windows design is its
portability across a variety of hardware platforms. With OneCore and the myriad device form factors
available, this is more important than ever. The hardware abstraction layer (HAL) is a key part of making
this portability possible. The HAL is a loadable kernel-mode module (Hal.dll) that provides the low-
level interface to the hardware platform on which Windows is running. It hides hardware-dependent
details such as I/O interfaces, interrupt controllers, and multiprocessor communication mechanisms—
any functions that are both architecture-specific and machine-dependent.

   So rather than access hardware directly, Windows internal components and user-written device
drivers maintain portability by calling the HAL routines when they need platform-dependent informa-
tion. For this reason, many HAL routines are documented in the WDK. To find out more about the HAL
and its use by device drivers, refer to the WDK.

    Although a couple of x86 HALs are included in a standard desktop Windows installation (as shown
in Table 2-4), Windows has the ability to detect at boot-up time which HAL should be used, eliminating
the problem that existed on earlier versions of Windows when attempting to boot a Windows installa-
tion on a different kind of system.

TABLE 2-4     List of x86 HALs
HAL File Name            Systems Supported

Halacpi.dll              Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI) PCs. Implies uniprocessor-only machine,
                         without APIC support. (The presence of either one would make the system use the HAL below
                         instead.)

Halmacpi.dll             Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC) PCs with an ACPI. The existence of an
                         APIC implies SMP support.

    On x64 and ARM machines, there is only one HAL image, called Hal.dll. This results from all x64
machines having the same motherboard configuration, because the processors require ACPI and APIC
support. Therefore, there is no need to support machines without ACPI or with a standard PIC. Similarly,
all ARM systems have ACPI and use interrupt controllers, which are similar to a standard APIC. Once
again, a single HAL can support this.

    On the other hand, although such interrupt controllers are similar, they are not identical. Addition-
ally, the actual timer and memory/DMA controllers on some ARM systems are different from others.

     Finally, in the IoT world, certain standard PC hardware such as the Intel DMA controller may not be pres-
     ent and might require support for a different controller, even on PC-based systems. Older versions of
     Windows handled this by forcing each vendor to ship a custom HAL for each possible platform combina-
     tion. This is no longer realistic, however, and results in significant amounts of duplicated code. Instead,
     Windows now supports modules known as HAL extensions, which are additional DLLs on disk that the
     boot loader may load if specific hardware requiring them is needed (usually through ACPI and registry-
     based configuration). Your desktop Windows 10 system is likely to include a HalExtPL080.dll and
     HalExtIntcLpioDMA.dll, the latter of which is used on certain low-power Intel platforms, for example.

        Creating HAL extensions requires collaboration with Microsoft, and such files must be custom
     signed with a special HAL extension certificate available only to hardware vendors. Additionally, they
     are highly limited in the APIs they can use and interact through a limited import/export table mecha-
     nism that does not use the traditional PE image mechanism. For example, the following experiment will
     not show you any functions if you try to use it on a HAL extension.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing Ntoskrnl.exe and HAL image dependencies
        You can view the relationship of the kernel and HAL images by using the Dependency Walker
        tool (Depends.exe) to examine their export and import tables. To examine an image in the
        Dependency Walker, open the File menu, choose Open, and select the desired image file.

           Here is a sample of output you can see by viewing the dependencies of Ntoskrnl.exe using this
        tool (for now, disregard the errors displayed by Dependency Walker’s inability to parse the API sets):

           Notice that Ntoskrnl.exe is linked against the HAL, which is in turn linked against Ntoskrnl.exe.
        (They both use functions in each other.) Ntoskrnl.exe is also linked to the following binaries:

         ■■   Pshed.dll The Platform-Specific Hardware Error Driver (PSHED) provides an abstraction of
              the hardware error reporting facilities of the underlying platform. It does this by hiding the
              details of a platform’s error-handling mechanisms from the OS and exposing a consistent
              interface to the Windows OS.

 ■■   Bootvid.dll The Boot Video Driver on x86 systems (Bootvid) provides support for the
      VGA commands required to display boot text and the boot logo during startup.

 ■■   Kdcom.dll    This is the Kernel Debugger Protocol (KD) communications library.

 ■■   Ci.dll This is the integrity library. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more information on code
      integrity.)

 ■■   Msrpc.sys The Microsoft Remote Procedure Call (RPC) client driver for kernel mode allows
      the kernel (and other drivers) to communicate with user-mode services through RPC or to
      marshal MES-encoded assets. For example, the kernel uses this to marshal data to and from
      the user-mode Plug-and-Play service.

  For a detailed description of the information displayed by this tool, see the Dependency
Walker help file (Depends.hlp).

    We asked you to disregard the errors that Dependency Walker has parsing API Sets because
its authors have not updated it to correctly handle this mechanism. While the implementation
of API Sets will be described in Chapter 3 in the “Image loader” section, you should still use the
Dependency Walker output to review what other dependencies the kernel may potentially have,
depending on SKU, as these API Sets may indeed point to real modules. Note that when dealing
with API Sets, they are described in terms of contracts, not DLLs or libraries. It’s important to
realize that any number (or even all) of these contracts might be absent from your machine.
Their presence depends on a combination of factors: SKU, platform, and vendor.

 ■■   Werkernel contract This provides support for Windows Error Reporting (WER) in the
      kernel, such as with live kernel dump creation.

 ■■   Tm contract This is the kernel transaction manager (KTM), described in Chapter 8 in Part 2.

 ■■   Kcminitcfg contract This is responsible for the custom initial registry configuration that
      may be needed on specific platforms.

 ■■   Ksr contract This handles Kernel Soft Reboot (KSR) and the required persistence of cer-
      tain memory ranges to support it, specifically on certain mobile and IoT platforms.

 ■■   Ksecurity contract This contains additional policies for AppContainer processes (that is,
      Windows Apps) running in user mode on certain devices and SKUs.

 ■■   Ksigningpolicy contract This contains additional policies for user-mode code integrity
      (UMCI) to either support non-AppContainer processes on certain SKUs or futher configure
      Device Guard and/or App Locker security features on certain platforms/SKUs.

 ■■   Ucode contract This is the microcode update library for platforms that can support pro-
      cessor microcode updates, such as Intel and AMD.

 ■■   Clfs contract This is the Common Log File System driver, used by (among other things)
      the Transactional Registry (TxR). For more information on TxR, see Chapter 8 in Part 2.

         ■■    Ium Contract These are additional policies for IUM Trustlets running on the system,
               which may be needed on certain SKUs, such as for providing shielded VMs on Datacenter
               Server. Trustlets are described further in Chapter 3.

     Device drivers
     Although device drivers are explained in detail in Chapter 6, this section provides a brief overview of
     the types of drivers and explains how to list the drivers installed and loaded on your system.

        Windows supports kernel-mode and user-mode drivers, but this section discussed the kernel drivers
     only. The term device driver implies a hardware device, but there are other device driver types that are
     not directly related to hardware (listed momentarily). This section focuses on device drivers that are
     related to controlling a hardware device.

        Device drivers are loadable kernel-mode modules (files typically ending with the .sys extension) that
     interface between the I/O manager and the relevant hardware. They run in kernel mode in one of three
     contexts:

        ■■    In the context of the user thread that initiated an I/O function (such as a read operation)

        ■■    In the context of a kernel-mode system thread (such as a request from the Plug and Play manager)

        ■■    As a result of an interrupt and therefore not in the context of any particular thread but rather of
              whichever thread was current when the interrupt occurred

        As stated in the preceding section, device drivers in Windows don’t manipulate hardware directly.
     Rather, they call functions in the HAL to interface with the hardware. Drivers are typically written in C
     and/or C++. Therefore, with proper use of HAL routines, they can be source-code portable across the
     CPU architectures supported by Windows and binary portable within an architecture family.

        There are several types of device drivers:

        ■■    Hardware device drivers These use the HAL to manipulate hardware to write output to or
              retrieve input from a physical device or network. There are many types of hardware device
              drivers, such as bus drivers, human interface drivers, mass storage drivers, and so on.

        ■■    File system drivers These are Windows drivers that accept file-oriented I/O requests and
              translate them into I/O requests bound for a particular device.

        ■■    File system filter drivers These include drivers that perform disk mirroring and encryption
              or scanning to locate viruses, intercept I/O requests, and perform some added-value processing
              before passing the I/O to the next layer (or in some cases rejecting the operation).

        ■■    Network redirectors and servers These are file system drivers that transmit file system I/O
              requests to a machine on the network and receive such requests, respectively.

        ■■    Protocol drivers These implement a networking protocol such as TCP/IP, NetBEUI, and IPX/SPX.

   ■■   Kernel streaming filter drivers These are chained together to perform signal processing on
        data streams, such as recording or displaying audio and video.

   ■■   Software drivers These are kernel modules that perform operations that can only be done
        in kernel mode on behalf of some user-mode process. Many utilities from Sysinternals such as
        Process Explorer and Process Monitor use drivers to get information or perform operations that
        are not possible to do from user-mode APIs.

Windows driver model
The original driver model was created in the first NT version (3.1) and did not support the concept of
Plug and Play (PnP) because it was not yet available. This remained the case until Windows 2000 came
along (and Windows 95/98 on the consumer Windows side).

   Windows 2000 added support for PnP, Power Options, and an extension to the Windows NT driver
model called the Windows Driver Model (WDM). Windows 2000 and later can run legacy Windows NT
4 drivers, but because these don’t support PnP and Power Options, systems running these drivers will
have reduced capabilities in these two areas.

   Originally, WDM provided a common driver model that was (almost) source compatible between
Windows 2000/XP and Windows 98/ME. This was done to make it easier to write drivers for hardware
devices, since a single code base was needed instead of two. WDM was simulated on Windows 98/ME.
Once these operating systems were no longer used, WDM remained the base model for writing drivers
for hardware devices for Windows 2000 and later versions.

   From the WDM perspective, there are three kinds of drivers:

   ■■   Bus drivers A bus driver services a bus controller, adapter, bridge, or any device that has child
        devices. Bus drivers are required drivers, and Microsoft generally provides them. Each type of
        bus (such as PCI, PCMCIA, and USB) on a system has one bus driver. Third parties can write bus
        drivers to provide support for new buses, such as VMEbus, Multibus, and Futurebus.

   ■■   Function drivers A function driver is the main device driver and provides the operational
        interface for its device. It is a required driver unless the device is used raw, an implementation in
        which I/O is done by the bus driver and any bus filter drivers, such as SCSI PassThru. A function
        driver is by definition the driver that knows the most about a particular device, and it is usually
        the only driver that accesses device-specific registers.

   ■■   Filter drivers A filter driver is used to add functionality to a device or existing driver, or to
        modify I/O requests or responses from other drivers. It is often used to fix hardware that pro-
        vides incorrect information about its hardware resource requirements. Filter drivers are optional
        and can exist in any number, placed above or below a function driver and above a bus driver.
        Usually, system original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) or independent hardware vendors
        (IHVs) supply filter drivers.

   In the WDM driver environment, no single driver controls all aspects of a device. A bus driver is
concerned with reporting the devices on its bus to PnP manager, while a function driver manipulates
the device.

        In most cases, lower-level filter drivers modify the behavior of device hardware. For example, if a de-
     vice reports to its bus driver that it requires 4 I/O ports when it actually requires 16 I/O ports, a lower-
     level, device-specific function filter driver could intercept the list of hardware resources reported by the
     bus driver to the PnP manager and update the count of I/O ports.

        Upper-level filter drivers usually provide added-value features for a device. For example, an upper-
     level device filter driver for a disk can enforce additional security checks.

        Interrupt processing is explained in Chapter 8 in Part 2 and in the narrow context of device drivers,
     in Chapter 6. Further details about the I/O manager, WDM, Plug and Play, and power management are
     also covered in Chapter 6.

     Windows Driver Foundation
     The Windows Driver Foundation (WDF) simplifies Windows driver development by providing two
     frameworks: the Kernel-Mode Driver Framework (KMDF) and the User-Mode Driver Framework
     (UMDF). Developers can use KMDF to write drivers for Windows 2000 SP4 and later, while UMDF sup-
     ports Windows XP and later.

        KMDF provides a simple interface to WDM and hides its complexity from the driver writer without
     modifying the underlying bus/function/filter model. KMDF drivers respond to events that they can
     register and call into the KMDF library to perform work that isn’t specific to the hardware they are
     managing, such as generic power management or synchronization. (Previously, each driver had to
     implement this on its own.) In some cases, more than 200 lines of WDM code can be replaced by a
     single KMDF function call.

        UMDF enables certain classes of drivers—mostly USB-based or other high-latency protocol buses,
     such as those for video cameras, MP3 players, cell phones, and printers—to be implemented as user-
     mode drivers. UMDF runs each user-mode driver in what is essentially a user-mode service, and it uses
     ALPC to communicate to a kernel-mode wrapper driver that provides actual access to hardware. If a
     UMDF driver crashes, the process dies and usually restarts. That way, the system doesn’t become un-
     stable; the device simply becomes unavailable while the service hosting the driver restarts.

        UMDF has two major versions: version 1.x is available for all OS versions that support UMDF, the
     latest and last being version 1.11, available in Windows 10. This version uses C++ and COM for driver
     writing, which is rather convenient for user-mode programmers, but it makes the UMDF model
     different from KMDF. Version 2.0 of UMDF, introduced in Windows 8.1, is based around the same
     object model as KMDF, making the two frameworks very similar in their programming model. Finally,
     WDF has been open-sourced by Microsoft, and at the time of this writing is available on GitHub at
     https://github.com/Microsoft/Windows-Driver-Frameworks.

Universal Windows drivers
Starting with Windows 10, the term Universal Windows drivers refers to the ability to write device driv-
ers once that share APIs and Device Driver Interfaces (DDIs) provided by the Windows 10 common core.
These drivers are binary-compatible for a specific CPU architecture (x86, x64, ARM) and can be used as
is on a variety of form factors, from IoT devices, to phones, to the HoloLens and Xbox One, to laptops
and desktops. Universal drivers can use KMDF, UMDF 2.x, or WDM as their driver model.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the installed device drivers
   To list the installed drivers, run the System Information tool (Msinfo32.exe). To launch this tool,
   click Start and then type Msinfo32 to locate it. Under System Summary, expand Software
   Environment and open System Drivers. Here’s an example output of the list of installed drivers:

      This window displays the list of device drivers defined in the registry, their type, and their state
   (Running or Stopped). Device drivers and Windows service processes are both defined in the
   same place: HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services. However, they are distinguished by a
   type code. For example, type 1 is a kernel-mode device driver. For a complete list of the infor-
   mation stored in the registry for device drivers, see Chapter 9 in Part 2.

       Alternatively, you can list the currently loaded device drivers by selecting the System process
   in Process Explorer and opening the DLL view. Here’s a sample output. (To get the extra columns,
   right-click a column header and click Select Columns to see all the available columns for modules
   in the DLL tab.)

       Peering into undocumented interfaces
       Examining the names of the exported or global symbols in key system images (such as Ntoskrnl.
       exe, Hal.dll, or Ntdll.dll) can be enlightening—you can get an idea of the kinds of things Windows
       can do versus what happens to be documented and supported today. Of course, just because
       you know the names of these functions doesn’t mean that you can or should call them—the
       interfaces are undocumented and are subject to change. We suggest that you look at these func-
       tions purely to gain more insight into the kinds of internal functions Windows performs, not to
       bypass supported interfaces.

          For example, looking at the list of functions in Ntdll.dll gives you the list of all the system
       services that Windows provides to user-mode subsystem DLLs versus the subset that each sub-
       system exposes. Although many of these functions map clearly to documented and supported
       Windows functions, several are not exposed via the Windows API.

          Conversely, it’s also interesting to examine the imports of Windows subsystem DLLs (such as
       Kernel32.dll or Advapi32.dll) and which functions they call in Ntdll.dll.

          Another interesting image to dump is Ntoskrnl.exe—although many of the exported routines
       that kernel-mode device drivers use are documented in the WDK, quite a few are not. You might
       also find it interesting to take a look at the import table for Ntoskrnl.exe and the HAL; this table
       shows the list of functions in the HAL that Ntoskrnl.exe uses and vice versa.

          Table 2-5 lists most of the commonly used function name prefixes for the executive compo-
       nents. Each of these major executive components also uses a variation of the prefix to denote
       internal functions—either the first letter of the prefix followed by an i (for internal) or the full
       prefix followed by a p (for private). For example, Ki represents internal kernel functions, and Psp
       refers to internal process support functions.

TABLE 2-5   Commonly Used Prefixes

Prefix         Component

Alpc           Advanced Local Procedure Calls

Cc             Common Cache

Cm             Configuration manager

Dbg            Kernel debug support

Dbgk           Debugging Framework for user mode

Em             Errata manager

Etw            Event Tracing for Windows

Ex             Executive support routines

FsRtl          File System Runtime Library

Hv             Hive library

Hvl            Hypervisor library

Io             I/O manager

Kd             Kernel debugger

Ke             Kernel

Kse            Kernel Shim Engine

Lsa            Local Security Authority

Mm             Memory manager

Nt             NT system services (accessible from user mode through system calls)

Ob             Object manager

Pf             Prefetcher

Po             Power manager

PoFx           Power framework

Pp             PnP manager

Ppm            Processor power manager

Ps             Process support

Rtl            Run-time library

Se             Security Reference Monitor

Sm             Store Manager

Tm             Transaction manager

Ttm            Terminal timeout manager

Vf             Driver Verifier

             TABLE 2-5    Commonly Used Prefixes (Continued)

              Prefix           Component

              Vsl              Virtual Secure Mode library

              Wdi              Windows Diagnostic Infrastructure

              Wfp              Windows FingerPrint

              Whea             Windows Hardware Error Architecture

              Wmi              Windows Management Instrumentation

              Zw               Mirror entry point for system services (beginning with Nt) that sets previous
                               access mode to kernel, which eliminates parameter validation, because Nt system
                               services validate parameters only if previous access mode is user

         You can decipher the names of these exported functions more easily if you understand the
       naming convention for Windows system routines. The general format is

             <Prefix><Operation><Object>

          In this format, Prefix is the internal component that exports the routine, Operation tells what is
       being done to the object or resource, and Object identifies what is being operated on.

          For example, ExAllocatePoolWithTag is the executive support routine to allocate from
       a paged or non-paged pool. KeInitializeThread is the routine that allocates and sets up a
       kernel thread object.

     System processes
     The following system processes appear on every Windows 10 system. One of these (Idle) is not a
     process at all, and three of them—System, Secure System, and Memory Compression—are not full
     processes because they are not running a user-mode executable. These types of processes are called
     minimal processes and are described in Chapter 3.
        ■■    Idle process     This contains one thread per CPU to account for idle CPU time.

        ■■    System process       This contains the majority of the kernel-mode system threads and handles.

        ■■    Secure System process This contains the address space of the secure kernel in VTL 1, if running.

        ■■    Memory Compression process This contains the compressed working set of user-mode
              processes, as described in Chapter 5.

        ■■    Session manager        (Smss.exe).

        ■■    Windows subsystem            (Csrss.exe).

        ■■    Session 0 initialization       (Wininit.exe).

        ■■    Logon process       (Winlogon.exe).

   ■■   Service Control Manager (Services.exe) and the child service processes it creates such as the
        system-supplied generic service-host process (Svchost.exe).

   ■■   Local Security Authentication Service (Lsass.exe), and if Credential Guard is active, the
        Isolated Local Security Authentication Server (Lsaiso.exe).

   To understand how these processes are related, it is helpful to view the process tree—that is, the
parent/child relationship between processes. Seeing which process created each process helps to
understand where each process comes from. Figure 2-6 shows the process tree following a Process
Monitor boot trace. To conduct a boot trace, open the Process Monitor Options menu and select
Enable Boot Logging. Then restart the system, open Process Monitor again, and open the Tools
menu and choose Process Tree or press Ctrl+T. Using Process Monitor enables you to see processes
that have since exited, indicated by the faded icon.

FIGURE 2-6   The initial system process tree.

   The next sections explain the key system processes shown in Figure 2-6. Although these sections
briefly indicate the order of process startup, Chapter 11 in Part 2, contains a detailed description of the
steps involved in booting and starting Windows.

System idle process
The first process listed in Figure 2-6 is the Idle process. As discussed in Chapter 3, processes are identified
by their image name. However, this process—as well as the System, Secure System, and Memory Com-
pression processes—isn’t running a real user-mode image. That is, there is no “System Idle Process.exe”
in the \Windows directory. In addition, because of implementation details, the name shown for this
process differs from utility to utility. The Idle process accounts for idle time. That’s why the number of
“threads” in this “process” is the number of logical processors on the system. Table 2-6 lists several of
the names given to the Idle process (process ID 0). The Idle process is explained in detail in Chapter 3.

     TABLE 2-6     Names for process ID 0 in various utilities
     Utility                                     Name for Process ID 0

     Task Manager                                System Idle process

     Process Status (Pstat.exe)                  Idle process

     Process Explorer (Procexp.exe)              System Idle process

     Task List (Tasklist.exe)                    System Idle process

     Tlist (Tlist.exe)                           System process

        Now let’s look at system threads and the purpose of each of the system processes that are running
     real images.

     System process and system threads
     The System process (process ID 4) is the home for a special kind of thread that runs only in kernel
     mode: a kernel-mode system thread. System threads have all the attributes and contexts of regular
     user-mode threads such as a hardware context, priority, and so on, but differ in that they run only in
     kernel-mode executing code loaded in system space, whether that is in Ntoskrnl.exe or in any other
     loaded device driver. In addition, system threads don’t have a user process address space and hence
     must allocate any dynamic storage from OS memory heaps, such as a paged or non-paged pool.

        Note On Windows 10 Version 1511, Task Manager calls the System process System and
        Compressed Memory. This is because of a new feature in Windows 10 that compresses mem-
        ory to save more process information in memory rather than page it out to disk. This mech-
        anism is further described in Chapter 5. Just remember that the term System process refers
        to this one, no matter the exact name displayed by this tool or another. Windows 10 Version
        1607 and Server 2016 revert the name of the System process to System. This is because a new
        process called Memory Compression is used for compressing memory. Chapter 5 discusses
        this process in more detail.

         System threads are created by the PsCreateSystemThread or IoCreateSystemThread functions,
     both documented in the WDK. These threads can be called only from kernel mode. Windows, as well
     as various device drivers, create system threads during system initialization to perform operations that
     require thread context, such as issuing and waiting for I/Os or other objects or polling a device. For
     example, the memory manager uses system threads to implement such functions as writing dirty pages
     to the page file or mapped files, swapping processes in and out of memory, and so forth. The kernel
     creates a system thread called the balance set manager that wakes up once per second to possibly
     initiate various scheduling and memory-management related events. The cache manager also uses
     system threads to implement both read-ahead and write-behind I/Os. The file server device driver
     (Srv2.sys) uses system threads to respond to network I/O requests for file data on disk partitions shared
     to the network. Even the floppy driver has a system thread to poll the floppy device. (Polling is more
     efficient in this case because an interrupt-driven floppy driver consumes a large amount of system

resources.) Further information on specific system threads is included in the chapters in which the
corresponding component is described.

   By default, system threads are owned by the System process, but a device driver can create a system
thread in any process. For example, the Windows subsystem device driver (Win32k.sys) creates a system
thread inside the Canonical Display Driver (Cdd.dll) part of the Windows subsystem process (Csrss.exe)
so that it can easily access data in the user-mode address space of that process.

   When you’re troubleshooting or going through a system analysis, it’s useful to be able to map the
execution of individual system threads back to the driver or even to the subroutine that contains the
code. For example, on a heavily loaded file server, the System process will likely consume considerable
CPU time. But knowing that when the System process is running, “some system thread” is running isn’t
enough to determine which device driver or OS component is running.

    So if threads in the System process are running, first determine which ones are running (for example,
with the Performance Monitor or Process Explorer tools). Once you find the thread (or threads) that is
running, look up in which driver the system thread began execution. This at least tells you which driver
likely created the thread. For example, in Process Explorer, right-click the System process and select
Properties. Then, in the Threads tab, click the CPU column header to view the most active thread at
the top. Select this thread and click the Module button to see the file from which the code on the top
of stack is running. Because the System process is protected in recent versions of Windows, Process
Explorer is unable to show a call stack.

Secure System process
The Secure System process (variable process ID) is technically the home of the VTL 1 secure kernel ad-
dress space, handles, and system threads. That being said, because scheduling, object management,
and memory management are owned by the VTL 0 kernel, no such actual entities will be associated
with this process. Its only real use is to provide a visual indicator to users (for example, in tools such as
Task Manager and Process Explorer) that VBS is currently active (providing at least one of the features
that leverages it).

Memory Compression process
The Memory Compression process uses its user-mode address space to store the compressed pages
of memory that correspond to standby memory that’s been evicted from the working sets of certain
processes, as described in Chapter 5. Unlike the Secure System process, the Memory Compression
process does actually host a number of system threads, usually seen as SmKmStoreHelperWorker and
SmStReadThread. Both of these belong to the Store Manager that manages memory compression.

   Additionally, unlike the other System processes in this list, this process actually stores its memory in
the user-mode address space. This means it is subject to working set trimming and will potentially have
large visible memory usage in system-monitoring tools. In fact, if you view the Performance tab in Task
Manager, which now shows both in-use and compressed memory, you should see that the size of the
Memory Compression process’s working set is equal to the amount of compressed memory.

     Session Manager
     The Session Manager (%SystemRoot%\System32\Smss.exe) is the first user-mode process created in
     the system. The kernel-mode system thread that performs the final phase of the initialization of the
     executive and kernel creates this process. It is created as a Protected Process Light (PPL), as described
     in Chapter 3.

         When Smss.exe starts, it checks whether it is the first instance (the master Smss.exe) or an instance
     of itself that the master Smss.exe launched to create a session. If command-line arguments are pres-
     ent, it is the latter. By creating multiple instances of itself during boot-up and Terminal Services session
     creation, Smss.exe can create multiple sessions at the same time—as many as four concurrent sessions,
     plus one more for each extra CPU beyond one. This ability enhances logon performance on Terminal
     Server systems where multiple users connect at the same time. Once a session finishes initializing, the
     copy of Smss.exe terminates. As a result, only the initial Smss.exe process remains active. (For a descrip-
     tion of Terminal Services, see the section “Terminal Services and multiple sessions” in Chapter 1.)

        The master Smss.exe performs the following one-time initialization steps:

        1.   It marks the process and the initial thread as critical. If a process or thread marked critical exits
             for any reason, Windows crashes. See Chapter 3 for more information.

        2.   It causes the process to treat certain errors as critical, such as invalid handle usage and heap
             corruption, and enables the Disable Dynamic Code Execution process mitigation.

        3.   It increases the process base priority to 11.

        4.   If the system supports hot processor add, it enables automatic processor affinity updates. That
             way, if new processors are added, new sessions will take advantage of the new processors. For
             more information about dynamic processor additions, see Chapter 4.

        5.   It initializes a thread pool to handle ALPC commands and other work items.

        6.   It creates an ALPC port named \SmApiPort to receive commands.

        7.   It initializes a local copy of the NUMA topology of the system.

        8.   It creates a mutex named PendingRenameMutex to synchronize file-rename operations.

        9.   It creates the initial process environment block and updates the Safe Mode variable if needed.

        10. Based on the ProtectionMode value in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session
             Manager key, it creates the security descriptors that will be used for various system resources.

        11. Based on the ObjectDirectories value in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
             Session Manager key, it creates the object manager directories that are described, such as \
             RPC Control and \Windows. It also saves the programs listed under the values BootExecute,
             BootExecuteNoPnpSync, and SetupExecute.

        12. It saves the program path listed in the S0InitialCommand value under the HKLM\SYSTEM\
             CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager key.

13. It reads the NumberOfInitialSessions value from the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
    Control\Session Manager key, but ignores it if the system is in manufacturing mode.

14. It reads the file rename operations listed under the PendingFileRenameOperations and
    PendingFileRenameOperations2 values from the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
    Session Manager key.

15. It reads the values of the AllowProtectedRenames, ClearTempFiles, TempFileDirectory,
    and DisableWpbtExecution values in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session
    Manager key.

16. It reads the list of DLLs in the ExcludeFromKnownDllList value found under the HKLM\SYSTEM\
    CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager key.

17. It reads the paging file information stored in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
    Session Manager\Memory Management key, such as the PagingFiles and ExistingPageFiles
    list values and the PagefileOnOsVolume and WaitForPagingFiles configuration values.

18. It reads and saves the values stored in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session
    Manager\ DOS Devices key.

19. It reads and saves the KnownDlls value list stored in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
    Control\Session Manager key.

20. It creates system-wide environment variables as defined in HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
    Control\Session Manager\Environment.

21. It creates the \KnownDlls directory, as well as \KnownDlls32 on 64-bit systems with WoW64.

22. It creates symbolic links for devices defined in HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Ses-
    sion Manager\DOS Devices under the \Global?? directory in the object manager namespace.

23. It creates a root \Sessions directory in the object manager namespace.

24. It creates protected mailslot and named pipe prefixes to protect service applications from spoof-
    ing attacks that could occur if a malicious user-mode application executes before a service does.

25. It runs the programs part of the BootExecute and BootExecuteNoPnpSync lists parsed earlier.
    (The default is Autochk.exe, which performs a disk check.)

26. It initializes the rest of the registry (HKLM software, SAM, and security hives).

27. Unless disabled by the registry, it executes the Windows Platform Binary Table (WPBT) binary
    registered in the respective ACPI table. This is often used by anti-theft vendors to force the
    execution of a very early native Windows binary that can call home or set up other services for
    execution, even on a freshly installed system. These processes must link with Ntdll.dll only (that
    is, belong to the native subsystem).

28. It processes pending file renames as specified in the registry keys seen earlier unless this is a
    Windows Recovery Environment boot.

        29. It initializes paging file(s) and dedicated dump file information based on the HKLM\System\
             CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management and HKLM\System\Cur-
             rentControlSet\Control\CrashControl keys.

        30. It checks the system’s compatibility with memory cooling technology, used on NUMA systems.

        31. It saves the old paging file, creates the dedicated crash dump file, and creates new paging files
             as needed based on previous crash information.

        32. It creates additional dynamic environment variables, such as PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE,
             PROCESSOR_LEVEL, PROCESSOR_IDENTIFIER, and PROCESSOR_REVISION, which are based on
             registry settings and system information queried from the kernel.

        33. It runs the programs in HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\SetupEx-
             ecute. The rules for these executables are the same as for BootExecute in step 11.

        34. It creates an unnamed section object that is shared by child processes (for example, Csrss.exe)
             for information exchanged with Smss.exe. The handle to this section is passed to child processes
             via handle inheritance. For more on handle inheritance, see Chapter 8 in Part 2.

        35. It opens known DLLs and maps them as permanent sections (mapped files) except those listed
             as exclusions in the earlier registry checks (none listed by default).

        36. It creates a thread to respond to session create requests.

        37. It creates the Smss.exe instance to initialize session 0 (non-interactive session).

        38. It creates the Smss.exe instance to initialize session 1 (interactive session) and, if configured
             in the registry, creates additional Smss.exe instances for extra interactive sessions to prepare
             itself in advance for potential future user logons. When Smss.exe creates these instances, it
             requests the explicit creation of a new session ID using the PROCESS_CREATE_NEW_SESSION flag
             in NtCreateUserProcess each time. This has the effect of calling the internal memory manager
             function MiSessionCreate, which creates the required kernel-mode session data structures
             (such as the Session object) and sets up the Session Space virtual address range that is used
             by the kernel-mode part of the Windows subsystem (Win32k.sys) and other session-space
             device drivers. See Chapter 5 for more details.

        After these steps have been completed, Smss.exe waits forever on the handle to the session 0
     instance of Csrss.exe. Because Csrss.exe is marked as a critical process (and is also a protected process;
     see Chapter 3), if Csrss.exe exits, this wait will never complete because the system will crash.

        A session startup instance of Smss.exe does the following:

        ■■   It creates the subsystem process(es) for the session (by default, the Windows subsystem Csrss.exe).

        ■■   It creates an instance of Winlogon (interactive sessions) or the Session 0 Initial Command, which
             is Wininit (for session 0) by default unless modified by the registry values seen in the preceding
             steps. See the upcoming paragraphs for more information on these two processes.

  Finally, this intermediate Smss.exe process exits, leaving the subsystem processes and Winlogon or
Wininit as parent-less processes.

Windows initialization process
The Wininit.exe process performs the following system initialization functions:

   1.   It marks itself and the main thread critical so that if it exits prematurely and the system is
        booted in debugging mode, it will break into the debugger. (Otherwise, the system will crash.)

   2.   It causes the process to treat certain errors as critical, such as invalid handle usage and heap
        corruption.

   3.   It initializes support for state separation, if the SKU supports it.

   4.   It creates an event named Global\FirstLogonCheck (this can be observed in Process Explorer
        or WinObj under the \BaseNamedObjects directory) for use by Winlogon processes to detect
        which Winlogon is first to launch.

   5.   It creates a WinlogonLogoff event in the BasedNamedObjects object manager directory to be
        used by Winlogon instances. This event is signaled (set) when a logoff operation starts.

   6.   It increases its own process base priority to high (13) and its main thread’s priority to 15.

   7.   Unless configured otherwise with the NoDebugThread registry value in the HKLM\Software\
        Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Winlogon key, it creates a periodic timer queue, which
        will break into any user-mode process as specified by the kernel debugger. This enables remote
        kernel debuggers to cause Winlogon to attach and break into other user-mode applications.

   8.   It sets the machine name in the environment variable COMPUTERNAME and then updates and
        configures TCP/IP-related information such as the domain name and host name

   9.   It sets the default profile environment variables USERPROFILE, ALLUSERSPROFILE, PUBLIC, and
        ProgramData.

   10. It creates the temp directory by expanding %SystemRoot%\Temp (for example, C:\Windows\
        Temp).

   11. It sets up font loading and DWM if session 0 is an interactive session, which depends on the SKU.

   12. It creates the initial terminal, which is composed of a window station (always named Winsta0)
        and two desktops (Winlogon and Default) for processes to run on in session 0.

   13. It initializes the LSA machine encryption key, depending on whether it’s stored locally or if it
        must be entered interactively. See Chapter 7 for more information on how local authentication
        keys are stored.

   14. It creates the Service Control Manager (SCM or Services.exe). See the upcoming paragraphs for
        a brief description and Chapter 9 in Part 2 for more details.

        15. It starts the Local Security Authentication Subsystem Service (Lsass.exe) and, if Credential Guard
             is enabled, the Isolated LSA Trustlet (Lsaiso.exe). This also requires querying the VBS provision-
             ing key from UEFI. See Chapter 7 for more information on Lsass.exe and Lsaiso.exe.

        16. If Setup is currently pending (that is, if this is the first boot during a fresh install or an update to
             a new major OS build or Insider Preview), it launches the setup program.

        17. It waits forever for a request for system shutdown or for one of the aforementioned system
             processes to terminate (unless the DontWatchSysProcs registry value is set in the Winlogon
             key mentioned in step 7). In either case, it shuts down the system.

     Service control manager
     Recall that with Windows, services can refer to either a server process or a device driver. This section
     deals with services that are user-mode processes. Services are like Linux daemon processes in that
     they can be configured to start automatically at system boot time without requiring an interactive
     logon. They can also be started manually, such as by running the Services administrative tool, using the
     sc.exe tool, or calling the Windows StartService function. Typically, services do not interact with the
     logged-on user, although there are special conditions when this is possible. Additionally, while most
     services run in special service accounts (such as SYSTEM or LOCAL SERVICE), others can run with the
     same security context as logged-in user accounts. (For more, see Chapter 9 in Part 2.)

          The Service Control Manager (SCM) is a special system process running the image %SystemRoot%\
     System32\Services.exe that is responsible for starting, stopping, and interacting with service processes.
     It is also a protected process, making it difficult to tamper with. Service programs are really just Win-
     dows images that call special Windows functions to interact with the SCM to perform such actions as
     registering the service’s successful startup, responding to status requests, or pausing or shutting down
     the service. Services are defined in the registry under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services.

        Keep in mind that services have three names: the process name you see running on the system, the
     internal name in the registry, and the display name shown in the Services administrative tool. (Not all
     services have a display name—if a service doesn’t have a display name, the internal name is shown.)
     Services can also have a description field that further details what the service does.

        To map a service process to the services contained in that process, use the tlist /s (from Debugging
     Tools for Windows) or tasklist /svc (built-in Windows tool) command. Note that there isn’t always
     one-to-one mapping between service processes and running services, however, because some services
     share a process with other services. In the registry, the Type value under the service’s key indicates
     whether the service runs in its own process or shares a process with other services in the image.

         A number of Windows components are implemented as services, such as the Print Spooler, Event
     Log, Task Scheduler, and various networking components. For more details on services, see Chapter 9
     in Part 2.

EXPERIMENT: Listing installed services
To list the installed services, open the Control Panel, select Administrative Tools, and select
Services. Alternatively, click Start and run services.msc. You should see output like this:

   To see the detailed properties of a service, right-click the service and select Properties.
For example, here are the properties of the Windows Update service:

    Notice that the Path to Executable field identifies the program that contains this service and
its command line. Remember that some services share a process with other services. Mapping
isn’t always one-to-one.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing service details inside service processes
        Process Explorer highlights processes hosting one service or more. (These processes are shaded
        pink color by default, but you can change this by opening the Options menu and choosing
        Configure Colors.) If you double-click a service-hosting process, you will see a Services tab that
        lists the services inside the process, the name of the registry key that defines the service, the display
        name seen by the administrator, the description text for that service (if present), and for Svchost.
        exe services, the path to the DLL that implements the service. For example, listing the services in
        one of the Svchost.exe processes running under the System account appears as follows:

     Winlogon, LogonUI, and Userinit
     The Windows logon process (%SystemRoot%\System32\Winlogon.exe) handles interactive user logons
     and logoffs. Winlogon.exe is notified of a user logon request when the user enters the secure attention
     sequence (SAS) keystroke combination. The default SAS on Windows is Ctrl+Alt+Delete. The reason for
     the SAS is to protect users from password-capture programs that simulate the logon process because
     this keyboard sequence cannot be intercepted by a user-mode application.

         The identification and authentication aspects of the logon process are implemented through DLLs
     called credential providers. The standard Windows credential providers implement the default Windows
     authentication interfaces: password and smartcard. Windows 10 provides a biometric credential pro-
     vider: face recognition, known as Windows Hello. However, developers can provide their own credential
     providers to implement other identification and authentication mechanisms instead of the standard
     Windows user name/password method, such as one based on a voice print or a biometric device such
     as a fingerprint reader. Because Winlogon.exe is a critical system process on which the system depends,
     credential providers and the UI to display the logon dialog box run inside a child process of Winlogon.exe

   called LogonUI.exe. When Winlogon.exe detects the SAS, it launches this process, which initializes the
   credential providers. When the user enters their credentials (as required by the provider) or dismisses
   the logon interface, the LogonUI.exe process terminates. Winlogon.exe can also load additional network
   provider DLLs that need to perform secondary authentication. This capability allows multiple network
   providers to gather identification and authentication information all at one time during normal logon.

      After the user name and password (or another information bundle as the credential provider re-
   quires) have been captured, they are sent to the Local Security Authentication Service process (Lsass.
   exe, described in Chapter 7) to be authenticated. Lsass.exe calls the appropriate authentication pack-
   age, implemented as a DLL, to perform the actual verification, such as checking whether a password
   matches what is stored in the Active Directory or the SAM (the part of the registry that contains the
   definition of the local users and groups). If Credential Guard is enabled, and this is a domain logon,
   Lsass.exe will communicate with the Isolated LSA Trustlet (Lsaiso.exe, described in Chapter 7) to obtain
   the machine key required to authenticate the legitimacy of the authentication request.

      Upon successful authentication, Lsass.exe calls a function in the SRM (for example, NtCreateToken)
   to generate an access token object that contains the user’s security profile. If User Account Control
   (UAC) is used and the user logging on is a member of the administrators group or has administrator
   privileges, Lsass.exe will create a second, restricted version of the token. This access token is then used
   by Winlogon to create the initial process(es) in the user’s session. The initial process(es) are stored in the
   Userinit registry value under the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Win-
   logon registry key. The default is Userinit.exe, but there can be more than one image in the list.

       Userinit.exe performs some initialization of the user environment, such as running the login script
   and reestablishing network connections. It then looks in the registry at the Shell value (under the
   same Winlogon key mentioned previously) and creates a process to run the system-defined shell (by
   default, Explorer.exe). Then Userinit exits. This is why Explorer is shown with no parent. Its parent has
   exited, and as explained in Chapter 1, tlist.exe and Process Explorer left-justify processes whose parent
   isn’t running. Another way of looking at it is that Explorer is the grandchild of Winlogon.exe.

      Winlogon.exe is active not only during user logon and logoff, but also whenever it intercepts the
   SAS from the keyboard. For example, when you press Ctrl+Alt+Delete while logged on, the Windows
   Security screen comes up, providing the options to log off, start the Task Manager, lock the worksta-
   tion, shut down the system, and so forth. Winlogon.exe and LogonUI.exe are the processes that handle
   this interaction.

      For a complete description of the steps involved in the logon process, see Chapter 11 in Part 2. For
   more details on security authentication, see Chapter 7. For details on the callable functions that inter-
   face with Lsass.exe (the functions that start with Lsa), see the documentation in the Windows SDK.

Conclusion
   This chapter takes a broad look at the overall system architecture of Windows. It examines the key
   components of Windows and shows how they interrelate. In the next chapter, we’ll look in more detail
   at processes, which are one of the most basic entities in Windows.

