CHAPTER 5

Memory management

  I n this chapter, you’ll learn how Windows implements virtual memory and how it manages the subset
    of virtual memory kept in physical memory. We’ll also describe the internal structure and components
   that make up the memory manager, including key data structures and algorithms. Before examining
   these mechanisms, we’ll review the basic services provided by the memory manager and key concepts
   such as reserved memory versus committed memory and shared memory.

Introduction to the memory manager
   By default, the virtual size of a process on 32-bit Windows is 2 GB. If the image is marked specifically as large
   address space–aware, and the system is booted with a special option (described in the section “x86 address
   space layouts” later in this chapter), a 32-bit process can grow to be up to 3 GB on 32-bit Windows and to 4
   GB on 64-bit Windows. The process virtual address space size on 64-bit Windows 8 and Server 2012 is 8192
   GB (8 TB) and on 64 bit Windows 8.1 (and later) and Server 2012 R2 (and later), it is 128 TB.

      As you saw in Chapter 2, “System architecture”—specifically in Table 2-2—the maximum amount
   of physical memory currently supported by Windows ranges from 2 GB to 24 TB, depending on which
   version and edition of Windows you are running. Because the virtual address space might be larger or
   smaller than the physical memory on the machine, the memory manager has two primary tasks:

      ■■   Translating, or mapping, a process’s virtual address space into physical memory so that when
           a thread running in the context of that process reads or writes to the virtual address space, the
           correct physical address is referenced. (The subset of a process’s virtual address space that is
           physically resident is called the working set. Working sets are described in more detail in the
           section “Working sets” later in this chapter.)

      ■■   Paging some of the contents of memory to disk when it becomes overcommitted—that is,
           when running threads try to use more physical memory than is currently available—and bring-
           ing the contents back into physical memory when needed.

       In addition to providing virtual memory management, the memory manager provides a core set
   of services on which the various Windows environment subsystems are built. These services include
   memory-mapped files (internally called section objects), copy-on-write memory, and support for ap-
   plications using large, sparse address spaces. The memory manager also provides a way for a process
   to allocate and use larger amounts of physical memory than can be mapped into the process virtual
   address space at one time—for example, on 32-bit systems with more than 3 GB of physical memory.
   This is explained in the section “Address Windowing Extensions” later in this chapter.

		
       Note There is a Control Panel applet (System) that provides control over the size, number,
       and locations of paging files. Its nomenclature suggests that virtual memory is the same
       thing as the paging file. This is not the case. The paging file is only one aspect of virtual
       memory. In fact, even if you run with no page file at all, Windows will still be using virtual
       memory. This distinction is explained in more detail later in this chapter.

    Memory manager components
    The memory manager is part of the Windows executive and therefore exists in the file Ntoskrnl.exe.
    It’s the largest component in the executive, hinting at its importance and complexity. No parts of the
    memory manager exist in the HAL. The memory manager consists of the following components:

       ■■   A set of executive system services for allocating, deallocating, and managing virtual memory,
            most of which are exposed through the Windows API or kernel-mode device driver interfaces

       ■■   A translation-not-valid and access fault trap handler for resolving hardware-detected memory-
            management exceptions and making virtual pages resident on behalf of a process

       ■■   Six key top-level routines, each running in one of six different kernel-mode threads in the System
            process:

            • The balance set manager (KeBalanceSetManager, priority 17) This calls an inner routine,
               the working set manager (MmWorkingSetManager), once per second as well as when free
               memory falls below a certain threshold. The working set manager drives the overall memory-
               management policies, such as working set trimming, aging, and modified page writing.

            • The process/stack swapper (KeSwapProcessOrStack, priority 23) This performs both
               process and kernel thread stack inswapping and outswapping. The balance set manager and
               the thread-scheduling code in the kernel awaken this thread when an inswap or outswap
               operation needs to take place.

            • The modified page writer (MiModifiedPageWriter, priority 18) This writes dirty pages
               on the modified list back to the appropriate paging files. This thread is awakened when the
               size of the modified list needs to be reduced.

            • The mapped page writer (MiMappedPageWriter, priority 18) This writes dirty pages in
               mapped files to disk or remote storage. It is awakened when the size of the modified list
               needs to be reduced or if pages for mapped files have been on the modified list for more
               than 5 minutes. This second modified page writer thread is necessary because it can gener-
               ate page faults that result in requests for free pages. If there were no free pages and only
               one modified page writer thread, the system could deadlock waiting for free pages.

            • The segment dereference thread (MiDereferenceSegmentThread, priority 19) This is
               responsible for cache reduction as well as for page file growth and shrinkage. For example, if
               there is no virtual address space for paged pool growth, this thread trims the page cache so
               that the paged pool used to anchor it can be freed for reuse.

       • The zero page thread (MiZeroPageThread, priority 0) This zeroes out pages on the free
            list so that a cache of zero pages is available to satisfy future demand-zero page faults. In
            some cases, memory zeroing is done by a faster function called MiZeroInParallel. See the
            note in the “Page list dynamics” section later in this chapter.

   Each of these components is covered in more detail later in the chapter except for the segment
dereference thread, which is covered in Chapter 14, “Cache manager,” in Part 2.

Large and small pages
Memory management is done in distinct chunks called pages. This is because the hardware memory
management unit translates virtual to physical addresses at the granularity of a page. Hence, a page is
the smallest unit of protection at the hardware level. (The various page-protection options are de-
scribed in the section “Protecting memory” later in this chapter.) The processors on which Windows
runs support two page sizes: small and large. The actual sizes vary based on the processor architecture,
and they are listed in Table 5-1.

TABLE 5-1   Page sizes
Architecture       Small Page Size    Large Page Size      Small Pages per Large Page

x86 (PAE)          4 KB               2 MB                 512

x64                4 KB               2 MB                 512

ARM                4 KB               4 MB                 1024

   Note Some processors support configurable page sizes, but Windows does not use this
   feature.

    The primary advantage of large pages is speed of address translation for references to data within
the large page. This advantage exists because the first reference to any byte within a large page will
cause the hardware’s translation look-aside buffer (TLB) (described in the section “Address translation”
later in this chapter), to have in its cache the information necessary to translate references to any other
byte within the large page. If small pages are used, more TLB entries are needed for the same range of
virtual addresses, thus increasing the recycling of entries as new virtual addresses require translation.
This, in turn, means having to go back to the page table structures when references are made to virtual
addresses outside the scope of a small page whose translation has been cached. The TLB is a very small
cache; thus, large pages make better use of this limited resource.

    To take advantage of large pages on systems with more than 2 GB of RAM, Windows maps with
large pages the core operating system images (Ntoskrnl.exe and Hal.dll) as well as core operating
system data (such as the initial part of non-paged pool and the data structures that describe the state
of each physical memory page). Windows also automatically maps I/O space requests (calls by device
drivers to MmMapIoSpace) with large pages if the request is of a satisfactorily large page length and
alignment. In addition, Windows allows applications to map their images, private memory, and page

    file–backed sections with large pages (see the MEM_LARGE_PAGES flag on the VirtualAlloc, Virtual-
    AllocEx, and VirtualAllocExNuma functions). You can also specify other device drivers to be mapped
    with large pages by adding a multistring registry value LargePageDrivers to the key HKLM\SYSTEM\
    CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management and specifying the names of the
    drivers as separately null-terminated strings.

        Attempts to allocate large pages may fail after the operating system has been running for an
    extended period because the physical memory for each large page must occupy a significant number
    (refer to Table 5-1) of physically contiguous small pages. This extent of physical pages must furthermore
    begin on a large page boundary. For example, physical pages 0–511 could be used as a large page on
    an x64 system, as could physical pages 512–1,023, but pages 10–521 could not. Free physical memory
    does become fragmented as the system runs. This is not a problem for allocations using small pages
    but can cause large page allocations to fail.

        The memory is also always non-pageable because the page file system does not support large
    pages. Because the memory is non-pageable, the caller is required to have the SeLockMemoryPrivi-
    lege to be able to allocate using large pages. Also, the allocated memory is not considered part of the
    process working set (described in the section “Working sets” later in this chapter); nor are large page
    allocations subject to job-wide limits on virtual memory usage.

       On Windows 10 version 1607 x64 and Server 2016 systems, large pages may also be mapped with
    huge pages, which are 1 GB in size. This is done automatically if the allocation size requested is larger
    than 1 GB, but it does not have to be a multiple of 1 GB. For example, an allocation of 1040 MB would
    result in using one huge page (1024 MB) plus 8 “normal” large pages (16 MB divided by 2 MB).

        There is an unfortunate side effect of large pages. Each page (whether huge, large, or small) must
    be mapped with a single protection that applies to the entire page. This is because hardware memory
    protection is on a per-page basis. If a large page contains, for example, both read-only code and read/
    write data, the page must be marked as read/write, meaning that the code will be writable. As a result,
    device drivers or other kernel-mode code could, either maliciously or due to a bug, modify what is
    supposed to be read-only operating system or driver code without causing a memory access violation.
    If small pages are used to map the operating system’s kernel-mode code, the read-only portions of
    Ntoskrnl.exe and Hal.dll can be mapped as read-only pages. Using small pages does reduce efficiency
    of address translation, but if a device driver (or other kernel-mode code) attempts to modify a read-
    only part of the operating system, the system will crash immediately with the exception information
    pointing at the offending instruction in the driver. If the write were allowed to occur, the system would
    likely crash later (in a harder-to-diagnose way) when some other component tried to use the corrupted
    data.

      If you suspect you are experiencing kernel code corruptions, enable Driver Verifier (described in
    Chapter 6, “I/O system”), which will disable the use of large pages.

       Note The term page used in this and later chapters refers to a small page unless otherwise
       indicated or apparent by context.

Examining memory usage
The Memory and Process performance-counter categories provide access to most of the details about
system and process memory utilization. Throughout this chapter, we’ll include references to specific
performance counters that contain information related to the component being described. We’ve
included relevant examples and experiments throughout the chapter. One word of caution, however:
Different utilities use varying and sometimes inconsistent or confusing names when displaying
memory information. The following experiment illustrates this point. (We’ll explain the terms used in
this example in subsequent sections.)

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing system memory information
   The Performance tab in the Windows Task Manager, shown in the following screenshot from a
   Windows 10 version 1607 system (click the Memory tab on the left in the Performance tab),
   displays basic system memory information. This information is a subset of the detailed memory
   information available through performance counters. It includes data on both physical and vir-
   tual memory usage. The table that follows shows the meaning of the memory-related values.

   Task Manager Value           Definition

   Memory usage histogram       The chart’s line height reflects physical memory in use by Windows (not
                                available as a performance counter). The area above the line is equal to the
                                Available value in the bottom section. The total height of the graph is equal
                                to the total value shown at the top right of the graph (31.9 GB in this example).
                                This represents the total RAM usable by the operating system, and does not
                                include BIOS shadow pages, device memory, and so on.

   Memory composition           This details the relation between memory that is actively used, standby,
                                modified, and free+zero (all described later in this chapter).

       Task Manager Value            Definition

       Total physical memory (top    This shows the physical memory usable by Windows.
       right of graph)

       In Use (Compressed)           This is the physical memory currently being used. The amount of compressed
                                     physical memory is in parentheses. Hovering over the value shows the amount
                                     of memory saved by the compression. (Memory compression is discussed in
                                     the section “Memory compression” later in this chapter.)

       Cached                        This is the sum of the following performance counters in the Memory
                                     category: Cache Bytes, Modified Page List Bytes, Standby Cache Core Bytes,
                                     Standby Cache Normal Priority Bytes, and Standby Cache Reserve Bytes.

       Available                     This is the amount of memory that is immediately available for use by the
                                     operating system, processes, and drivers. It is equal to the combined size of
                                     the standby, free, and zero page lists.

       Free                          This shows the free and zero-page list bytes. To see this information, hover
                                     over the right-most part of the Memory Composition bar (assuming you have
                                     enough free memory to hover over it).

       Committed                     The two numbers shown here are equal to the values in the Committed Bytes
                                     and Commit Limit performance counters, respectively.

       Paged Pool                    This is the total size of the paged pool, including both free and allocated
                                     regions.

       Non-Paged Pool                This is the total size of the non-paged pool, including both free and allocated
                                     regions.

          To see the specific usage of the paged and non-paged pool, use the Poolmon utility, described
       later in this chapter in the “Monitoring pool usage” section.

           The Process Explorer tool from Sysinternals can show considerably more data about physical
       and virtual memory. On its main screen, click the View menu, choose System Information, and
       click the Memory tab. Here is an example of a display from a 64-bit Windows 10 system. (We will
       explain most of these counters in the relevant sections later in this chapter.)

   Two other Sysinternals tools show extended memory information:

 ■■   VMMap     This shows the usage of virtual memory within a process to a fine level of detail.

 ■■   RAMMap This shows detailed physical memory usage.

   These tools are featured in experiments found later in this chapter.

   Finally, the !vm command in the kernel debugger shows the basic memory-management
information available through the memory-related performance counters. This command can be
useful if you’re looking at a crash dump or hung system. Here’s an example of its output from a
64-bit Windows 10 system with 32 GB of RAM:
lkd> !vm
Page File: \??\C:\pagefile.sys
  Current:   1048576 Kb Free Space:           1034696 Kb
  Minimum:   1048576 Kb Maximum:              4194304 Kb
Page File: \??\C:\swapfile.sys
  Current:     16384 Kb Free Space:            16376 Kb
  Minimum:     16384 Kb Maximum:            24908388 Kb
No Name for Paging File
  Current: 58622948 Kb Free Space:          57828340 Kb
  Minimum: 58622948 Kb Maximum:             58622948 Kb

Physical Memory:          8364281 (   33457124 Kb)
Available Pages:          4627325 (   18509300 Kb)
ResAvail Pages:           7215930 (   28863720 Kb)
Locked IO Pages:                0 (          0 Kb)
Free System PTEs:      4295013448 (17180053792 Kb)
Modified Pages:             68167 (     272668 Kb)
Modified PF Pages:          68158 (     272632 Kb)
Modified No Write Pages:        0 (          0 Kb)
NonPagedPool Usage:           495 (       1980 Kb)
NonPagedPoolNx Usage:      269858 (    1079432 Kb)
NonPagedPool Max:      4294967296 (17179869184 Kb)
PagedPool 0 Usage:         371703 (    1486812 Kb)
PagedPool 1 Usage:          99970 (     399880 Kb)
PagedPool 2 Usage:         100021 (     400084 Kb)
PagedPool 3 Usage:          99916 (     399664 Kb)
PagedPool 4 Usage:          99983 (     399932 Kb)
PagedPool Usage:           771593 (    3086372 Kb)
PagedPool Maximum:     4160749568 (16642998272 Kb)
Session Commit:             12210 (      48840 Kb)
Shared Commit:             344197 (    1376788 Kb)
Special Pool:                   0 (          0 Kb)
Shared Process:             19244 (      76976 Kb)
Pages For MDLs:            419675 (    1678700 Kb)
Pages For AWE:                  0 (          0 Kb)
NonPagedPool Commit:       270387 (    1081548 Kb)
PagedPool Commit:          771593 (    3086372 Kb)
Driver Commit:              24984 (      99936 Kb)
Boot Commit:               100044 (     400176 Kb)

       System PageTables:                   5948 (        23792 Kb)
       VAD/PageTable Bitmaps:              18202 (        72808 Kb)
       ProcessLockedFilePages:               299 (         1196 Kb)
       Pagefile Hash Pages:                   33 (          132 Kb)
       Sum System Commit:                1986816 (      7947264 Kb)
       Total Private:                    2126069 (      8504276 Kb)
       Misc/Transient Commit:              18422 (        73688 Kb)
       Committed pages:                  4131307 (     16525228 Kb)
       Commit limit:                     9675001 (     38700004 Kb)
       ...

          The values not in parentheses are in small pages (4 KB). We will describe many of the details of
       the output of this command throughout this chapter.

    Internal synchronization
    Like all other components of the Windows executive, the memory manager is fully reentrant and
    supports simultaneous execution on multiprocessor systems. That is, it allows two threads to acquire
    resources in such a way that they don’t corrupt each other’s data. To accomplish the goal of being fully
    reentrant, the memory manager uses several different internal synchronization mechanisms, such as
    spinlocks and interlocked instructions, to control access to its own internal data structures. (Synchroni-
    zation objects are discussed in Chapter 8, “System mechanisms”, in Part 2.)

       Some of the system-wide resources to which the memory manager must synchronize access include:

       ■■   Dynamically allocated portions of the system virtual address space

       ■■   System working sets

       ■■   Kernel memory pools

       ■■   The list of loaded drivers

       ■■   The list of paging files

       ■■   Physical memory lists

       ■■   Image base randomization address space layout randomization (ASLR) structures

       ■■   Each individual entry in the page frame number (PFN) database

       Per-process memory-management data structures that require synchronization include the following:

       ■■   Working set lock      This is held while changes are made to the working set list.

       ■■   Address space lock         This is held whenever the address space is being changed.

       Both these locks are implemented using pushlocks. These are described in Chapter 8 in Part 2.

Services provided by the memory manager
   The memory manager provides a set of system services to allocate and free virtual memory, share mem-
   ory between processes, map files into memory, flush virtual pages to disk, retrieve information about a
   range of virtual pages, change the protection of virtual pages, and lock the virtual pages into memory.

      Like other Windows executive services, memory-management services allow their caller to supply
   a process handle indicating the particular process whose virtual memory is to be manipulated. The
   caller can thus manipulate either its own memory or (with proper permissions) the memory of another
   process. For example, if a process creates a child process, by default it has the right to manipulate the
   child process’s virtual memory. Thereafter, the parent process can allocate, deallocate, read, and write
   memory on behalf of the child process by calling virtual memory services and passing a handle to the
   child process as an argument. This feature is used by subsystems to manage the memory of their client
   processes. It is also essential for implementing debuggers because debuggers must be able to read and
   write to the memory of the process being debugged.

     Most of these services are exposed through the Windows API. As shown in Figure 5-1, the Windows
   API has four groups of functions for managing memory in applications:

      ■■   Virtual API This is the lowest-level API for general memory allocations and deallocations. It
           always works on page granularity. It is also the most powerful, supporting the full capabilities
           of the memory manager. Functions include VirtualAlloc, VirtualFree, VirtualProtect,
           VirtualLock, and others.

      ■■   Heap API This provides functions for small allocations (typically less than a page). It uses
           the Virtual API internally, but adds management on top of it. Heap manager functions include
           HeapAlloc, HeapFree, HeapCreate, HeapReAlloc and others. The heap manager is discussed in
           the section “Heap manager” later in this chapter.
      ■■   Local/Global APIs      These are leftovers from 16-bit Windows and are now implemented using
           the Heap API.
      ■■   Memory-mapped files These functions allow mapping files as memory and/or sharing
           memory between cooperating processes. Memory-mapped file functions include Create-
           FileMapping, OpenFileMapping, MapViewOfFile, and others.

           FIGURE 5-1   Memory API groups in user mode.

         The dotted box shows a typical C/C++ runtime implementation of memory management (functions
      such as malloc, free, realloc, C++ operator new and delete) using the Heap API. The box is dotted
      because this implementation is compiler-dependent and certainly not mandatory (although quite
      common). The C runtime equivalents that are implemented in Ntdll.dll use the Heap API.

         The memory manager also provides several services to other kernel-mode components inside the
      executive as well as to device drivers. These include allocating and deallocating physical memory and
      locking pages in physical memory for direct memory access (DMA) transfers. These functions begin
      with the prefix Mm. In addition, although not strictly part of the memory manager, some executive
      support routines that begin with Ex are used to allocate and deallocate from the system heaps (paged
      and non-paged pool) as well as to manipulate look-aside lists. We’ll touch on these topics later in this
      chapter in the section “Kernel-mode heaps (system memory pools).”

      Page states and memory allocations
      Pages in a process virtual address space are either free, reserved, committed, or shareable. Committed
      and shareable pages are pages that, when accessed, ultimately translate to valid pages in physical
      memory. Committed pages are also referred to as private pages. This is because committed pages
      cannot be shared with other processes, whereas shareable pages can be (but might be in use by only
      one process).

         Private pages are allocated through the Windows VirtualAlloc, VirtualAllocEx, and Virtual-
      AllocExNuma functions, which lead eventually to the executive in the function NtAllocateVirtual-
      Memory inside the memory manager. These functions are capable of committing memory as well as
      reserving memory. Reserving memory means setting aside a range of contiguous virtual addresses for
      possible future use (such as an array) while consuming negligible system resources, and then com-
      mitting portions of the reserved space as needed as the application runs. Or, if the size requirements
      are known in advance, a process can reserve and commit in the same function call. In either case, the
      resulting committed pages can then be accessed by any thread in the process. Attempting to access
      free or reserved memory results in an access violation exception because the page isn’t mapped to any
      storage that can resolve the reference.

         If committed (private) pages have never been accessed before, they are created at the time of first
      access as zero-initialized pages (or demand zero). Private committed pages may later be automatically
      written to the paging file by the operating system if required by demand for physical memory. Private
      refers to the fact that these pages are normally inaccessible to any other process.

         Note Some functions, such as ReadProcessMemory and WriteProcessMemory, appear to
         permit cross-process memory access, but these are implemented by running kernel-mode
         code in the context of the target process. (This is referred to as attaching to the process.)
         They also require that the security descriptor of the target process grant the accessor the
         PROCESS_VM_READ or PROCESS_VM_WRITE right, respectively, or that the accessor holds the
         SeDebugPrivilege, which is by default granted only to members of the administrators group.

   Shared pages are usually mapped to a view of a section. This in turn is part or all of a file, but may
instead represent a portion of page file space. All shared pages can potentially be shared with other
processes. Sections are exposed in the Windows API as file-mapping objects.

    When a shared page is first accessed by any process, it will be read in from the associated mapped
file unless the section is associated with the paging file, in which case it is created as a zero-initialized
page. Later, if it is still resident in physical memory, the second and subsequent processes accessing it
can simply use the same page contents that are already in memory. Shared pages might also have been
prefetched by the system.

    Two upcoming sections of this chapter, “Shared memory and mapped files” and “Section objects,”
go into much more detail about shared pages. Pages are written to disk through a mechanism called
modified page writing. This occurs as pages are moved from a process’s working set to a system-wide
list called the modified page list. From there, they are written to disk or remote storage. (Working sets
and the modified list are explained later in this chapter.) Mapped file pages can also be written back
to their original files on disk with an explicit call to FlushViewOfFile or by the mapped page writer as
memory demands dictate.

   You can decommit private pages and/or release address space with the VirtualFree or Virtual-
FreeEx function. The difference between decommittal and release is similar to the difference between
reservation and committal. Decommitted memory is still reserved, but released memory has been
freed; it is neither committed nor reserved.

   Using the two-step process of reserving and then committing virtual memory defers committing
pages—and, thereby, defers adding to the system commit charge described in the next section—until
needed, but keeps the convenience of virtual contiguity. Reserving memory is a relatively inexpensive op-
eration because it consumes very little actual memory. All that needs to be updated or constructed is the
relatively small internal data structures that represent the state of the process address space. We’ll explain
these data structures, called page tables and Virtual Address Descriptors (VADs), later in this chapter.

    One extremely common use for reserving a large space and committing portions of it as needed
is the user-mode stack for each thread. When a thread is created, a stack is created by reserving a
contiguous portion of the process address space. (The default size is 1 MB but you can override this size
with the CreateThread and CreateRemoteThread(Ex) function calls or change it on an executable
image basis by using the /STACK linker flag.) By default, the initial page in the stack is committed and
the next page is marked as a guard page (which isn’t committed) that traps references beyond the end
of the committed portion of the stack and expands it.

   EXPERIMENT: Reserved versus committed pages
   You can use the TestLimit Sysinternals utility to allocate large amounts of reserved or private
   committed virtual memory. You can then observe the difference via Process Explorer. Follow
   these steps:

        1.   Open two command prompt windows.

            2.    Invoke TestLimit in one of the command prompt windows to create a large amount of
                  reserved memory:
                  C:\temp>testlimit -r 1 -c 800

                  Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
                  Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
                  Sysinternals - wwww.sysinternals.com

                  Process ID: 18468

                  Reserving private bytes 1 MB at a time ...
                  Leaked 800 MB of reserved memory (800 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 0
                  The operation completed successfully.

            3.    In the other command prompt window, create a similar amount of committed memory:
                  C:\temp>testlimit -m 1 -c 800

                  Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
                  Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
                  Sysinternals - wwww.sysinternals.com

                  Process ID: 14528

                  Leaking private bytes 1 KB at a time ...
                  Leaked 800 MB of private memory (800 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 0
                  The operation completed successfully.

            4.    Run Task Manager, click the Details tab, and add a Commit Size column.

            5.    Find the two instances of TestLimit.exe in the list. They should look something like the
                  following:

            6.    Notice that Task Manager shows the committed size but it has no counters that reveal
                  the reserved memory in the other TestLimit process.

       7.   Open Process Explorer.

       8.   Click the Process Memory tab and enable the Private Bytes and Virtual Size columns.

       9.   Find the two TestLimit.exe processes in the main display:

       10. Notice that the virtual sizes of the two processes are identical, but only one shows a
            Private Bytes value that is comparable to the Virtual Size value. The large difference in
            the other TestLimit process (process ID 18468) is due to the reserved memory. You could
            make the same comparison in Performance Monitor by looking at the Virtual Bytes and
            Private Bytes counters in the Process category.

Commit charge and commit limit
On the Performance tab in Task Manager, on the Memory page, there is a Committed label with two
numbers underneath it. The memory manager keeps track of private committed memory usage on a
global basis, termed commitment or commit charge. This is the first of the two numbers, which repre-
sents the total of all committed virtual memory in the system.

   There is a system-wide limit, called the system commit limit or simply the commit limit, on the
amount of committed virtual memory that can exist at any one time. This limit corresponds to the
current total size of all paging files plus the amount of RAM that is usable by the operating system.
This is the second of the two numbers displayed under the Committed label. The memory manager
can increase the commit limit automatically by expanding one or more of the paging files if they are
not already at their configured maximum size.

   Commit charge and the system commit limit are explained in more detail in the section “Commit
charge and the system commit limit” later in this chapter.

      Locking memory
      In general, it’s better to let the memory manager decide which pages remain in physical memory.
      However, there might be special circumstances when it might be necessary for an application or device
      driver to lock pages in physical memory. Pages can be locked in memory in two ways:

         ■■   Windows applications can call the VirtualLock function to lock pages in their process work-
              ing set. Pages locked using this mechanism remain in memory until explicitly unlocked or until
              the process that locked them terminates. The number of pages a process can lock can’t exceed
              its minimum working set size minus eight pages. If a process needs to lock more pages, it can
              increase its working set minimum with the SetProcessWorkingSetSizeEx function, discussed
              later in this chapter in the section “Working set management.”

         ■■   Device drivers can call the MmProbeAndLockPages, MmLockPagableCodeSection, MmLockPagable-
              DataSection, or MmLockPagableSectionByHandle kernel-mode functions. Pages locked using
              this mechanism remain in memory until explicitly unlocked. The last three of these APIs enforce
              no quota on the number of pages that can be locked in memory because the resident avail-
              able page charge is obtained when the driver first loads. This ensures that it can never cause a
              system crash due to overlocking. For the first API, quota charges must be obtained or the API
              will return a failure status.

      Allocation granularity
      Windows aligns each region of reserved process address space to begin on an integral boundary de-
      fined by the value of the system allocation granularity, which can be retrieved from the Windows Get-
      SystemInfo or GetNativeSystemInfo functions. This value is 64 KB, a granularity that is used by the
      memory manager to efficiently allocate metadata (for example, VADs, bitmaps, and so on) to support
      various process operations. In addition, if support were added for future processors with larger page
      sizes (for example, up to 64 KB) or virtually indexed caches that require system-wide physical-to-virtual
      page alignment, the risk of requiring changes to applications that made assumptions about allocation
      alignment would be reduced.

         Note Windows kernel-mode code isn’t subject to the same restrictions. It can reserve
         memory on a single-page granularity (although this is not exposed to device drivers for the
         reasons detailed earlier). This level of granularity is primarily used to pack TEB allocations
         more densely. Because this mechanism is internal only, this code can easily be changed if
         a future platform requires different values. Also, for the purposes of supporting 16-bit and
         MS-DOS applications on x86 systems only, the memory manager provides the MEM_DOS_LIM
         flag to the MapViewOfFileEx API, which is used to force the use of single-page granularity.

         Finally, when a region of address space is reserved, Windows ensures that the size and base of the
      region is a multiple of the system page size, whatever that might be. For example, because x86 systems
      use 4 KB pages, if you tried to reserve a region of memory 18 KB in size, the actual amount reserved on

an x86 system would be 20 KB. If you specified a base address of 3 KB for an 18 KB region, the actual
amount reserved would be 24 KB. Note that the VAD for the allocation would then also be rounded to
64 KB alignment/length, thus making the remainder of it inaccessible.

Shared memory and mapped files
As is true with most modern operating systems, Windows provides a mechanism to share memory
among processes and the operating system. Shared memory can be defined as memory that is visible to
more than one process or that is present in more than one process virtual address space. For example,
if two processes use the same DLL, it would make sense to load the referenced code pages for that DLL
into physical memory only once and share those pages between all processes that map the DLL, as
illustrated in Figure 5-2.

FIGURE 5-2   Sharing memory between processes.

    Each process would still maintain its private memory areas to store private data but the DLL code
and unmodified data pages could be shared without harm. As we’ll explain later, this kind of sharing
happens automatically because the code pages in executable images—EXE and DLL files, and several
other types like screen savers (SCR), which are essentially DLLs under other names—are mapped as
execute-only and writable pages are mapped as copy-on-write. (See the “Copy-on-write” section later
in this chapter for more information.)

   Figure 5-2 shows two processes, based on different images, that share a DLL mapped just once to
physical memory. The images (EXE) code itself is not shared in this case because the two processes run
different images. The EXE code would be shared between processes that run the same image, such as
two or more processes running Notepad.exe.

   The underlying primitives in the memory manager used to implement shared memory are called
section objects, which are exposed as file-mapping objects in the Windows API. The internal structure
and implementation of section objects are described later in this chapter in the section “Section objects.”

  This fundamental primitive in the memory manager is used to map virtual addresses whether in
main memory, in the page file, or in some other file that an application wants to access as if it were in
memory. A section can be opened by one process or by many. In other words, section objects don’t
necessarily equate to shared memory.

         A section object can be connected to an open file on disk (called a mapped file) or to committed
      memory (to provide shared memory). Sections mapped to committed memory are called page-file-backed
      sections because the pages are written to the paging file (as opposed to a mapped file) if demands on
      physical memory require it. (Because Windows can run with no paging file, page-file-backed sections
      might in fact be “backed” only by physical memory.) As with any other empty page that is made visible
      to user mode (such as private committed pages), shared committed pages are always zero-filled when
      they are first accessed to ensure that no sensitive data is ever leaked.

          To create a section object, call the Windows CreateFileMapping, CreateFileMappingFromApp,
      or CreateFileMappingNuma(Ex) function, specifying a previously opened file handle to map it to (or
      INVALID_HANDLE_VALUE for a page-file-backed section) and optionally a name and security descriptor.
      If the section has a name, other processes can open it with OpenFileMapping or the CreateFileMap-
      ping* functions. Or you can grant access to section objects through either handle inheritance (by
      specifying that the handle be inheritable when opening or creating the handle) or handle duplication
      (by using DuplicateHandle). Device drivers can also manipulate section objects with the ZwOpenSection,
      ZwMapViewOfSection, and ZwUnmapViewOfSection functions.

           A section object can refer to files that are much larger than can fit in the address space of a process.
      (If the paging file backs a section object, sufficient space must exist in the paging file and/or RAM to
      contain it.) To access a very large section object, a process can map only the portion of the section ob-
      ject that it requires (called a view of the section) by calling the MapViewOfFile(Ex), MapViewOfFile-
      FromApp, or MapViewOfFileExNuma function and then specifying the range to map. Mapping views
      permits processes to conserve address space because only the views of the section object needed at
      the time must be mapped into memory.

          Windows applications can use mapped files to conveniently perform I/O to files by simply making
      them appear as data in memory within their address space. User applications aren’t the only consumers
      of section objects; the image loader uses section objects to map executable images, DLLs, and device
      drivers into memory, and the cache manager uses them to access data in cached files. (For informa-
      tion on how the cache manager integrates with the memory manager, see Chapter 14 in Part 2.) The
      implementation of shared memory sections, both in terms of address translation and the internal data
      structures, is explained in the section “Section objects” later in this chapter.

         EXPERIMENT: Viewing memory-mapped files
         You can list the memory-mapped files in a process by using Process Explorer. To do so, config-
         ure the lower pane to show the DLL view. (Open the View menu, select Lower Pane View, and
         choose DLLs.) Note that this is more than just a list of DLLs—it represents all memory-mapped
         files in the process address space. Some of these are DLLs, one is the image file (EXE) being run,
         and additional entries might represent memory-mapped data files.

            The following display from Process Explorer shows a WinDbg process using several differ-
         ent memory mappings to access the memory dump file being examined. Like most Windows
         programs, it (or one of the Windows DLLs it is using) is also using memory mapping to access a
         Windows data file called Locale.nls, which is part of the internationalization support in Windows.

      You can also search for memory-mapped files by opening the Find menu and choosing
   Find Handle or DLL (or pressing Ctrl+F). This can be useful when trying to determine which
   process(es) is using a DLL or a memory-mapped file that you are trying to replace.

Protecting memory
As explained in Chapter 1, “Concepts and tools,” Windows provides memory protection so that no user
process can inadvertently or deliberately corrupt the address space of another process or the operating
system. Windows provides this protection in four primary ways.

   ■■   All system-wide data structures and memory pools used by kernel-mode system components
        can be accessed only while in kernel mode. User-mode threads can’t access these pages. If they
        attempt to do so, the hardware generates a fault, which the memory manager reports to the
        thread as an access violation.
   ■■   Each process has a separate, private address space, protected from access by any thread belong-
        ing to another process. Even shared memory is not really an exception to this because each pro-
        cess accesses the shared regions using addresses that are part of its own virtual address space. The
        only exception is if another process has virtual memory read or write access to the process object
        (or holds SeDebugPrivilege) and thus can use the ReadProcessMemory or WriteProcessMemory
        function. Each time a thread references an address, the virtual memory hardware, in concert
        with the memory manager, intervenes and translates the virtual address into a physical one. By
        controlling how virtual addresses are translated, Windows can ensure that threads running in one
        process don’t inappropriately access a page belonging to another process.
   ■■   In addition to the implicit protection offered by virtual-to-physical address translation, all pro-
        cessors supported by Windows provide some form of hardware-controlled memory protection
        such as read/write, read-only, and so on. (The exact details of such protection vary according to
        the processor.) For example, code pages in the address space of a process are marked read-only
        and are thus protected from modification by user threads. Table 5-2 lists the memory-protection
        options defined in the Windows API. (See the documentation for the VirtualProtect, Virtual-
        ProtectEx, VirtualQuery, and VirtualQueryEx functions.)

      TABLE 5-2       Memory-protection options defined in the Windows API
       Attribute                                  Description

       PAGE_NOACCESS                              Any attempt to read from, write to, or execute code in this region causes an access
                                                  violation.

       PAGE_READONLY                              Any attempt to write to (and on processors with no execute support, execute code
                                                  in) memory causes an access violation, but reads are permitted.

       PAGE_READWRITE                             The page is readable and writable but not executable.

       PAGE_EXECUTE                               Any attempt to write to code in memory in this region causes an access violation, but
                                                  execution (and read operations on all existing processors) is permitted.

       PAGE_EXECUTE_READ*                         Any attempt to write to memory in this region causes an access violation, but executes
                                                  and reads are permitted.

       PAGE_EXECUTE_READWRITE*                    The page is readable, writable, and executable. Any attempted access will succeed.

       PAGE_WRITECOPY                             Any attempt to write to memory in this region causes the system to give the process
                                                  a private copy of the page. On processors with no-execute support, attempts to
                                                  execute code in memory in this region cause an access violation.

       PAGE_EXECUTE_WRITECOPY                     Any attempt to write to memory in this region causes the system to give the process
                                                  a private copy of the page. Reading and executing code in this region is permitted.
                                                  (No copy is made in this case.)

       PAGE_GUARD                                 Any attempt to read from or write to a guard page raises an EXCEPTION_GUARD_PAGE
                                                  exception and turns off the guard page status. Guard pages thus act as a one-shot
                                                  alarm. Note that this flag can be specified with any of the page protections listed in
                                                  this table except PAGE_NOACCESS.

       PAGE_NOCACHE                               This uses physical memory that is not cached. This is not recommended for general
                                                  usage. It is useful for device drivers—for example, mapping a video frame buffer
                                                  with no caching.

       PAGE_WRITECOMBINE                          This enables write-combined memory accesses. When enabled, the processor does
                                                  not cache memory writes (possibly causing significantly more memory traffic than if
                                                  memory writes were cached), but it does try to aggregate write requests to optimize
                                                  performance. For example, if multiple writes are made to the same address, only the
                                                  most recent write might occur. Separate writes to adjacent addresses may be simi-
                                                  larly collapsed into a single large write. This is not typically used for general applica-
                                                  tions, but it is useful for device drivers—for example, mapping a video frame buffer
                                                  as write combined.

       PAGE_TARGETS_INVALID and                   These values control behavior of Control Flow Guard (CFG) for executable code in
       PAGE_TARGETS_NO_UPDATE                     these pages. Both constants have the same value but are used in different calls, es-
       (Windows 10 and Windows                    sentially acting as a toggle. PAGE_TARGETS_INVALID indicates indirect calls should
       Server 2016)                               fail CFG and crash the process. PAGE_TARGETS_NO_UPDATE allows VirtualProtect
                                                  calls that change the page range to allow execution to not update CFG state. See
                                                  Chapter 7, “Security,” for more information on CFG.

      *No execute protection is supported on processors that have the necessary hardware support (for example, all x64 processors) but not in older x86
      processors. If unsupported, “execute” translates to “read.”

           ■■   Shared memory section objects have standard Windows access control lists (ACLs) that are
                checked when processes attempt to open them, thus limiting access of shared memory to those
                processes with the proper rights. Access control also comes into play when a thread creates a
                section to contain a mapped file. To create the section, the thread must have at least read
                access to the underlying file object or the operation will fail.

         Once a thread has successfully opened a handle to a section, its actions are still subject to the
      memory manager and the hardware-based page protections described earlier. A thread can change
      the page-level protection on virtual pages in a section if the change doesn’t violate the permissions

in the ACL for that section object. For example, the memory manager allows a thread to change the
pages of a read-only section to have copy-on-write access but not to have read/write access. The
copy-on-write access is permitted because it has no effect on other processes sharing the data.

Data Execution Prevention
Data Execution Prevention (DEP), or no-execute (NX) page protection, causes an attempt to transfer
control to an instruction in a page marked as “no execute” to generate an access fault. This can prevent
certain types of malware from exploiting bugs in the system through the execution of code placed
in a data page such as the stack. DEP can also catch poorly written programs that don’t correctly set
permissions on pages from which they intend to execute code. If an attempt is made in kernel mode to
execute code in a page marked as “no execute,” the system will crash with the bug check code ATTEMPTED_
EXECUTE_OF_NOEXECUTE_MEMORY (0xFC). (See Chapter 15, “Crash dump analysis,” in Part 2 for an
explanation of these codes.) If this occurs in user mode, a STATUS_ACCESS_VIOLATION (0xC0000005)
exception is delivered to the thread attempting the illegal reference. If a process allocates memory that
needs to be executable, it must explicitly mark such pages by specifying the PAGE_EXECUTE, PAGE_
EXECUTE_READ, PAGE_EXECUTE_READWRITE, or PAGE_EXECUTE_WRITECOPY flags on the page-granularity
memory-allocation functions.

   On 32-bit x86 systems that support DEP, bit 63 in the page table entry (PTE) is used to mark a page as
non-executable. Therefore, the DEP feature is available only when the processor is running in Physical
Address Extension (PAE) mode, without which page table entries are only 32 bits wide. (See the section
“x86 virtual address translation” later in this chapter.) Thus, support for hardware DEP on 32-bit systems
requires loading the PAE kernel (%SystemRoot%\System32\Ntkrnlpa.exe), which currently is the only
supported kernel on x86 systems.

   On ARM systems, DEP is set to AlwaysOn.

   On 64-bit versions of Windows, execution protection is always applied to all 64-bit processes and
device drivers and can be disabled only by setting the nx BCD option to AlwaysOff. Execution pro-
tection for 32-bit programs depends on system configuration settings, described shortly. On 64-bit
Windows, execution protection is applied to thread stacks (both user and kernel mode), user-mode
pages not specifically marked as executable, the kernel paged pool, and the kernel session pool. For
a description of kernel memory pools, see the section “Kernel-mode heaps (system memory pools).”
However, on 32-bit Windows, execution protection is applied only to thread stacks and user-mode
pages, not to the paged pool and session pool.

   The application of execution protection for 32-bit processes depends on the value of the BCD nx
option. To change the settings, open the Data Execution Prevention tab in the Performance Options
dialog box (see Figure 5-3). (To open this dialog box, right-click Computer, select Properties, click
Advanced System Settings, and choose Performance Settings.) When you configure no-execute
protection in the Performance Options dialog box, the BCD nx option is set to the appropriate value.
Table 5-3 lists the variations of the values and how they correspond to the Data Execution Prevention
tab. The registry lists 32-bit applications that are excluded from execution protection under the HKLM\
SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\AppCompatFlags\Layers key, with the value name
being the full path of the executable and the data set to DisableNXShowUI.
                                                             CHAPTER 5    Memory management           319
    FIGURE 5-3   Data Execution Prevention tab settings.

    TABLE 5-3    BCD nx values
                      Option on Data Execution
     BCD nx Value                                          Explanation
                      Prevention Tab

     OptIn            Turn on DEP for Essential Windows    This enables DEP for core Windows system images. It enables
                      Programs and Services Only           32-bit processes to dynamically configure DEP for their life-
                                                           time.

     OptOut           Turn on DEP for All Programs and     This enables DEP for all executables except those specified.
                      Services Except Those I Select       It enables 32-bit processes to dynamically configure DEP for
                                                           their lifetime. It also enables system compatibility fixes for DEP.

     AlwaysOn         There is no dialog box option for    This enables DEP for all components with no ability to exclude
                      this setting                         certain applications. It disables dynamic configuration for
                                                           32-bit processes and disables system compatibility fixes.

     AlwaysOff        There is no dialog box option for    This disables DEP (not recommended). It also disables dynamic
                      this setting                         configuration for 32-bit processes.

       On Windows client versions (both 64-bit and 32-bit), execution protection for 32-bit processes is
    configured by default to apply only to core Windows operating system executables. That is, the nx BCD
    option is set to OptIn. This is to avoid breaking 32-bit applications that might rely on being able to
    execute code in pages not specifically marked as executable, such as self-extracting or packed applica-
    tions. On Windows server systems, execution protection for 32-bit applications is configured by default
    to apply to all 32-bit programs. That is, the nx BCD option is set to OptOut.

       Even if you force DEP to be enabled, there are still other methods through which applications can
    disable DEP for their own images. For example, regardless of which execution-protection options are
    enabled, the image loader will verify the signature of the executable against known copy-protection

mechanisms (such as SafeDisc and SecuROM) and disable execution protection to provide compatibil-
ity with older copy-protected software such as computer games. (See Chapter 3 for more information
about the image loader.)

   EXPERIMENT: Looking at DEP protection on processes
   Process Explorer can show you the current DEP status for all the processes on your system, in-
   cluding whether the process is opted in or benefiting from permanent protection. To look at the
   DEP status for processes, right-click any column in the process tree, choose Select Columns, and
   then select DEP Status on the Process Image tab. There are three possible values:

    ■■   DEP (permanent) This means the process has enabled DEP because it is a “necessary
         Windows program or service.”

    ■■   DEP This means the process opted in to DEP. This may be due to a system-wide policy
         to opt in to all 32-bit processes, because of an API call such as SetProcessDEPPolicy, or
         because the /NXCOMPAT linker flag was set when the image was built.

    ■■   Nothing If the column displays no information for this process, DEP is disabled because
         of either a system-wide policy or an explicit API call or shim.

   Additionally, to provide compatibility with older versions of the Active Template Library (ATL) frame-
work (version 7.1 or earlier), the Windows kernel provides an ATL thunk emulation environment. This
environment detects ATL thunk code sequences that have caused the DEP exception and emulates the
expected operation. Application developers can request that ATL thunk emulation not be applied by
using the latest Microsoft C++ compiler and specifying the /NXCOMPAT flag (which sets the IMAGE_DLL-
CHARACTERISTICS_NX_COMPAT flag in the PE header), which tells the system that the executable fully
supports DEP. Note that ATL thunk emulation is permanently disabled if the AlwaysOn value is set.

   Finally, if the system is in OptIn or OptOut mode and executing a 32-bit process, the SetProcess-
DEPPolicy function allows a process to dynamically disable DEP or to permanently enable it. When it
is enabled through this API, DEP cannot be disabled programmatically for the lifetime of the process.
This function can also be used to dynamically disable ATL thunk emulation if the image wasn’t compiled
with the /NXCOMPAT flag. On 64-bit processes or systems booted with AlwaysOff or AlwaysOn, the
function always returns a failure. The GetProcessDEPPolicy function returns the 32-bit per-process
DEP policy (it fails on 64-bit systems, where the policy is always the same—enabled), while GetSystem-
DEPPolicy can be used to return a value corresponding to the policies in Table 5-3.

Copy-on-write
Copy-on-write page protection is an optimization the memory manager uses to conserve physical memory.
When a process maps a copy-on-write view of a section object that contains read/write pages, the memory
manager delays the copying of pages until the page is written to instead of making a process private copy
at the time the view is mapped. For example, in Figure 5-4, two processes are sharing three pages, each
marked copy-on-write, but neither of the two processes has attempted to modify any data on the pages.

    FIGURE 5-4   The “before” of copy-on-write.

       If a thread in either process writes to a page, a memory-management fault is generated. The
    memory manager sees that the write is to a copy-on-write page, so instead of reporting the fault as an
    access violation, it does the following:

       1.   It allocates a new read/write page in physical memory.

       2.   It copies the contents of the original page to the new page.

       3.   It updates the corresponding page-mapping information (explained later in this chapter) in this
            process to point to the new location.

       4.   It dismisses the exception, causing the instruction that generated the fault to be re-executed.

      This time, the write operation succeeds. However, as shown in Figure 5-5, the newly copied page is
    now private to the process that did the writing and isn’t visible to the other process still sharing the copy-
    on-write page. Each new process that writes to that same shared page will also get its own private copy.

    FIGURE 5-5   The “after” of copy-on-write.

       One application of copy-on-write is to implement breakpoint support in debuggers. For example,
    by default, code pages start out as execute-only. If a programmer sets a breakpoint while debugging

a program, however, the debugger must add a breakpoint instruction to the code. It does this by first
changing the protection on the page to PAGE_EXECUTE_READWRITE and then changing the instruction
stream. Because the code page is part of a mapped section, the memory manager creates a private
copy for the process with the breakpoint set, while other processes continue using the unmodified
code page.

   Copy-on-write is one example of an evaluation technique called lazy evaluation that the memory
manager uses as often as possible. Lazy-evaluation algorithms avoid performing an expensive opera-
tion until absolutely required. If the operation is never required, no time is wasted on it.

  To examine the rate of copy-on-write faults, see the Write Copies/Sec performance counter in the
Memory category of the Performance Monitor tool.

Address Windowing Extensions
Although the 32-bit version of Windows can support up to 64 GB of physical memory (refer to Table
2-2), each 32-bit user process has only a 2 GB virtual address space by default. (You can configure this
to up to 3 GB when using the increaseuserva BCD option, described in the upcoming section “Virtual
address space layouts.”) An application that needs to make more than 2 GB (or 3 GB) of data easily
available in a single process could do so via file mapping, remapping a part of its address space into
various portions of a large file. However, significant paging would be involved upon each remap.

   For higher performance (and more fine-grained control), Windows provides a set of functions called
Address Windowing Extensions (AWE). These functions allow a process to allocate more physical memory
than can be represented in its virtual address space. It then can access the physical memory by mapping
a portion of its virtual address space into selected portions of the physical memory at various times.

   You allocate and use memory via the AWE functions in three steps:

   1.   You allocate the physical memory to be used. The application uses the Windows functions
        AllocateUserPhysicalPages or AllocateUserPhysicalPagesNuma. (These require the
        SeLockMemoryPrivilege.)

   2.   You create one or more regions of virtual address space to act as windows to map views of the
        physical memory. The application uses the Win32 VirtualAlloc, VirtualAllocEx, or Virtual-
        AllocExNuma function with the MEM_PHYSICAL flag.

   3.   Steps 1 and 2 are, generally speaking, initialization steps. To actually use the memory, the applica-
        tion uses MapUserPhysicalPages or MapUserPhysicalPagesScatter to map a portion of the
        physical region allocated in step 1 into one of the virtual regions, or windows, allocated in step 2.

   Figure 5-6 shows an example. The application has created a 256 MB window in its address space and
has allocated 4 GB of physical memory. It can then use MapUserPhysicalPages or MapUserPhysical-
PagesScatter to access any portion of the physical memory by mapping the desired portion of mem-
ory into the 256 MB window. The size of the application’s virtual address space window determines
the amount of physical memory the application can access with any given mapping. To access another
portion of the allocated RAM, the application can simply remap the area.

    FIGURE 5-6   Using AWE to map physical memory.

       The AWE functions exist on all editions of Windows and are usable regardless of how much physical
    memory a system has. However, AWE is most useful on 32-bit systems with more than 2 GB of physi-
    cal memory because it provides a way for a 32-bit process to access more RAM than its virtual address
    space would otherwise allow. Another use is for security purposes. Because AWE memory is never
    paged out, the data in AWE memory can never have a copy in the paging file that someone could
    examine by rebooting into an alternate operating system. (VirtualLock provides the same guarantee
    for pages in general.)

       Finally, there are some restrictions on memory allocated and mapped by the AWE functions:

       ■■   Pages can’t be shared between processes.

       ■■   The same physical page can’t be mapped to more than one virtual address.

       ■■   Page protection is limited to read/write, read-only, and no access.

       AWE is less useful on 64 bit Windows systems because these systems support 128 TB of virtual address
    space per process, while allowing a maximum of only 24 TB of RAM (on Windows Server 2016 systems).
    Therefore, AWE is not necessary to allow an application to use more RAM than it has virtual address
    space; the amount of RAM on the system will always be smaller than the process virtual address space.
    AWE remains useful, however, for setting up non-pageable regions of a process address space. It provides
    finer granularity than the file-mapping APIs. (The system page size is 4 KB rather than 64 KB.)

       For a description of the page table data structures used to map memory on systems with more than
    4 GB of physical memory, see the section “x86 virtual address translation.”

Kernel-mode heaps (system memory pools)
    At system initialization, the memory manager creates two dynamically sized memory pools, or heaps,
    that most kernel-mode components use to allocate system memory:

   ■■   Non-paged pool This consists of ranges of system virtual addresses that are guaranteed to
        reside in physical memory at all times. Thus, they can be accessed at any time without incurring
        a page fault—meaning they can be accessed from any IRQL. One of the reasons a non-paged
        pool is required is because page faults can’t be satisfied at DPC/dispatch level or above. There-
        fore, any code and data that might execute or be accessed at or above DPC/dispatch level must
        be in non-pageable memory.

   ■■   Paged pool This is a region of virtual memory in system space that can be paged into and out
        of the system. Device drivers that don’t need to access the memory from DPC/dispatch level or
        above can use paged pool. It is accessible from any process context.

  Both memory pools are in the system part of the address space and are mapped in the virtual
address space of every process. The executive provides routines to allocate and deallocate from these
pools. For information on these routines, see the functions that start with ExAllocatePool, ExAllocate-
PoolWithTag, and ExFreePool in the Windows Development Kit (WDK) documentation.

   Systems start with four paged pools, which are combined to make the overall system paged pool,
and two non-paged pools. More are created—as many as 64—depending on the number of NUMA
nodes on the system. Having more than one paged pool reduces the frequency of system code block-
ing on simultaneous calls to pool routines. Additionally, the different pools created are mapped across
different virtual address ranges that correspond to different NUMA nodes on the system. The different
data structures, such as the large page look-aside lists, to describe pool allocations are also mapped
across different NUMA nodes.

   In addition to the paged and non-paged pools, there are a few other pools with special attributes
or uses. For example, there is a pool region in session space that is used for data that is common to all
processes in the session. Allocations from another pool, called special pool, are surrounded by pages
marked as “no access” to help isolate problems in code that accesses memory before or after the re-
gion of pool it allocated.

Pool sizes
A non-paged pool starts at an initial size based on the amount of physical memory on the system and
then grows as needed. For a non-paged pool, the initial size is 3 percent of system RAM. If this is less
than 40 MB, the system will instead use 40 MB as long as 10 percent of RAM results in more than 40 MB.
Otherwise, 10 percent of RAM is chosen as a minimum. Windows dynamically chooses the maximum size
of the pools and allows a given pool to grow from its initial size to the maximums shown in Table 5-4.

TABLE 5-4   Maximum pool sizes
                                                                                    Maximum on 64-Bit Systems
                                                Maximum on 64 bit Systems
Pool Type       Maximum on 32-Bit Systems                                           (Windows 8.1, 10, Server 2012
                                                (Windows 8, Server 2012)
                                                                                    R2, 2016)

Non-paged       75 percent of physical memory   75 percent of physical memory       16 TB
                or 2 GB, whichever is smaller   or 128 GB, whichever is smaller

Paged           2 GB                            384 GB                              15.5 TB

       Four of these computed sizes are stored in kernel variables in Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2.
    Three of these are exposed as performance counters and one is computed only as a performance
    counter value. Windows 10 and Server 2016 moved the global variables into fields in a global memory
    management structure (MI_SYSTEM_INFORMATION) named MiState. Within this lies a variable named
    Vs (of type _MI_VISIBLE_STATE) where this information resides. The global variable MiVisibleState
    also points to that Vs member. These variables and counters are listed in Table 5-5.

    TABLE 5-5    System pool size variables and performance counters
     Kernel Variable                           Performance Counter     Description

     MmSizeOfNonPagedPoolInBytes               Memory: Pool non-       This is the size of the initial non-paged pool. It
                                               paged bytes             can be reduced or enlarged automatically by
                                                                       the system if memory demands dictate. The
                                                                       kernel variable will not show these changes,
                                                                       but the performance counter will.

     MmMaximumNonPagedPoolInBytes              Not available           This is the maximum size of a non-paged
     (Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2)                                  pool.

     MiVisibleState->MaximumNonPagePool        Not available           This is the maximum size of a non-paged
     InBytes (Windows 10 and Server 2016)                              pool.

     Not available                             Memory: Pool paged      This is the current total virtual size of paged
                                               bytes                   pool.

     WorkingSetSize (number of pages) in the   Memory: Pool paged      This is the current physical (resident) size of
     MmPagedPoolWs struct (type MMSUPPORT)     resident bytes          paged pool.
     (Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2)

     MmSizeOfPagedPoolInBytes (Windows 8.x     Not available           This is the maximum (virtual) size of a paged
     and Server 2012/R2)                                               pool.

     MiState.Vs.SizeOfPagedPoolIn Bytes        Not available           This is the maximum (virtual) size of a paged
     (Windows 10 and Server 2016)                                      pool.

       EXPERIMENT: Determining the maximum pool sizes
       You can obtain the pool maximums by using either Process Explorer or live kernel debugging
       (explained in Chapter 1). To view pool maximums with Process Explorer, select the View menu,
       choose System Information, and then click the Memory tab. The pool limits are displayed in
       the Kernel Memory section, as shown here:

              Note For Process Explorer to retrieve this information, it must have access to
              the symbols for the kernel running on your system. For a description of how to
              configure Process Explorer to use symbols, see the experiment “Viewing pro-
              cess details with Process Explorer” in Chapter 1.

     To view the same information by using the kernel debugger, you can use the !vm command as
   was shown previously in this chapter.

Monitoring pool usage
The Memory performance counter object has separate counters for the non-paged pool and paged
pool (both virtual and physical). In addition, the Poolmon utility (in the WDK Tools directory) allows you
to monitor the detailed usage of non-paged and paged pool. When you run Poolmon, you should see
a display like the one shown in Figure 5-7.

FIGURE 5-7   Poolmon output.

   Any highlighted lines you might see represent changes to the display. (You can disable the high-
lighting feature by typing / while running Poolmon; type / again to re-enable highlighting.) Type ?
while Poolmon is running to bring up its help screen. You can configure which pools you want to moni-
tor (paged, non-paged, or both) and the sort order. For example, by pressing the P key until only non-
paged allocations are shown, and then the D key to sort by the Diff (differences) column, you can find
out what kind of structures are most numerous in non-paged pool. Also, the command-line options are
shown, which allow you to monitor specific tags (or every tag but one tag). For example, the command
poolmon –iCM will monitor only CM tags (allocations from the configuration manager, which manages
the registry). The columns have the meanings shown in Table 5-6.

    TABLE 5-6    Poolmon columns
     Column        Explanation

     Tag           This is a four-byte tag given to the pool allocation.

     Type          This is the pool type (paged or non-paged).

     Allocs        This is a count of all allocations. The number in parentheses shows the difference in the Allocs column
                   since the last update.

     Frees         This is the count of all frees. The number in parentheses shows the difference in the Frees column since
                   the last update.

     Diff          This is the count of allocations minus frees.

     Bytes         This is the total bytes consumed by this tag. The number in parentheses shows the difference in the Bytes
                   column since the last update.

     Per Alloc     This is the size in bytes of a single instance of this tag.

        For a description of the meaning of the pool tags used by Windows, see the Pooltag.txt file in the
    Triage subdirectory where the Debugging tools for Windows are located. Because third-party device-
    driver pool tags are not listed in this file, you can use the –c switch on the 32-bit version of Poolmon
    that comes with the WDK to generate a local pool tag file (Localtag.txt). This file will contain pool tags
    used by drivers found on your system, including third-party drivers. (Note that if a device-driver binary
    has been deleted after it was loaded, its pool tags will not be recognized.)

       Alternatively, you can search the device drivers on your system for a pool tag by using the Strings.exe
    tool from Sysinternals. For example, the following command displays drivers that contain the string "abcd":

    strings %SYSTEMROOT%\system32\drivers\*.sys | findstr /i "abcd"

       Device drivers do not necessarily have to be located in %SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers. They can
    be in any folder. To list the full path of all loaded drivers, follow these steps:

       1.     Open the Start menu and type Msinfo32 (System Information should appear).

       2.     Run System Information.

       3.     Select Software Environment.

       4.     Choose System Drivers. If a device driver has been loaded and then deleted from the system,
              it will not be listed here.

       An alternative way to view pool usage by device driver is to enable the pool-tracking feature of Driver
    Verifier, explained in Chapter 6. While this makes the mapping from pool tag to device driver unneces-
    sary, it does require a reboot (to enable Driver Verifier on the desired drivers). After rebooting with pool
    tracking enabled, you can either run the graphical Driver Verifier Manager (%SystemRoot%\System32\
    Verifier.exe) or use the Verifier /Log command to send the pool-usage information to a file.

      Finally, you can view pool usage with the kernel debugger !poolused command. The !poolused 2
    command shows non-paged pool usage sorted by pool tag using the most amount of pool. The
    !poolused 4 command lists paged-pool usage, again sorted by pool tag using the most amount of
    pool. The following example shows the partial output from these two commands:

lkd> !poolused 2
........
Sorting by NonPaged Pool Consumed

                   NonPaged                       Paged
Tag      Allocs             Used       Allocs             Used

 File        626381    260524032              0              0         File objects
 Ntfx        733204    227105872              0              0         General Allocation , Binary:
                                                                       ntfs.sys
MmCa     513713       148086336               0              0         Mm control areas for mapped
                                                                       files , Binary: nt!mm
FMsl     732490       140638080               0              0         STREAM_LIST_CTRL structure ,
                                                                       Binary: fltmgr.sys
 CcSc        104420      56804480             0              0         Cache Manager Shared Cache Map
                                                                       , Binary: nt!cc
SQSF     283749        45409984               0              0         UNKNOWN pooltag 'SQSF', please
                                                                       update pooltag.txt
 FMfz        382318      42819616             0              0         FILE_LIST_CTRL structure ,
                                                                       Binary: fltmgr.sys
 FMsc        36130       32950560             0              0         SECTION_CONTEXT structure ,
                                                                       Binary: fltmgr.sys
 EtwB           517      31297568          107      105119744          Etw Buffer , Binary: nt!etw
 DFmF        382318      30585440       382318       91756320          UNKNOWN pooltag 'DFmF', please
                                                                       update pooltag.txt
 DFmE        382318      18351264             0              0         UNKNOWN pooltag 'DFmE', please
                                                                       update pooltag.txt
 FSfc        382318      18351264             0              0         Unrecoginzed File System Run
                                                                       Time allocations (update
                                                                       pooltag.w) , Binary: nt!fsrtl
 smNp         4295       17592320             0              0         ReadyBoost store node pool
                                                                       allocations , Binary: nt!store
                                                                       or rdyboost.sys
 Thre         5780       12837376             0              0         Thread objects , Binary: nt!ps
 Pool            8       12834368             0              0         Pool tables, etc.

  EXPERIMENT: Troubleshooting a pool leak
  In this experiment, you will fix a real paged pool leak on your system so that you can use the
  techniques described in the previous section to track down the leak. The leak will be generated
  by the Notmyfault tool from Sysinternals. Follow these steps:

        1.    Run Notmyfault.exe for your OS bitness (for example, the 64 bit on a 64-bit system).

        2.    Notmyfault.exe loads the Myfault.sys device driver and presents a Not My Fault dialog
              box with the Crash tab selected. Click the Leak tab. It should look something like this:

          3.   Ensure that the Leak/Second setting is set to 1000 KB.

          4.   Click the Leak Paged button. This causes Notmyfault to begin sending requests to the
               Myfault device driver to allocate paged pool. Notmyfault will continue sending requests
               until you click the Stop Paged button. Paged pool is not normally released even when
               you close a program that has caused it to occur (by interacting with a buggy device
               driver). The pool is permanently leaked until you reboot the system. However, to make
               testing easier, the Myfault device driver detects that the process was closed and frees its
               allocations.

          5.   While the pool is leaking, open Task Manager, click the Performance tab, and select
               the Memory label. Notice the Paged Pool value climbing. You can also check this with
               Process Explorer’s System Information display (select the View menu, choose System
               Information, and click the Memory tab).

          6.   To determine which pool tag is leaking, run Poolmon and press the B key to sort by the
               number of bytes.

          7.   Press P twice so that Poolmon shows only paged pool. Notice the Leak pool tag climb-
               ing to the top of the list. (Poolmon shows changes to pool allocations by highlighting
               the lines that change.)

          8.   Click the Stop Paged button so that you don’t exhaust paged pool on your system.

          9.   Using the technique described in the previous section, run Strings (from Sysinternals) to
               look for driver binaries that contain the Leak pool tag. This should display a match on
               the file Myfault.sys, thus confirming it as the driver using the Leak pool tag.
               Strings %SystemRoot%\system32\drivers\*.sys | findstr Leak

Look-aside lists
Windows provides a fast memory-allocation mechanism called look-aside lists. The basic difference
between pools and look-aside lists is that while general pool allocations can vary in size, a look-aside
list contains only fixed-sized blocks. Although the general pools are more flexible in terms of what they
can supply, look-aside lists are faster because they don’t use any spinlocks.

    Executive components and device drivers can create look-aside lists that match the size of frequent-
ly allocated data structures by using the ExInitializeNPagedLookasideList (for non-paged alloca-
tions) and ExInitializePagedLookasideList (for paged allocation) functions, as documented in the
WDK. To minimize the overhead of multiprocessor synchronization, several executive subsystems such
as the I/O manager, cache manager, and object manager create separate look-aside lists for each pro-
cessor for their frequently accessed data structures. The executive also creates a general per-processor
paged and non-paged look-aside list for small allocations (256 bytes or less).

    If a look-aside list is empty (as it is when it’s first created), the system must allocate from the paged
or non-paged pool. But if it contains a freed block, the allocation can be satisfied very quickly. (The
list grows as blocks are returned to it.) The pool-allocation routines automatically tune the number of
freed buffers that look-aside lists store according to how often a device driver or executive subsystem
allocates from the list. The more frequent the allocations, the more blocks are stored on a list. Look-
aside lists are automatically reduced in size if they aren’t being allocated from. (This check happens
once per second when the balance set manager system thread wakes up and calls the ExAdjustLook-
asideDepth function.)

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the system look-aside lists
   You can display the contents and sizes of the various system look-aside lists with the kernel
   debugger !lookaside command. The following excerpt is from the output of this command:
   lkd> !lookaside

   Lookaside "nt!CcTwilightLookasideList" @ 0xfffff800c6f54300 Tag(hex): 0x6b576343 "CcWk"
       Type            =       0200 NonPagedPoolNx
       Current Depth =             0 Max Depth =             4
       Size            =        128 Max Alloc =            512
       AllocateMisses =      728323 FreeMisses =        728271
       TotalAllocates =     1030842 TotalFrees =       1030766
       Hit Rate        =          29% Hit Rate   =          29%

   Lookaside "nt!IopSmallIrpLookasideList" @ 0xfffff800c6f54500 Tag(hex): 0x73707249 "Irps"
       Type            =        0200 NonPagedPoolNx
       Current Depth =             0 Max Depth =              4
       Size            =         280 Max Alloc =           1120
       AllocateMisses =        44683 FreeMisses =         43576
       TotalAllocates =       232027 TotalFrees =        230903
       Hit Rate        =          80% Hit Rate    =          81%

       Lookaside "nt!IopLargeIrpLookasideList" @ 0xfffff800c6f54600 Tag(hex): 0x6c707249 "Irpl"
           Type            =        0200 NonPagedPoolNx
           Current Depth =             0 Max Depth =              4
           Size            =        1216 Max Alloc =           4864
           AllocateMisses =       143708 FreeMisses =        142551
           TotalAllocates =       317297 TotalFrees =        316131
           Hit Rate        =          54% Hit Rate    =          54%
       ...

       Total NonPaged currently allocated for above lists =                   0
       Total NonPaged potential for above lists           =               13232
       Total Paged currently allocated for above lists    =                   0
       Total Paged potential for above lists              =                4176

Heap manager
    Most applications allocate smaller blocks than the 64-KB minimum allocation granularity possible
    using page-granularity functions such as VirtualAlloc. Allocating such a large area for relatively
    small allocations is not optimal from a memory usage and performance standpoint. To address this,
    Windows provides a component called the heap manager, which manages allocations inside larger
    memory areas reserved using the page-granularity memory-allocation functions. The allocation
    granularity in the heap manager is relatively small: 8 bytes on 32-bit systems, and 16 bytes on 64-bit
    systems. The heap manager has been designed to optimize memory usage and performance in the
    case of these smaller allocations.

       The heap manager exists in two places: Ntdll.dll and Ntoskrnl.exe. The subsystem APIs (such as
    the Windows heap APIs) call the functions in Ntdll.dll, and various executive components and device
    drivers call the functions in Ntoskrnl.exe. Its native interfaces (prefixed with Rtl) are available only for
    use in internal Windows components or kernel-mode device drivers. The documented Windows API in-
    terfaces to the heap (prefixed with Heap) are forwarders to the native functions in Ntdll.dll. In addition,
    legacy APIs (prefixed with either Local or Global) are provided to support older Windows applica-
    tions. These also internally call the heap manager, using some of its specialized interfaces to support
    legacy behavior. The most common Windows heap functions are:

       ■■   HeapCreate or HeapDestroy    These create or delete, respectively, a heap. The initial reserved
            and committed size can be specified at creation.

       ■■   HeapAlloc    This allocates a heap block. It is forwarded to RtlAllocateHeap in Ntdll.dll.

       ■■   HeapFree    This frees a block previously allocated with HeapAlloc.

       ■■   HeapReAlloc This changes the size of an existing allocation, growing or shrinking an existing
            block. It is forwarded to RtlReAllocateHeap in Ntdll.dll.

       ■■   HeapLock and HeapUnlock       These control mutual exclusion to heap operations.

       ■■   HeapWalk    This enumerates the entries and regions in a heap.

Process heaps
Each process has at least one heap: the default process heap. The default heap is created at process
startup and is never deleted during the process’s lifetime. It defaults to 1 MB in size, but you can make
it bigger by specifying a starting size in the image file by using the /HEAP linker flag. This size is just the
initial reserve, however. It will expand automatically as needed. You can also specify the initial commit-
ted size in the image file.

   The default heap can be explicitly used by a program or implicitly used by some Windows internal
functions. An application can query the default process heap by making a call to the Windows GetPro-
cessHeap function. Processes can also create additional private heaps with the HeapCreate function.
When a process no longer needs a private heap, it can recover the virtual address space by calling
HeapDestroy. An array with all heaps is maintained in each process, and a thread can query them with
the Windows GetProcessHeaps function.

   A Universal Windows Platform (UWP) app process includes at least three heaps:

   ■■   The default process heap just described.

   ■■   A shared heap used to pass large arguments to the process’ session Csrss.exe instance.
        This is created by the CsrClientConnectToServer Ntdll.dll function, which executes early in
        the process initialization done by Ntdll.dll. The heap handle is available in the global variable
        CsrPortHeap (in Ntdll.dll).

   ■■   A heap created by the Microsoft C runtime library. Its handle is stored in the global variable
        _crtheap (in the msvcrt module). This heap is the one used internally by the C/C++ memory-
        allocation functions such as malloc, free, operator new/delete, and so on.

    A heap can manage allocations either in large memory regions reserved from the memory manager
via VirtualAlloc or from memory-mapped file objects mapped in the process address space. The
latter approach is rarely used in practice (and is not exposed by the Windows API), but it’s suitable for
scenarios where the content of the blocks needs to be shared between two processes or between a
kernel-mode and a user-mode component. The Win32 GUI subsystem driver (Win32k.sys) uses such a
heap for sharing GDI and USER objects with user mode. If a heap is built on top of a memory-mapped
file region, certain constraints apply with respect to the component that can call heap functions:

   ■■   The internal heap structures use pointers, and therefore do not allow remapping to different
        addresses in other processes.

   ■■   The synchronization across multiple processes or between a kernel component and a user pro-
        cess is not supported by the heap functions.

   ■■   In the case of a shared heap between user mode and kernel mode, the user-mode mapping
        should be read-only to prevent user-mode code from corrupting the heap’s internal structures,
        which would result in a system crash. The kernel-mode driver is also responsible for not putting
        any sensitive data in a shared heap to avoid leaking it to user mode.

    Heap types
    Until Windows 10 and Server 2016, there was just one heap type, which we’ll call the NT heap. The NT
    heap is augmented by an optional front-end layer, which if used, consists of the low-fragmentation
    heap (LFH).

       Windows 10 introduced a new heap type called segment heap. The two heap types include common
    elements but are structured and implemented differently. By default, the segment heap is used by all
    UWP apps and some system processes, while the NT heap is used by all other processes. This can be
    changed in the registry as described in the section “The segment heap” later in this chapter.

    The NT heap
    As shown in Figure 5-8, the NT heap in user mode is structured in two layers: a front-end layer and
    the heap back end (sometimes called the heap core). The back end handles the basic functionality and
    includes the management of blocks inside segments, the management of the segments, policies for
    extending the heap, committing and decommitting memory, and management of large blocks.

    FIGURE 5-8   NT heap layers in user mode.

       For user-mode heaps only, a front-end heap layer can exist on top of the core functionality.
    Windows supports one optional front end layer, the LFH, described in the upcoming section
    “The low-fragmentation heap.”

    Heap synchronization
    The heap manager supports concurrent access from multiple threads by default. However, if a process
    is single threaded or uses an external mechanism for synchronization, it can tell the heap manager
    to avoid the overhead of synchronization by specifying the HEAP_NO_SERIALIZE flag either at heap
    creation or on a per-allocation basis. If heap synchronization is enabled, there is one lock per heap that
    protects all internal heap structures.

    A process can also lock the entire heap and prevent other threads from performing heap operations
for operations that would require consistent states across multiple heap calls. For instance, enumerat-
ing the heap blocks in a heap with the Windows function HeapWalk requires locking the heap if mul-
tiple threads can perform heap operations simultaneously. Locking and unlocking a heap can be done
with the HeapLock and HeapUnlock functions, respectively.

The low-fragmentation heap
Many applications running in Windows have relatively small heap memory usage—usually less than 1
MB. For this class of applications, the heap manager’s best-fit policy helps keep a low memory footprint
for each process. However, this strategy does not scale for large processes and multiprocessor ma-
chines. In these cases, memory available for heap usage might be reduced due to heap fragmentation.
Performance can suffer in scenarios where only certain sizes are often used concurrently from different
threads scheduled to run on different processors. This happens because several processors need to
modify the same memory location (for example, the head of the look-aside list for that particular size)
at the same time, thus causing significant contention for the corresponding cache line.

    The LFH avoids fragmentation by managing allocated blocks in predetermined different block-size
ranges called buckets. When a process allocates memory from the heap, the LFH chooses the bucket
that maps to the smallest block large enough to hold the required size. (The smallest block is 8 bytes.)
The first bucket is used for allocations between 1 and 8 bytes, the second for allocations between 9 and
16 bytes, and so on, until the 32nd bucket, which is used for allocations between 249 and 256 bytes, fol-
lowed by the 33rd bucket, which is used for allocations between 257 and 272 bytes, and so on. Finally,
the 128th bucket, which is the last, is used for allocations between 15,873 and 16,384 bytes. (This is
known as a binary buddy system.) If the allocation is larger than 16,384 bytes, the LFH simply forwards it
to the underlying heap back end. Table 5-7 summarizes the different buckets, their granularity, and the
range of sizes they map to.

TABLE 5-7   LFH buckets
Buckets       Granularity      Range

1–32          8                1–256

33–48         16               257–512

49–64         32               513–1,024

65–80         64               1,025–2,048

81–96         128              2,049–4,096

97–112        256              4,097–8,192

113–128       512              8,193–16,384

   The LFH addresses these issues by using the core heap manager and look-aside lists. The Windows
heap manager implements an automatic tuning algorithm that can enable the LFH by default under
certain conditions, such as lock contention or the presence of popular size allocations that have shown
better performance with the LFH enabled. For large heaps, a significant percentage of allocations is

    frequently grouped in a relatively small number of buckets of certain sizes. The allocation strategy used
    by LFH is to optimize the usage for these patterns by efficiently handling same-size blocks.

        To address scalability, the LFH expands the frequently accessed internal structures to a number of
    slots that is two times larger than the current number of processors on the machine. The assignment
    of threads to these slots is done by an LFH component called the affinity manager. Initially, the LFH
    starts using the first slot for heap allocations; however, if a contention is detected when accessing some
    internal data, the LFH switches the current thread to use a different slot. Further contentions will spread
    threads on more slots. These slots are controlled for each size bucket to improve locality and minimize
    the overall memory consumption.

       Even if the LFH is enabled as a front-end heap, the less frequent allocation sizes may continue to use
    the core heap functions to allocate memory, while the most popular allocation classes will be performed
    from the LFH. Once the LFH is enabled for a specific heap, it cannot be disabled. The HeapSetInfor-
    mation API with the HeapCompatibilityInformation class that was able to remove the LFH layer in
    Windows 7 and earlier versions of Windows is now ignored.

    The segment heap
    Figure 5-9 shows the architecture of the segment heap, introduced in Windows 10.

    FIGURE 5-9   Segment heap.

       The actual layer that manages an allocation depends on the allocation size as follows:

       ■■   For small sizes (less than or equal to 16,368 bytes), the LFH allocator is used, but only if the size is
            determined to be a common one. This is a similar logic to the LFH front layer of the NT heap. If
            the LFH has not kicked in yet, the variable size (VS) allocator will be used instead.

   ■■   For sizes less than or equal to 128 KB (and not serviced by the LFH), the VS allocator is used. Both
        VS and LFH allocators use the back end to create the required heap sub-segments as necessary.

   ■■   Allocations larger than 128 KB and less than or equal to 508 KB are serviced directly by the heap
        back end.

   ■■   Allocations larger than 508 KB are serviced by calling the memory manager directly (Virtual-
        Alloc) since these are so large that using the default 64 KB allocation granularity (and rounding
        to the nearest page size) is deemed good enough.

   Here is a quick comparison of the two heap implementations:

   ■■   In some scenarios, the segment heap may be somewhat slower than the NT heap. However, it’s
        likely that future Windows versions would make it on par with the NT heap.

   ■■   The segment heap has a lower memory footprint for its metadata, making it better suited for
        low-memory devices such as phones.

   ■■   The segment heap’s metadata is separated from the actual data, while the NT heap’s metadata
        is interspersed with the data itself. This makes the segment heap more secure, as it’s more dif-
        ficult to get to the metadata of an allocation given just a block address.

   ■■   The segment heap can be used only for a growable heap. It cannot be used with a user-supplied
        memory mapped file. If such a segment heap creation is attempted, an NT heap is created
        instead.

   ■■   Both heaps support LFH-type allocations, but their internal implementation is completely dif-
        ferent. The segment heap has a more efficient implementation in terms of memory consump-
        tion and performance.

   As mentioned, UWP apps use segment heaps by default. This is mainly because of their lower mem-
ory footprint, which is suitable for low-memory devices. It’s also used with certain system processes
based on executable name: csrss.exe, lsass.exe, runtimebroker.exe, services.exe, smss.exe, and svchost.
exe.

   The segment heap is not the default heap for desktop apps because there are some compatibility
concerns that may affect existing applications. It’s likely that in future versions, however, it will become
the default. To enable or disable the segment heap for a specific executable, you can set an Image File
Execution Options value named FrontEndHeapDebugOptions (DWORD):

   ■■   Bit 2 (4) to disable segment heap

   ■■   Bit 3 (8) to enable segment heap

   You can also globally enable or disable the segment heap by adding a value named Enabled
(DWORD) to the HKLM\ SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Segment Heap registry
key. A zero value disables the segment heap and a non-zero value enables it.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing basic heap information
       In this experiment, we’ll examine some heaps of a UWP process.

           1.   Using Windows 10, run the Windows calculator. (Click the Start button and type
                Calculator to find it.)

           2.   The calculator in Windows 10 has been turned into a UWP app (Calculator.Exe). Run
                WinDbg and attach to the calculator process.

           3.   Once attached, WinDbg breaks into the process. Issue the !heap command to get a
                quick summary of heaps in the process:
                0:033> !heap
                        Heap Address          NT/Segment Heap

                          2531eb90000             Segment Heap
                          2531e980000                  NT Heap
                          2531eb10000             Segment Heap
                          25320a40000             Segment Heap
                          253215a0000             Segment Heap
                          253214f0000             Segment Heap
                          2531eb70000             Segment Heap
                          25326920000             Segment Heap
                          253215d0000                  NT Heap

           4.   Notice the various heaps with their handle and type (segment or NT). The first heap is
                the default process heap. Because it’s growable and not using any preexisting memory
                block, it’s created as a segment heap. The second heap is used with a user-defined
                memory block (described earlier in the “Process heaps” section). Because this feature is
                currently unsupported by the segment heap, it’s created as an NT heap.

           5.   An NT heap is managed by the NtDll!_HEAP structure. Let’s view this structure for the
                second heap:
                0:033> dt ntdll!_heap 2531e980000
                   +0x000 Segment          : _HEAP_SEGMENT
                   +0x000 Entry            : _HEAP_ENTRY
                   +0x010 SegmentSignature : 0xffeeffee
                   +0x014 SegmentFlags     : 1
                   +0x018 SegmentListEntry : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0x00000253'1e980120 -
                0x00000253'1e980120 ]
                   +0x028 Heap             : 0x00000253'1e980000 _HEAP
                   +0x030 BaseAddress      : 0x00000253'1e980000 Void
                   +0x038 NumberOfPages    : 0x10
                   +0x040 FirstEntry       : 0x00000253'1e980720 _HEAP_ENTRY
                   +0x048 LastValidEntry   : 0x00000253'1e990000 _HEAP_ENTRY
                   +0x050 NumberOfUnCommittedPages : 0xf
                   +0x054 NumberOfUnCommittedRanges : 1
                   +0x058 SegmentAllocatorBackTraceIndex : 0

        +0x05a Reserved         : 0
        +0x060 UCRSegmentList   : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0x00000253'1e980fe0 -
     0x00000253'1e980fe0 ]
        +0x070 Flags            : 0x8000
        +0x074 ForceFlags       : 0
        +0x078 CompatibilityFlags : 0
        +0x07c EncodeFlagMask   : 0x100000
        +0x080 Encoding         : _HEAP_ENTRY
        +0x090 Interceptor      : 0
        +0x094 VirtualMemoryThreshold : 0xff00
        +0x098 Signature        : 0xeeffeeff
        +0x0a0 SegmentReserve   : 0x100000
        +0x0a8 SegmentCommit    : 0x2000
        +0x0b0 DeCommitFreeBlockThreshold : 0x100
        +0x0b8 DeCommitTotalFreeThreshold : 0x1000
        +0x0c0 TotalFreeSize    : 0x8a
        +0x0c8 MaximumAllocationSize : 0x00007fff'fffdefff
        +0x0d0 ProcessHeapsListIndex : 2
        ...
        +0x178 FrontEndHeap     : (null)
        +0x180 FrontHeapLockCount : 0
        +0x182 FrontEndHeapType : 0 ''
        +0x183 RequestedFrontEndHeapType : 0 ''
        +0x188 FrontEndHeapUsageData : (null)
        +0x190 FrontEndHeapMaximumIndex : 0
        +0x192 FrontEndHeapStatusBitmap : [129] ""
        +0x218 Counters         : _HEAP_COUNTERS
        +0x290 TuningParameters : _HEAP_TUNING_PARAMETERS

6.   Notice the FrontEndHeap field. This field indicates whether a front-end layer exists. In
     the preceding output, it’s null, meaning there is no front-end layer. A non-null value
     indicates an LFH front-end layer (since it’s the only one defined).

7.   A segment heap is defined with the NtDll!_SEGMENT_HEAP structure. Here’s the default
     process heap:
     0:033> dt ntdll!_segment_heap 2531eb90000
        +0x000 TotalReservedPages : 0x815
        +0x008 TotalCommittedPages : 0x6ac
        +0x010 Signature        : 0xddeeddee
        +0x014 GlobalFlags      : 0
        +0x018 FreeCommittedPages : 0
        +0x020 Interceptor      : 0
        +0x024 ProcessHeapListIndex : 1
        +0x026 GlobalLockCount : 0
        +0x028 GlobalLockOwner : 0
        +0x030 LargeMetadataLock : _RTL_SRWLOCK
        +0x038 LargeAllocMetadata : _RTL_RB_TREE
        +0x048 LargeReservedPages : 0
        +0x050 LargeCommittedPages : 0
        +0x058 SegmentAllocatorLock : _RTL_SRWLOCK
        +0x060 SegmentListHead : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0x00000253'1ec00000 -

               0x00000253'28a00000 ]
                  +0x070 SegmentCount     : 8
                  +0x078 FreePageRanges   : _RTL_RB_TREE
                  +0x088 StackTraceInitVar : _RTL_RUN_ONCE
                  +0x090 ContextExtendLock : _RTL_SRWLOCK
                  +0x098 AllocatedBase    : 0x00000253'1eb93200          ""
                  +0x0a0 UncommittedBase : 0x00000253'1eb94000           "--- memory read error at
               address 0x00000253'1eb94000 ---"
                  +0x0a8 ReservedLimit    : 0x00000253'1eba5000          "--- memory read error at
               address 0x00000253'1eba5000 ---"
                  +0x0b0 VsContext        : _HEAP_VS_CONTEXT
                  +0x120 LfhContext       : _HEAP_LFH_CONTEXT

          8.   Notice the Signature field. It’s used to distinguish between the two types of heaps.

          9.   Notice the SegmentSignature field of the _HEAP structure. It is in the same offset
               (0x10). This is how functions such as RtlAllocateHeap know which implementation to
               turn to based on the heap handle (address) alone.

          10. Notice the last two fields in the _SEGMENT_HEAP. These contain the VS and LFH allocator
               information.

          11. To get more information on each heap, issue the !heap -s command:

               0:033> !heap -s

                                                           Process    Total         Total
                                                 Global       Heap Reserved     Committed
                   Heap Address     Signature     Flags       List    Bytes         Bytes
                                                             Index      (K)           (K)

                      2531eb90000    ddeeddee          0          1      8276          6832
                      2531eb10000    ddeeddee          0          3      1108           868
                      25320a40000    ddeeddee          0          4      1108            16
                      253215a0000    ddeeddee          0          5      1108            20
                      253214f0000    ddeeddee          0          6      3156           816
                      2531eb70000    ddeeddee          0          7      1108            24
                      25326920000    ddeeddee          0          8      1108            32

               ****************************************************************************
               *************
                                         NT HEAP STATS BELOW
               ****************************************************************************
               *************
               LFH Key                   : 0xd7b666e8f56a4b98
               Termination on corruption : ENABLED
               Affinity manager status:
                  - Virtual affinity limit 8
                  - Current entries in use 0
                  - Statistics: Swaps=0, Resets=0, Allocs=0

                           Heap      Flags    Reserv   Commit   Virt     Free   List     UCR   Virt
               Lock    Fast

                                        (k)     (k)    (k)     (k) length      blocks
            cont. heap
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
            ----------
            000002531e980000 00008000       64      4    64      2     1     1    0
            0
            00000253215d0000 00000001       16    16     16     10     1     1    0
            N/A
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
            ----------

       12. Notice the first part of the output. It shows extended information on segment heaps (if
            any). The second part shows extended information on NT heaps in the process.

      The !heap debugger command provides a multitude of options for viewing, investigating, and
   searching heaps. See the “Debugger Tools for Windows” documentation for more information.

Heap security features
As the heap manager has evolved, it has taken an increased role in early detection of heap usage errors
and in mitigating effects of potential heap-based exploits. These measures exist to lessen the security
effect of potential vulnerabilities in applications. Both the NT-heap and the segment-heap implemen-
tations have multiple mechanisms that reduce the likelihood of memory exploitation.

   The metadata used by the heaps for internal management is packed with a high degree of random-
ization to make it difficult for an attempted exploit to patch the internal structures to prevent crashes
or conceal the attack attempt. These blocks are also subject to an integrity-check mechanism on the
header to detect simple corruptions such as buffer overruns. Finally, the heap uses a small degree of
randomization of the base address or handle. By using the HeapSetInformation API with the Heap-
EnableTerminationOnCorruption class, processes can opt in for an automatic termination in case of
detected inconsistencies to avoid executing unknown code.

    As an effect of block metadata randomization, using the debugger to simply dump a block header
as an area of memory is not that useful. For example, the size of the block and whether it is busy are not
easy to spot from a regular dump. The same applies to LFH blocks. They have a different type of meta-
data stored in the header, also partially randomized. To dump these details, the !heap –i command
in the debugger does all the work to retrieve the metadata fields from a block, also flagging checksum
or free-list inconsistencies if they exist. The command works for both LFH and regular heap blocks. The
total size of the blocks, the user-requested size, the segment owning the block, and the header partial
checksum are available in the output, as shown in the following sample. Because the randomization al-
gorithm uses the heap granularity, the !heap –i command should be used only in the proper context
of the heap containing the block. In the example, the heap handle is 0x001a0000. If the current heap
context were different, the decoding of the header would be incorrect. To set the proper context, the
same !heap –i command with the heap handle as an argument must be executed first.

    0:004> !heap -i 000001f72a5e0000
    Heap context set to the heap 0x000001f72a5e0000

    0:004> !heap -i 000001f72a5eb180
    Detailed information for block entry 000001f72a5eb180
    Assumed heap       : 0x000001f72a5e0000 (Use !heap -i NewHeapHandle to change)
    Header content     : 0x2FB544DC 0x1000021F (decoded : 0x7F01007E 0x10000048)
    Owning segment     : 0x000001f72a5e0000 (offset 0)
    Block flags        : 0x1 (busy )
    Total block size   : 0x7e units (0x7e0 bytes)
    Requested size     : 0x7d0 bytes (unused 0x10 bytes)
    Previous block size: 0x48 units (0x480 bytes)
    Block CRC          : OK - 0x7f
    Previous block     : 0x000001f72a5ead00
    Next block         : 0x000001f72a5eb960

    Segment heap-specific security features
    The segment heap implementation uses many security mechanisms to make it harder to corrupt
    memory or to allow code injection by an attacker. Here are a few of them:

       ■■   Fail fast on linked list node corruption The segment heap uses linked lists to track seg-
            ments and sub-segments. As with the NT heap, checks are added in the list node insertion and
            removal to prevent arbitrary memory writes due to corrupted list nodes. If a corrupted node is
            detected, the process is terminated via a call to RtlFailFast.

       ■■   Fail fast on red-black (RB) tree node corruption The segment heap uses RB trees to track
            free back-end and VS allocations. Node insertion and deletion functions validate the nodes
            involved or, if corrupted, invoke the fail-fast mechanism.

       ■■   Function pointer decoding Some aspects of the segment heap allow for callbacks (in
            VsContext and LfhContext structures, part of the _SEGMENT_HEAP structure). An attacker can
            override these callbacks to point to his or her own code. However, the function pointers are en-
            coded by using a XOR function with an internal random heap key and the context address, both
            of which cannot be guessed in advance.

       ■■   Guard pages When LFH and VS sub-segments and large blocks are allocated, a guard page is
            added at the end. This helps to detect overflows and corruption of adjacent data. See the sec-
            tion “Stacks” later in this chapter for more information on guard pages.

    Heap debugging features
    The heap manager includes several features to help detect bugs by using the following heap settings:

       ■■   Enable tail checking The end of each block carries a signature that is checked when the
            block is released. If a buffer overrun destroys the signature entirely or partially, the heap will
            report this error.

   ■■   Enable free checking A free block is filled with a pattern that is checked at various points
        when the heap manager needs to access the block, such as at removal from the free list to sat-
        isfy an allocate request. If the process continues to write to the block after freeing it, the heap
        manager will detect changes in the pattern and the error will be reported.

   ■■   Parameter checking This function consists of extensive checking of the parameters passed
        to the heap functions.

   ■■   Heap validation     The entire heap is validated at each heap call.

   ■■   Heap tagging and stack traces support This function supports the specification of tags for
        allocation and/or captures user-mode stack traces for the heap calls to help narrow the possible
        causes of a heap error.

   The first three options are enabled by default if the loader detects that a process is started under
the control of a debugger. (A debugger can override this behavior and turn off these features.) You can
specify the heap debugging features for an executable image by setting various debugging flags in the
image header using the Gflags tool. (See the next experiment and the section “Windows global flags”
in Chapter 8 in Part 2.) Alternatively, you can enable heap debugging options using the !heap com-
mand in the standard Windows debuggers. (See the debugger help for more information.)

   Enabling heap-debugging options affects all heaps in the process. Also, if any of the heap-debug-
ging options are enabled, the LFH will be disabled automatically and the core heap will be used (with
the required debugging options enabled). The LFH is also not used for heaps that are not expandable
(because of the extra overhead added to the existing heap structures) or for heaps that do not allow
serialization.

Pageheap
Because the tail and free checking options described in the preceding sections might discover corrup-
tions that occurred well before the problem was detected, an additional heap debugging capability,
called pageheap, is provided. Pageheap directs all or part of the heap calls to a different heap manager.
You can enable pageheap using the Gflags tool (part of the Debugging Tools for Windows). When
enabled, the heap manager places allocations at the end of pages and reserves the page that imme-
diately follows. Because reserved pages are not accessible, any buffer overruns that occur will cause
an access violation, making it easier to detect the offending code. Optionally, pageheap allows for the
placement of blocks at the beginning of the pages, with the preceding page reserved, to detect buffer
underrun problems (a rare occurrence). Pageheap also can protect freed pages against any access to
detect references to heap blocks after they have been freed.

   Note that using the pageheap can cause you to run out of address space (in 32-bit processes)
because of the significant overhead added for small allocations. Also, performance can suffer due to
the increase of references to demand zero pages, loss of locality, and additional overhead caused by
frequent calls to validate heap structures. A process can reduce the impact by specifying that the page-
heap be used only for blocks of certain sizes, address ranges, and/or originating DLLs.

       EXPERIMENT: Using pageheap
       In this experiment, you’ll turn on pageheap for Notepad.exe and see its effects.

           1.   Run Notepad.exe.

           2.   Open Task Manager, click to the Details tab, and add the Commit Size column to the
                display.

           3.   Notice the commit size of the notepad instance you just launched.

           4.   Run Gflags.exe, located in the folder where Debugging Tools for Windows is installed
                (requires elevation).

           5.   Click the Image File tab.

           6.   In the Image text box, type notepad.exe. Then press the Tab key. The various check
                boxes should be selected.

           7.   Select the Enable Page Heap check box. The dialog box should look like this:

           8.   Click Apply.

           9.   Run another instance of Notepad. (Don’t close the first one.)

           10. In Task Manager, compare the commit size of both notepad instances. Notice that the
                second instance has a much larger commit size even though both are empty notepad
                processes. This is due to the extra allocations that pageheap provides. Here’s a screen-
                shot from 32-bit Windows 10:

11. To get a better sense of the extra memory allocated, use the VMMap Sysinternals tool.
    While the notepad processes are still running, open VMMap.exe and select the notepad
    instance that is using pageheap:

12. Open another instance of VMMap and select the other notepad instance. Place the
    windows side by side to see both:

          13. Notice that the difference in the commit size is clearly visible in the Private Data (yellow)
              part.

          14. Click the Private Data line in the middle display on both VMMap instances to see its
              parts in the bottom display (sorted by size in the screenshot):

          15. The left screenshot (notepad with pageheap) clearly consumes more memory. Open
              one of the 1,024 KB chunks. You should see something like this:

          16. You can clearly see the reserved pages between committed pages that help catch buffer
              overruns and underruns courtesy of pageheap. Uncheck the Enable Page Heap option
              in Gflags and click Apply so future instances of notepad will run without pageheap.

         For more information on pageheap, see the “Debugging Tools for Windows” help file.

Fault-tolerant heap
Microsoft has identified the corruption of heap metadata as one of the most common causes of ap-
plication failures. Windows includes a feature called the fault-tolerant heap (FTH) to mitigate these
problems and to provide better problem-solving resources to application developers. The FTH is
implemented in two primary components:

   ■■   The detection component (FTH server)

   ■■   The mitigation component (FTH client)

   The detection component is a DLL called Fthsvc.dll that is loaded by the Windows Security Center
service (Wscsvc.dll), which in turn runs in one of the shared service processes under the local service
account. It is notified of application crashes by the Windows Error Reporting (WER) service.

   Suppose an application crashes in Ntdll.dll with an error status indicating either an access violation
or a heap-corruption exception. If it is not already on the FTH service’s list of watched applications,
the service creates a “ticket” for the application to hold the FTH data. If the application subsequently
crashes more than four times in an hour, the FTH service configures the application to use the FTH cli-
ent in the future.

    The FTH client is an application-compatibility shim. This mechanism has been used since Windows
XP to allow applications that depend on a particular behavior of older Windows systems to run on later
systems. In this case, the shim mechanism intercepts the calls to the heap routines and redirects them
to its own code. The FTH code implements numerous mitigations that attempt to allow the application
to survive despite various heap-related errors.

    For example, to protect against small buffer overrun errors, the FTH adds 8 bytes of padding and
an FTH reserved area to each allocation. To address a common scenario in which a block of heap is ac-
cessed after it is freed, HeapFree calls are implemented only after a delay. “Freed” blocks are put on a
list, and freed only when the total size of the blocks on the list exceeds 4 MB. Attempts to free regions
that are not actually part of the heap, or not part of the heap identified by the heap handle argument
to HeapFree, are simply ignored. In addition, no blocks are actually freed once exit or RtlExitUser-
Process has been called.

  The FTH server continues to monitor the failure rate of the application after the mitigations have
been installed. If the failure rate does not improve, the mitigations are removed.

   You can observe the activity of the fault-tolerant heap in the Event Viewer. Follow these steps:

   1.   Open a Run prompt and type eventvwr.msc.

   2.   In the left pane, choose Event Viewer, select Applications and Services Logs, choose
        Microsoft, select Windows, and click Fault-Tolerant-Heap.

   3.   Click the Operational log.

   4.   The FTH may be disabled completely in the registry. in the HKLM\Software\Microsoft\FTH key,
        set the Enabled value to 0.

        That same key contains the various FTH settings, such as the delay mentioned earlier and an exclu-
    sion list of executables (which includes by default system processes such as smss.exe, csrss.exe, wininit.
    exe, services.exe, winlogon.exe and taskhost.exe). A rule list is also included (RuleList value), which
    lists the modules and exception type (and some flags) to watch for in order for FTH to kick in. By de-
    fault, a single rule is listed, indicating heap problems in Ntdll.dll of type STATUS_ACCESS_VIOLATION
    (0xc0000005).

       The FTH does not normally operate on services, and it is disabled on Windows server systems for
    performance reasons. A system administrator can manually apply the shim to an application or service
    executable by using the Application Compatibility Toolkit.

Virtual address space layouts
    This section describes the components in the user and system address space, followed by the specific
    layouts on 32-bit (x86 and ARM) and 64-bit (x64) systems. This information will help you to understand
    the limits on process and system virtual memory on these platforms.

       Three main types of data are mapped into the virtual address space in Windows:

       ■■   Per-process private code and data As explained in Chapter 1, each process has a private
            address space that cannot be accessed by other processes. That is, a virtual address is always
            evaluated in the context of the current process and cannot refer to an address defined by any
            other process. Threads within the process can therefore never access virtual addresses outside
            this private address space. Even shared memory is not an exception to this rule, because shared
            memory regions are mapped into each participating process, and so are accessed by each
            process using per-process addresses. Similarly, the cross-process memory functions (Read-
            ProcessMemory and WriteProcessMemory) operate by running kernel-mode code in the con-
            text of the target process. The process virtual address space, called page tables, is described in
            the “Address translation” section. Each process has its own set of page tables. They are stored
            in kernel-mode-only accessible pages so that user-mode threads in a process cannot modify
            their own address space layout.

       ■■   Session-wide code and data Session space contains information that is common to each
            session. (For a description of sessions, see Chapter 2.) A session consists of the processes and
            other system objects such as the window station, desktops, and windows that represent a single
            user’s logon session. Each session has a session-specific paged pool area used by the kernel-mode
            portion of the Windows subsystem (Win32k.sys) to allocate session-private GUI data structures.
            In addition, each session has its own copy of the Windows subsystem process (Csrss.exe) and
            logon process (Winlogon.exe). The Session Manager process (Smss.exe) is responsible for
            creating new sessions, which includes loading a session-private copy of Win32k.sys, creating
            the session-private object manager namespace (see Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more details on the
            object manager), and creating the session-specific instances of the Csrss.exe and Winlogon.exe
            processes. To virtualize sessions, all session-wide data structures are mapped into a region of
            system space called session space. When a process is created, this range of addresses is mapped
            to the pages associated with the session that the process belongs to.

   ■■   System-wide code and data System space contains global operating system code and data
        structures visible by kernel-mode code regardless of which process is currently executing. System
        space consists of the following components:

        • System code This contains the OS image, HAL, and device drivers used to boot the system.
        • Nonpaged pool This is the non-pageable system memory heap.
        • Paged pool This is the pageable system memory heap.
        • System cache This is virtual address space used to map files open in the system cache.
           (See Chapter 11, “Startup and shutdown,” in Part 2 for detailed information.)

        • System page table entries (PTEs) This is the pool of system PTEs used to map system
           pages such as I/O space, kernel stacks, and memory descriptor lists. You can see how many
           system PTEs are available by using Performance Monitor to examine the value of the Memory:
           Free System Page Table Entries counter.

        • System working set lists These are the working set list data structures that describe the
           three system working sets: system cache, paged pool, and system PTEs.

        • System mapped views This is used to map Win32k.sys, the loadable kernel-mode part of
           the Windows subsystem, as well as kernel-mode graphics drivers it uses. (See Chapter 2 for
           more information on Win32k.sys.)

        • Hyperspace This is a special region used to map the process working set list and other
           per-process data that doesn’t need to be accessible in arbitrary process context. Hyperspace
           is also used to temporarily map physical pages into the system space. One example of this is
           invalidating page table entries in page tables of processes other than the current one, such
           as when a page is removed from the standby list.

        • Crash dump information This is reserved to record information about the state of a
           system crash.

        • HAL usage This is system memory reserved for HAL-specific structures.
   Now that we’ve described the basic components of the virtual address space in Windows, let’s
examine the specific layout on the x86, ARM, and x64 platforms.

x86 address space layouts
By default, each user process on 32-bit versions of Windows has a 2 GB private address space. (The
operating system takes the remaining 2 GB.) However, for x86, the system can be configured with the
increaseuserva BCD boot option to permit user address spaces up to 3 GB. Two possible address
space layouts are shown in Figure 5-10.

  The ability of a 32-bit process to grow beyond 2 GB was added to accommodate the need for 32-bit
applications to keep more data in memory than could be done with a 2 GB address space. Of course,
64-bit systems provide a much larger address space.

    FIGURE 5-10   x86 virtual address space layouts (2 GB on the left, 3 GB on the right).

       For a process to grow beyond 2 GB of address space, the image file must have the IMAGE_FILE_
    LARGE_ADDRESS_AWARE flag set in the image header (in addition to the global increaseuserva set-
    ting). Otherwise, Windows reserves the additional address space for that process so that the applica-
    tion won’t see virtual addresses greater than 0x7FFFFFFF. Access to the additional virtual memory is
    opt-in because some applications assume they’ll be given at most 2 GB of the address space. Because
    the high bit of a pointer referencing an address below 2 GB is always zero (31 bits are needed to refer-
    ence a 2 GB address space), these applications would use the high bit in their pointers as a flag for their
    own data—clearing it, of course, before referencing the data. If they ran with a 3 GB address space,
    they would inadvertently truncate pointers that have values greater than 2 GB, causing program errors,
    including possible data corruption. You set this flag by specifying the /LARGEADDRESSAWARE linker flag
    when building the executable. Alternatively, use the Property page in Visual Studio (choose Linker,
    select System, and click Enable Large Addresses). You can add the flag to an executable image even
    without building (no source code required) by using a tool such as Editbin.exe (part of the Windows
    SDK tools), assuming the file is not signed. This flag has no effect when running the application on a
    system with a 2 GB user address space.

       Several system images are marked as large address space aware so that they can take advantage of
    systems running with large process address spaces. These include the following:

       ■■   Lsass.exe The Local Security Authority Subsystem
       ■■   Inetinfo.exe Internet Information Server
       ■■   Chkdsk.exe The Check Disk utility

   ■■   Smss.exe The Session Manager

   ■■   Dllhst3g.exe A special version of Dllhost.exe (for COM+ applications)

   EXPERIMENT: Checking whether an application is large address aware
   You can use the Dumpbin utility from the Visual Studio Tools (and older versions of the Windows
   SDK) to check other executables to see if they support large address spaces. Use the /headers
   flag to display the results. Here’s a sample output of Dumpbin on the Session Manager:
   dumpbin /headers c:\windows\system32\smss.exe
   Microsoft (R) COFF/PE Dumper Version 14.00.24213.1
   Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
   Dump of file c:\windows\system32\smss.exe
   PE signature found
   File Type: EXECUTABLE IMAGE
   FILE HEADER VALUES
                14C machine (x86)
                  5 number of sections
           57898F8A time date stamp Sat Jul 16 04:36:10 2016
                  0 file pointer to symbol table
                  0 number of symbols
                 E0 size of optional header
                122 characteristics
                      Executable
                      Application can handle large (>2GB) addresses
                      32 bit word machine

   Finally, memory allocations using VirtualAlloc, VirtualAllocEx, and VirtualAllocExNuma start
with low virtual addresses and grow higher by default. Unless a process allocates a lot of memory or
has a very fragmented virtual address space, it will never get back very high virtual addresses. There-
fore, for testing purposes, you can force memory allocations to start from high addresses by using
the MEM_TOP_DOWN flag to the VirtualAlloc* functions or by adding a DWORD registry value named
AllocationPreference to the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory
Management key and setting its value to 0x100000.

  The following output shows runs of the TestLimit utility (shown in previous experiments) leaking
memory on a 32-bit Windows machine booted without the increaseuserva option:
Testlimit.exe -r

Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

Process ID: 5500

Reserving private bytes (MB)...
Leaked 1978 MB of reserved memory (1940 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 8

       The process managed to reserve close to the 2 GB limit (but not quite). The process address space
    has the EXE code and various DLLs mapped, so naturally it’s not possible in a normal process to reserve
    the entire address space.

       On that same system, you can switch to a 3 GB address space by running the following command
    from an administrative command window:

    C:\WINDOWS\system32>bcdedit /set increaseuserva 3072

    The operation completed successfully.

       Notice that the command allows you to specify any number (in MB) between 2,048 (the 2 GB
    default) to 3,072 (the 3 GB maximum). After you restart the system so that the setting can take effect,
    running TestLimit again produces the following:

    Testlimit.exe -r

    Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
    Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
    Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

    Process ID: 2308

    Reserving private bytes (MB)...
    Leaked 2999 MB of reserved memory (2999 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 8

        TestLimit was able to leak close to 3 GB, as expected. This is only possible because TestLimit was
    linked with /LARGEADDRESSAWARE. Had it not been, the results would have been essentially the same as
    on the system booted without increaseuserva.

       Note To revert a system to the normal 2 GB address space per process, run the bcdedit /
       deletevalue increaseuserva command.

    x86 system address space layout
    The 32-bit versions of Windows implement a dynamic system address space layout by using a virtual
    address allocator. (We’ll describe this functionality later in this section.) There are still a few specifically
    reserved areas, as shown in Figure 5-10. However, many kernel-mode structures use dynamic address
    space allocation. These structures are therefore not necessarily virtually contiguous with themselves.
    Each can easily exist in several disjointed pieces in various areas of system address space. The uses of
    system address space that are allocated in this way include the following:

       ■■   Non-paged pool

       ■■   Paged pool

       ■■   Special pool

   ■■   System PTEs

   ■■   System mapped views

   ■■   File system cache

   ■■   PFN database

   ■■   Session space

x86 session space
For systems with multiple sessions (which is almost always the case, as session 0 is used by system
processes and services, while session 1 is used for the first logged on user), the code and data unique to
each session are mapped into system address space but shared by the processes in that session. Figure
5-11 shows the general layout of session space. The sizes of the components of session space, just like
the rest of kernel system address space, are dynamically configured and resized by the memory man-
ager on demand.

FIGURE 5-11   x86 session space layout (not proportional).

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing sessions
   You can display which processes are members of which sessions by examining the session ID.
   You can do this using Task Manager, Process Explorer, or the kernel debugger. Using the kernel
   debugger, you can list the active sessions with the !session command as follows:
   lkd> !session
   Sessions on machine: 3
   Valid Sessions: 0 1 2
   Current Session 2

       You can then set the active session using the !session -s command and display the address
   of the session data structures and the processes in that session with the !sprocess command:
   lkd> !session -s 1
   Sessions on machine: 3

       Implicit process is now d4921040
       Using session 1

       lkd> !sprocess
       Dumping Session 1

       _MM_SESSION_SPACE d9306000
       _MMSESSION        d9306c80
       PROCESS d4921040 SessionId: 1 Cid: 01d8     Peb: 00668000         ParentCid: 0138
           DirBase: 179c5080 ObjectTable: 00000000 HandleCount:           0.
           Image: smss.exe

       PROCESS d186c180 SessionId: 1 Cid: 01ec     Peb: 00401000 ParentCid: 01d8
           DirBase: 179c5040 ObjectTable: d58d48c0 HandleCount: <Data Not Accessible>
           Image: csrss.exe

       PROCESS d49acc40 SessionId: 1 Cid: 022c     Peb: 03119000 ParentCid: 01d8
           DirBase: 179c50c0 ObjectTable: d232e5c0 HandleCount: <Data Not Accessible>
           Image: winlogon.exe

       PROCESS dc0918c0 SessionId: 1 Cid: 0374     Peb: 003c4000 ParentCid: 022c
           DirBase: 179c5160 ObjectTable: dc28f6c0 HandleCount: <Data Not Accessible>
           Image: LogonUI.exe

       PROCESS dc08e900 SessionId: 1 Cid: 037c     Peb: 00d8b000 ParentCid: 022c
           DirBase: 179c5180 ObjectTable: dc249640 HandleCount: <Data Not Accessible>
           Image: dwm.exe

         To view the details of the session, dump the MM_SESSION_SPACE structure using the dt com-
       mand, as follows:
       lkd> dt nt!_mm_session_space d9306000
           +0x000 ReferenceCount   : 0n4
           +0x004 u                : <unnamed-tag>
           +0x008 SessionId        : 1
           +0x00c ProcessReferenceToSession : 0n6
           +0x010 ProcessList      : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0xd4921128 - 0xdc08e9e8 ]
           +0x018 SessionPageDirectoryIndex : 0x1617f
           +0x01c NonPagablePages : 0x28
           +0x020 CommittedPages   : 0x290
           +0x024 PagedPoolStart   : 0xc0000000 Void
           +0x028 PagedPoolEnd     : 0xffbfffff Void
           +0x02c SessionObject    : 0xd49222b0 Void
           +0x030 SessionObjectHandle : 0x800003ac Void
           +0x034 SessionPoolAllocationFailures : [4] 0
           +0x044 ImageTree        : _RTL_AVL_TREE
           +0x048 LocaleId         : 0x409
           +0x04c AttachCount      : 0
           +0x050 AttachGate       : _KGATE
           +0x060 WsListEntry      : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0xcdcde060 - 0xd6307060 ]
           +0x080 Lookaside        : [24] _GENERAL_LOOKASIDE
           +0xc80 Session          : _MMSESSION
       ...

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing session space utilization
   You can view session space memory utilization with the !vm 4 command in the kernel debugger.
   For example, the following output was taken from a 32-bit Windows client system with a remote
   desktop connection, resulting in three sessions—the default two sessions plus the remote session.
   (The addresses are for the MM_SESSION_SPACE objects shown earlier.)
   lkd> !vm 4
   ...
   Terminal Server Memory Usage By Session:

   Session ID 0 @ d6307000:
   Paged Pool Usage:     2012 Kb
   NonPaged Usage:        108 Kb
   Commit Usage:         2292 Kb

   Session ID 1 @ d9306000:
   Paged Pool Usage:     2288 Kb
   NonPaged Usage:        160 Kb
   Commit Usage:         2624 Kb

   Session ID 2 @ cdcde000:
   Paged Pool Usage:     7740 Kb
   NonPaged Usage:        208 Kb
   Commit Usage:         8144 Kb

   Session Summary
   Paged Pool Usage:       12040 Kb
   NonPaged Usage:           476 Kb
   Commit Usage:           13060 Kb

System page table entries
System page table entries (PTEs) are used to dynamically map system pages such as I/O space, kernel
stacks, and the mapping for memory descriptor lists (MDLs, discussed to some extent in Chapter 6).
System PTEs aren’t an infinite resource. On 32-bit Windows, the number of available system PTEs is such
that the system can theoretically describe 2 GB of contiguous system virtual address space. On Windows
10 64 bit and Server 2016, system PTEs can describe up to 16 TB of contiguous virtual address space.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing system PTE information
   You can see how many system PTEs are available by examining the value of the Memory: Free
   System Page Table Entries counter in Performance Monitor or by using the !sysptes or !vm
   command in the debugger. You can also dump the _MI_SYSTEM_PTE_TYPE structure as part
   of the memory state (MiState) variable (or the MiSystemPteInfo global variable on Windows
   8.x/2012/R2). This will also show you how many PTE allocation failures occurred on the system.
   A high count indicates a problem and possibly a system PTE leak.

       kd> !sysptes
       System PTE Information
         Total System Ptes 216560
           starting PTE: c0400000
         free blocks: 969   total free: 16334           largest free block: 264

       kd> ? MiState
       Evaluate expression: -2128443008 = 81228980

       kd> dt nt!_MI_SYSTEM_INFORMATION SystemPtes
          +0x3040 SystemPtes : _MI_SYSTEM_PTE_STATE

       kd> dt nt!_mi_system_pte_state SystemViewPteInfo 81228980+3040
          +0x10c SystemViewPteInfo : _MI_SYSTEM_PTE_TYPE

       kd> dt nt!_mi_system_pte_type 81228980+3040+10c
          +0x000 Bitmap           : _RTL_BITMAP
          +0x008 BasePte          : 0xc0400000 _MMPTE
          +0x00c Flags            : 0xe
          +0x010 VaType           : c ( MiVaDriverImages )
          +0x014 FailureCount     : 0x8122bae4 -> 0
          +0x018 PteFailures      : 0
          +0x01c SpinLock         : 0
          +0x01c GlobalPushLock   : (null)
          +0x020 Vm               : 0x8122c008 _MMSUPPORT_INSTANCE
          +0x024 TotalSystemPtes : 0x120
          +0x028 Hint             : 0x2576
          +0x02c LowestBitEverAllocated : 0xc80
          +0x030 CachedPtes       : (null)
          +0x034 TotalFreeSystemPtes : 0x73

          If you are seeing lots of system PTE failures, you can enable system PTE tracking by creating a
       new DWORD value in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory
       Management key called TrackPtes and setting its value to 1. You can then use !sysptes 4 to
       show a list of allocators.

    ARM address space layout
    As shown in Figure 5-12, the ARM address space layout is nearly identical to the x86 address space. The
    memory manager treats ARM-based systems exactly as x86 systems in terms of pure memory manage-
    ment. The differences are at the address translation layer, described in the section “Address translation”
    later in this chapter.

FIGURE 5-12   ARM virtual address space layout.

64-bit address space layout
The theoretical 64-bit virtual address space is 16 exabytes (EB), or 18,446,744,073,709,551,616 bytes.
Current processor limitations allow for 48 address lines only, limiting the possible address space to
256 TB (2 to the 48th power). The address space is divided in half, where the lower 128 TB are available
as private user processes and the upper 128 TB are system space. System space is divided into several
different-sized regions (Windows 10 and Server 2016), as shown in Figure 5-13. Clearly, 64 bits provides
a tremendous leap in terms of address space sizes as opposed to 32 bit. The actual starts of various
kernel sections are not necessarily those shown, as ASLR is in effect in kernel space in the latest versions
of Windows.

    FIGURE 5-13   x64 address space layout.

       Note Windows 8 and Server 2012 are limited to 16 TB of address space. This is because of
       Windows implementation limitations, described in Chapter 10 of the sixth edition of Windows
       Internals Part 2. Of these, 8 TB is per process and the other 8 TB is used for system space.

       Thirty-two–bit images that are large address space aware receive an extra benefit while running on
    64-bit Windows (under Wow64). Such an image will actually receive all 4 GB of user address space avail-
    able. After all, if the image can support 3 GB pointers, 4 GB pointers should not be any different, because
    unlike the switch from 2 GB to 3 GB, there are no additional bits involved. The following output shows
    TestLimit running as a 32-bit application, reserving address space on a 64-bit Windows machine.

    C:\Tools\Sysinternals>Testlimit.exe -r

    Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
    Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
    Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

    Process ID: 264

    Reserving private bytes (MB)...
    Leaked 4008 MB of reserved memory (4008 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 8
    Not enough storage is available to process this command.

    These results depend on TestLimit having been linked with the /LARGEADDRESSAWARE option. Had it
not been, the results would have been about 2 GB for each. Sixty-four–bit applications linked without /
LARGEADDRESSAWARE are constrained to the first 2 GB of the process virtual address space, just like 32-
bit applications. (This flag is set by default in Visual Studio for 64-bit builds.)

x64 virtual addressing limitations
As discussed, 64 bits of virtual address space allow for a possible maximum of 16 EB of virtual memory
—a notable improvement over the 4 GB offered by 32-bit addressing. Obviously, neither today’s com-
puters nor tomorrow’s are even close to requiring support for that much memory.

    Accordingly, to simplify chip architecture and avoid unnecessary overhead—particularly in address
translation (described later)—AMD’s and Intel’s current x64 processors implement only 256 TB of
virtual address space. That is, only the low-order 48 bits of a 64-bit virtual address are implemented.
However, virtual addresses are still 64 bits wide, occupying 8 bytes in registers or when stored in
memory. The high-order 16 bits (bits 48 through 63) must be set to the same value as the highest-order
implemented bit (bit 47), in a manner similar to sign extension in two’s complement arithmetic. An
address that conforms to this rule is said to be a canonical address.

   Under these rules, the bottom half of the address space starts at 0x0000000000000000 as expected,
but ends at 0x00007FFFFFFFFFFF. The top half of the address space starts at 0xFFFF800000000000 and
ends at 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF. Each canonical portion is 128 TB. As newer processors implement more of
the address bits, the lower half of memory will expand upward toward 0x7FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF, while the
upper half will expand downward toward 0x8000000000000000.

Dynamic system virtual address space management
Thirty-two–bit versions of Windows manage the system address space through an internal kernel vir-
tual allocator mechanism, described in this section. Currently, 64-bit versions of Windows have no need
to use the allocator for virtual address space management (and thus bypass the cost) because each
region is statically defined (refer to Figure 5-13).

   When the system initializes, the MiInitializeDynamicVa function sets up the basic dynamic ranges
and sets the available virtual address to all available kernel space. It then initializes the address space
ranges for boot loader images, process space (hyperspace), and the HAL through the MiInitialize-
SystemVaRange function, which is used to set hard-coded address ranges (on 32-bit systems only).
Later, when non-paged pool is initialized, this function is used again to reserve the virtual address
ranges for it. Finally, whenever a driver loads, the address range is relabeled to a driver-image range
instead of a boot-loaded range.

   After this point, the rest of the system virtual address space can be dynamically requested and
released through MiObtainSystemVa (and its analogous MiObtainSessionVa) and MiReturnSystemVa.
Operations such as expanding the system cache, the system PTEs, non-paged pool, paged pool, and/or
special pool; mapping memory with large pages; creating the PFN database; and creating a new
session all result in dynamic virtual address allocations for a specific range.

       Each time the kernel virtual address space allocator obtains virtual memory ranges for use by a certain
    type of virtual address, it updates the MiSystemVaType array, which contains the virtual address type for
    the newly allocated range. The values that can appear in MiSystemVaType are shown in Table 5-8.

    TABLE 5-8   System virtual address types
     Region                                    Description                                  Limitable

     MiVaUnused (0)                            Unused                                       N/A

     MiVaSessionSpace (1)                      Addresses for session space                  Yes

     MiVaProcessSpace (2)                      Addresses for process address space          No

     MiVaBootLoaded (3)                        Addresses for images loaded by the boot      No
                                               loader

     MiVaPfnDatabase (4)                       Addresses for the PFN database               No

     MiVaNonPagedPool (5)                      Addresses for the non-paged pool             Yes

     MiVaPagedPool (6)                         Addresses for the paged pool                 Yes

     MiVaSpecialPoolPaged (7)                  Addresses for the special pool (paged)       No

     MiVaSystemCache (8)                       Addresses for the system cache               No

     MiVaSystemPtes (9)                        Addresses for system PTEs                    Yes

     MiVaHal (10)                              Addresses for the HAL                        No

     MiVaSessionGlobalSpace (11)               Addresses for session global space           No

     MiVaDriverImages (12)                     Addresses for loaded driver images           No

     MiVaSpecialPoolNonPaged (13)              Addresses for the special pool (non-paged)   Yes

     MiVaSystemPtesLarge (14)                  Addresses for large page PTEs                Yes

       Although the ability to dynamically reserve virtual address space on demand allows better manage-
    ment of virtual memory, it would be useless without the ability to free this memory. As such, when the
    paged pool or system cache can be shrunk, or when special pool and large page mappings are freed,
    the associated virtual address is freed. Another case is when the boot registry is released. This allows
    dynamic management of memory depending on each component’s use. Additionally, components can
    reclaim memory through MiReclaimSystemVa, which requests virtual addresses associated with the
    system cache to be flushed out (through the dereference segment thread) if available virtual address
    space has dropped below 128 MB. Reclaiming can also be satisfied if initial non-paged pool has been
    freed.

        In addition to better proportioning and better management of virtual addresses dedicated to dif-
    ferent kernel memory consumers, the dynamic virtual address allocator also has advantages when it
    comes to memory footprint reduction. Instead of having to manually pre-allocate static page table
    entries and page tables, paging-related structures are allocated on demand. On both 32-bit and 64-bit
    systems, this reduces boot-time memory usage because unused addresses won’t have their page tables
    allocated. It also means that on 64-bit systems, the large address space regions that are reserved don’t
    need to have their page tables mapped in memory. This allows them to have arbitrarily large limits,
    especially on systems that have little physical RAM to back the resulting paging structures.

EXPERIMENT: Querying system virtual address usage
(Windows 10 and Server 2016)
You can look at the current and peak usage of each system virtual address type by using the
kernel debugger. The global variable MiVisibleState (of type MI_VISIBLE_STATE) provides
information available in the public symbols. (The example is on x86 Windows 10.)

    1.   To get a sense of the data provided by MiVisibleState, dump the structure with values:
         lkd> dt nt!_mi_visible_state poi(nt!MiVisibleState)
            +0x000 SpecialPool      : _MI_SPECIAL_POOL
            +0x048 SessionWsList    : _LIST_ENTRY [ 0x91364060 - 0x9a172060 ]
            +0x050 SessionIdBitmap : 0x8220c3a0 _RTL_BITMAP
            +0x054 PagedPoolInfo    : _MM_PAGED_POOL_INFO
            +0x070 MaximumNonPagedPoolInPages : 0x80000
            +0x074 SizeOfPagedPoolInPages : 0x7fc00
            +0x078 SystemPteInfo    : _MI_SYSTEM_PTE_TYPE
            +0x0b0 NonPagedPoolCommit : 0x3272
            +0x0b4 BootCommit       : 0x186d
            +0x0b8 MdlPagesAllocated : 0x105
            +0x0bc SystemPageTableCommit : 0x1e1
            +0x0c0 SpecialPagesInUse : 0
            +0x0c4 WsOverheadPages : 0x775
            +0x0c8 VadBitmapPages   : 0x30
            +0x0cc ProcessCommit    : 0xb40
            +0x0d0 SharedCommit     : 0x712a
            +0x0d4 DriverCommit     : 0n7276
            +0x100 SystemWs         : [3] _MMSUPPORT_FULL
            +0x2c0 SystemCacheShared : _MMSUPPORT_SHARED
            +0x2e4 MapCacheFailures : 0
            +0x2e8 PagefileHashPages : 0x30
            +0x2ec PteHeader        : _SYSPTES_HEADER
            +0x378 SessionSpecialPool : 0x95201f48 _MI_SPECIAL_POOL
            +0x37c SystemVaTypeCount : [15] 0
            +0x3b8 SystemVaType     : [1024] ""
            +0x7b8 SystemVaTypeCountFailures : [15] 0
            +0x7f4 SystemVaTypeCountLimit : [15] 0
            +0x830 SystemVaTypeCountPeak : [15] 0
            +0x86c SystemAvailableVa : 0x38800000

    2.   Notice the last arrays with 15 elements each, corresponding to the system virtual
         address types from Table 5-8. Here are the SystemVaTypeCount and SystemVaType-
         CountPeak arrays:

         lkd> dt nt!_mi_visible_state poi(nt!mivisiblestate) -a SystemVaTypeCount
            +0x37c SystemVaTypeCount :
             [00] 0
             [01] 0x1c
             [02] 0xb
             [03] 0x15
             [04] 0xf
             [05] 0x1b

                    [06] 0x46
                    [07] 0
                    [08] 0x125
                    [09] 0x38
                    [10] 2
                    [11] 0xb
                    [12] 0x19
                    [13] 0
                    [14] 0xd
                lkd> dt nt!_mi_visible_state poi(nt!mivisiblestate) -a SystemVaTypeCountPeak
                   +0x830 SystemVaTypeCountPeak :
                    [00] 0
                    [01] 0x1f
                    [02] 0
                    [03] 0x1f
                    [04] 0xf
                    [05] 0x1d
                    [06] 0x51
                    [07] 0
                    [08] 0x1e6
                    [09] 0x55
                    [10] 0
                    [11] 0xb
                    [12] 0x5d
                    [13] 0
                    [14] 0xe

       EXPERIMENT: Querying system virtual address usage
       (Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2)
       You can look at the current and peak usage of each system virtual address type by using the
       kernel debugger. For each system virtual address type described in Table 5-8, the MiSystemVa-
       TypeCount, MiSystemVaTypeCountFailures, and MiSystemVaTypeCountPeak global arrays in
       the kernel contain the sizes, count failures, and peak sizes for each type. The size is in multiples of
       a PDE mapping (see the “Address translation” section later in this chapter), which is effectively the
       size of a large page (2 MB on x86). Here’s how you can dump the usage for the system, followed
       by the peak usage. You can use a similar technique for the failure counts. (The example is from a
       32-bit Windows 8.1 system.)
       lkd> dd /c 1 MiSystemVaTypeCount L f
       81c16640 00000000
       81c16644 0000001e
       81c16648 0000000b
       81c1664c 00000018
       81c16650 0000000f
       81c16654 00000017
       81c16658 0000005f
       81c1665c 00000000
       81c16660 000000c7

   81c16664 00000021
   81c16668 00000002
   81c1666c 00000008
   81c16670 0000001c
   81c16674 00000000
   81c16678 0000000b
   lkd> dd /c 1 MiSystemVaTypeCountPeak L f
   81c16b60 00000000
   81c16b64 00000021
   81c16b68 00000000
   81c16b6c 00000022
   81c16b70 0000000f
   81c16b74 0000001e
   81c16b78 0000007e
   81c16b7c 00000000
   81c16b80 000000e3
   81c16b84 00000027
   81c16b88 00000000
   81c16b8c 00000008
   81c16b90 00000059
   81c16b94 00000000
   81c16b98 0000000b

   Theoretically, the different virtual address ranges assigned to components can grow arbitrarily in
size if enough system virtual address space is available. In practice, on 32-bit systems, the kernel alloca-
tor implements the ability to set limits on each virtual address type for the purposes of both reliability
and stability. (On 64-bit systems, kernel address space exhaustion is currently not a concern.) Although
no limits are imposed by default, system administrators can use the registry to modify these limits for
the virtual address types that are currently marked as limitable (see Table 5-8).

   If the current request during the MiObtainSystemVa call exceeds the available limit, a failure is marked
(see the previous experiment) and a reclaim operation is requested regardless of available memory. This
should help alleviate memory load and might allow the virtual address allocation to work during the next
attempt. Recall, however, that reclaiming affects only system cache and non-paged pool.

   EXPERIMENT: Setting system virtual address limits
   The MiSystemVaTypeCountLimit array contains limitations for system virtual address usage
   that can be set for each type. Currently, the memory manager allows only certain virtual address
   types to be limited, and it provides the ability to use an undocumented system call to set limits
   for the system dynamically during run time. (These limits can also be set through the registry, as
   described at http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb870880.aspx.) These limits can be set for
   those types marked in Table 5-8.

      You can use the MemLimit utility (found in this book’s downloadable resources) on 32-bit sys-
   tems to query and set the different limits for these types and to see the current and peak virtual
   address space usage. Here’s how you can query the current limits with the -q flag:

       C:\Tools>MemLimit.exe -q

       MemLimit v1.01 - Query and set hard limits on system VA space consumption
       Copyright (C) 2008-2016 by Alex Ionescu
       www.alex-ionescu.com

       System Va Consumption:

       Type                        Current               Peak                Limit
       Non Paged Pool                45056 KB           55296 KB                0 KB
       Paged Pool                   151552 KB          165888 KB                0 KB
       System Cache                 446464 KB          479232 KB                0 KB
       System PTEs                   90112 KB          135168 KB                0 KB
       Session Space                 63488 KB           73728 KB                0 KB

          As an experiment, use the following command to set a limit of 100 MB for paged pool:
       memlimit.exe -p 100M

         Now use the Sysinternals TestLimit tool to create as many handles as possible. Normally, with
       enough paged pool, the number should be around 16 million. But with the limit to 100 MB, it’s less:
       C:\Tools\Sysinternals>Testlimit.exe -h

       Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
       Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
       Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

       Process ID: 4780

       Creating handles...
       Created 10727844 handles. Lasterror: 1450

         See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more information about objects, handles, and page-pool con-
       sumption.

    System virtual address space quotas
    The system virtual address space limits described in the previous section allow for the limiting of
    system-wide virtual address space usage of certain kernel components. However, they work only on
    32-bit systems when applied to the system as a whole. To address more specific quota requirements
    that system administrators might have, the memory manager collaborates with the process manager to
    enforce either system-wide or user-specific quotas for each process.

       You can configure the PagedPoolQuota, NonPagedPoolQuota, PagingFileQuota, and Working-
    SetPagesQuota values in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory
    Management key to specify how much memory of each type a given process can use. This information
    is read at initialization, and the default system quota block is generated and then assigned to all system
    processes. (User processes get a copy of the default system quota block unless per-user quotas have
    been configured, as explained next.)

   To enable per-user quotas, you can create subkeys under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
Session Manager\Quota System registry key, each one representing a given user SID. The values men-
tioned previously can then be created under this specific SID subkey, enforcing the limits only for the
processes created by that user. Table 5-9 shows how to configure these values (which can be done at
run time or not) and which privileges are required.

TABLE 5-9   Process quota types
Value Name               Description           Value Type   Dynamic        Privilege

PagedPoolQuota           This is the maxi-     Size in MB   Only for       SeIncreaseQuotaPrivilege
                         mum size of paged                  processes
                         pool that can be                   running with
                         allocated by this                  the system
                         process.                           token

NonPagedPoolQuota        This is the maxi-     Size in MB   Only for       SeIncreaseQuotaPrivilege
                         mum size of non-                   processes
                         paged pool that                    running with
                         can be allocated by                the system
                         this process.                      token

PagingFileQuota          This is the maxi-     Pages        Only for       SeIncreaseQuotaPrivilege
                         mum number                         processes
                         of pages that a                    running with
                         process can have                   the system
                         backed by the                      token
                         page file.

WorkingSetPagesQuota     This is the maxi-     Pages        Yes            SeIncreaseBasePriorityPrivilege
                         mum number of                                     unless operation is a purge request
                         pages that a pro-
                         cess can have in
                         its working set (in
                         physical memory).

User address space layout
Just as address space in the kernel is dynamic, the user address space is also built dynamically. The
addresses of the thread stacks, process heaps, and loaded images (such as DLLs and an application’s
executable) are dynamically computed (if the application and its images support it) through the ASLR
mechanism.

   At the operating system level, user address space is divided into a few well-defined regions of
memory, as shown in Figure 5-14. The executable and DLLs themselves are present as memory-mapped
image files, followed by the heap(s) of the process and the stack(s) of its thread(s). Apart from these
regions (and some reserved system structures such as the TEBs and PEB), all other memory allocations
are run-time dependent and generated. ASLR is involved with the location of all these run time–
dependent regions and, combined with DEP, provides a mechanism for making remote exploitation
of a system through memory manipulation harder to achieve. Because Windows code and data are
placed at dynamic locations, an attacker cannot typically hard-code a meaningful offset into either a
program or a system-supplied DLL.

    FIGURE 5-14    User address space layout with ASLR enabled.

       EXPERIMENT: Analyzing user virtual address space
       The VMMap utility from Sysinternals can show you a detailed view of the virtual memory being
       used by any process on your machine. This information is divided into categories for each type of
       allocation, summarized as follows:

        ■■     Image This displays memory allocations used to map the executable and its dependencies
               (such as dynamic libraries) and any other memory-mapped image (portable executable
               format) files.

        ■■     Mapped File This displays memory allocations for memory mapped data files.

        ■■     Shareable This displays memory allocations marked as shareable, typically including
               shared memory (but not memory-mapped files, which are listed under either Image or
               Mapped File).

        ■■     Heap    This displays memory allocated for the heap(s) that this process owns.

        ■■     Managed Heap This displays memory allocated by the .NET CLR (managed objects).
               It would show nothing for a process that does not use .NET.

        ■■     Stack   This displays memory allocated for the stack of each thread in this process.

        ■■     Private Data This displays memory allocations marked as private other than the stack and
               heap, such as internal data structures.

             The following shows a typical view of Explorer (64 bit) as seen through VMMap:

       Depending on the type of memory allocation, VMMap can show additional information such
   as file names (for mapped files), heap IDs and types (for heap allocations), and thread IDs (for
   stack allocations). Furthermore, each allocation’s cost is shown both in committed memory and
   working set memory. The size and protection of each allocation is also displayed.

   ASLR begins at the image level, with the executable for the process and its dependent DLLs. Any
image file that has specified ASLR support in its PE header (IMAGE_DLL_CHARACTERISTICS_DYNAMIC_
BASE), typically specified by using the /DYNAMICBASE linker flag in Microsoft Visual Studio, and contains
a relocation section will be processed by ASLR. When such an image is found, the system selects an
image offset valid globally for the current boot. This offset is selected from a bucket of 256 values, all of
which are 64 KB aligned.

Image randomization
For executables, the load offset is calculated by computing a delta value each time an executable is
loaded. This value is a pseudo-random 8-bit number from 0x10000 to 0xFE0000, calculated by taking
the current processor’s time stamp counter (TSC), shifting it by four places, and then performing a
division modulo 254 and adding 1. This number is then multiplied by the allocation granularity of 64 KB
discussed earlier. By adding 1, the memory manager ensures that the value can never be 0, so executa-
bles will never load at the address in the PE header if ASLR is being used. This delta is then added to the
executable’s preferred load address, creating one of 256 possible locations within 16 MB of the image
address in the PE header.

       For DLLs, computing the load offset begins with a per-boot, system-wide value called the image
    bias. This is computed by MiInitializeRelocations and stored in the global memory state structure
    (MI_SYSTEM_INFORMATION) in the MiState.Sections.ImageBias fields (MiImageBias global variable
    in Windows 8.x/2012/R2). This value corresponds to the TSC of the current CPU when this function was
    called during the boot cycle, shifted and masked into an 8-bit value. This provides 256 possible values
    on 32 bit systems; similar computations are done for 64-bit systems with more possible values as the
    address space is vast. Unlike executables, this value is computed only once per boot and shared across
    the system to allow DLLs to remain shared in physical memory and relocated only once. If DLLs were
    remapped at different locations inside different processes, the code could not be shared. The loader
    would have to fix up address references differently for each process, thus turning what had been share-
    able read-only code into process-private data. Each process using a given DLL would have to have its
    own private copy of the DLL in physical memory.

       Once the offset is computed, the memory manager initializes a bitmap called ImageBitMap (MiIm-
    ageBitMap global variable in Windows 8.x/2012/R2), which is part of the MI_SECTION_STATE structure.
    This bitmap is used to represent ranges from 0x50000000 to 0x78000000 for 32-bit systems (see the
    numbers for 64-bit systems below), and each bit represents one unit of allocation (64 KB, as men-
    tioned). Whenever the memory manager loads a DLL, the appropriate bit is set to mark its location in
    the system. When the same DLL is loaded again, the memory manager shares its section object with
    the already relocated information.

        As each DLL is loaded, the system scans the bitmap from top to bottom for free bits. The ImageBias
    value computed earlier is used as a start index from the top to randomize the load across different
    boots as suggested. Because the bitmap will be entirely empty when the first DLL (which is always Ntdll.
    dll) is loaded, its load address can easily be calculated. (Sixty-four–bit systems have their own bias.)

       ■■   32 bit   0x78000000 – (ImageBias + NtDllSizein64KBChunks) * 0x10000

       ■■   64 bit 0x7FFFFFFF0000 – (ImageBias64High + NtDllSizein64KBChunks) * 0x10000

        Each subsequent DLL will then load in a 64 KB chunk below. Because of this, if the address of Ntdll.
    dll is known, the addresses of other DLLs could easily be computed. To mitigate this possibility, the or-
    der in which known DLLs are mapped by the Session Manager during initialization is also randomized
    when Smss.exe loads.

       Finally, if no free space is available in the bitmap (which would mean that most of the region defined
    for ASLR is in use), the DLL relocation code defaults back to the executable case, loading the DLL at a 64
    KB chunk within 16 MB of its preferred base address.

       EXPERIMENT: Calculating the load address of Ntdll.dll
       With what you learned in the previous section, you can calculate the load address of Ntdll.dll with
       the kernel variable information. The following calculation is done on a Windows 10 x86 system:

            1.   Start local kernel debugging.

       2.   Find the ImageBias value:
            lkd> ? nt!mistate
            Evaluate expression: -2113373760 = 820879c0
            lkd> dt nt!_mi_system_information sections.imagebias 820879c0
               +0x500 Sections           :
                  +0x0dc ImageBias          : 0x6e

       3.   Open Explorer and find the size of Ntdll.dll in the System32 directory. On this system, it’s
            1547 KB = 0x182c00, so the size in 64 KB chunks is 0x19 (always rounding up). The result
            is 0x78000000 – (0x6E + 0x19) * 0x10000 = 0x77790000.

       4.   Open Process Explorer, find any process, and look at the load address (in the Base or
            Image Base columns) of Ntdll.dll. You should see the same value.

       5.   Try to do the same for a 64-bit system.

Stack randomization
The next step in ASLR is to randomize the location of the initial thread’s stack and, subsequently, of
each new thread. This randomization is enabled unless the StackRandomizationDisabled flag was
enabled for the process, and consists of first selecting one of 32 possible stack locations separated by
either 64 KB or 256 KB. You select this base address by finding the first appropriate free memory region
and then choosing the xth available region, where x is once again generated based on the current pro-
cessor’s TSC shifted and masked into a 5-bit value. (This allows for 32 possible locations.)

   When this base address has been selected, a new TSC-derived value is calculated—this one 9 bits
long. The value is then multiplied by 4 to maintain alignment, which means it can be as large as 2,048
bytes (half a page). It is added to the base address to obtain the final stack base.

Heap randomization
ASLR randomizes the location of the initial process heap and subsequent heaps when created in user
mode. The RtlCreateHeap function uses another pseudo-random TSC-derived value to determine the
base address of the heap. This value, 5 bits this time, is multiplied by 64 KB to generate the final base
address, starting at 0, giving a possible range of 0x00000000 to 0x001F0000 for the initial heap. Ad-
ditionally, the range before the heap base address is manually deallocated to force an access violation
if an attack is doing a brute-force sweep of the entire possible heap address range.

ASLR in kernel address space
ASLR is also active in kernel address space. There are 64 possible load addresses for 32-bit drivers and
256 for 64-bit drivers. Relocating user-space images requires a significant amount of work area in
kernel space, but if kernel space is tight, ASLR can use the user-mode address space of the System pro-
cess for this work area. On Windows 10 (version 1607) and Server 2016, ASLR is implemented for most
system memory regions, such as paged and non-paged pools, system cache, page tables, and the PFN
database (initialized by MiAssignTopLevelRanges).

    Controlling security mitigations
    As you’ve seen, ASLR and many other security mitigations in Windows are optional because of their
    potential compatibility effects: ASLR applies only to images with the IMAGE_DLL_CHARACTERISTICS_
    DYNAMIC_BASE bit in their image headers, hardware no-execute (DEP) can be controlled by a combina-
    tion of boot options and linker options, and so on. To allow both enterprise customers and individual
    users more visibility and control of these features, Microsoft publishes the Enhanced Mitigation Experi-
    ence Toolkit (EMET). EMET offers centralized control of the mitigations built into Windows and adds
    several more mitigations not yet part of the Windows product. Additionally, EMET provides notification
    capabilities through the event log to let administrators know when certain software has experienced
    access faults because mitigations have been applied. Finally, EMET enables manual opt-out for certain
    applications that might exhibit compatibility issues in certain environments, even though they were
    opted in by the developer.

       Note EMET is in version 5.51 at the time of this writing. Its end of support has been extended
       to the end of July 2018. However, some of its features are integrated in current Windows
       versions.

       EXPERIMENT: Looking at ASLR protection on processes
       You can use Process Explorer from Sysinternals to look over your processes (and, just as impor-
       tant, the DLLs they load) to see if they support ASLR. Even if just one DLL loaded by a process
       does not support ASLR, it can make the process much more vulnerable to attacks.

          To look at the ASLR status for processes, follow these steps:

           1.   Right-click any column in the process tree and choose Select Columns.

           2.   Select ASLR Enabled on the Process Image and DLL tabs.

           3.   Notice that all in-box Windows programs and services are running with ASLR enabled,
                but third-party applications may or may not run with ASLR.

           In the example, we have highlighted the Notepad.exe process. In this case, its load address
       is 0x7FF7D76B0000. If you were to close all instances of Notepad and then start another, you
       would find it at a different load address. If you shut down and reboot the system and then try the
       experiment again, you will find that the ASLR-enabled DLLs are at different load addresses after
       each boot.

Address translation
   Now that you’ve seen how Windows structures the virtual address space, let’s look at how it maps these
   address spaces to real physical pages. User applications and system code reference virtual addresses.
   This section starts with a detailed description of 32-bit x86 address translation in PAE mode (the only
   mode supported in recent versions of Windows) and continues with a description of the differences on
   the ARM and x64 platforms. The next section describes what happens when such a translation doesn’t
   resolve to a physical memory address (page fault) and explains how Windows manages physical
   memory via working sets and the page frame database.

   x86 virtual address translation
   The original x86 kernel supported no more than 4 GB of physical memory, based on the CPU hardware
   available at the time. The Intel x86 Pentium Pro processor introduced a memory-mapping mode called
   Physical Address Extension (PAE). With the proper chipset, the PAE mode allows 32-bit operating systems
   access to up to 64 GB of physical memory on current Intel x86 processors (up from 4 GB without PAE)
   and up to 1,024 GB of physical memory when running on x64 processors in legacy mode (although
   Windows currently limits this to 64 GB due to the size of the PFN database required to describe so much
   memory). Since then, Windows has maintained two separate x86 kernels—one that did not support
   PAE and one that did. Starting with Windows Vista, an x86 Windows installation always installs the PAE
   kernel even if the system’s physical memory is not higher than 4 GB. This allows Microsoft to maintain a
   single x86 kernel, as the benefits of the non-PAE kernel in terms of performance and memory footprint
   became negligible (and is required for hardware no-execute support). Thus, we’ll describe only x86 PAE
   address translation. Interested readers can read the relevant section in the sixth edition of this book for
   the non-PAE case.

        Using data structures that the memory manager creates and maintains called page tables, the CPU
    translates virtual addresses into physical addresses. Each page of virtual address space is associated with a
    system-space structure called a page table entry (PTE), which contains the physical address to which the vir-
    tual one is mapped. For example, Figure 5-15 shows how three consecutive virtual pages might be mapped
    to three physically discontiguous pages on an x86 system. There may not even be any PTEs for regions that
    have been marked as reserved or committed but never accessed, because the page table itself might be
    allocated only when the first page fault occurs. (The dashed line connecting the virtual pages to the PTEs in
    Figure 5-15 represents the indirect relationship between virtual pages and physical memory.)

    FIGURE 5-15   Mapping virtual addresses to physical memory (x86).

       Note Even kernel-mode code (such as device drivers) cannot reference physical memory
       addresses directly, but it may do so indirectly by first creating virtual addresses mapped
       to them. For more information, see the memory descriptor list (MDL) support routines
       described in the WDK documentation.

       The actual translation process and the layout of the page tables and page directories (described
    shortly), are determined by the CPU. The operating system must follow suit and build the structures
    correctly in memory for the whole concept to work. Figure 5-16 depicts a general diagram of x86
    translation. The general concept, however, is the same for other architectures.

       As shown in Figure 5-16, the input to the translation system consists of a 32-bit virtual address (since
    this is the addressable range with 32 bit) and a bunch of memory-related structures (page tables, page
    directories, a single page directory pointer table [PDPT], and translation lookaside buffers, all described

shortly). The output should be a 36-bit physical address in RAM where the actual byte is located. The
number 36 comes from the way the page tables are structured and, as mentioned, dictated by the
processor. When mapping small pages (the common case, shown in Figure 5-16), the least significant
12 bits from the virtual address are copied directly to the resulting physical address. 12 bits is exactly
4 KB—the size of a small page.

FIGURE 5-16   Virtual address translation overview.

     If the address cannot be translated successfully (for example, the page may not be in physical
memory but resides in a page file), the CPU throws an exception known as a page fault that indicates
to the OS that the page cannot be located. Because the CPU has no idea where to find the page
(page file, mapped file, or something else), it relies on the OS to get the page from wherever it’s located
(if possible), fix the page tables to point to it, and request that the CPU tries translation again. (Page
faults are described in the section “Page files” later in this chapter.)

   Figure 5-17 depicts the entire process of translating x86 virtual to physical addresses.

FIGURE 5-17   x86 virtual address translation.

        The 32-bit virtual address to be translated is logically segregated into four parts. As you’ve seen, the
    lower 12 bits are used as-is to select a specific byte within a page. The translation process starts with a
    single PDPT per process, which resides in physical memory at all times. (Otherwise, how would the sys-
    tem locate it?) Its physical address is stored in the KPROCESS structure for each process. The special x86
    register CR3 stores this value for the currently executing process (that is, one of its threads made the
    access to the virtual address). This means that when a context switch occurs on a CPU, if the new thread
    is running under a different process than the old thread, then the CR3 register must be loaded with the
    new process’s page directory pointer address from its KROCESS structure. The PDPT must be aligned on
    a 32-byte boundary and must furthermore reside in the first 4 GB of RAM (because CR3 on x86 is still a
    32-bit register).

        Given the layout in Figure 5-17, the sequence of translating a virtual address to a physical one goes
    as follows:

       1.   The two most significant bits of the virtual address (bits 30 and 31) provide an index into
            the PDPT. This table has four entries. The entry selected—the page directory pointer entry
            (PDPE)—points to the physical address of a page directory.

       2.   A page directory contains 512 entries, one of which is selected by bits 21 to 29 (9 bits) from the
            virtual address. The selected page directory entry (PDE) points to the physical address of a page
            table.

       3.   A page table also contains 512 entries, one of which is selected by bits 13 to 28 (9 bits) from the
            virtual address. The selected page table entry (PTE) points to the physical address of the start of
            the page.

       4.   The virtual address offset (lower 12 bits) is added to the PTE pointed-to address to give the final
            physical address requested by the caller.

       Every entry value in the various tables is also called a page frame number (PFN) because it points
    to a page-aligned address. Each entry is 64 bits wide—so the size of a page directory or page table is
    no larger than a 4 KB page—but only 24 bits are strictly necessary to describe a 64 GB physical range
    (combined with the 12 bits of the offset for an address range with a total of 36 bits). This means there
    are more bits than needed for the actual PFN values.

       One of the extra bits in particular is paramount to the whole mechanism: the valid bit. This bit indi-
    cates whether the PFN data is indeed valid and therefore whether the CPU should execute the proce-
    dure just outlined. If the bit is clear, however, it indicates a page fault. The CPU raises an exception and
    expects the OS to handle the page fault in some meaningful way. For example, if the page in question
    was previously written to disk, then the memory manager should read it back to a free page in RAM, fix
    the PTE, and tell the CPU to try again.

       Because Windows provides a private address space for each process, each process has its own PDPT,
    page directories, and page tables to map that process’s private address space. However, the page
    directories and page tables that describe system space are shared among all processes (and session
    space is shared only among processes in a session). To avoid having multiple page tables describing
    the same virtual memory, the page directory entries that describe system space are initialized to point

to the existing system page tables when a process is created. If the process is part of a session, session
space page tables are also shared by pointing the session space page directory entries to the existing
session page tables.

Page tables and page table entries
Each PDE points to a page table. A page table is a simple array of PTEs. So, too, is a PDPT. Every page
table has 512 entries and each PTE maps a single page (4 KB). This means a page table can map a 2 MB
address space (512 x 4 KB). Similarly, a page directory has 512 entries, each pointing to a page table.
This means a page directory can map 512 x 2 MB or 1 GB of address space. This makes sense because
there are four PDPEs, which together can map the entire 32-bit 4 GB address space.

   For large pages, the PDE points with 11 bits to the start of a large page in physical memory, where
the byte offset is taken for the low 21 bits of the original virtual address. This means such a PDE map-
ping a large page does not point to any page table.

    The layout of a page directory and page table is essentially the same. You can use the kernel debug-
ger !pte command to examine PTEs. (See the upcoming experiment “Translating addresses.”) We’ll
discuss valid PTEs here and invalid PTEs in the section “Page fault handling.” Valid PTEs have two main
fields: the PFN of the physical page containing the data or of the physical address of a page in memory,
and some flags that describe the state and protection of the page. (See Figure 5-18.)

FIGURE 5-18   Valid x86 hardware PTEs.

   The bits labeled “Software” and “Reserved” in Figure 5-18 are ignored by the memory management
unit (MMU) inside the CPU regardless of whether the PTE is valid. These bits are stored and interpreted
by the memory manager. Table 5-10 briefly describes the hardware-defined bits in a valid PTE.

TABLE 5-10    PTE status and protection bits
Name of Bit           Meaning

Accessed              The page has been accessed.

Cache disabled        This disables CPU caching for that page.

Copy-on-write         The page is using copy-on-write (described earlier).

    TABLE 5-10     PTE status and protection bits (continued)
     Name of Bit           Meaning

     Dirty                 The page has been written to.

     Global                Translation applies to all processes. For example, a translation buffer flush won’t affect this PTE.

     Large page            This indicates that the PDE maps a 2 MB page. (Refer to the section “Large and small pages”
                           earlier in this chapter.)

     No execute            This indicates that code cannot execute in the page. (It can be used for data only.)

     Owner                 This indicates whether user-mode code can access the page or whether the page is limited to
                           kernel-mode access.

     Prototype             The PTE is a prototype PTE, which is used as a template to describe shared memory associated
                           with section objects.

     Valid                 This indicates whether the translation maps to a page in physical memory.

     Write through         This marks the page as write-through or, if the processor supports the page attribute table, write-
                           combined. This is typically used to map video frame buffer memory.

     Write                 This indicates to the MMU whether the page is writable.

         On x86 systems, a hardware PTE contains two bits that can be changed by the MMU: the dirty bit
    and the accessed bit. The MMU sets the accessed bit whenever the page is read or written (provided
    it is not already set). The MMU sets the dirty bit whenever a write operation occurs to the page. The
    operating system is responsible for clearing these bits at the appropriate times. They are never cleared
    by the MMU.

        The x86 MMU uses a write bit to provide page protection. When this bit is clear, the page is read-
    only. When it is set, the page is read/write. If a thread attempts to write to a page with the write bit
    clear, a memory-management exception occurs. In addition, the memory manager’s access fault han-
    dler (described later in the section “Page fault handling”) must determine whether the thread can be
    allowed to write to the page (for example, if the page was really marked copy-on-write) or whether an
    access violation should be generated.

    Hardware versus software write bits in page table entries
    The additional write bit implemented in software (refer to Table 5-10) is used to force an update of
    the dirty bit to be synchronized with updates to Windows memory management data. In a simple
    implementation, the memory manager would set the hardware write bit (bit 1) for any writable page.
    A write to any such page will cause the MMU to set the dirty bit in the PTE. Later, the dirty bit will tell
    the memory manager that the contents of that physical page must be written to backing store before
    the physical page can be used for something else.

       In practice, on multiprocessor systems, this can lead to race conditions that are expensive to resolve.
    At any time, the MMUs of the various processors can set the dirty bit of any PTE that has its hardware
    write bit set. The memory manager must, at various times, update the process working set list to reflect
    the state of the dirty bit in a PTE. The memory manager uses a pushlock to synchronize access to the
    working set list. But on a multiprocessor system, even while one processor is holding the lock, the dirty bit
    might be changed by MMUs of other CPUs. This raises the possibility of missing an update to a dirty bit.

   To avoid this, the Windows memory manager initializes both read-only and writable pages with the
hardware write bit (bit 1) of their PTEs set to 0 and records the true writable state of the page in the
software write bit (bit 11). On the first write access to such a page, the processor will raise a memory-
management exception because the hardware write bit is clear, just as it would be for a true read-only
page. In this case, though, the memory manager learns that the page actually is writable (via the
software write bit), acquires the working set pushlock, sets the dirty bit and the hardware write bit in
the PTE, updates the working set list to note that the page has been changed, releases the working set
pushlock, and dismisses the exception. The hardware write operation then proceeds as usual, but the
setting of the dirty bit is made to happen with the working set list pushlock held.

    On subsequent writes to the page, no exceptions occur because the hardware write bit is set. The
MMU will redundantly set the dirty bit, but this is benign because the “written-to” state of the page is
already recorded in the working set list. Forcing the first write to a page to go through this exception
handling may seem to be excessive overhead. However, it happens only once per writable page as long
as the page remains valid. Furthermore, the first access to almost any page already goes through mem-
ory-management exception handling because pages are usually initialized in the invalid state (the PTE
bit 0 is clear). If the first access to a page is also the first write access to the page, the dirty bit handling
just described will occur within the handling of the first-access page fault, so the additional overhead
is small. Finally, on both uniprocessor and multiprocessor systems, this implementation allows flushing
of the translation look-aside buffer (described in the next section) without holding a lock for each page
being flushed.

Translation look-aside buffer
   As you’ve learned, each hardware address translation requires three lookups:

   ■■   One to find the right entry in the PDPT

   ■■   One to find the right entry in the page directory (which provides the location of the page table)

   ■■   One to find the right entry in the page table

    Because doing three additional memory lookups for every reference to a virtual address would
quadruple the required bandwidth to memory, resulting in poor performance, all CPUs cache address
translations so that repeated accesses of the same addresses don’t have to be repeatedly translated.
This cache is an array of associative memory called the translation lookaside buffer (TLB). Associative
memory is a vector whose cells can be read simultaneously and compared to a target value. In the
case of the TLB, the vector contains the virtual-to-physical page mappings of the most recently used
pages, as shown in Figure 5-19, and the type of page protection, size, attributes, and so on applied to
each page. Each entry in the TLB is like a cache entry whose tag holds portions of the virtual address
and whose data portion holds a physical page number, protection field, valid bit, and usually a dirty
bit indicating the condition of the page to which the cached PTE corresponds. If a PTE’s global bit is
set (as is done by Windows for system space pages that are visible to all processes), the TLB entry isn’t
invalidated on process context switches.

    FIGURE 5-19   Accessing the TLB.

        Frequently used virtual addresses are likely to have entries in the TLB, which provides extremely
    fast virtual-to-physical address translation and, therefore, fast memory access. If a virtual address
    isn’t in the TLB, it might still be in memory, but multiple memory accesses are needed to find it, which
    makes the access time slightly slower. If a virtual page has been paged out of memory or if the memory
    manager changes the PTE, the memory manager is required to explicitly invalidate the TLB entry. If
    a process accesses it again, a page fault occurs, and the memory manager brings the page back into
    memory (if needed) and re-creates its PTE (which then results in an entry for it in the TLB).

       EXPERIMENT: Translating addresses
       To clarify how address translation works, this experiment shows an example of translating a
       virtual address on an x86 PAE system using the available tools in the kernel debugger to examine
       the PDPT, page directories, page tables, and PTEs. In this example, you’ll work with a process that
       has virtual address 0x3166004, currently mapped to a valid physical address. In later examples,
       you’ll see how to follow address translation for invalid addresses with the kernel debugger.

          First convert 0x3166004 to binary and break it into the three fields used to translate an address.
       In binary, 0x3166004 is 11.0001.0110.0110.0000.0000.0100. Breaking it into the component fields
       yields the following:

    To start the translation process, the CPU needs the physical address of the process’s PDPT. This
is found in the CR3 register while a thread in that process is running. You can display this address
by looking at the DirBase field in the output of the !process command, as shown here:
lkd> !process -1 0
PROCESS 99aa3040 SessionId: 2 Cid: 1690     Peb: 03159000 ParentCid: 0920
    DirBase: 01024800 ObjectTable: b3b386c0 HandleCount: <Data Not Accessible>
    Image: windbg.exe

   The DirBase field shows that the PDPT is at physical address 0x1024800. As shown in the
preceding illustration, the PDPT index field in the sample virtual address is 0. Therefore, the PDPT
entry that contains the physical address of the relevant page directory is the first entry in the
PDPT, at physical address 0x1024800.

   The kernel debugger !pte command displays the PDE and PTE that describe a virtual address,
as shown here:
lkd> !pte 3166004
                    VA 03166004
PDE at C06000C0            PTE at C0018B30
contains 0000000056238867 contains 800000005DE61867
pfn 56238     ---DA--UWEV pfn 5de61      ---DA--UW-V

   The debugger does not show the PDPT, but it is easy to display given its physical address:
lkd> !dq 01024800 L4
# 1024800 00000000'53c88801 00000000'53c89801
# 1024810 00000000'53c8a801 00000000'53c8d801

    Here we have used the debugger extension command !dq. This is similar to the dq command
(display as quadwords—64 bit values) but lets us examine memory by physical rather than virtual
address. Because we know the PDPT is only four entries long, we added the L 4 length argument
to keep the output uncluttered.

    As illustrated, the PDPT index (the two most significant bits) from the sample virtual address
equal 0, so the PDPT entry you want is the first displayed quadword. PDPT entries have a format
similar to PDEs and PTEs, so you can see that this one contains a PFN of 0x53c88 (always page-
aligned), for a physical address of 0x53c88000. That’s the physical address of the page directory.

   The !pte output shows the PDE address 0xC06000C0 as a virtual address, not physical. On
x86 systems, the first process page directory starts at virtual address 0xC0600000. In this case,
the PDE address is 0xC0—that is, 8 bytes (the size of an entry) times 24 added to the page direc-
tory start address. Therefore, the page directory index field of the sample virtual address is 24.
That means you’re looking at the 25th PDE in the page directory.

   The PDE provides the PFN of the needed page table. In this example, the PFN is 0x56238, so
the page table starts at physical address 0x56238000. To this the MMU will add the page table
index field (0x166) from the virtual address multiplied by 8 (the size of a PTE in bytes). The result-
ing physical address of the PTE is 0x56238B30.

          The debugger shows that this PTE is at virtual address 0xC0018B30. Notice that the byte offset
       portion (0xB30) is the same as that from the physical address, as is always the case in address
       translation. Because the memory manager maps page tables starting at 0xC0000000, adding
       0xB30 to 0xC0018000 (the 0x18 is entry 24 as you’ve seen) yields the virtual address shown in
       the kernel debugger output: 0xC0018B30. The debugger shows that the PFN field of the PTE is
       0x5DE61.

          Finally, you can consider the byte offset from the original address. As described, the MMU
       concatenates the byte offset to the PFN from the PTE, giving a physical address of 0x5DE61004.
       This is the physical address that corresponds to the original virtual address of 0x3166004…at the
       moment.

          The flags bits from the PTE are interpreted to the right of the PFN number. For example,
       the PTE that describes the page being referenced has flags of ---DA--UW-V. Here, A stands for
       accessed (the page has been read), U for user-mode accessible (as opposed to kernel-mode ac-
       cessible only), W for writable page (rather than just readable), and V for valid (the PTE represents a
       valid page in physical memory).

           To confirm the calculation of the physical address, look at the memory in question via both its
       virtual and its physical addresses. First, using the debugger’s dd (display dwords) command on
       the virtual address, you see the following:
       lkd> dd 3166004 L 10
       03166004 00000034 00000006 00003020 0000004e
       03166014 00000000 00020020 0000a000 00000014

          And with the !dd command on the physical address just computed, you see the same contents:
       lkd> !dd 5DE61004 L 10
       #5DE61004 00000034 00000006 00003020 0000004e
       #5DE61014 00000000 00020020 0000a000 00000014

         You could similarly compare the displays from the virtual and physical addresses of the PTE
       and PDE.

    x64 virtual address translation
    Address translation on x64 is similar to x86, but with a fourth level added. Each process has a top-level
    extended page directory called the page map level 4 table that contains the physical locations of 512
    third-level structures, called page directory pointers. The page parent directory is analogous to the x86
    PAE PDPT, but there are 512 of them instead of just one, and each page parent directory is an entire
    page containing 512 entries instead of just four. Like the PDPT, the page parent directory’s entries con-
    tain the physical locations of second-level page directories, each of which in turn contains 512 entries
    providing the locations of the individual page tables. Finally, the page tables, each of which contains
    512 page table entries, contain the physical locations of the pages in memory. All the “physical loca-
    tions” in the preceding description are stored in these structures as PFNs.

   Current implementations of the x64 architecture limit virtual addresses to 48 bits. The components
that make up this 48-bit virtual address and the connection between the components for translation
purposes are shown in Figure 5-20, and the format of an x64 hardware PTE is shown in Figure 5-21.

FIGURE 5-20   x64 address translation.

FIGURE 5-21   x64 hardware PTE.

ARM virtual address translation
   Virtual address translation on ARM 32-bit processors uses a single page directory with 1,024 entries,
each 32 bits in size. The translation structures are shown in Figure 5-22.

    FIGURE 5-22   ARM virtual address translation structures.

        Every process has a single page directory, with its physical address stored in the TTBR register (simi-
    lar to the CR3 x86/x64 register). The 10 most significant bits of the virtual address select a PDE that may
    point to one of 1,024 page tables. A specific PTE is selected by the next 10 bits of the virtual address.
    Each valid PTE points to the start of a page in physical memory, where the offset is given by the lower
    12 bits of the address (just as in the x86 and x64 cases). The scheme in Figure 5-22 suggests that the
    addressable physical memory is 4 GB because each PTE is smaller (32 bits) than the x86/x64 case (64
    bits), and indeed only 20 bits are used for the PFN. ARM processors do support a PAE mode (similar to
    x86), but Windows does not use this functionality. Future Windows versions may support the ARM
    64-bit architecture, which will alleviate the physical address limitations as well as dramatically increase
    the virtual address space for processes and the system.

       Curiously, the layout of valid PTE, PDE, and large page PDE are not the same. Figure 5-23 shows the
    layout of a valid PTE for ARMv7, currently used by Windows. For more information, consult the official
    ARM documentation.

    FIGURE 5-23   ARM valid PTE layout.

Page fault handling
   Earlier, you saw how address translations are resolved when the PTE is valid. When the PTE valid bit is
   clear, this indicates that the desired page is for some reason not currently accessible to the process. This
   section describes the types of invalid PTEs and how references to them are resolved.

      Note Only the 32-bit x86 PTE formats are detailed in this section. PTEs for 64-bit and ARM
      systems contain similar information, but their detailed layout is not presented.

      A reference to an invalid page is called a page fault. The kernel trap handler (see the section “Trap
   dispatching” in Chapter 8 in Part 2) dispatches this kind of fault to the memory manager fault handler
   function, MmAccessFault, to resolve. This routine runs in the context of the thread that incurred the
   fault and is responsible for attempting to resolve the fault (if possible) or raise an appropriate exception.
   These faults can be caused by a variety of conditions, as listed in Table 5-11.

   TABLE 5-11   Reasons for access faults
   Reason for Fault                                                   Result

   Corrupt PTE/PDE                                                    Bug-check (crash) the system with code 0x1A
                                                                      ( MEMORY_MANAGEMENT).

   Accessing a page that isn’t resident in memory but is on disk in   Allocate a physical page and read the desired page
   a page file or a mapped file                                       from disk and into the relevant working set.

   Accessing a page that is on the standby or modified list           Transition the page to the relevant process, session, or
                                                                      system working set.

   Accessing a page that isn’t committed (for example, reserved       Access violation exception.
   address space or address space that isn’t allocated)

   Accessing a page from user mode that can be accessed only in       Access violation exception.
   kernel mode

   Writing to a page that is read-only                                Access violation exception.

   Accessing a demand-zero page                                       Add a zero-filled page to the relevant working set.

   Writing to a guard page                                            Guard-page violation (if there is a reference to a user-
                                                                      mode stack, perform automatic stack expansion).

   Writing to a copy-on-write page                                    Make a process-private (or session-private) copy of the
                                                                      page and use it to replace the original in the process,
                                                                      session, or system working set.

   Writing to a page that is valid but hasn’t been written to the     Set the dirty bit in the PTE.
   current backing store copy

   Executing code in a page that is marked as no execute              Access violation exception.

   PTE permissions don’t match enclave permissions (see the sec-      User mode: access violation exception.
   tion “Memory enclaves” later in this chapter and the Windows       Kernel mode: bug-check with code 0x50
   SDK documentation for the CreateEnclave function)                  (PAGE_FAULT_IN_NONPAGED_AREA).

      The following section describes the four basic kinds of invalid PTEs that are processed by the access
   fault handler. Following that is an explanation of a special case of invalid PTEs, called prototype PTEs,
   which are used to implement shareable pages.

    Invalid PTEs
    If the valid bit of a PTE encountered during address translation is zero, the PTE represents an invalid
    page—one that will raise a memory-management exception, or page fault, upon reference. The MMU
    ignores the remaining bits of the PTE, so the operating system can use these bits to store information
    about the page that will assist in resolving the page fault.

        The following list details the four kinds of invalid PTEs and their structure. These are often referred
    to as software PTEs because they are interpreted by the memory manager rather than the MMU. Some
    of the flags are the same as those for a hardware PTE, as described in Table 5-10, and some of the bit
    fields have either the same or similar meanings to corresponding fields in the hardware PTE.

       ■■   Page file The desired page resides within a paging file. As illustrated in Figure 5-24, 4 bits in
            the PTE indicate in which of 16 possible page files the page resides, and 32 bits provide the page
            number within the file. The pager initiates an in-page operation to bring the page into memory
            and make it valid. The page file offset is always non-zero and never all ones (that is, the very first
            and last pages in the page file are not used for paging) to allow for other formats, described next.

            FIGURE 5-24   A PTE representing a page in a page file.

       ■■   Demand zero This PTE format is the same as the page file PTE shown in the previous entry
            but the page file offset is zero. The desired page must be satisfied with a page of zeroes. The
            pager looks at the zero page list. If the list is empty, the pager takes a page from the free list and
            zeroes it. If the free list is also empty, it takes a page from one of the standby lists and zeroes it.

       ■■   Virtual Address Descriptor This PTE format is the same as the page file PTE shown previous-
            ly but in this case the page file offset field is all one. This indicates a page whose definition and
            backing store, if any, can be found in the process’s Virtual Address Descriptor (VAD) tree. This
            format is used for pages that are backed by sections in mapped files. The pager finds the VAD
            that defines the virtual address range encompassing the virtual page and initiates an in-page
            operation from the mapped file referenced by the VAD. (VADs are described in more detail in
            the section “Virtual address descriptors” later in this chapter.)

       ■■   Transition The transition bit is one. The desired page is in memory on either the standby,
            modified, or modified-no-write list or not on any list. The pager will remove the page from
            the list (if it is on one) and add it to the process working set. This is known as a soft page fault
            because no I/O is involved.

       ■■   Unknown The PTE is zero or the page table doesn’t yet exist. (The PDE that would provide
            the physical address of the page table contains zero.) In both cases, the memory manager must

        examine the VADs to determine whether this virtual address has been committed. If so, page
        tables are built to represent the newly committed address space. If not—that is, if the page is
        reserved or hasn’t been defined at all—the page fault is reported as an access violation exception.

Prototype PTEs
If a page can be shared between two processes, the memory manager uses a software structure
called prototype page table entries (prototype PTEs) to map these potentially shared pages. For page-
file–backed sections, an array of prototype PTEs is created when a section object is first created. For
mapped files, portions of the array are created on demand as each view is mapped. These prototype
PTEs are part of the segment structure (described in the section “Section objects” later in this chapter).

    When a process first references a page mapped to a view of a section object (recall that VADs are
created only when the view is mapped), the memory manager uses the information in the prototype PTE
to fill in the real PTE used for address translation in the process page table. When a shared page is made
valid, both the process PTE and the prototype PTE point to the physical page containing the data. To track
the number of process PTEs that reference a valid shared page, a counter in its PFN database entry is
incremented. Thus, the memory manager can determine when a shared page is no longer referenced by
any page table and thus can be made invalid and moved to a transition list or written out to disk.

    When a shareable page is invalidated, the PTE in the process page table is filled in with a special PTE
that points to the prototype PTE that describes the page, as shown in Figure 5-25. Thus, when the page
is accessed, the memory manager can locate the prototype PTE using the information encoded in this
PTE, which in turn describes the page being referenced.

FIGURE 5-25   Structure of an invalid PTE that points to the prototype PTE.

   A shared page can be in one of six different states, as described by the prototype PTE:

   ■■   Active/valid The page is in physical memory because of another process that accessed it.

   ■■   Transition The desired page is in memory on the standby or modified list (or not on any list).

   ■■   Modified-no-write        The desired page is in memory and on the modified-no-write list. (Refer
        to Table 5-11.)

   ■■   Demand zero       The desired page should be satisfied with a page of zeroes.

   ■■   Page file The desired page resides within a page file.

   ■■   Mapped file     The desired page resides within a mapped file.

       Although the format of these prototype PTEs is the same as that of the real PTEs described earlier,
    the prototype PTEs aren’t used for address translation. They are a layer between the page table and the
    PFN database and never appear directly in page tables.

       By having all the accessors of a potentially shared page point to a prototype PTE to resolve faults,
    the memory manager can manage shared pages without needing to update the page tables of each
    process sharing the page. For example, a shared code or data page might be paged out to disk at some
    point. When the memory manager retrieves the page from disk, it needs only to update the prototype
    PTE to point to the page’s new physical location. The PTEs in each of the processes sharing the page
    remain the same, with the valid bit clear and still pointing to the prototype PTE. Later, as processes
    reference the page, the real PTE will get updated.

       Figure 5-26 illustrates two virtual pages in a mapped view. One is valid and the other is invalid. As
    shown, the first page is valid and is pointed to by the process PTE and the prototype PTE. The second
    page is in the paging file—the prototype PTE contains its exact location. The process PTE (and any
    other processes with that page mapped) points to this prototype PTE.

    FIGURE 5-26   Prototype page table entries.

    In-paging I/O
    In-paging I/O occurs when a read operation must be issued to a file (paging or mapped) to satisfy a
    page fault. Also, because page tables are themselves pageable, the processing of a page fault can incur
    additional I/O if necessary when the system is loading the page table page that contains the PTE or the
    prototype PTE that describes the original page being referenced.

       The in-page I/O operation is synchronous—that is, the thread waits on an event until the I/O com-
    pletes—and isn’t interruptible by asynchronous procedure call (APC) delivery. The pager uses a special
    modifier in the I/O request function to indicate paging I/O. Upon completion of paging I/O, the I/O
    system triggers an event, which wakes up the pager and allows it to continue in-page processing.

      While the paging I/O operation is in progress, the faulting thread doesn’t own any critical memory
    management synchronization objects. Other threads within the process can issue virtual memory

functions and handle page faults while the paging I/O takes place. But there are a few interesting
conditions that the pager must recognize when the I/O completes are exposed:

   ■■   Another thread in the same process or a different process could have faulted the same page
        (called a collided page fault and described in the next section).

   ■■   The page could have been deleted and remapped from the virtual address space.

   ■■   The protection on the page could have changed.

   ■■   The fault could have been for a prototype PTE, and the page that maps the prototype PTE could
        be out of the working set.

   The pager handles these conditions by saving enough state on the thread’s kernel stack before
the paging I/O request such that when the request is complete, it can detect these conditions and, if
necessary, dismiss the page fault without making the page valid. When and if the faulting instruction is
reissued, the pager is again invoked and the PTE is reevaluated in its new state.

Collided page faults
The case when another thread in the same process or a different process faults a page that is cur-
rently being in-paged is known as a collided page fault. The pager detects and handles collided page
faults optimally because they are common occurrences in multithreaded systems. If another thread
or process faults the same page, the pager detects the collided page fault, noticing that the page is
in transition and that a read is in progress. (This information is in the PFN database entry.) In this case,
the pager may issue a wait operation on the event specified in the PFN database entry. Alternatively, it
can choose to issue a parallel I/O to protect the file systems from deadlocks. (The first I/O to complete
“wins,” and the others are discarded.) This event was initialized by the thread that first issued the I/O
needed to resolve the fault.

    When the I/O operation completes, all threads waiting on the event have their wait satisfied. The
first thread to acquire the PFN database lock is responsible for performing the in-page completion
operations. These operations consist of checking I/O status to ensure that the I/O operation completed
successfully, clearing the read-in-progress bit in the PFN database, and updating the PTE.

    When subsequent threads acquire the PFN database lock to complete the collided page fault, the
pager recognizes that the initial updating has been performed because the read-in-progress bit is clear
and checks the in-page error flag in the PFN database element to ensure that the in-page I/O completed
successfully. If the in-page error flag is set, the PTE isn’t updated, and an in-page error exception is
raised in the faulting thread.

Clustered page faults
The memory manager prefetches large clusters of pages to satisfy page faults and populate the system
cache. The prefetch operations read data directly into the system’s page cache instead of into a work-
ing set in virtual memory. Therefore, the prefetched data does not consume virtual address space, and
the size of the fetch operation is not limited to the amount of virtual address space that is available.

    Also, no expensive TLB-flushing inter-processor interrupt (IPI) is needed if the page will be repurposed.
    The prefetched pages are put on the standby list and marked as in transition in the PTE. If a prefetched
    page is subsequently referenced, the memory manager adds it to the working set. However, if it is
    never referenced, no system resources are required to release it. If any pages in the prefetched cluster
    are already in memory, the memory manager does not read them again. Instead, it uses a dummy page
    to represent them so that an efficient single large I/O can still be issued, as shown in Figure 5-27.

    FIGURE 5-27   Usage of dummy page during virtual-address-to-physical-address mapping in an MDL.

       In the figure, the file offsets and virtual addresses that correspond to pages A, Y, Z, and B are logi-
    cally contiguous, although the physical pages themselves are not necessarily contiguous. Pages A and
    B are nonresident, so the memory manager must read them. Pages Y and Z are already resident in
    memory, so it is not necessary to read them. (In fact, they might already have been modified since they
    were last read in from their backing store, in which case it would be a serious error to overwrite their
    contents.) However, reading pages A and B in a single operation is more efficient than performing one
    read for page A and a second read for page B. Therefore, the memory manager issues a single read re-
    quest that comprises all four pages (A, Y, Z, and B) from the backing store. Such a read request includes
    as many pages as it makes sense to read, based on the amount of available memory, the current system
    usage, and so on.

       When the memory manager builds the MDL that describes the request, it supplies valid pointers to
    pages A and B. However, the entries for pages Y and Z point to a single system-wide dummy page X.
    The memory manager can fill the dummy page X with the potentially stale data from the backing store
    because it does not make X visible. However, if a component accesses the Y and Z offsets in the MDL, it
    sees the dummy page X instead of Y and Z.

       The memory manager can represent any number of discarded pages as a single dummy page, and
    that page can be embedded multiple times in the same MDL or even in multiple concurrent MDLs that
    are being used for different drivers. Consequently, the contents of the locations that represent the
    discarded pages can change at any time. (See Chapter 6 for more on MDLs.)

Page files
Page files store modified pages that are still in use by some process but have had to be written to disk
because they were unmapped or memory pressure resulted in a trim. Page file space is reserved when
the pages are initially committed, but the actual optimally clustered page file locations cannot be cho-
sen until pages are written out to disk.

    When the system boots, the Session Manager process (Smss.exe) reads the list of page files to open
by examining the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management\
PagingFiles registry value. This multistring registry value contains the name, minimum size, and maxi-
mum size of each paging file. Windows supports up to 16 paging files on x86 and x64 and up to 2 page
files on ARM. On x86 and x64 systems, each page file can be up to 16 TB in size, while the maximum is
4 GB on ARM systems. Once open, the page files can’t be deleted while the system is running because
the System process maintains an open handle to each page file.

   Because the page file contains parts of process and kernel virtual memory, for security reasons, the
system can be configured to clear the page file at system shutdown. To enable this, set the ClearPage-
FileAtShutdown registry value in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\
Memory Management key to 1. Otherwise, after shutdown, the page file will contain whatever data
happened to have been paged out while the system was up. This data could then be accessed by some-
one who gained physical access to the machine.

   If the minimum and maximum paging file sizes are both zero (or not specified), this indicates a
system-managed paging file. Windows 7 and Server 2008 R2 used a simple scheme based on RAM size
alone as follows:

   ■■   Minimum size     Set to the amount of RAM or 1 GB, whichever is larger

   ■■   Maximum size Set to 3 * RAM or 4 GB, whichever is larger

    These settings are not ideal. For example, today’s laptops and desktop machines can easily have 32
GB or 64 GB of RAM, and server machines can have hundreds of gigabytes of RAM. Setting the initial
page file size to the size of RAM may result in a considerable loss of disk space, especially if disk sizes
are relatively small and based on solid-state device (SSD). Furthermore, the amount of RAM in a system
is not necessarily indicative of the typical memory workload on that system.

    The current implementation uses a more elaborate scheme to derive a “good” minimum page file
size based not only on RAM size, but also on page file history usage and other factors. As part of page-
file creation and initialization, Smss.exe calculates page file minimum sizes based on four factors, stored
in global variables:

   ■■   RAM (SmpDesiredPfSizeBasedOnRAM)          This is the recommended page file size based on RAM.

   ■■   Crash dump (SmpDesiredPfSizeForCrashDump)           This is the recommended page file size
        needed to be able to store a crash dump.

   ■■   History (SmpDesiredPfSizeBasedOnHistory) This is the recommended page file size based on
        usage history. Smss.exe uses a timer that triggers once an hour and records the page file usage.

       ■■      Apps (SmpDesiredPfSizeForApps)             This is the recommended page file for Windows apps.

       ■■      These values are computed as shown in Table 5-12.

    TABLE 5-12       Base calculation for page file size recommendation
     Recommendation Base           Recommended Page File Size

     RAM                           If RAM <= 1 GB, then size = 1 GB. If RAM > 1 GB, then add 1/8 GB for every extra gigabyte
                                   of RAM, up to a maximum of 32 GB.

     Crash dump                    If a dedicated dump file is configured, then no page file is required for storing a dump file,
                                   and the size = 0. (You can configure this for a dedicated dump file by adding the value
                                   DedicatedDumpFile in the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl key.)
                                   If the dump type configured is set to Automatic (the default), then:
                                     If RAM < 4 GB, then size = RAM / 6.
                                     Otherwise, size = 2/3 GB + 1/8 GB for each extra gigabyte above 4 GB, capped to 32 GB.
                                   If there was a recent crash for which the page file was not large enough, then recommend-
                                   ed size is increased to RAM size or 32 GB, whichever is smaller.
                                   If a full dump is configured, returned size = RAM size plus additional information size pres-
                                   ent in a dump file.
                                   If a kernel dump is configured, then size = RAM.

     History                       If enough samples have been logged, returns the 90 th percentile as the recommended size.
                                   Otherwise, returns the size based on RAM (above).

     Apps                          If it’s a server, return zero.
                                   The recommended size is based on a factor that the Process Lifecycle Manager (PLM) uses
                                   to determine when to terminate an app. Current factor is 2.3 * RAM, which was considered
                                   with RAM = 1 GB (rough minimum for mobile devices). The recommended size (based
                                   on the mentioned factor) is around 2.5 GB. If this is more than RAM, RAM is subtracted.
                                   Otherwise, zero is returned.

      The maximum page file size for a system-managed size is set at three times the size of RAM or 4 GB,
    whichever is larger. The minimum (initial) page file size is determined as follows:

       ■■      If it’s the first system-managed page file, then the base size is set based on page file history
               (refer to Table 5-12). Otherwise, the base size is based on RAM.

       ■■      If it’s the first system-managed page file:

               • If the base size is smaller than the computed page file size for apps (SmpDesiredPfSize-
                    ForApps), then set the new base as the size computed for apps (refer to Table 5-12).

               • If the (new) base size is smaller than the computed size for crash dumps (SmpDesiredPf-
                    SizeForCrashDump), then set the new base to be the size computed for crash dumps.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing page files
       To view the list of page files, look in the registry at the PagingFiles value in the HKLM\SYSTEM\
       CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management key. This entry contains the
       paging file configuration settings modified through the Advanced System Settings dialog box. To
       access these settings, follow these steps:

               1.    Open Control Panel.

    2.   Click System and Security and then click System. This opens the System Properties
         dialog box, which you can also access by right-clicking on Computer in Explorer and
         selecting Properties.

    3.   Click Advanced System Settings.

    4.   In the Performance area, click Settings. This opens the Performance Options dialog
         box.

    5.   Click the Advanced tab.

    6.   In the Virtual Memory area, click Change.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing page file recommended sizes
To view the actual variables calculated in Table 5-12, follow these steps (this experiment was done
using an x86 Windows 10 system):

    1.   Start local kernel debugging.

    2.   Locate Smss.exe processes:
         lkd> !process 0 0 smss.exe
         PROCESS 8e54bc40 SessionId: none Cid: 0130                Peb: 02bab000     ParentCid:
         0004
              DirBase: bffe0020 ObjectTable: 8a767640           HandleCount: <Data Not
         Accessible>
              Image: smss.exe

         PROCESS 9985bc40 SessionId: 1 Cid: 01d4     Peb: 02f9c000               ParentCid: 0130
             DirBase: bffe0080 ObjectTable: 00000000 HandleCount:                 0.
             Image: smss.exe

         PROCESS a122dc40 SessionId: 2 Cid: 02a8     Peb: 02fcd000               ParentCid: 0130
             DirBase: bffe0320 ObjectTable: 00000000 HandleCount:                 0.
             Image: smss.exe

    3.   Locate the first one (with a session ID of none), which is the master Smss.exe. (Refer to
         Chapter 2 for more details.)

    4.   Switch the debugger context to that process:
         lkd> .process /r /p 8e54bc40
         Implicit process is now 8e54bc40
         Loading User Symbols
         ..

    5.   Show the four variables described in the previous section. (Each one is 64 bits in size.)
         lkd> dq smss!SmpDesiredPfSizeBasedOnRAM L1
         00974cd0 00000000'4fff1a00

                lkd> dq smss!SmpDesiredPfSizeBasedOnHistory L1
                00974cd8 00000000'05a24700
                lkd> dq smss!SmpDesiredPfSizeForCrashDump L1
                00974cc8 00000000'1ffecd55
                lkd> dq smss!SmpDesiredPfSizeForApps L1
                00974ce0 00000000'00000000

           6.   Because there is a single volume (C:\) on this machine, a single page file would be cre-
                ated. Assuming it wasn’t specifically configured, it would be system managed. You can
                look at the actual file size of C:\PageFile.Sys on disk or use the !vm debugger command:
                lkd> !vm 1
                Page File: \??\C:\pagefile.sys
                  Current:    524288 Kb Free Space:            524280 Kb
                  Minimum:    524288 Kb Maximum:              8324476 Kb
                Page File: \??\C:\swapfile.sys
                  Current:    262144 Kb Free Space:            262136 Kb
                  Minimum:    262144 Kb Maximum:              4717900 Kb
                No Name for Paging File
                  Current: 11469744 Kb Free Space:           11443108 Kb
                  Minimum: 11469744 Kb Maximum:              11469744 Kb
                ...

           Notice the minimum size of C:\PageFIle.sys (524288 KB). (We’ll discuss the other page file
       entries in the next section). According to the variables, SmpDesiredPfSizeForCrashDump is the
       largest, so must be the determining factor (0x1FFECD55 = 524211 KB), which is very close to the
       listed value. (Page file sizes round up to multiple of 64 MB.)

        To add a new page file, Control Panel uses the internal NtCreatePagingFile system service defined
    in Ntdll.dll. (This requires the SeCreatePagefilePrivilege.) Page files are always created as non-
    compressed files, even if the directory they are in is compressed. Their names are PageFile.Sys (except
    some special ones described in the next section). They are created in the root of partitions with the
    Hidden file attribute so they are not immediately visible. To keep new page files from being deleted, a
    handle is duplicated into the System process so that even after the creating process closes the handle
    to the new page file, a handle is nevertheless always open to it.

    The swap file
    In the UWP apps world, when an app goes to the background—for example, it is minimized—the
    threads in that process are suspended so that the process does not consume any CPU. The private
    physical memory used by the process can potentially be reused for other processes. If memory pres-
    sure is high, the private working set (physical memory used by the process) may be swapped out to disk
    to allow the physical memory to be used for other processes.

       Windows 8 added another page file called a swap file. It is essentially the same as a normal page file
    but is used exclusively for UWP apps. It’s created on client SKUs only if at least one normal page file
    was created (the normal case). Its name is SwapFile.sys and it resides in the system root partition—for
    example, C:\SwapFile.Sys.

    After the normal page files are created, the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session
Manager\Memory Management registry key is consulted. If a DWORD value named SwapFileControl
exists and its value is zero, swap file creation is aborted. If a value named SwapFile exists, it’s read as a
string with the same format as a normal page file, with a filename, an initial size, and a maximum size.
The difference is that a value of zero for the sizes is interpreted as no swap file creation. These two reg-
istry values do not exist by default, which results in the creation of a SwapFile.sys file on the system root
partition with a minimum size of 16 MB on fast (and small) disks (for example, SSD) or 256 MB on slow
(or large SSD) disks. The maximum size of the swap file is set to 1.5 * RAM or 10 percent of the system
root partition size, whichever is smaller. See Chapter 7 in this book and Chapter 8, “System mechanisms,”
and Chapter 9, “Management mechanisms,” in Part 2 for more on UWP apps.

   Note The swap file is not counted against the maximum page files supported.

The virtual page file
The !vm debugger command hints at another page file called “No Name for Paging File.” This is a
virtual page file. As the name suggests, it has no actual file, but is used indirectly as the backing store
for memory compression (described later in this chapter in the section “Memory compression”). It is
large, but its size is set arbitrarily as not to run out of free space. The invalid PTEs for pages that have
been compressed point to this virtual page file and allow the memory compression store to get to the
compressed data when needed by interpreting the bits in the invalid PTE leading to the correct store,
region, and index.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing swap file and virtual page file information
   The !vm debugger command shows the information on all page files, including the swap file and
   the virtual page file:
   lkd> !vm 1
   Page File: \??\C:\pagefile.sys
     Current:    524288 Kb Free Space:              524280 Kb
     Minimum:    524288 Kb Maximum:                8324476 Kb
   Page File: \??\C:\swapfile.sys
     Current:    262144 Kb Free Space:              262136 Kb
     Minimum:    262144 Kb Maximum:                4717900 Kb
   No Name for Paging File
     Current: 11469744 Kb Free Space:            11443108 Kb
     Minimum: 11469744 Kb Maximum:               11469744 Kb

       On this system, the swap file minimum size is 256 MB, as the system is a Windows 10 virtual
   machine. (The VHD behind the disk is considered a slow disk.) The maximum size of the swap file
   is about 4.5 GB, as the RAM on the system is 3 GB and disk partition size is 64 GB (the minimum
   of 4.5 GB and 6.4 GB).

    Commit charge and the system commit limit
    We are now in a position to more thoroughly discuss the concepts of commit charge and the system
    commit limit.

        Whenever virtual address space is created—for example, by a VirtualAlloc (for committed
    memory) or MapViewOfFile call—the system must ensure that there is room to store it, either in RAM
    or in backing store, before successfully completing the create request. For mapped memory (other
    than sections mapped to the page file), the file associated with the mapping object referenced by the
    MapViewOfFile call provides the required backing store. All other virtual allocations rely on system-
    managed shared resources for storage: RAM and the paging file(s). The purpose of the system commit
    limit and commit charge is to track all uses of these resources to ensure they are never overcommit-
    ted—that is, that there is never more virtual address space defined than there is space to store its
    contents, either in RAM or in backing store (on disk).

       Note This section makes frequent references to paging files. It is possible (though not gen-
       erally recommended) to run Windows without any paging files. Essentially, this means that
       when RAM is exhausted, there is no room to grow and memory allocations fail, generating a
       blue screen. You can consider every reference to paging files here to be qualified by “if one
       or more paging files exist.”

         Conceptually, the system commit limit represents the total committed virtual address space that
    can be created in addition to virtual allocations that are associated with their own backing store—that
    is, in addition to sections mapped to files. Its numeric value is simply the amount of RAM available to
    Windows plus the current sizes of any page files. If a page file is expanded or new page files are created,
    the commit limit increases accordingly. If no page files exist, the system commit limit is simply the total
    amount of RAM available to Windows.

       Commit charge is the system-wide total of all committed memory allocations that must be kept in
    either RAM or in a paging file. From the name, it should be apparent that one contributor to commit
    charge is process-private committed virtual address space. However, there are many other contribu-
    tors, some of them not so obvious.

       Windows also maintains a per-process counter called the process page file quota. Many of the allo-
    cations that contribute to commit charge also contribute to the process page file quota. This represents
    each process’s private contribution to the system commit charge. Note, however, that this does not
    represent current page file usage. It represents the potential or maximum page file usage, should all
    these allocations have to be stored there.

        The following types of memory allocations contribute to the system commit charge and, in many cases,
    to the process page file quota. (Some of these will be described in detail in later sections of this chapter.)

       ■■   Private committed memory This is memory allocated with the VirtualAlloc call with the
            MEM_COMMIT option. This is the most common type of contributor to the commit charge. These
            allocations are also charged to the process page file quota.

   ■■   Page-file-backed mapped memory This is memory allocated with a MapViewOfFile call
        that references a section object, which in turn is not associated with a file. The system uses a
        portion of the page file as the backing store instead. These allocations are not charged to the
        process page file quota.
   ■■   Copy-on-write regions of mapped memory (even if it is associated with ordinary mapped
        files) The mapped file provides backing store for its own unmodified content. However,
        should a page in the copy-on-write region be modified, it can no longer use the original
        mapped file for backing store. It must be kept in RAM or in a paging file. These allocations are
        not charged to the process page file quota.
   ■■   Non-paged and paged pool and other allocations in system space that are not backed
        by explicitly associated files Even the currently free regions of the system memory pools
        contribute to commit charge. The non-pageable regions are counted in the commit charge
        even though they will never be written to the page file because they permanently reduce the
        amount of RAM available for private pageable data. These allocations are not charged to the
        process page file quota.
   ■■   Kernel stacks    Threads’ stacks when executing in kernel mode.
   ■■   Page tables Most of these are themselves pageable, and they are not backed by mapped
        files. However, even if they are not pageable, they occupy RAM. Therefore, the space required
        for them contributes to commit charge.
   ■■   Space for page tables that are not yet actually allocated As you’ll see, where large areas
        of virtual space have been defined but not yet referenced (for example, private committed vir-
        tual space), the system need not actually create page tables to describe it. However, the space
        for these as-yet-nonexistent page tables is charged to commit charge to ensure that the page
        tables can be created when they are needed.
   ■■   Allocations of physical memory made via the Address Windowing Extension (AWE) APIs
        As discussed previously, consume physical memory directly.

    For many of these items, the commit charge may represent the potential use of storage rather than
its actual use. For example, a page of private committed memory does not actually occupy either a
physical page of RAM or the equivalent page file space until it’s been referenced at least once. Until
then, it is a demand-zero page (described later). But commit charge accounts for such pages when the
virtual space is first created. This ensures that when the page is later referenced, actual physical storage
space will be available for it.

   A region of a file mapped as copy-on-write has a similar requirement. Until the process writes to the re-
gion, all pages in it are backed by the mapped file. However, the process may write to any of the pages in the
region at any time. When that happens, those pages are thereafter treated as private to the process. Their
backing store is, thereafter, the page file. Charging the system commit for them when the region is first cre-
ated ensures that there will be private storage for them later, if and when the write accesses occur.

    A particularly interesting case occurs when reserving private memory and later committing it. When
the reserved region is created with VirtualAlloc, system commit charge is not charged for the actual
virtual region. On Windows 8 and Server 2012 and earlier versions, it is charged for any new page table

    pages that will be required to describe the region, even though these might not yet exist or even be
    eventually needed. Starting with Windows 8.1 and Server 2012 R2, page table hierarchies for reserved
    regions are not charged immediately; this means that huge reserved memory regions can be allocated
    without exhausting page tables. This becomes important in some security features, such as Control Flow
    Guard (CFG, see Chapter 7 for more details). If the region or a part of it is later committed, system com-
    mit is charged to account for the size of the region (and page tables), as is the process page file quota.

       To put it another way, when the system successfully completes, for example, a VirtualAlloc com-
    mit or MapViewOfFile call, it makes a commitment that the necessary storage will be available when
    needed, even if it wasn’t needed at that moment. Thus, a later memory reference to the allocated re-
    gion can never fail for lack of storage space. (Of course, it could still fail for other reasons, such as page
    protection, the region being deallocated, and so on.) The commit charge mechanism allows the system
    to keep this commitment.

        The commit charge appears in the Performance Monitor counters as Memory: Committed Bytes. It
    is also the first of the two numbers displayed on the Task Manager’s Performance tab with the legend
    Commit (the second being the commit limit), and it is displayed by Process Explorer’s System Informa-
    tion Memory tab as Commit Charge – Current.

       The process page file quota appears in the performance counters as Process: Page File Bytes. The
    same data appears in the Process: Private Bytes performance counter. (Neither term exactly describes
    the true meaning of the counter.)

        If the commit charge ever reaches the commit limit, the memory manager will attempt to increase
    the commit limit by expanding one or more page files. If that is not possible, subsequent attempts to
    allocate virtual memory that uses commit charge will fail until some existing committed memory is
    freed. The performance counters listed in Table 5-13 allow you to examine private committed memory
    usage on a system-wide, per-process, or per-page-file, basis.
    TABLE 5-13    Committed memory and page file performance counters
     Performance Counter              Description

     Memory: Committed Bytes          This is the number of bytes of virtual (not reserved) memory that has been committed.
                                      This number doesn’t necessarily represent page file usage because it includes private
                                      committed pages in physical memory that have never been paged out. Rather, it repre-
                                      sents the charged amount that must be backed by page file space and/or RAM.

     Memory: Commit Limit             This is the number of bytes of virtual memory that can be committed without having to
                                      extend the paging files. If the paging files can be extended, this limit is soft.

     Process: Page File Quota         This is the process’s contribution to Memory: Committed Bytes.

     Process: Private Bytes           This is the same as Process: Page File Quota.

     Process: Working Set ‒ Private   This is the subset of Process: Page File Quota that is currently in RAM and can be refer-
                                      enced without a page fault. It is also a subset of Process: Working Set.

     Process: Working Set             This is the subset of Process: Virtual Bytes that is currently in RAM and can be refer-
                                      enced without a page fault.

     Process: Virtual Bytes           This is the total virtual memory allocation of the process, including mapped regions,
                                      private committed regions, and private reserved regions.

     Paging File: % Usage             This is the percentage of the page file space that is currently in use.

     Paging File: % Usage Peak        This is the highest observed value of Paging File: % Usage.

Commit charge and page file size
The counters in Table 5-13 can assist you in choosing a custom page file size. The default policy based
on the amount of RAM works acceptably for most machines, but depending on the workload, it can
result in a page file that’s unnecessarily large or not large enough.

   To determine how much page-file space your system really needs based on the mix of applications
that have run since the system booted, examine the peak commit charge in the Memory tab of Process
Explorer’s System Information display. This number represents the peak amount of page file space since
the system booted that would have been needed if the system had to page out the majority of private
committed virtual memory (which rarely happens).

   If the page file on your system is too big, the system will not use it any more or less. In other words,
increasing the size of the page file does not change system performance. It simply means the system
can have more committed virtual memory. If the page file is too small for the mix of applications you
are running, you might get a “system running low on virtual memory” error message. In this case, check
to see whether a process has a memory leak by examining the process private bytes count. If no pro-
cess appears to have a leak, check the system paged pool size. If a device driver is leaking paged pool,
this might also explain the error. Refer to the “Troubleshooting a pool leak” experiment in the “Kernel-
mode heaps (system memory pools)” section for information on troubleshooting a pool leak.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing page file usage with Task Manager
   You can view committed memory usage with Task Manager. To do so, click its Performance tab.
   You’ll see the following counters related to page files:

           The system commit total is displayed under the Committed label as two numbers. The first
       number represents potential page file usage, not actual page file usage. It is how much page file
       space would be used if all the private committed virtual memory in the system had to be paged
       out all at once. The second number displayed is the commit limit, which is the maximum virtual
       memory usage that the system can support before running out of virtual memory. (This includes
       virtual memory backed in physical memory as well as by the paging files.) The commit limit is es-
       sentially the size of RAM plus the current size of the paging files. It therefore does not account for
       possible page file expansion.

          Process Explorer’s System Information display shows an additional piece of information about
       system commit usage—namely, the percentage of the peak as compared to the limit and the
       current usage as compared to the limit:

Stacks
    Whenever a thread runs, it must have access to a temporary storage location in which to store function
    parameters, local variables, and the return address after a function call. This part of memory is called a
    stack. On Windows, the memory manager provides two stacks for each thread: the user stack and the
    kernel stack, as well as per-processor stacks called DPC stacks. Chapter 2 briefly discussed how system
    calls cause the thread to switch from a user stack to its kernel stack. Now we’ll look at some extra ser-
    vices the memory manager provides to efficiently use stack space.

User stacks
When a thread is created, the memory manager automatically reserves a predetermined amount of
virtual memory, which by default is 1 MB. This amount can be configured in the call to the Create-
Thread or CreateRemoteThread(Ex) function or when compiling the application by using the /
STACK:reserve switch in the Microsoft C/C++ compiler, which stores the information in the image
header. Although 1 MB is reserved, only the first page of the stack will be committed (unless the PE
header of the image specifies otherwise), along with a guard page. When a thread’s stack grows large
enough to touch the guard page, an exception occurs, causing an attempt to allocate another guard.
Through this mechanism, a user stack doesn’t immediately consume all 1 MB of committed memory
but instead grows with demand. (However, it will never shrink back.)

   EXPERIMENT: Creating the maximum number of threads
   With only 2 GB of user address space available to each 32-bit process, the relatively large
   memory that is reserved for each thread’s stack allows for an easy calculation of the maximum
   number of threads that a process can support: a little less than 2,048, for a total of nearly 2 GB of
   memory (unless the increaseuserva BCD option is used and the image is large address space
   aware). By forcing each new thread to use the smallest possible stack reservation size, 64 KB, the
   limit can grow to about 30,000 threads. You can test this for yourself by using the TestLimit utility
   from Sysinternals. Here is some sample output:
   C:\Tools\Sysinternals>Testlimit.exe -t -n 64

   Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
   Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
   Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

   Process ID: 17260

   Creating threads with 64 KB stacks...
   Created 29900 threads. Lasterror: 8

      If you attempt this experiment on a 64-bit Windows installation (with 128 TB of user address
   space available), you would expect to see potentially hundreds of thousands of threads created
   (assuming sufficient memory was available). Interestingly, however, TestLimit actually creates
   fewer threads than on a 32-bit machine. This has to do with the fact that Testlimit.exe is a 32-bit
   application and thus runs under the Wow64 environment. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more
   information on Wow64.) Each thread will therefore have not only its 32-bit Wow64 stack but
   also its 64-bit stack, thus consuming more than twice the memory, while keeping only 2 GB of
   address space. To properly test the thread-creation limit on 64-bit Windows, use the Testlimit64.
   exe binary instead.

      You will need to terminate TestLimit with Process Explorer or Task Manager. You cannot use
   Ctrl+C to break the application because this operation itself creates a new thread, which will not
   be possible once memory is exhausted.

    Kernel stacks
    Although user stack sizes are typically 1 MB, the amount of memory dedicated to the kernel stack is
    significantly smaller: 12 KB on 32-bit systems and 16 KB on 64-bit systems, followed by another guard
    page, for a total of 16 or 20 KB of virtual address space. Code running in the kernel is expected to have
    less recursion than user code, as well as contain more efficient variable use and keep stack buffer sizes
    low. Because kernel stacks live in system address space (which is shared by all processes), their memory
    usage has a bigger impact of the system.

       Although kernel code is usually not recursive, interactions between graphics system calls handled by
    Win32k.sys and its subsequent callbacks into user mode can cause recursive re-entries in the kernel on
    the same kernel stack. As such, Windows provides a mechanism for dynamically expanding and shrink-
    ing the kernel stack from its initial size. As each additional graphics call is performed from the same
    thread, another 16 KB kernel stack is allocated. (This happens anywhere in system address space. The
    memory manager provides the ability to jump stacks when nearing the guard page.) Whenever each
    call returns to the caller (unwinding), the memory manager frees the additional kernel stack that had
    been allocated, as shown in Figure 5-28. This mechanism allows reliable support for recursive system
    calls as well as efficient use of system address space. It is provided for use by driver developers when
    performing recursive callouts through the KeExpandKernelStackAndCallout(Ex) APIs, as necessary.

    FIGURE 5-28    Kernel stack jumping.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing kernel-stack usage
       You can use the RamMap tool from Sysinternals to display the physical memory currently being
       occupied by kernel stacks. Here’s a screenshot from the Use Counts tab:

          To view kernel-stack usage, try the following:

           1.     Repeat the previous TestLimit experiment, but don’t terminate TestLimit yet.

           2.     Switch to RamMap.

           3.     Open the File menu and select Refresh (or press F5). You should see a much higher
                  kernel stack size:

         Running TestLimit a few more times (without closing previous instances) would easily exhaust
      physical memory on a 32-bit system, and this limitation results in one of the primary limits on
      system-wide 32-bit thread count.

   DPC stack
   Windows keeps a per-processor DPC stack available for use by the system whenever DPCs are executing.
   This approach isolates the DPC code from the current thread’s kernel stack. (This is unrelated to the
   DPC’s actual operation because DPCs run in arbitrary thread context. See Chapter 6 for more on DPCs.)
   The DPC stack is also configured as the initial stack for handling the sysenter (x86), svc (ARM), or
   syscall (x64) instruction during a system call. The CPU is responsible for switching the stack when
   these instructions are executed, based on one of the model-specific registers (MSRs on x86/x64).
   However, Windows does not want to reprogram the MSR for every context switch because that is an
   expensive operation. Windows therefore configures the per-processor DPC stack pointer in the MSR.

Virtual address descriptors
   The memory manager uses a demand-paging algorithm to know when to load pages into memory,
   waiting until a thread references an address and incurs a page fault before retrieving the page from
   disk. Like copy-on-write, demand paging is a form of lazy evaluation—waiting to perform a task until it
   is required.

       The memory manager uses lazy evaluation not only to bring pages into memory but also to con-
   struct the page tables required to describe new pages. For example, when a thread commits a large
   region of virtual memory with VirtualAlloc, the memory manager could immediately construct the
   page tables required to access the entire range of allocated memory. But what if some of that range
   is never accessed? Creating page tables for the entire range would be a wasted effort. Instead, the
   memory manager waits to create a page table until a thread incurs a page fault. It then creates a page
   table for that page. This method significantly improves performance for processes that reserve and/or
   commit a lot of memory but access it sparsely.

       The virtual address space that would be occupied by such as-yet-nonexistent page tables is charged
   to the process page file quota and to the system commit charge. This ensures that space will be avail-
   able for them should they actually be created. With the lazy-evaluation algorithm, allocating even
   large blocks of memory is a fast operation. When a thread allocates memory, the memory manager
   must respond with a range of addresses for the thread to use. To do this, the memory manager
   maintains another set of data structures to keep track of which virtual addresses have been reserved
   in the process’s address space and which have not. These data structures are known as Virtual Address
   Descriptors (VADs). VADs are allocated in non-paged pool.

    Process VADs
    For each process, the memory manager maintains a set of VADs that describes the status of the process’s
    address space. VADs are organized into a self-balancing AVL tree (named after its inventors, Adelson-
    Velsky and Landis, where the heights of the two child subtrees of any node differ by at most 1; this makes
    the insertion, lookup, and deletion very fast). On average, this results in the fewest comparisons when
    searching for a VAD corresponding with a virtual address. There is one VAD for each virtually contiguous
    range of not-free virtual addresses that all have the same characteristics (reserved versus committed
    versus mapped, memory access protection, and so on). Figure 5-29 shows a diagram of a VAD tree.

    FIGURE 5-29   VADs.

        When a process reserves address space or maps a view of a section, the memory manager creates a
    VAD to store any information supplied by the allocation request, such as the range of addresses being
    reserved, whether the range will be shared or private, whether a child process can inherit the contents
    of the range, and the page protection applied to pages in the range.

        When a thread first accesses an address, the memory manager must create a PTE for the page con-
    taining the address. To do so, it finds the VAD whose address range contains the accessed address and
    uses the information it finds to fill in the PTE. If the address falls outside the range covered by the VAD or
    in a range of addresses that are reserved but not committed, the memory manager knows that the thread
    didn’t allocate the memory before attempting to use it and therefore generates an access violation.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing VADs
       You can use the kernel debugger’s !vad command to view the VADs for a given process. First find
       the address of the root of the VAD tree with the !process command. Then specify that address
       to the !vad command, as shown in the following example of the VAD tree for a process running
       Explorer.exe:
       lkd> !process 0 1 explorer.exe
       PROCESS ffffc8069382e080
           SessionId: 1 Cid: 43e0     Peb: 00bc5000 ParentCid: 0338
           DirBase: 554ab7000 ObjectTable: ffffda8f62811d80 HandleCount: 823.
           Image: explorer.exe
           VadRoot ffffc806912337f0 Vads 505 Clone 0 Private 5088. Modified 2146. Locked 0.
       ...

   lkd> !vad ffffc8068ae1e470
   VAD           Level     Start       End Commit
   ffffc80689bc52b0 9         640      64f      0 Mapped                 READWRITE
   Pagefile section, shared commit 0x10
   ffffc80689be6900 8         650      651      0 Mapped                 READONLY
   Pagefile section, shared commit 0x2
   ffffc80689bc4290 9         660      675      0 Mapped                 READONLY
   Pagefile section, shared commit 0x16
   ffffc8068ae1f320 7         680      6ff     32 Private                READWRITE
   ffffc80689b290b0 9         700       701      2 Private               READWRITE
   ffffc80688da04f0 8         710       711      2 Private               READWRITE
   ffffc80682795760 6         720       723      0 Mapped                READONLY
   Pagefile section, shared commit 0x4
   ffffc80688d85670 10        730       731      0 Mapped                READONLY
   Pagefile section, shared commit 0x2
   ffffc80689bdd9e0 9         740       741      2 Private               READWRITE
   ffffc80688da57b0 8         750       755      0 Mapped                READONLY
   \Windows\en-US\explorer.exe.mui
   ...
   Total VADs: 574, average level: 8, maximum depth: 10
   Total private commit: 0x3420 pages (53376 KB)
   Total shared commit: 0x478 pages (4576 KB)

Rotate VADs
A video card driver must typically copy data from the user-mode graphics application to various other
system memory, including the video card memory and the AGP port’s memory, both of which have
different caching attributes as well as addresses. To quickly allow these different views of memory to be
mapped into a process, and to support the different cache attributes, the memory manager implements
rotate VADs, which allow video drivers to transfer data directly by using the GPU and to rotate unneeded
memory in and out of the process view pages on demand. Figure 5-30 shows an example of how the
same virtual address can rotate between video RAM and virtual memory.

FIGURE 5-30   Rotate VADs.

NUMA
    Each new release of Windows provides new enhancements to the memory manager to make better use
    of non-uniform memory architecture (NUMA) machines, such as large server systems as well as Intel
    i7 and AMD Opteron SMP workstations. The NUMA support in the memory manager adds intelligent
    knowledge of node information such as location, topology, and access costs to allow applications and
    drivers to take advantage of NUMA capabilities, while abstracting the underlying hardware details.

       When the memory manager is initializing, it calls the MiComputeNumaCosts function to perform
    various page and cache operations on different nodes. It then computes the time it took for those
    operations to complete. Based on this information, it builds a node graph of access costs (the distance
    between a node and any other node on the system). When the system requires pages for a given
    operation, it consults the graph to choose the most optimal node (that is, the closest). If no memory is
    available on that node, it chooses the next closest node, and so on.

       Although the memory manager ensures that, whenever possible, memory allocations come from
    the ideal processor’s node (the ideal node) of the thread making the allocation, it also provides func-
    tions that allow applications to choose their own node, such as the VirtualAllocExNuma, Create-
    FileMappingNuma, MapViewOfFileExNuma, and AllocateUserPhysicalPagesNuma APIs.

       The ideal node isn’t used only when applications allocate memory but also during kernel operation
    and page faults. For example, when a thread running on a non-ideal processor takes a page fault, the
    memory manager won’t use the current node. Instead, it will allocate memory from the thread’s ideal
    node. Although this might result in slower access time while the thread is still running on this CPU,
    overall memory access will be optimized as the thread migrates back to its ideal node. In any case, if
    the ideal node is out of resources, the closest node to the ideal node is chosen and not a random other
    node. Just like user-mode applications, however, drivers can specify their own node when using APIs
    such as MmAllocatePagesForMdlEx or MmAllocateContiguousMemorySpecifyCacheNode.

       Various memory manager pools and data structures are also optimized to take advantage of NUMA
    nodes. The memory manager tries to evenly use physical memory from all the nodes on the system to
    hold the non-paged pool. When a non-paged pool allocation is made, the memory manager uses the
    ideal node as an index to choose a virtual memory address range inside non-paged pool that cor-
    responds to physical memory belonging to this node. In addition, per-NUMA node pool free lists are
    created to efficiently leverage these types of memory configurations. Apart from non-paged pool,
    the system cache and system PTEs are also similarly allocated across all nodes, as well as the memory
    manager’s look-aside lists.

       Finally, when the system needs to zero pages, it does so in parallel across different NUMA nodes by
    creating threads with NUMA affinities that correspond to the nodes in which the physical memory is
    located. The logical prefetcher and SuperFetch (described in the section “Proactive memory manage-
    ment [SuperFetch]”) also use the ideal node of the target process when prefetching, while soft page
    faults cause pages to migrate to the ideal node of the faulting thread.

Section objects
   As noted earlier in this chapter in the “Shared memory and mapped files” section, the section object,
   which the Windows subsystem calls a file mapping object, represents a block of memory that two or
   more processes can share. A section object can be mapped to the paging file or to another file on disk.

      The executive uses sections to load executable images into memory, and the cache manager uses them
   to access data in a cached file. (See Chapter 14 in Part 2 for more information on how the cache manager
   uses section objects.) You can also use section objects to map a file into a process address space. The file can
   then be accessed as a large array by mapping different views of the section object and reading or writing to
   memory rather than to the file—an activity called mapped file I/O. When the program accesses an invalid
   page (one not in physical memory), a page fault occurs and the memory manager automatically brings
   the page into memory from the mapped file or page file. If the application modifies the page, the memory
   manager writes the changes back to the file during its normal paging operations. (Alternatively, the applica-
   tion can flush a view explicitly by using the Windows FlushViewOfFile function.)

       Like other objects, section objects are allocated and deallocated by the object manager. The object
   manager creates and initializes an object header, which it uses to manage the objects; the memory
   manager defines the body of the section object. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more on the object man-
   ager). The memory manager also implements services that user-mode threads can call to retrieve and
   change the attributes stored in the body of section objects. The structure of a section object is shown
   in Figure 5-31. Table 5-14 summarizes the unique attributes stored in section objects.

   FIGURE 5-31       A section object.

   TABLE 5-14      Section object body attributes
    Attribute             Purpose

    Maximum size          This is the largest size to which the section can grow in bytes. If mapping a file, this is the maximum
                          size of the file.

    Page protection       This is page-based memory protection assigned to all pages in the section when it is created.

    Paging file or        This indicates whether the section is created empty (backed by the paging file—as explained earlier,
    mapped file           page-file-backed sections use page-file resources only when the pages need to be written out to
                          disk) or loaded with a file (backed by the mapped file).

    Based or not          This indicates whether a section is a based section, which must appear at the same virtual address
    based                 for all processes sharing it, or a non-based section, which can appear at different virtual addresses
                          for different processes.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing section objects
       You can use Process Explorer from Sysinternals to see files mapped by a process. Follow these steps:

           1.   Open the View menu, choose Lower Pane View, and select DLLs.

           2.   Open the View menu, choose Select Columns, choose DLL, and enable the Mapping
                Type column.

           3.   Notice the files marked as Data in the Mapping column. These are mapped files rather
                than DLLs and other files the image loader loads as modules. Section objects that are
                backed by a page file are indicated in the Name column as <Pagefile Backed>. Other-
                wise, the file name is shown.

           Another way to view section objects is to switch to handle view (open the View menu, choose
       Lower Pane View, and select Handles) and look for objects of type Section. In the following
       screenshot, the object name (if it exists) is shown. This is not the file name backing the section
       (if any); it’s the name given to the section in the object manager’s namespace. (See Chapter 8 in
       Part 2 for more on the object manager.) Double-clicking the entry shows more information on
       the object, such as the number of open handles and its security descriptor.

    The data structures maintained by the memory manager that describe mapped sections are shown
in Figure 5-32. These structures ensure that data read from mapped files is consistent regardless of the
type of access (open file, mapped file, and so on). For each open file (represented by a file object), there
is a single section object pointers structure. This structure is the key to maintaining data consistency
for all types of file access as well as to providing caching for files. The section object pointers structure
points to one or two control areas. One control area is used to map the file when it is accessed as a
data file and the other is used to map the file when it is run as an executable image. A control area in
turn points to subsection structures that describe the mapping information for each section of the file
(read-only, read/write, copy-on-write, and so on). The control area also points to a segment structure
allocated in paged pool, which in turn points to the prototype PTEs used to map to the actual pages
mapped by the section object. As described earlier in this chapter, process page tables point to these
prototype PTEs, which in turn map the pages being referenced.

FIGURE 5-32   Internal section structures.

       Although Windows ensures that any process that accesses (reads or writes) a file will always see
    the same consistent data, there is one case in which two copies of pages of a file can reside in physical
    memory. (Even in this case, all accessors get the latest copy and data consistency is maintained.) This
    duplication can happen when an image file has been accessed as a data file (having been read or writ-
    ten) and is then run as an executable image. (An example might be when an image is linked and then
    run; the linker had the file open for data access, and then when the image was run, the image loader
    mapped it as an executable.) Internally, the following actions occur:

       1.   If the executable file was created using the file-mapping APIs or the cache manager, a data
            control area is created to represent the data pages in the image file being read or written.

       2.   When the image is run and the section object is created to map the image as an executable,
            the memory manager finds that the section object pointers for the image file point to a data
            control area and flushes the section. This step is necessary to ensure that any modified pages
            have been written to disk before accessing the image through the image control area.

       3.   The memory manager creates a control area for the image file.

       4.   As the image begins execution, its (read-only) pages are faulted in from the image file or cop-
            ied directly over from the data file if the corresponding data page is resident.

        Because the pages mapped by the data control area might still be resident (on the standby list), this
    is the one case in which two copies of the same data are in two different pages in memory. However,
    this duplication doesn’t result in a data consistency issue. This is because, as mentioned, the data con-
    trol area has already been flushed to disk, so the pages read from the image are up to date (and these
    pages are never written back to disk).

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing control areas
       To find the address of the control area structures for a file, you must first get the address of the
       file object in question. You can obtain this address through the kernel debugger by dumping the
       process handle table with the !handle command and noting the object address of a file object.
       Although the kernel debugger !file command displays the basic information in a file object, it
       doesn’t display the pointer to the section object pointers structure. Then, using the dt command,
       format the file object to get the address of the section object pointers structure. This structure
       consists of three pointers: a pointer to the data control area, a pointer to the shared cache map
       (explained in Chapter 14 in Part 2), and a pointer to the image control area. From the section ob-
       ject pointers structure, you can obtain the address of a control area for the file (if one exists) and
       feed that address into the !ca command.

          For example, if you open a PowerPoint file and use !handle to display the handle table for
       that process, you will find an open handle to the PowerPoint file (you can do a text search). (For
       more information on using !handle, see the “Object manager” section in Chapter 8 in Part 2 or
       the debugger documentation.)
       lkd> !process 0 0 powerpnt.exe
       PROCESS ffffc8068913e080

    SessionId: 1 Cid: 2b64      Peb: 01249000 ParentCid: 1d38
    DirBase: 252e25000 ObjectTable: ffffda8f49269c40 HandleCount: 1915.
    Image: POWERPNT.EXE
lkd> .process /p ffffc8068913e080
Implicit process is now ffffc806'8913e080
lkd> !handle
...
0c08: Object: ffffc8068f56a630 GrantedAccess: 00120089 Entry: ffffda8f491d0020
Object: ffffc8068f56a630 Type: (ffffc8068256cb00) File
    ObjectHeader: ffffc8068f56a600 (new version)
        HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 30839
        Directory Object: 00000000 Name: \WindowsInternals\7thEdition\Chapter05\
diagrams.pptx {HarddiskVolume2}
...

   Taking the file object address (FFFFC8068F56A630) and formatting it with dt results in this:
lkd> dt nt!_file_object ffffc8068f56a630
    +0x000 Type             : 0n5
    +0x002 Size             : 0n216
    +0x008 DeviceObject     : 0xffffc806'8408cb40 _DEVICE_OBJECT
    +0x010 Vpb              : 0xffffc806'82feba00 _VPB
    +0x018 FsContext        : 0xffffda8f'5137cbd0 Void
    +0x020 FsContext2       : 0xffffda8f'4366d590 Void
    +0x028 SectionObjectPointer : 0xffffc806'8ec0c558 _SECTION_OBJECT_POINTERS
...

   Taking the address of the section object pointers structure and formatting it with dt results in
this:
lkd> dt nt!_section_object_pointers 0xffffc806'8ec0c558
   +0x000 DataSectionObject : 0xffffc806'8e838c10 Void
   +0x008 SharedCacheMap   : 0xffffc806'8d967bd0 Void
   +0x010 ImageSectionObject : (null)

   Finally, you can use !ca to display the control area using the address:
lkd> !ca 0xffffc806'8e838c10
ControlArea @ ffffc8068e838c10
  Segment       ffffda8f4d97fdc0 Flink       ffffc8068ecf97b8 Blink
ffffc8068ecf97b8
  Section Ref                  1 Pfn Ref                   58 Mapped Views            2
  User Ref                     0 WaitForDel                 0 Flush Count             0
  File Object ffffc8068e5d3d50 ModWriteCount                0 System Views            2
  WritableRefs                 0
  Flags (8080) File WasPurged  \WindowsInternalsBook\7thEdition\Chapter05\diagrams.pptx

Segment @ ffffda8f4d97fdc0
  ControlArea     ffffc8068e838c10        ExtendInfo       0000000000000000
  Total Ptes                    80
  Segment Size               80000        Committed                          0
  Flags (c0000) ProtectionMask

        Subsection 1 @ ffffc8068e838c90
          ControlArea ffffc8068e838c10        Starting Sector            0   Number Of Sectors      58
          Base Pte     ffffda8f48eb6d40       Ptes In Subsect           58   Unused Ptes             0
          Flags                       d       Sector Offset              0   Protection              6
          Accessed
          Flink        ffffc8068bb7fcf0       Blink    ffffc8068bb7fcf0      MappedViews             2

        Subsection 2 @ ffffc8068c2e05b0
          ControlArea ffffc8068e838c10        Starting Sector           58   Number Of Sectors     28
          Base Pte     ffffda8f3cc45000       Ptes In Subsect           28   Unused Ptes          1d8
          Flags                       d       Sector Offset              0   Protection             6
          Accessed
          Flink        ffffc8068c2e0600       Blink    ffffc8068c2e0600      MappedViews             1

            Another technique is to display the list of all control areas with the !memusage command. The
        following excerpt is from the output of this command. (The command might take a long time to
        complete on a system with a large amount of memory.)
        lkd> !memusage
         loading PFN database
        loading (100% complete)

        Compiling memory usage data (99% Complete).

                     Zeroed:       98533 ( 394132 kb)
                       Free:        1405 (    5620 kb)
                    Standby:      331221 ( 1324884 kb)
                   Modified:       83806 ( 335224 kb)
            ModifiedNoWrite:         116 (     464 kb)
               Active/Valid:     1556154 ( 6224616 kb)
                 Transition:           5 (      20 kb)
                  SLIST/Bad:        1614 (    6456 kb)
                    Unknown:           0 (       0 kb)
                      TOTAL:     2072854 ( 8291416 kb)

        Dangling Yes Commit:      130 (     520 kb)
         Dangling No Commit:   514812 ( 2059248 kb)
          Building kernel map
          Finished building kernel map

         (Master1 0 for 1c0)

         (Master1 0 for e80)

         (Master1 0 for ec0)

         (Master1 0 for f00)
        Scanning PFN database - (02% complete)

         (Master1 0 for de80)
        Scanning PFN database - (100% complete)

  Usage Summary (in Kb):
Control       Valid Standby Dirty Shared Locked PageTables name
ffffffffd 1684540      0      0      0 1684540     0    AWE
ffff8c0b7e4797d0    64      0      0       0     0    0 mapped_file( Microsoft-
Windows-Kernel-PnP%4Configuration.evtx )
ffff8c0b7e481650    0      4     0       0     0     0 mapped_file( No name for file )
ffff8c0b7e493c00     0     40      0       0     0    0 mapped_file( FSD-{ED5680AF-
0543-4367-A331-850F30190B44}.FSD )
ffff8c0b7e4a1b30     8     12      0       0     0    0 mapped_file( msidle.dll )
ffff8c0b7e4a7c40   128      0      0       0     0    0 mapped_file( Microsoft-
Windows-Diagnosis-PCW%4Operational.evtx )
ffff8c0b7e4a9010    16      8      0     16      0    0 mapped_file( netjoin.dll
)8a04db00     ...
ffff8c0b7f8cc360 8212       0      0       0     0    0 mapped_file( OUTLOOK.EXE )
ffff8c0b7f8cd1a0    52     28      0       0     0    0 mapped_file( verdanab.ttf )
ffff8c0b7f8ce910    0      4     0       0     0     0 mapped_file( No name for file )
ffff8c0b7f8d3590    0      4     0       0     0     0 mapped_file( No name for file )
…

   The Control column points to the control area structure that describes the mapped file. You
can display control areas, segments, and subsections with the kernel debugger !ca command.
For example, to dump the control area for the mapped file Outlook.exe in this example, type the
!ca command followed by the Control column number, as shown here:

lkd> !ca ffff8c0b7f8cc360

ControlArea @ ffff8c0b7f8cc360
  Segment      ffffdf08d8a55670      Flink        ffff8c0b834f1fd0     Blink
ffff8c0b834f1fd0
  Section Ref                  1     Pfn Ref                  806    Mapped Views             1
  User Ref                     2     WaitForDel                 0    Flush Count           c5a0
  File Object ffff8c0b7f0e94e0       ModWriteCount              0    System Views          ffff
  WritableRefs          80000161
  Flags (a0) Image File

      \Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Office\root\Office16\OUTLOOK.EXE

Segment @ ffffdf08d8a55670
  ControlArea     ffff8c0b7f8cc360       BasedAddress    0000000000be0000
  Total Ptes                  1609
  Segment Size             1609000       Committed                      0
  Image Commit                  f4       Image Info      ffffdf08d8a556b8
  ProtoPtes       ffffdf08dab6b000
  Flags (c20000) ProtectionMask

Subsection 1 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc3e0
  ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360       Starting Sector           0    Number Of Sectors      2
  Base Pte     ffffdf08dab6b000      Ptes In Subsect           1    Unused Ptes            0
  Flags                       2      Sector Offset             0    Protection             1

Subsection 2 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc418
  ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360       Starting Sector           2    Number Of Sectors 7b17

              Base Pte     ffffdf08dab6b008      Ptes In Subsect          f63   Unused Ptes              0
              Flags                       6      Sector Offset              0   Protection               3

         Subsection 3 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc450
           ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360          Starting Sector         7b19   Number Of Sectors 19a4
           Base Pte     ffffdf08dab72b20         Ptes In Subsect          335   Unused Ptes          0
           Flags                       2         Sector Offset              0   Protection           1

         Subsection 4 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc488
           ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360          Starting Sector         94bd   Number Of Sectors      764
           Base Pte     ffffdf08dab744c8         Ptes In Subsect           f2   Unused Ptes              0
           Flags                       a         Sector Offset              0   Protection               5

         Subsection 5 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc4c0
           ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360          Starting Sector         9c21   Number Of Sectors        1
           Base Pte     ffffdf08dab74c58         Ptes In Subsect            1   Unused Ptes              0
           Flags                       a         Sector Offset              0   Protection               5

         Subsection 6 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc4f8
           ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360          Starting Sector         9c22   Number Of Sectors        1
           Base Pte     ffffdf08dab74c60         Ptes In Subsect            1   Unused Ptes              0
           Flags                       a         Sector Offset              0   Protection               5

         Subsection 7 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc530
           ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360          Starting Sector         9c23   Number Of Sectors      c62
           Base Pte     ffffdf08dab74c68         Ptes In Subsect          18d   Unused Ptes              0
           Flags                       2         Sector Offset              0   Protection               1

         Subsection 8 @ ffff8c0b7f8cc568
           ControlArea ffff8c0b7f8cc360          Starting Sector         a885   Number Of Sectors      771
           Base Pte     ffffdf08dab758d0         Ptes In Subsect           ef   Unused Ptes              0
           Flags                       2         Sector Offset              0   Protection               1

Working sets
      Now that you’ve looked at how Windows keeps track of physical memory and how much memory it
      can support, we’ll explain how Windows keeps a subset of virtual addresses in physical memory.

         As you’ll recall, a subset of virtual pages resident in physical memory is called a working set. There
      are three kinds of working sets:

         ■■    Process working sets    These contain the pages referenced by threads within a single process.
         ■■    System working sets These contain the resident subset of the pageable system code (for
               example, Ntoskrnl.exe and drivers), paged pool, and the system cache.
         ■■    Session’s working set Each session has a working set that contains the resident subset of the
               kernel-mode session-specific data structures allocated by the kernel-mode part of the Windows
               subsystem (Win32k.sys), session paged pool, session mapped views, and other session-space
               device drivers.

  Before examining the details of each type of working set, let’s look at the overall policy for deciding
which pages are brought into physical memory and how long they remain.

Demand paging
The Windows memory manager uses a demand-paging algorithm with clustering to load pages into
memory. When a thread receives a page fault, the memory manager loads into memory the faulted
page plus a small number of pages preceding and/or following it. This strategy attempts to minimize
the number of paging I/Os a thread will incur. Because programs—especially large ones—tend to ex-
ecute in small regions of their address space at any given time, loading clusters of virtual pages reduces
the number of disk reads. For page faults that reference data pages in images, the cluster size is three
pages. For all other page faults, the cluster size is seven pages.

   However, a demand-paging policy can result in a process incurring many page faults when its
threads first begin executing or when they resume execution at a later point. To optimize the startup of
a process (and the system), Windows has an intelligent prefetch engine called the logical prefetcher, de-
scribed in the next section. Further optimization and prefetching is performed by another component,
called SuperFetch, described later in the chapter.

Logical prefetcher and ReadyBoot
During a typical system boot or application startup, the order of faults is such that some pages are
brought in from one part of a file, then perhaps from a distant part of the same file, then from a dif-
ferent file, then perhaps from a directory, and then again from the first file. This jumping around slows
down each access considerably. Indeed, analysis shows that disk seek times are a dominant factor
in slowing boot and application startup times. By prefetching batches of pages all at once, you can
achieve a more sensible ordering of access without excessive backtracking, thus improving the overall
time for system and application startup. The pages that are needed can be known in advance because
of the high correlation in accesses across boots or application starts.

   The prefetcher tries to speed the boot process and application startup by monitoring the data
and code accessed by boot and application startups and using that information at the beginning of
a subsequent boot or application startup to read in the code and data. When the prefetcher is active,
the memory manager notifies the prefetcher code in the kernel of page faults—those that require that
data be read from disk (hard faults) and those that simply require data already in memory to be added
to a process’s working set (soft faults). The prefetcher monitors the first 10 seconds of application
startup. For boot, the prefetcher by default traces from system start through the 30 seconds following
the start of the user’s shell (typically Explorer) or, failing that, through 60 seconds following Windows
service initialization or through 120 seconds, whichever comes first.

    The trace assembled in the kernel notes faults taken on the NTFS master file table (MFT) metadata
file (if the application accesses files or directories on NTFS volumes), referenced files, and referenced
directories. With the trace assembled, the kernel prefetcher code waits for requests from the prefetcher
component of the Superfetch service (%SystemRoot%\System32\Sysmain.dll), running in an instance of
Svchost. The Superfetch service is responsible for both the logical prefetching component in the kernel

      and the SuperFetch component that we’ll talk about later. The prefetcher signals the \KernelObjects\
      PrefetchTracesReady event to inform the Superfetch service that it can now query trace data.

         Note You can enable or disable prefetching of the boot or application startups by editing
         the DWORD registry value EnablePrefetcher in the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
         Control\Session Manager\Memory Management\PrefetchParameters key. Set it to 0 to dis-
         able prefetching altogether, 1 to enable prefetching of only applications, 2 for prefetching
         of boot only, and 3 for both boot and applications.

         The Superfetch service (which hosts the logical prefetcher, although it is a completely separate
      component from the actual SuperFetch functionality) performs a call to the internal NtQuerySystem-
      Information system call requesting the trace data. The logical prefetcher post-processes the trace
      data, combining it with previously collected data, and writes it to a file in the %SystemRoot%\Prefetch
      folder. (See Figure 5-33.) The file’s name is the name of the application to which the trace applies followed
      by a dash and the hexadecimal representation of a hash of the file’s path. The file has a .pf extension.
      An example would be NOTEPAD.EXE-9FB27C0E.PF.

      FIGURE 5-33   Prefetch folder.

         There is an exception to the file name rule for images that host other components, including the
      Microsoft Management Console (%SystemRoot%\System32\Mmc.exe), the service hosting process
      (%SystemRoot%\System32\Svchost.exe), the RunDLL component (%SystemRoot%\System32\Rundll32.exe),
      and Dllhost (%SystemRoot%\System32\Dllhost.exe). Because add-on components are specified on the
      command line for these applications, the prefetcher includes the command line in the generated hash.

Thus, invocations of these applications with different components on the command line will result in
different traces.

   For a system boot, a different mechanism is used, called ReadyBoot. ReadyBoot tries to optimize I/O
operations by creating large and efficient I/O reads and storing the data in RAM. When system compo-
nents require the data, it’s serviced through the stored RAM. This especially benefits mechanical disks,
but can be also useful for SSDs. Information on the files to prefetch is stored after boot in the ReadyBoot
subdirectory of the Prefetch directory shown in Figure 5-33. Once boot is complete, the cached data in
RAM is deleted. For very fast SSDs, ReadyBoot is off by default because its gains are marginal, if any.

   When the system boots or an application starts, the prefetcher is called to give it an opportunity
to prefetch. The prefetcher looks in the prefetch directory to see if a trace file exists for the prefetch
scenario in question. If it does, the prefetcher calls NTFS to prefetch any MFT metadata file references,
reads in the contents of each of the directories referenced, and finally opens each file referenced. It
then calls the memory manager function MmPrefetchPages to read in any data and code specified in
the trace that’s not already in memory. The memory manager initiates all the reads asynchronously and
then waits for them to complete before letting an application’s startup continue.

   EXPERIMENT: Watching prefetch file reads and writes
   If you capture a trace of application startup with Process Monitor from Sysinternals on a client
   edition of Windows (Windows Server editions disable prefetching by default), you can see the
   prefetcher check for and read the application’s prefetch file (if it exists). In addition, you can see
   the prefetcher write out a new copy of the file roughly 10 seconds after the application starts.
   Here is a capture of Notepad startup with an Include filter set to prefetch so that Process
   Monitor shows only accesses to the %SystemRoot%\Prefetch directory:

            Lines 0–3 show the Notepad prefetch file being read in the context of the Notepad process
         during its startup. Lines 7–19 (which have time stamps 10 seconds later than the first four lines)
         show the Superfetch service—running in the context of a Svchost process—writing out the
         updated prefetch file.

         To minimize seeking even further, every three days or so, during system idle periods, the Superfetch
      service organizes a list of files and directories in the order that they are referenced during a boot or
      application start and stores it in a file named %SystemRoot%\Prefetch\Layout.ini (see Figure 5-34).
      This list also includes frequently accessed files tracked by Superfetch.

      FIGURE 5-34   Prefetch defragmentation layout file.

          It then launches the system defragmenter with a command-line option that tells the defragmenter
      to defragment based on the contents of the file instead of performing a full defrag. The defragmenter
      finds a contiguous area on each volume large enough to hold all the listed files and directories that
      reside on that volume and then moves them in their entirety into that area so that they are stored one
      after the other. Thus, future prefetch operations will even be more efficient because all the data read
      in is now stored physically on the disk in the order it will be read. Because the files defragmented for
      prefetching usually number only in the hundreds, this defragmentation is much faster than full-volume
      defragmentations.

      Placement policy
      When a thread receives a page fault, the memory manager must determine where in physical memory
      to put the virtual page. The set of rules it uses to determine the best position is called a placement
      policy. Windows considers the size of CPU memory caches when choosing page frames to minimize
      unnecessary thrashing of the cache.

    If physical memory is full when a page fault occurs, Windows uses a replacement policy to deter-
mine which virtual page must be removed from memory to make room for the new page. Common re-
placement policies include least recently used (LRU) and first in, first out (FIFO). The LRU algorithm (also
known as the clock algorithm, as implemented in most versions of UNIX) requires the virtual memory
system to track when a page in memory is used. When a new page frame is required, the page that
hasn’t been used for the greatest amount of time is removed from the working set. The FIFO algorithm
is somewhat simpler: It removes the page that has been in physical memory for the greatest amount of
time, regardless of how often it’s been used.

   Replacement policies can be further characterized as either global or local. A global replacement
policy allows a page fault to be satisfied by any page frame, regardless of whether that frame is owned
by another process. For example, a global replacement policy using the FIFO algorithm would locate
the page that has been in memory the longest and would free it to satisfy a page fault. A local replace-
ment policy would limit its search for the oldest page to the set of pages already owned by the process
that incurred the page fault. Be aware that global replacement policies make processes vulnerable to
the behavior of other processes. For example, an ill-behaved application can undermine the entire
operating system by inducing excessive paging activity in all processes.

   Windows implements a combination of local and global replacement policies. When a working set
reaches its limit and/or needs to be trimmed because of demands for physical memory, the memory
manager removes pages from working sets until it has determined there are enough free pages.

Working set management
Every process starts with a default working set minimum of 50 pages and a working set maximum of
345 pages. Although it has little effect, you can change these working set limits with the Windows
SetProcessWorkingSetSize function, although you must have the increase scheduling priority (SeIn-
creaseBasePriorityPrivilege) privilege to do this. However, unless you have configured the pro-
cess to use hard working set limits, these limits are ignored. That is, the memory manager will permit
a process to grow beyond its maximum if it is paging heavily and there is ample memory. (Conversely
the memory manager will shrink a process below its working set minimum if it is not paging and there
is a high demand for physical memory on the system.) You can set hard working set limits using the
SetProcessWorkingSetSizeEx function along with the QUOTA_LIMITS_HARDWS_MAX_ENABLE flag, but
it is almost always better to let the system manage your working set.

   On 32 bit systems, the maximum working set size can’t exceed the system-wide maximum calcu-
lated at system initialization time, stored in the MiMaximumWorkingSet kernel variable. On x64 systems,
physical memory would be the practical upper limit, as the virtual address space is so vast. The working
set maximums are listed in Table 5-15.
TABLE 5-15   Upper limit for working set maximums
Windows Version                                             Working Set Maximum

x86, ARM                                                    2 GB—64 KB (0x7FFF0000)

x86 versions of Windows booted with increaseuserva          2 GB—64 KB + user virtual address increase

x64 (Windows 8, Server 2012)                                8,192 GB (8 TB)

X64 (Windows 8.1, 10, Server 2012 R2, 2016)                 128 TB

         When a page fault occurs, the process’s working set limits and the amount of free memory on
      the system are examined. If conditions permit, the memory manager allows a process to grow to its
      working set maximum (or beyond if the process does not have a hard working set limit and there are
      enough free pages available). However, if memory is tight, Windows replaces rather than adds pages in
      a working set when a fault occurs.

          Windows attempts to keep memory available by writing modified pages to disk. Still, when modified
      pages are being generated at a very high rate, more memory is required to meet memory demands.
      Therefore, when physical memory runs low, the working set manager, a routine that runs in the context
      of the balance set manager system thread (described in the next section), initiates automatic working
      set trimming to increase the amount of free memory available in the system. You can also initiate work-
      ing set trimming of your own process—for example, after process initialization—with the aforemen-
      tioned Windows SetProcessWorkingSetSizeEx function.

         The working set manager examines available memory and decides which, if any, working sets need
      to be trimmed. If there is ample memory, the working set manager calculates how many pages could
      be removed from working sets if needed. If trimming is needed, it looks at working sets that are above
      their minimum setting. It also dynamically adjusts the rate at which it examines working sets and
      arranges the list of processes that are candidates to be trimmed into an optimal order. For example,
      processes with many pages that have not been accessed recently are examined first; larger processes
      that have been idle longer are considered before smaller processes that are running more often; the
      process running the foreground application is considered last; and so on.

         When the working set manager finds processes that are using more than their minimums, it looks
      for pages to remove from the working sets, making the pages available for other uses. If the amount of
      free memory is still too low, the working set manager continues removing pages from processes’ work-
      ing sets until it achieves a minimum number of free pages on the system.

          The working set manager tries to remove pages that haven’t been accessed recently by checking the
      accessed bit in the hardware PTE to see whether a page has been accessed. If the bit is clear, the page
      is said to be aged. That is, a count is incremented indicating that the page hasn’t been referenced since
      the last working set trim scan. Later, the age of pages is used to locate candidate pages to remove from
      the working set.

         If the hardware PTE accessed bit is set, the working set manager clears it and goes on to examine
      the next page in the working set. In this way, if the accessed bit is clear the next time the working set
      manager examines the page, it knows that the page hasn’t been accessed since the last time it was
      examined. This scan for pages to remove continues through the working set list until either the number
      of desired pages has been removed or the scan has returned to the starting point. The next time the
      working set is trimmed, the scan picks up where it left off last.

         EXPERIMENT: Viewing process working set sizes
         You can use Performance Monitor to examine process working set sizes by looking at the perfor-
         mance counters shown in the following table. Several other process viewer utilities (such as Task
         Manager and Process Explorer) also display the process working set size.

    Counter                        Description

    Process: Working Set           This notes the current size of the selected process’s working set in bytes.

    Process: Working Set Peak      This tracks the peak size of the selected process’s working set in bytes.

    Process: Page Faults/Sec       This indicates the number of page faults for the process that occur each
                                   second.

   You can also get the total of all the process working sets by selecting the _Total process in
the instance box in Performance Monitor. This process isn’t real; it’s simply a total of the process-
specific counters for all processes currently running on the system. The total you see is larger
than the actual RAM being used, however, because the size of each process working set includes
pages being shared by other processes. Thus, if two or more processes share a page, the page is
counted in each process’s working set.

EXPERIMENT: Working set versus virtual size
Earlier in this chapter, you used the TestLimit utility to create two processes: one with a large
amount of memory that was merely reserved, and one in which the memory was private commit-
ted. You then examined the difference between them with Process Explorer. Now we will create a
third TestLimit process—one that not only commits the memory but also accesses it, thus bring-
ing it into its working set. Follow these steps:

    1.   Create a new TestLimit process.
         C:\Users\pavely>testlimit -d 1 -c 800

         Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
         Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
         Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

         Process ID: 13008

         Leaking private bytes with touch 1 MB at a time...
         Leaked 800 MB of private memory (800 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 0
         The operation completed successfully.

    2.   Open Process Explorer.

    3.   Open the View menu, choose Select Columns, and click the Process Memory tab.

    4.   Enable the Private Bytes, Virtual Size, Working Set Size, WS Shareable Bytes, and
         WS Private Bytes counters.

    5.   Find the three instances of TestLimit, as shown in the display:

          The new TestLimit process is the third one shown, PID 13008. It is the only one of the three that
       actually referenced the memory allocated, so it is the only one with a working set that reflects
       the size of the test allocation.

          Note that this result is possible only on a system with enough RAM to allow the process to
       grow to such a size. Even on this system, not quite all of the private bytes (821,888 K) are in the
       WS Private portion of the working set. A small number of the private pages have been pushed
       out of the process working set due to replacement or have not been paged in yet.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing the working set list in the debugger
       You can view the individual entries in the working set by using the kernel debugger !wsle command.
       The following example shows a partial output of the working set list of WinDbg (32-bit system):
       lkd> !wsle 7

       Working Set Instance @ c0802d50
       Working Set Shared @ c0802e30

           FirstFree         f7d    FirstDynamic            6
           LastEntry        203d    NextSlot                6   LastInitialized         2063
           NonDirect           0    HashTable               0   HashTableSize              0

       Reading the WSLE data .............................................................
       .......

       Virtual Address                Age   Locked    ReferenceCount
               c0603009               0         0          1
               c0602009               0         0          1
               c0601009               0         0          1
               c0600009               0         0          1
               c0802d59               6         0          1
               c0604019               0         0          1
               c0800409               2         0          1
               c0006209               1         0          1
               77290a05               5         0          1
               7739aa05               5         0          1
               c0014209               1         0          1

            c0004209              1         0          1
            72a37805              4         0          1
              b50409              2         0          1
              b52809              4         0          1
            7731dc05              6         0          1
              bbec09              6         0          1
              bbfc09              6         0          1
            6c801805              4         0          1
            772a1405              2         0          1
              944209              1         0          1
            77316a05              5         0          1
            773a4209              1         0          1
            77317405              2         0          1
            772d6605              3         0          1
              a71409              2         0          1
              c1d409              2         0          1
            772d4a05              5         0          1
            77342c05              6         0          1
            6c80f605              3         0          1
            77320405              2         0          1
            77323205              1         0          1
            77321405              2         0          1
            7ffe0215              1         0          2
              a5fc09              6         0          1
            7735cc05              6         0          1
   …

      Notice that some entries in the working set list are page table pages (the ones with addresses
   greater than 0xC0000000), some are from system DLLs (the ones in the 0x7nnnnnnn range), and
   some are from the code of Windbg.exe itself.

Balance set manager and swapper
Working set expansion and trimming take place in the context of a system thread called the balance set
manager (KeBalanceSetManager function). The balance set manager is created during system initial-
ization. Although the balance set manager is technically part of the kernel, it calls the memory man-
ager’s working set manager (MmWorkingSetManager) to perform working set analysis and adjustment.

    The balance set manager waits for two different event objects: an event that is signaled when a
periodic timer set to fire once per second expires and an internal working set manager event that the
memory manager signals at various points when it determines that working sets need to be adjusted.
For example, if the system is experiencing a high page fault rate or the free list is too small, the memory
manager wakes up the balance set manager so that it will call the working set manager to begin trim-
ming working sets. When memory is more plentiful, the working set manager permits faulting process-
es to gradually increase the size of their working sets by faulting pages back into memory. However, the
working sets will grow only as needed.

       When the balance set manager wakes up because its 1-second timer has expired, it takes the follow-
    ing steps:

       1.   If the system supports Virtual Secure Mode (VSM, Windows 10 and Server 2016), then the
            secure kernel is called to do its periodic housekeeping (VslSecureKernelPeriodicTick).

       2.   Calls a routine to adjust IRP credits to optimize the usage of the per-processor look-aside lists
            used in IRP completion (IoAdjustIrpCredits). This allows better scalability when certain
            processors are under heavy I/O load. (See Chapter 6 for more on IRPs.)

       3.   Checks the look-aside lists and adjusts their depths (if necessary) to improve access time and
            reduce pool usage and pool fragmentation (ExAdjustLookasideDepth).

       4.   Calls to adjust the Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) buffer pool size to use ETW memory buf-
            fers more efficiently (EtwAdjustTraceBuffers). (For more on ETW, see Chapter 8 in Part 2.)

       5.   Calls the memory manager’s working set manager. The working set manager has its own inter-
            nal counters that regulate when to perform working set trimming and how aggressively to trim.

       6.   Enforces execution time for jobs (PsEnforceExecutionLimits).

       7.   Every eighth time the balance set manager wakes up because its 1-second timer has expired,
            it signals an event that wakes up another system thread called the swapper (KeSwapProcess-
            OrStack). It attempts to outswap kernel stacks for threads that have not executed for a long
            time. The swapper thread (which runs at priority 23) looks for threads that have been in a user
            mode wait state for 15 seconds. If it finds one, it puts the thread’s kernel stack in transition
            (moving the pages to the modified or standby lists) to reclaim its physical memory, operating
            on the principle that if a thread has been waiting that long, it’s going to be waiting even longer.
            When the last thread in a process has its kernel stack removed from memory, the process is
            marked to be entirely outswapped. That’s why, for example, processes that have been idle for a
            long time (such as Wininit or Winlogon) can have a working set size of zero.

    System working sets
    Just as processes have working sets that manage pageable portions of the process address space, the
    pageable code and data in the system address space is managed using three global working sets, col-
    lectively known as the system working sets. These global working sets are as follows:

       ■■   System cache working set       This contains pages that are resident in the system cache.

       ■■   Paged pool working set This contains pages that are resident in the paged pool.

       ■■   System PTEs working set This contains pageable code and data from loaded drivers and the
            kernel image and pages from sections that have been mapped into the system space.

       Table 5-16 shows where these system working set types are stored.

TABLE 5-16    System working sets
System Working Set Type       Stored in (Windows 8.x, Server 2012/R2)   Stored in (Windows 10, Server 2016)

System cache                  MmSystemCacheWs                           MiState.SystemVa.SystemWs[0]

Paged pool                    MmPagedPoolWs                             MiState.SystemVa.SystemWs[2]

System PTEs                   MmSystemPtesWs                            MiState.SystemVa.SystemWs[1]

   You can examine the sizes of these working sets or the sizes of the components that contribute to
them with the performance counters or system variables shown in Table 5-17. (Note that the perfor-
mance counter values are in bytes, whereas the system variables are measured in pages.)

TABLE 5-17    System working set performance counters
Performance Counter (in Bytes)      System Variable (in Pages)                    Description

Memory: Cache Bytes                 WorkingSetSize member                         This is the physical memory
Memory: System Cache Resident                                                     consumed by the file system
Bytes                                                                             cache.

Memory: Cache Bytes Peak            PeakWorkingSetSize member (Windows 10         This is the peak system
                                    and 2016)                                     working set size.
                                    Peak member (Windows 8.x and 2012/R2)

Memory: System Driver Resident      SystemPageCounts.SystemDriverPage             This is the physical memory
Bytes                               (global, Windows 10 and Server 2016)          consumed by pageable
                                    MmSystemDriverPage (global, Windows 8.x       device driver code.
                                    and Server 2012/R2)

Memory: Pool Paged Resident Bytes   WorkingSetSize member                         This is the physical memory
                                                                                  consumed by paged pool.

   You can also examine the paging activity in the system cache working set by examining the Memory:
Cache Faults/Sec performance counter. This counter describes page faults that occur in the system
cache working set (both hard and soft). The PageFaultCount member in the system cache working set
structure contains the value for this counter.

Memory notification events
Windows provides a way for user-mode processes and kernel-mode drivers to be notified when physi-
cal memory, paged pool, non-paged pool, and commit charge are low and/or plentiful. This informa-
tion can be used to determine memory usage as appropriate. For example, if available memory is
low, the application can reduce memory consumption. If available paged pool is high, the driver can
allocate more memory. Finally, the memory manager also provides an event that permits notification
when corrupted pages have been detected.

    User-mode processes can be notified only of low or high memory conditions. An application can call
the CreateMemoryResourceNotification function, specifying whether low or high memory notifica-
tion is desired. The returned handle can be provided to any of the wait functions. When memory is low
(or high), the wait completes, thus notifying the thread of the condition. Alternatively, the QueryMemory-
ResourceNotification can be used to query the system memory condition at any time without
blocking the calling thread.

       Drivers, on the other hand, use the specific event name that the memory manager has set up in the \
    KernelObjects object manager directory. This is because notification is implemented by the memory
    manager signaling one of the globally named event objects it defines, shown in Table 5-18. When a given
    memory condition is detected, the appropriate event is signaled, thus waking up any waiting threads.

    TABLE 5-18    Memory manager notification events
     Event Name                       Description

     HighCommitCondition              This event is set when the commit charge is near the maximum commit limit—in
                                      other words, memory usage is very high, very little space is available in physical
                                      memory or paging files, and the operating system cannot increase the size of its
                                      paging files.

     HighMemoryCondition              This event is set whenever the amount of free physical memory exceeds the
                                      defined amount.

     HighNonPagedPoolCondition        This event is set whenever the amount of non-paged pool exceeds the defined
                                      amount.

     HighPagedPoolCondition           This event is set whenever the amount of paged pool exceeds the defined
                                      amount.

     LowCommitCondition               This event is set when the commit charge is low relative to the current commit
                                      limit—in other words, memory usage is low and a lot of space is available in
                                      physical memory or paging files.

     LowMemoryCondition               This event is set whenever the amount of free physical memory falls below the
                                      defined amount.

     LowNonPagedPoolCondition         This event is set whenever the amount of free non-paged pool falls below the
                                      defined amount.

     LowPagedPoolCondition            This event is set whenever the amount of free paged pool falls below the defined
                                      amount.

     MaximumCommitCondition           This event is set when the commit charge is near the maximum commit limit—in
                                      other words, memory usage is very high, very little space is available in physical
                                      memory or paging files, and the operating system cannot increase the size or
                                      number of paging files.

     MemoryErrors                     This indicates that a bad page (non-zeroed zero page) has been detected.

       Note You can override the high and low memory values by adding the LowMemoryThreshold
       or HighMemoryThreshold DWORD registry value under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
       Session Manager\Memory Management. This specifies the number of megabytes to use as
       the low or high threshold. You can also configure the system to crash when a bad page is
       detected instead of signaling a memory error event by setting the PageValidationAction
       DWORD registry value in the same key to 1.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing the memory resource notification events
       To see the memory resource notification events, run WinObj from Sysinternals and click the
       KernelObjects folder. You will see both the low and high memory condition events shown in the
       pane on the right:

         If you double-click either event, you can see how many handles and/or references have been
      made to the objects. To see whether any processes in the system have requested memory resource
      notification, search the handle table for references to LowMemoryCondition or HighMemoryCondition.
      To do so, use Process Explorer’s Find menu (choose Find Handle or DLL) or use WinDbg. (For a
      description of the handle table, see the section “Object manager” in Chapter 8 in Part 2.)

Page frame number database
   Several previous sections concentrated on the virtual view of a Windows process—page tables, PTEs,
   and VADs. The remainder of this chapter will explain how Windows manages physical memory, start-
   ing with how Windows keeps track of physical memory. Whereas working sets describe the resident
   pages owned by a process or the system, the PFN database describes the state of each page in physical
   memory. The page states are listed in Table 5-19.

   TABLE 5-19   Physical page states
   Status                     Description

   Active (also called valid) The page is part of a working set (either a process working set, a session working set, or a sys-
                              tem working set), or it’s not in any working set (for example, a non-paged kernel page) and a
                              valid PTE usually points to it.

   Transition                 This is a temporary state for a page that isn’t owned by a working set and isn’t on any paging
                              list. A page is in this state when an I/O to the page is in progress. The PTE is encoded so that
                              collided page faults can be recognized and handled properly. (This use of the term transition
                              differs from the use of the word in the section on invalid PTEs. An invalid transition PTE refers
                              to a page on the standby or modified list.)

   Standby                    The page previously belonged to a working set but was removed or was prefetched/clustered
                              directly into the standby list. The page wasn’t modified since it was last written to disk. The
                              PTE still refers to the physical page but it is marked invalid and in transition.

    TABLE 5-19    Physical page states (continued)

     Status       Description

     Modified     The page previously belonged to a working set but was removed. However, the page was modified while
                  it was in use and its current contents haven’t yet been written to disk or remote storage. The PTE still refers
                  to the physical page but is marked invalid and in transition. It must be written to the backing store before
                  the physical page can be reused.

     Modified     This is the same as a modified page except that the page has been marked so that the memory manager’s
     no-write     modified page writer won’t write it to disk. The cache manager marks pages as modified no-write at the
                  request of file system drivers. For example, NTFS uses this state for pages containing file system metadata
                  so that it can first ensure that transaction log entries are flushed to disk before the pages they are protect-
                  ing are written to disk. (NTFS transaction logging is explained in Chapter 13, “File systems,” in Part 2.)

     Free         The page is free but has unspecified dirty data in it. For security reasons, these pages can’t be given as a
                  user page to a user process without being initialized with zeroes, but they can be overwritten with new
                  data (for example, from a file) before being given to a user process.

     Zeroed       The page is free and has been initialized with zeroes by the zero page thread or was determined to already
                  contain zeroes.

     Rom          The page represents read-only memory.

     Bad          The page has generated parity or other hardware errors and can’t be used (or used as part of an enclave).

       The PFN database consists of an array of structures that represent each physical page of memory
    on the system. The PFN database and its relationship to page tables are shown in Figure 5-35. As this
    figure shows, valid PTEs usually point to entries in the PFN database (and the PFN index points to the
    page in physical memory), and the PFN database entries (for non-prototype PFNs) point back to the page
    table that is using them (if it is being used by a page table). For prototype PFNs, they point back to the
    prototype PTE.

    FIGURE 5-35    Page tables and the PFN database.

   Of the page states listed in Table 5-19, six are organized into linked lists so that the memory man-
ager can quickly locate pages of a specific type. (Active/valid pages, transition pages, and overloaded
“bad” pages aren’t in any system-wide page list.) Additionally, the standby state is associated with eight
different lists ordered by priority. (We’ll talk about page priority later in this section.) Figure 5-36 shows
an example of how these entries are linked together.

FIGURE 5-36   Page lists in the PFN database.

  In the next section, you’ll find out how these linked lists are used to satisfy page faults and how
pages move to and from the various lists.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing the PFN database
   You can use the MemInfo tool from the Windows Internals book’s website to dump the size of the
   various paging lists by using the –s flag. The following is the output from this command:
   C:\Tools>MemInfo.exe -s
   MemInfo v3.00 - Show PFN database information
   Copyright (C) 2007-2016 Alex Ionescu
   www.alex-ionescu.com

   Initializing PFN Database... Done

   PFN Database List Statistics
                 Zeroed:    4867 (              19468 kb)

                        Free:    3076 (   12304 kb)
                     Standby: 4669104 (18676416 kb)
                    Modified:    7845 (   31380 kb)
             ModifiedNoWrite:     117 (     468 kb)
                Active/Valid: 3677990 (14711960 kb)
                  Transition:       5 (      20 kb)
                         Bad:       0 (       0 kb)
                     Unknown:    1277 (    5108 kb)
                       TOTAL: 8364281 (33457124 kb)

          Using the kernel debugger !memusage command, you can obtain similar information, al-
       though this will take considerably longer to execute.

    Page list dynamics
    Figure 5-37 shows a state diagram for page frame transitions. For simplicity, the modified-no-write,
    bad and ROM lists aren’t shown.

    FIGURE 5-37   State diagram for physical pages.

       Page frames move between the paging lists in the following ways:

       ■■   When the memory manager needs a zero-initialized page to service a demand-zero page fault
            (a reference to a page that is defined to be all zeroes or to a user-mode committed private page
            that has never been accessed), it first attempts to get one from the zero page list. If the list is
            empty, it gets one from the free page list and zeroes the page. If the free list is empty, it goes to
            the standby list and zeroes that page.

		   One reason zero-initialized pages are needed is to meet security requirements such as the
     Common Criteria (CC). Most CC profiles specify that user-mode processes be given initialized
     page frames to prevent them from reading a previous process’s memory contents. Thus, the
     memory manager gives user-mode processes zeroed page frames unless the page is being
     read in from a backing store. In that case, the memory manager prefers to use non-zeroed page
     frames, initializing them with the data off the disk or remote storage. The zero page list is popu-
     lated from the free list by the zero page thread system thread (thread 0 in the System process).
     The zero page thread waits on a gate object to signal it to go to work. When the free list has
     eight or more pages, this gate is signaled. However, the zero page thread will run only if at least
     one processor has no other threads running, because the zero page thread runs at priority 0
     and the lowest priority that a user thread can be set to is 1.

Note When memory needs to be zeroed as a result of a physical page allocation by
a driver that calls MmAllocatePagesForMdl(Ex), by a Windows application that calls
AllocateUserPhysicalPages or AllocateUserPhysicalPagesNuma, or when an application
allocates large pages, the memory manager zeroes the memory by using a higher-perform-
ing function called MiZeroInParallel that maps larger regions than the zero page thread,
which only zeroes a page at a time. In addition, on multiprocessor systems, the memory
manager creates additional system threads to perform the zeroing in parallel (and in a
NUMA-optimized fashion on NUMA platforms).

■■   When the memory manager doesn’t require a zero-initialized page, it goes first to the free list.
     If that’s empty, it goes to the zeroed list. If the zeroed list is empty, it goes to the standby lists.
     Before the memory manager can use a page frame from the standby lists, it must first backtrack
     and remove the reference from the invalid PTE (or prototype PTE) that still points to the page
     frame. Because entries in the PFN database contain pointers back to the previous user’s page
     table page (or to a page of prototype PTE pool for shared pages), the memory manager can
     quickly find the PTE and make the appropriate change.

■■   When a process must give up a page out of its working set either because it referenced a new
     page and its working set was full or the memory manager trimmed its working set, the page
     goes to the standby lists if the page was clean (not modified) or to the modified list if the page
     was modified while it was resident.

■■   When a process exits, all the private pages go to the free list. Also, when the last reference to
     a page-file-backed section is closed, and the section has no remaining mapped views, these
     pages also go to the free list.

EXPERIMENT: The free and zero page lists
You can observe the release of private pages at process exit with Process Explorer’s System Infor-
mation display. Begin by creating a process with numerous private pages in its working set. We
did this in an earlier experiment with the TestLimit utility:

       C:\Tools\Sysinternals>Testlimit.exe -d 1 -c 1500

       Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
       Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
       Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

       Process ID: 13928

       Leaking private bytes with touch 1 MB at a time...
       Leaked 1500 MB of private memory (1500 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 0
       The operation completed successfully.

          The –d option causes TestLimit to not only allocate the memory as private committed, but to
       touch it—that is, to access it. This causes physical memory to be allocated and assigned to the
       process to realize the area of private committed virtual memory. If there is sufficient available
       RAM on the system, the entire 1,500 MB should be in RAM for the process. The process will now
       wait until you cause it to exit or terminate (perhaps by pressing Ctrl+C in its command window).
       After you do, follow these steps:

           1.   Open Process Explorer.

           2.   Open the View menu, choose System Information, and click the Memory tab.

           3.   Observe the size of the Free and Zeroed lists.

           4.   Terminate or exit the TestLimit process.

           You may see the free page list briefly increase in size. We say “may” because the zero page
       thread is awakened as soon as there are only eight pages on the free list, and it acts very quickly.
       Process Explorer updates this display only once per second, and it is likely that most of the pages
       were already zeroed and moved to the zeroed page list before it happened to “catch” this state.
       If you can see the temporary increase in the free list, you will then see it drop to zero, and a cor-
       responding increase will occur in the zeroed page list. If not, you will simply see the increase in
       the zeroed list.

       EXPERIMENT: The modified and standby page lists
       You can observe the movement of pages from process working set to the modified page list and
       then to the standby page list with the VMMap and RAMMap Sysinternals tools and the live kernel
       debugger. Follow these steps:

           1.   Open RAMMap and observe the state of the quiet system. This is an x86 system with
                3 GB of RAM. The columns in this display represent the various page states shown in
Figure 5-37 (a few of the columns not important to this discussion have been narrowed
                for ease of reference).

2.   The system has about 420 MB of RAM free (sum of the free and zeroed page lists).
     About 580 MB is on the standby list (hence part of “available,” but likely containing data
     recently lost from processes or being used by SuperFetch). About 830 MB is “active,”
     being mapped directly to virtual addresses via valid page table entries.

3.   Each row further breaks down into page state by usage or origin (process private,
     mapped file, and so on). For example, at the moment, of the active 830 MB, about 400
     MB is due to process private allocations.

4.   Now, as in the previous experiment, use the TestLimit utility to create a process with
     a large number of pages in its working set. Again, we will use the –d option to cause
     TestLimit to write to each page, but this time we will use it without a limit, so as to create
     as many private modified pages as possible:
     C:\Tools\Sysinternals>Testlimit.exe -d

     Testlimit v5.24 - test Windows limits
     Copyright (C) 2012-2015 Mark Russinovich
     Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

     Process ID: 7548

     Leaking private bytes with touch (MB)...
     Leaked 1975 MB of private memory (1975 MB total leaked). Lasterror: 8

5.   TestLimit has now created 1975 allocations of 1 MB each. In RAMMap, use the File |
     Refresh command to update the display (because of the cost of gathering its informa-
     tion, RAMMap does not update continuously).

          6.   You will see that over 2.8 GB are now active, of which 2.4 GB are in the Process Private
               row. This is due to the memory allocated and accessed by the TestLimit process. Note
               also that the standby, zeroed, and free lists are now much smaller. Most of the RAM
               allocated to TestLimit came from these lists.

          7.   Next, in RAMMap, check the process’s physical page allocations. Change to the
               Physical Pages tab, and set the filter at the bottom to the Process column and the
               value Testlimit.exe. This display shows all the physical pages that are part of the
               process working set.

8.   We would like to identify a physical page involved in the allocation of virtual address
     space done by TestLimit’s –d option. RAMMap does not give an indication about which
     virtual allocations are associated with RAMMap’s VirtualAlloc calls. However, we can
     get a good hint of this through the VMMap tool. Using VMMap on the same process,
     we find the following:

9.   In the lower part of the display, we find hundreds of allocations of process private data,
     each 1 MB in size and with 1 MB committed. These match the size of the allocations
     done by TestLimit. One of these is highlighted in the preceding screenshot. Note the
     starting virtual address, 0x310000.

10. Now go back to RAMMap’s physical memory display. Arrange the columns to make the
     Virtual Address column easily visible, click it to sort by that value, and you can find that
     virtual address:

          11. This shows that the virtual page starting at 0x310000 is currently mapped to physical
              address 0x212D1000. TestLimit’s –d option writes the program’s own name to the first
              bytes of each allocation. We can demonstrate this with the !dc (display characters using
              physical address) command in the local kernel debugger:
              lkd> !dc 0x212d1000
              #212d1000 74736554 696d694c 00000074 00000000 TestLimit.......
              #212d1010 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 ................
              ...

          12. If you’re not quick enough, this may fail—the page may be removed from the working
              set. For the final leg of the experiment, we will demonstrate that this data remains intact
              (for a while, anyway) after the process working set is reduced and this page is moved to
              the modified and then the standby page list.

          13. In VMMap, having selected the TestLimit process, open the View menu and choose
              Empty Working Set to reduce the process’s working set to the bare minimum.
              VMMap’s display should now look like this:

14. Notice that the Working Set bar graph is practically empty. In the middle section, the
    process shows a total working set of only 4 KB, and almost all of it is in page tables. Now
    return to RAMMap and refresh it. On the Use Counts tab, you will find that active pages
    have been reduced tremendously, with a large number of pages on the modified list
    and some on the standby list:

15. RAMMap’s Processes tab confirms that the TestLimit process contributed most of those
    pages to those lists:

    Page priority
    Every physical page in the system has a page priority value assigned to it by the memory manager. The
    page priority is a number in the range 0 to 7. Its main purpose is to determine the order in which pages
    are consumed from the standby list. The memory manager divides the standby list into eight sublists
    that each stores pages of a particular priority. When the memory manager wants to take a page from
    the standby list, it takes pages from low-priority lists first.

        Each thread and process in the system is also assigned a page priority. A page’s priority usually
    reflects the page priority of the thread that first causes its allocation. (If the page is shared, it reflects
    the highest page priority among the sharing threads.) A thread inherits its page-priority value from
    the process to which it belongs. The memory manager uses low priorities for pages it reads from disk
    speculatively when anticipating a process’s memory accesses.

       By default, processes have a page-priority value of 5, but the SetProcessInformation and
    SetThreadInformation user-mode functions allow applications to change process and thread page-
    priority values. These functions call the native NtSetInformationProcess and NtSetInformation-
    Thread functions. You can look at the memory priority of a thread with Process Explorer (per-page
    priority can be displayed by looking at the PFN entries, as you’ll see in an experiment later in the chap-
    ter). Figure 5-38 shows Process Explorer’s Threads tab displaying information about Winlogon’s main
    thread. Although the thread priority itself is high, the memory priority is still the standard 5.

    FIGURE 5-38   Process Explorer’s Threads tab.

       The real power of memory priorities is realized only when the relative priorities of pages are under-
    stood at a high level, which is the role of SuperFetch, covered at the end of this chapter.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing the prioritized standby lists
You can use Process Explorer to look at the size of each standby paging list by opening the System
Information dialog box and selecting the Memory tab:

   On the recently started x86 system used in this experiment, there is about 9 MB of data
cached at priority 0, about 47 MB at priority 1, about 68 MB at priority 2, etc. The following shows
what happens when we use the TestLimit tool from Sysinternals to commit and touch as much
memory as possible:
C:\Tools\Sysinternals>Testlimit.exe -d

   Note how the lower-priority standby page lists were used first (shown by the repurposed
count) and are now much smaller, while the higher lists still contain valuable cached data.

    Modified page writer and mapped page writer
    The memory manager employs two system threads to write pages back to disk and move those
    pages back to the standby lists (based on their priority). One system thread writes out modified pages
    (MiModifiedPageWriter) to the paging file, and a second one writes modified pages to mapped files
    (MiMappedPageWriter). Two threads are required to avoid creating a deadlock. This would occur if the
    writing of mapped file pages caused a page fault that in turn required a free page when no free pages
    were available, thus requiring the modified page writer to create more free pages. By having the modi-
    fied page writer perform mapped file paging I/Os from a second system thread, that thread can wait
    without blocking regular page file I/O.

       Both threads run at priority 18, and after initialization they wait for separate event objects to trigger
    their operation. The mapped page writer waits on 18 event objects:

       ■■   An exit event, signaling the thread to exit (not relevant to this discussion).

       ■■   The mapped writer event, stored in the global variable MiSystemPartition.Modwriter.
            MappedPageWriterEvent (MmMappedPageWriterEvent on Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2).
            This event can be signaled in the following instances:

            • During a page list operation (MiInsertPageInList); this routine inserts a page into one of
               the lists (standby, modified, etc.) based on its input arguments. The routine signals this event
               if the number of file-system-destined pages on the modified page list has reached more
               than 16 and the number of available pages has fallen below 1024.

            • In an attempt to obtain free pages (MiObtainFreePages).
            • By the memory manager’s working set manager (MmWorkingSetManager), which runs as part
               of the kernel’s balance set manager (once every second). The working set manager signals
               this event if the number of file-system-destined pages on the modified page list has reached
               more than 800.

            • Upon a request to flush all modified pages (MmFlushAllPages).
            • Upon a request to flush all file-system-destined modified pages (MmFlushAllFilesystem-
               Pages). Note that in most cases, writing modified mapped pages to their backing store files
               does not occur if the number of mapped pages on the modified page list is less than the
               maximum write cluster size, which is 16 pages. This check is not made in MmFlushAllFile-
               systemPages or MmFlushAllPages.

       ■■   An array of 16 events associated with 16 mapped page lists, stored in MiSystemPartition.
            PageLists.MappedPageListHeadEvent (MiMappedPageListHeadEvent on Windows 8.x and
            Server 2012/R2). Each time a mapped page is dirtied, it is inserted into one of these 16 mapped
            page lists based on a bucket number, stored in MiSystemPartition.WorkingSetControl-
            >CurrentMappedPageBucket (MiCurrentMappedPageBucket on Windows 8.x and Server
            2012/R2). This bucket number is updated by the working set manager whenever the system
            considers that mapped pages have gotten old enough, which is currently 100 seconds (stored
            in the WriteGapCounter variable in the same structure [MiWriteGapCounter on Windows 8.x

        and Server 2012/R2] and incremented whenever the working set manager runs). The reason
        for these additional events is to reduce data loss in the case of a system crash or power failure
        by eventually writing out modified mapped pages even if the modified list hasn’t reached its
        threshold of 800 pages.

   The modified page writer waits on two events: the first is an Exit event, and the second stored in
MiSystemPartition.Modwriter.ModifiedPageWriterEvent (on Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2
waits on a kernel gate stored in MmModifiedPageWriterGate), which can be signaled in the following
scenarios:

   ■■   A request to flush all pages has been received.

   ■■   The number of available pages—stored in MiSystemPartition.Vp.AvailablePages
        (MmAvailablePages on Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2)—drops below 128 pages.

   ■■   The total size of the zeroed and free page lists drops below 20,000 pages, and the number of
        modified pages destined for the paging file is greater than the smaller of one-sixteenth of the
        available pages or 64 MB (16,384 pages).

   ■■   When a working set is being trimmed to accommodate additional pages, if the number of
        pages available is less than 15,000.

   ■■   During a page list operation (MiInsertPageInList). This routine signals this event if the num-
        ber of page-file-destined pages on the modified page list has reached more than 16 pages and
        the number of available pages has fallen below 1,024.

    Additionally, the modified page writer waits on two other events after the preceding event is
signaled. One is used to indicate rescanning of the paging file is required (for example, a new page
file may have been created), stored in MiSystemPartition.Modwriter.RescanPageFilesEvent
(MiRescanPageFilesEvent on Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2). The second event is internal to the
paging file header (MiSystemPartition.Modwriter.PagingFileHeader [MmPagingFileHeader on
Windows 8.x and Server 2012/R2]), which allows the system to manually request flushing out data to
the paging file when needed.

    When invoked, the mapped page writer attempts to write as many pages as possible to disk with
a single I/O request. It accomplishes this by examining the original PTE field of the PFN database ele-
ments for pages on the modified page list to locate pages in contiguous locations on the disk. Once a
list is created, the pages are removed from the modified list, an I/O request is issued, and, at successful
completion of the I/O request, the pages are placed at the tail of the standby list corresponding to their
priority.

   Pages that are in the process of being written can be referenced by another thread. When this hap-
pens, the reference count and the share count in the PFN entry that represents the physical page are
incremented to indicate that another process is using the page. When the I/O operation completes, the
modified page writer notices that the reference count is no longer 0 and doesn’t place the page on any
standby list.

    PFN data structures
    Although PFN database entries are of fixed length, they can be in several different states, depending
    on the state of the page. Thus, individual fields have different meanings depending on the state. Figure
    5-39 shows the formats of PFN entries for different states.

    FIGURE 5-39     States of PFN database entries (specific layouts are conceptual).

        Several fields are the same for several PFN types, but others are specific to a given type of PFN. The
    following fields appear in more than one PFN type:

       ■■   PTE address This is the virtual address of the PTE that points to this page. Also, since PTE
            addresses will always be aligned on a 4-byte boundary (8 bytes on 64-bit systems), the two
            low-order bits are used as a locking mechanism to serialize access to the PFN entry.

       ■■   Reference count This is the number of references to this page. The reference count is incre-
            mented when a page is first added to a working set and/or when the page is locked in memory for
            I/O (for example, by a device driver). The reference count is decremented when the share count be-
            comes 0 or when pages are unlocked from memory. When the share count becomes 0, the page is
            no longer owned by a working set. Then, if the reference count is also zero, the PFN database entry
            that describes the page is updated to add the page to the free, standby, or modified list.

       ■■   Type This is the type of page represented by this PFN. (Types include active/valid, standby,
            modified, modified-no-write, free, zeroed, bad, and transition.)

       ■■   Flags     The information contained in the flags field is shown in Table 5-20.

       ■■   Priority This is the priority associated with this PFN, which will determine on which standby
            list it will be placed.

   ■■   Original PTE contents All PFN database entries contain the original contents of the PTE that
        pointed to the page (which could be a prototype PTE). Saving the contents of the PTE allows it
        to be restored when the physical page is no longer resident. PFN entries for AWE allocations are
        exceptions; they store the AWE reference count in this field instead.

   ■■   PFN of PTE This is the physical page number of the page table page containing the PTE that
        points to this page.

   ■■   Color Besides being linked together on a list, PFN database entries use an additional field to
        link physical pages by “color,” which is the page’s NUMA node number.

   ■■   Flags A second flags field is used to encode additional information on the PTE. These flags are
        described in Table 5-21.

TABLE 5-20      Flags within PFN database entries
Flag                        Meaning

Write in progress           This indicates that a page write operation is in progress. The first DWORD contains the ad-
                            dress of the event object that will be signaled when the I/O is complete.

Modified state              This indicates whether the page was modified. (If the page was modified, its contents must
                            be saved to disk before removing it from memory.)

Read in progress            This indicates that an in-page operation is in progress for the page. The first DWORD
                            contains the address of the event object that will be signaled when the I/O is complete.

ROM                         This indicates that this page comes from the computer’s firmware or another piece of
                            read-only memory such as a device register.

In-page error               This indicates that an I/O error occurred during the in-page operation on this page.
                            (In this case, the first field in the PFN contains the error code.)

Kernel stack                This indicates that this page is being used to contain a kernel stack. In this case, the PFN
                            entry contains the owner of the stack and the next stack PFN for this thread.

Removal requested           This indicates that the page is the target of a remove (due to ECC/scrubbing or hot memory
                            removal).

Parity error                This indicates that the physical page contains parity or error correction control errors.

TABLE 5-21     Secondary flags within PFN database entries
Flag                        Meaning

PFN image verified          This indicates that the code signature for this PFN (contained in the cryptographic signature
                            catalog for the image being backed by this PFN) has been verified.

AWE allocation              This indicates that this PFN backs an AWE allocation.

Prototype PTE               This indicates that the PTE referenced by the PFN entry is a prototype PTE. For example, this
                            page is shareable.

   The remaining fields are specific to the type of PFN. For example, the first PFN in Figure 5-39 repre-
sents a page that is active and part of a working set. The share count field represents the number of PTEs
that refer to this page. (Pages marked read-only, copy-on-write, or shared read/write can be shared by
multiple processes.) For page table pages, this field is the number of valid and transition PTEs in the page
table. As long as the share count is greater than 0, the page isn’t eligible for removal from memory.

        The working set index field is an index into the process working set list (or the system or session
    working set list, or zero if not in any working set) where the virtual address that maps this physical page
    resides. If the page is a private page, the working set index field refers directly to the entry in the work-
    ing set list because the page is mapped only at a single virtual address. In the case of a shared page, the
    working set index is a hint that is guaranteed to be correct only for the first process that made the page
    valid. (Other processes will try to use the same index where possible.) The process that initially sets this
    field is guaranteed to refer to the proper index and doesn’t need to add a working set list hash entry
    referenced by the virtual address into its working set hash tree. This guarantee reduces the size of the
    working set hash tree and makes searches faster for these entries.

        The second PFN in Figure 5-39 is for a page on either the standby or the modified list. In this case,
    the forward and backward link fields link the elements of the list together within the list. This linking
    allows pages to be easily manipulated to satisfy page faults. When a page is on one of the lists, the
    share count is by definition 0 (because no working set is using the page) and therefore can be overlaid
    with the backward link. The reference count is also 0 if the page is on one of the lists. If it is non-zero
    (because an I/O could be in progress for this page—for example, when the page is being written to
    disk), it is first removed from the list.

        The third PFN in Figure 5-39 is for a page that belongs to a kernel stack. As mentioned earlier, kernel
    stacks in Windows are dynamically allocated, expanded, and freed whenever a callback to user mode
    is performed and/or returns, or when a driver performs a callback and requests stack expansion. For
    these PFNs, the memory manager must keep track of the thread actually associated with the kernel
    stack, or if it is free it keeps a link to the next free look-aside stack.

       The fourth PFN in Figure 5-39 is for a page that has an I/O in progress (for example, a page read).
    While the I/O is in progress, the first field points to an event object that will be signaled when the I/O
    completes. If an in-page error occurs, this field contains the Windows error status code representing
    the I/O error. This PFN type is used to resolve collided page faults.

      In addition to the PFN database, the system variables in Table 5-22 describe the overall state of
    physical memory.

    TABLE 5-22   System variables that describe physical memory
                                                        Variable (Windows 8.x and
     Variable (Windows 10 and Server 2016)                                            Description
                                                        Server 2012/R2)

     MiSystemPartition.Vp.NumberOfPhysicalPages         MmNumberOfPhysicalPages       This is the total number
                                                                                      of physical pages avail-
                                                                                      able on the system.

     MiSystemPartition.Vp.AvailablePages                MmAvailablePages              This is the total number
                                                                                      of available pages on
                                                                                      the system—the sum of
                                                                                      the pages on the zeroed,
                                                                                      free, and standby lists.

     MiSystemPartition.Vp.ResidentAvailablePages        MmResidentAvailablePages      This is the total number of
                                                                                      physical pages that would
                                                                                      be available if every pro-
                                                                                      cess was trimmed to its
                                                                                      minimum working set size
                                                                                      and all modified pages
                                                                                      were flushed to disk.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing PFN entries
   You can examine individual PFN entries with the kernel debugger !pfn command. You need to
   supply the PFN as an argument. (For example, !pfn 0 shows the first entry, !pfn 1 shows the
   second, and so on.) In the following example, the PTE for virtual address 0xD20000 is displayed,
   followed by the PFN that contains the page directory, and then the actual page:
   lkd> !pte d20000
                       VA 00d20000
   PDE at C0600030            PTE at C0006900
   contains 000000003E989867 contains 8000000093257847
   pfn 3e989     ---DA--UWEV pfn 93257      ---D---UW-V

   lkd> !pfn 3e989
       PFN 0003E989 at address 868D8AFC
       flink       00000071 blink / share count 00000144 pteaddress C0600030
       reference count 0001   Cached    color 0   Priority 5
       restore pte 00000080 containing page 0696B3 Active     M
       Modified
   lkd> !pfn 93257
       PFN 00093257 at address 87218184
       flink       000003F9 blink / share count 00000001 pteaddress C0006900
       reference count 0001   Cached    color 0   Priority 5
       restore pte 00000080 containing page 03E989 Active     M
       Modified

      You can also use the MemInfo tool to obtain information about a PFN. MemInfo can some-
   times give you more information than the debugger’s output, and it does not require being
   booted into debugging mode. Here’s MemInfo’s output for those same two PFNs:
   C:\Tools>MemInfo.exe -p 3e989

   0x3E989000 Active         Page Table          5    N/A               0xC0006000 0x8E499480

   C:\Tools>MemInfo.exe -p 93257

   0x93257000 Active         Process Private     5    windbg.exe        0x00D20000 N/A

      From left to right, the information shown includes the physical address, type, page priority,
   process name, virtual address, and potential extra information. MemInfo correctly recognized
   that the first PFN was a page table and that the second PFN belongs to WinDbg, which was the
   active process when the !pte d20000 command was used in the debugger.

Page file reservation
We have already seen some mechanisms used by the memory manager to attempt to reduce physical
memory consumption and thus reduce accessing page files. Using the standby and modified list is one
such mechanism, and so is memory compression (see the “Memory compression” section later in this
chapter). Another optimization the memory uses is directly related to accessing page files themselves.

        Rotational hard disks have a moving head that travels to a target sector before the disk can actually
    read or write. This seek time is relatively expensive (in the order of milliseconds) and so the total disk
    activity is the seek time added to the actual read/write time. If the amount of data accessed contigu-
    ously from the seek position is large, then the seek time may be negligible. But if the head must seek a
    lot while accessing scattered data on the disk, the aggregated seek time becomes the main issue.

       When the Session Manager (Smss.exe) creates a page file, it queries the disk of the file’s partition to
    find whether it’s a rotational disk or a solid-state drive (SSD). If it’s rotational, it activates a mechanism
    called page file reservations that tries to keep contiguous pages in physical memory contiguous in the
    page file as well. If the disk is an SSD (or a hybrid, which for the sake of page file reservation is treated
    as SSD), then page file reservation adds no real value (since there is no moving head), and the feature is
    not utilized for this particular page file.

       Page file reservation is handled in three locations within the memory manager: working set man-
    ager, modified page writer, and page fault handler. The working set manager performs working set
    trimming by calling the MiFreeWsleList routine. The routine takes a list of pages from a working set
    and for each page it decrements its share count. If it reaches zero, the page can be placed on the modi-
    fied list, changing the relevant PTE into a transition PTE. The old valid PTE is saved in the PFN.

        The invalid PTE has two bits related to page file reservation: page file reserved and page file al-
    located (refer to Figure 5-24). When a physical page is needed and is taken from one of the “free” page
    lists (free, zero or standby) to become an active (valid) page, an invalid PTE is saved into the Original
    PTE field of the PFN. This field is the key for tracking page file reservation.

        The MiCheckReservePageFileSpace routine tries to create page file reservation cluster starting
    from a specified page. It checks if page file reservation is disabled for the target page file and if there
    is already page file reservation for this page (based on the original PTE), and if any of these conditions
    is true, the function aborts further processing for this page. The routine also checks if the page type is
    of user pages, and if not, it bails out. Page file reservation is not attempted for other page types (such
    as paged pool), because it was not found to be particularly beneficial (because of unpredictable usage
    patterns, for example), which led to small clusters. Finally, MiCheckReservePageFileSpace calls MiRe-
    servePageFileSpace to do the actual work.

       The search for page file reservation starts backward from the initial PTE. The goal is to locate eligible
    consecutive pages where reservation is possible. If the PTE that maps the neighboring page represents
    a decommitted page, a non-paged pool page, or if it’s already reserved, then the page cannot be used;
    the current page will become the lower limit of the reservation cluster. Otherwise, the search continues
    backward. Then the search starts from the initial page forward, trying to gather as many eligible pages
    as possible. The cluster size must be at least 16 pages for the reservation to take place (the maximum
    cluster size is 512 pages). Figure 5-40 shows an example of a cluster bound by invalid page on one hand
    and an existing cluster on the other (note that it can span page tables within the same page directory).

FIGURE 5-40 Page file reservation cluster.

    Once the page cluster is computed, free page file space must be located to be reserved for this clus-
ter of pages. Page file allocations are managed by a bitmap (where each set bit indicates a used page in
the file). For page file reservation, a second bitmap is used that indicates pages that have been reserved
(but not necessarily written to yet—this is the job of the page file allocation bitmap). Once there is page
file space that is not reserved and not allocated (based on these bitmaps), the relevant bits are set in
the reservation bitmap only. It is the job of the modified page writer to set these bits in the allocation
bitmap when it writes the contents of the pages to disk. If not enough page file space could be found
for the required cluster size, page file expansion is attempted, and if that already happened (or the
maximum page file size is the expanded size), then the cluster size is reduced to fit in the reservation
size that was located.

   Note The clustered pages (except the original starting PTE) are not linked to any of the
   physical page lists. The reservation information is placed in the Original PTE of the PFN.

    The modified page writer needs to handle writing pages that have reservations as a special case. It
uses all the gathered information described previously to build an MDL that contains the correct PFNs
for the cluster that is used as part of writing to the page file. Building the cluster includes finding con-
tiguous pages that can span reservation clusters. If there are “holes” between clusters, a dummy page
is added in between (a page that contains all bytes with 0xFF value). If the dummy page count is above
32, the cluster is broken. This “walk” is done going forward and then backward to build the final cluster
to write. Figure 5-41 shows an example of the state of pages after such a cluster has been built by the
modified page writer.

    FIGURE 5-41 Cluster built before writing.

       Finally, the page fault handler uses the built information from the reservation bitmap and the PTEs
    to determine the start and end points of clusters, to efficiently load back needed pages with minimal
    seeking of the mechanical disk head.

Physical memory limits
    Now that you’ve learned how Windows keeps track of physical memory, we’ll describe how much of
    it Windows can actually support. Because most systems access more code and data than can fit in
    physical memory as they run, physical memory is essentially a window into the code and data used
    over time. The amount of memory can therefore affect performance because when data or code that a
    process or the operating system needs is not present, the memory manager must bring it in from disk
    or remote storage.

       Besides affecting performance, the amount of physical memory affects other resource limits. For
    example, the amount of non-paged pool is backed by physical memory, thus obviously constrained by
    physical memory. Physical memory also contributes to the system virtual memory limit, which is the
    sum of roughly the size of physical memory plus the current configured size of all paging files. Physical
    memory also can indirectly limit the maximum number of processes.

       Windows support for physical memory is dictated by hardware limitations, licensing, operating
    system data structures, and driver compatibility. The following URL shows the memory limits of the
    various Windows editions: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/aa366778.aspx.
    Table 5-23 summarizes the limits in Windows 8 and higher versions.

TABLE 5-23   Limitations on physical memory support in Windows
Operating System Version/Edition                       32-Bit Maximum         64-Bit Maximum

Windows 8.x Professional and Enterprise                4 GB                   512

Windows 8.x (all other editions)                       4 GB                   128 GB

Windows Server 2012/R2 Standard and Datacenter         N/A                    4 TB

Windows Server 2012/R2 Essentials                      N/A                    64 GB

Windows Server 2012/R2 Foundation                      N/A                    32 GB

Windows Storage Server 2012 Workgroup                  N/A                    32 GB

Windows Storage Server 2012 Standard                   N/A                    4 TB
Hyper-V Server 2012

Windows 10 Home                                        4 GB                   128 GB

Windows 10 Pro, Education and Enterprise               4 GB                   2 TB

Windows Server 2016 Standard and Datacenter            N/A                    24 TB

   At the time of this writing, the maximum supported physical memory is 4 TB on some Server 2012/R2
editions and 24 TB on Server 2016 editions. The limitations don’t come from any implementation or
hardware limitation, but because Microsoft will support only configurations it can test. As of this writ-
ing, these were the largest tested and supported memory configurations.

Windows client memory limits
64-bit Windows client editions support different amounts of memory as a differentiating feature, with
the low end being 4 GB increasing to 2 TB for Enterprise and Professional editions. All 32-bit Windows
client editions, however, support a maximum of 4 GB of physical memory, which is the highest physical
address accessible with the standard x86 memory management mode.

   Although client SKUs support PAE addressing modes on x86 systems in order to provide hardware
no-execute protection (which would also enable access to more than 4 GB of physical memory), test-
ing revealed that systems would crash, hang, or become unbootable because some device drivers,
commonly those for video and audio devices found typically on clients but not servers, were not
programmed to expect physical addresses larger than 4 GB. As a result, the drivers truncated such ad-
dresses, resulting in memory corruptions and corruption side effects. Server systems commonly have
more generic devices, with simpler and more stable drivers, and therefore had not generally revealed
these problems. The problematic client driver ecosystem led to the decision for client editions to ignore
physical memory that resides above 4 GB, even though they can theoretically address it. Driver devel-
opers are encouraged to test their systems with the nolowmem BCD option, which will force the kernel
to use physical addresses above 4 GB only if sufficient memory exists on the system to allow it. This will
immediately lead to the detection of such issues in faulty drivers.

   Although 4 GB is the licensed limit for 32-bit client editions, the effective limit is actually lower and
depends on the system’s chipset and connected devices. This is because the physical address map
includes not only RAM but device memory, and x86 and x64 systems typically map all device memory
below the 4 GB address boundary to remain compatible with 32-bit operating systems that don’t know

    how to handle addresses larger than 4 GB. Newer chipsets do support PAE-based device remapping,
    but client editions of Windows do not support this feature for the driver compatibility problems ex-
    plained earlier. (Otherwise, drivers would receive 64-bit pointers to their device memory.)

       If a system has 4 GB of RAM and devices such as video, audio, and network adapters that implement
    windows into their device memory that sum to 500 MB, then 500 MB of the 4 GB of RAM will reside
    above the 4 GB address boundary, as shown in Figure 5-42.

    FIGURE 5-42   Physical memory layout on a 4 GB system.

       The result is that if you have a system with 3 GB or more of memory and you are running a 32-bit
    Windows client, you may not get the benefit of all the RAM. You can see how much RAM Windows has
    detected as being installed in the System Properties dialog box, but to see how much memory is really
    available to Windows, you need to look at Task Manager’s Performance page or the Msinfo32 utility.
    For example, on a Hyper-V virtual machine configured with 4 GB of RAM, with 32-bit Windows 10
    installed, the amount of physical memory available is 3.87 GB, as shown in the Msinfo32 utility:

        Installed Physical Memory (RAM)            4.00 GB
        Total Physical Memory                      3.87 GB

      You can see the physical memory layout with the MemInfo tool. The following output is from
    MemInfo when run on a 32-bit system, using the –r switch to dump physical memory ranges:

    C:\Tools>MemInfo.exe -r
    MemInfo v3.00 - Show PFN database information
    Copyright (C) 2007-2016 Alex Ionescu
    www.alex-ionescu.com

    Physical Memory Range: 00001000 to 0009F000 (158 pages, 632 KB)
    Physical Memory Range: 00100000 to 00102000 (2 pages, 8 KB)
    Physical Memory Range: 00103000 to F7FF0000 (1015533 pages, 4062132 KB)
    MmHighestPhysicalPage: 1015792

       Note the gap in the memory address range from A0000 to 100000 (384 KB), and another gap from
    F8000000 to FFFFFFFF (128 MB).

     You can use Device Manager on your machine to see what is occupying the various reserved
  memory regions that can’t be used by Windows (and that will show up as holes in MemInfo’s output).
  To check Device Manager, follow these steps:

     1.   Run Devmgmt.msc.

     2.   Open the View menu and select Resources by Connection.

     3.   Expand the Memory node. On the laptop computer used for the output shown in Figure 5-43,
          the primary consumer of mapped device memory is, unsurprisingly, the video card (Hyper-V S3
          Cap), which consumes 128 MB in the range F8000000–FBFFFFFF.

          FIGURE 5-43   Hardware-reserved memory ranges on a 32-bit Windows system.

     Other miscellaneous devices account for most of the rest, and the PCI bus reserves additional ranges
  for devices as part of the conservative estimation the firmware uses during boot.

Memory compression
  The Windows 10 memory manager implements a mechanism that compresses private and page-file-
  backed section pages that are on the modified page list. The primary candidates for compression
  are private pages belonging to UWP apps because compression works very well with the working set
  swapping and emptying that already occurs for such applications if memory is tight. After an applica-
  tion is suspended and its working set is outswapped, the working set can be emptied at any time and
  dirty pages can be compressed. This will create additional available memory that may be enough to
  hold another application in memory without making the first application’s pages leave memory.

     Note Experiments have shown that pages compress to around 30–50 percent of their
     original size using Microsoft’s Xpress algorithm, which balances speed with size, thus
     resulting in considerable memory savings.

  The memory compression architecture must adhere to the following requirements:

     ■■   A page cannot be in memory in a compressed and an uncompressed form because this would
          waste physical memory due to duplication. This means that whenever a page is compressed, it
          must become a free page after successful compression.

       ■■   The compression store must maintain its data structures and store the compressed data such
            that it is always saving memory for the system overall. This means that if a page doesn’t com-
            press well enough, it will not be added to the store.

       ■■   Compressed pages must appear as available memory (because they can really be repurposed
            if needed) to avoid creating a perception issue that compressing memory somehow increases
            memory consumption.

       Memory compression is enabled by default on client SKUs (phone, PC, Xbox, and so on). Server SKUs
    do not currently use memory compression, but that is likely to change in future server versions.

       Note In Windows 2016, Task Manager still shows a number in parentheses for compressed
       memory, but that number is always zero. Also, the memory compression process does not exist.

        During system startup, the Superfetch service (sysmain.dll, hosted in a svchost.exe instance, de-
    scribed in the upcoming “Proactive memory management (SuperFetch)” section) instructs the Store Man-
    ager in the executive through a call to NtSetSystemInformation to create a single system store (always
    the first store to be created), to be used by non-UWP applications. Upon app startup, each UWP applica-
    tion communicates with the Superfetch service and requests the creation of a store for itself.

    Compression illustration
    To get a sense of how memory compression works, let’s look at an illustrative example. Assume that at
    some point in time, the following physical pages exist:

       The zero and free page lists contain pages that have garbage and zeroes, respectively, and can be
    used to satisfy memory commits; for the sake of this discussion, we’ll treat them as one list. The active
    pages belong to various processes, while the modified pages have dirty data that has not yet been
    written to a page file, but can be soft-faulted without an I/O operation to a process working set if that
    process references a modified page.

        Now assume the memory manager decides to trim the modified page list—for example, because
    it has become too large or the zero/free pages have become too small. Assume three pages are to be
    removed from the modified list. The memory manager compresses their contents into a single page
    (taken from the zero/free list):

   Pages 11, 12 and 13 are compressed into page 1. After that’s done, page 1 is no longer free and is in
fact active, part of the working set of the memory compression process (described in the next section).
Pages 11, 12, and 13 are no longer needed and move to the free list; the compression saved two pages:

  Suppose the same process repeats. This time, pages 14, 15, and 16 are compressed into (say) two
pages (2 and 3) as shown here:

  The result is that pages 2 and 3 join the working set of the memory compression process, while
pages 14, 15, and 16 become free:

       Suppose the memory manager later decides to trim the working set of the memory compression
    process. In that case, such pages are moved to the modified list because they contain data not yet
    written to a page file. Of course, they can at any time be soft-faulted back into their original process
    (decompressing in the process by using free pages). The following shows pages 1 and 2 being removed
    from the active pages of the memory compression process and moved to the modified list:

      If memory becomes tight, the memory manager may decide to write the compressed modified
    pages to a page file:

   Finally, after such pages have been written to a page file, they move to the standby list because their
content is saved, so they can be repurposed if necessary. They can also be soft-faulted (as when they
are part of the modified list) by decompressing them and moving the resulting pages to the active
state under the relevant process working set. When in the standby list, they are attached to the appro-
priate sub-list, depending on their priority (as described in the “Page priority and rebalancing” section
later in this chapter):

Compression architecture
The compression engine needs a “working area” memory to store compressed pages and the data
structures that manage them. In Windows 10 versions prior to 1607, the user address space of the System
process was used. Starting with Windows 10 Version 1607, a new dedicated process called Memory
Compression is used instead. One reason for creating this new process was that the System process
memory consumption looked high to a casual observer, which implied the system was consuming a lot
of memory. That was not the case, however, because compressed memory does not count against the
commit limit. Nevertheless, sometimes perception is everything.

   The Memory Compression process is a minimal process, which means it does not load any DLLs.
Rather, it just provides an address space to work with. It’s not running any executable image either—
the kernel is just using its user mode address space. (See Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs,” for more
information on minimal processes.)

   Note By design, Task Manager does not show the Memory Compression process in its
   details view, but Process Explorer does. Using a kernel debugger, the compression process
   image name is MemCompression.

       For each store, the Store Manager allocates memory in regions with a configurable region size.
    Currently, the size used is 128 KB. The allocations are done by normal VirtualAlloc calls as needed.
    The actual compressed pages are stored in 16 byte chunks within a region. Naturally, a compressed
    page (4 KB) can span many chunks. Figure 5-44 shows a store with an array of regions and some of the
    data structures associated with managing such a store.

    FIGURE 5-44   Store data structures.

        As shown in Figure 5-44, pages are managed with a B+Tree—essentially a tree where a node can
    have any number of children—where each page entry points to its compressed content within one
    of the regions. A store starts with zero regions, and regions are allocated and deallocated as needed.
    Regions are also associated with priorities, as described in the “Page priority and rebalancing” section
    later in this chapter.

       Adding a page involves the following major steps:

       1.   If there is no current region with the page’s priority, allocate a new region, lock it in physi-
            cal memory, and assign it the priority of the page to be added. Set the current region for that
            priority to the allocated region.

       2.   Compress the page and store it in the region, rounding up to the granularity unit (16 bytes). For
            example, if a page compresses to 687 bytes, it consumes 43 16-byte units (always rounding up).
            Compression is done on the current thread, with low CPU priority (7) to minimize interference.
            When decompression is needed, it’s performed in parallel using all available processors.

       3.   Update the page and region information in the Page and Region B+Trees.

   4.   If the remaining space in the current region is not large enough to store the compressed page, a
        new region is allocated (with the same page priority) and set as the current region for that priority.

   Removing a page from the store involves the following steps:

   1.   Find the page entry in the Page B+Tree and the region entry in the Region B+Tree.

   2.   Remove the entries and update the space used in the region.

   3.   If the region becomes empty, deallocate the region.

   Regions become fragmented over time as compressed pages are added and removed. The memory
for a region is not freed until the region is completely empty. This means some kind of compaction is
necessary to reduce memory waste. A compaction operation is lazily scheduled with aggressiveness
depending on the amount of fragmentation. Region priorities are taken into account when consolidat-
ing regions.

   EXPERIMENT: Memory compression
   There is very little visibility to the memory compression going on in the system. You can view the
   memory compression process with Process Explorer or a kernel debugger. The following figure
   shows the Performance tab in the properties of the Memory Compression process in Process
   Explorer (which must run with admin privileges):

      Notice that the process has no user time (since only kernel threads “work” within this process),
   and its working set is private only (not shared). This is because the compressed memory is not
   sharable in any sense. Compare that to the Memory view in Task Manager:

            Here, the compressed memory in parentheses should correlate with the working set of the
       Memory Compression process—this screenshot was taken about a minute after the previous
       one—because this is the amount of space that the compressed memory is consuming.

Memory partitions
    Traditionally, virtual machines (VMs) are used to isolate applications so that separate VMs can run com-
    pletely isolated applications (or groups of applications) at least from a security standpoint. VMs cannot
    interact with each other, providing strong security and resource boundaries. Although this works, VMs
    have a high resource cost in terms of hardware that hosts the VMs and management costs. This gave a
    rise to container-based technologies, such as Docker. These technologies attempt to lower the barrier
    for isolation and resource management by creating sandbox containers that host applications, all on
    the same physical or virtual machine.

        Creating such containers is difficult, as it would require kernel drivers that perform some form of
    virtualization on top of the regular Windows. Some of these drivers are the following (a single driver
    can encompass all these functionalities):

       ■■    File system (mini) filter that would create an illusion of an isolated file system

       ■■    Registry virtualization driver, creating an illusion of a separate registry (CmRegisterCallbacksEx)

       ■■    Private object manager namespace, by utilizing silos (see Chapter 3 for more details)

       ■■    Process management for associating processes with the correct container by using process create/
             notifications (PsSetCreateNotifyRoutineEx)

   Even with these in place, some things are difficult to virtualize, specifically memory management. Each
container may want to use its own PFN database, its own page file, and so on. Windows 10 (64-bit versions
only) and Windows Server 2016 provide such possible memory control through Memory Partitions.

    A memory partition consists of its own memory-related management structures, such as page lists
(standby, modified, zero, free, etc.), commit charge, working set, page trimmer, modified page writer,
zero-page thread, and so on, but isolated from other partitions. Memory partitions are represented
in the system by Partition objects, which are securable, nameable objects (just like other executive
objects). One partition always exists, called the System Partition, and it represents the system as a whole
and is the ultimate parent of any explicitly created partition. The system partition’s address is stored in
a global variable (MiSystemPartition) and its name is KernelObjects\MemoryPartition0, visible
with tools such as WinObj from Sysinternals as shown in Figure 5-45.

FIGURE 5-45   The System Partition in WinObj.

   All partition objects are stored in global list, where the current maximum partition count is 1024 (10
bits), because the partition index must be encoded in PTEs for quick access to partition information
where applicable. One of these indices is the system partition and two other values are used as special
sentinels, leaving 1021 partitions available.

   Memory partitions can be created from user mode or kernel mode by using the NtCreatePartition
internal (and undocumented) function; user mode callers must have the SeLockMemory privilege for
the call to succeed. The function can accept a parent partition, which initial pages will come from
and eventually return to, when the partition is destroyed; the system partition is the default parent if
none is specified. NtCreatePartition delegates the actual work to the internal memory manager
MiCreatePartition function.

    An existing partition can be opened by name using NtOpenPartition (no special privilege required
for this as the object can be protected by ACLs as usual). The actual manipulation of a partition is
reserved for the NtManagePartition function. This is the function that can be used to add memory
to the partition, add a paging file, copy memory from one partition to another, and generally obtain
information about a partition.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing memory partitions
       In this experiment, you’ll use the kernel debugger to look at partition objects.

           1.   Start local kernel debugging and issue the !partition command. It lists all the parti-
                tion objects in the system.
                lkd> !partition
                Partition0 fffff803eb5b2480 MemoryPartition0

           2.   By default, the always existing system partition is shown. The !parti-
                tion command can accept the address of a partition object and show more
                details:

                lkd> !partition fffff803eb5b2480
                PartitionObject @ ffffc808f5355920 (MemoryPartition0)
                _MI_PARTITION 0 @ fffff803eb5b2480
                   MemoryRuns: 0000000000000000
                   MemoryNodeRuns: ffffc808f521ade0
                   AvailablePages:         0n4198472 ( 16 Gb 16 Mb 288 Kb)
                   ResidentAvailablePages: 0n6677702 ( 25 Gb 484 Mb 792 Kb)
                      0 _MI_NODE_INFORMATION @ fffff10000003800
                            TotalPagesEntireNode:    0x7f8885
                                              Zeroed                        Free
                            1GB                 0 ( 0)                                           0 (
                0)
                            2MB                41 ( 82 Mb)                                       0 (
                0)
                            64KB             3933 ( 245 Mb 832 Kb)                               0 (
                0)
                            4KB            82745 ( 323 Mb 228 Kb)                                0 (
                0)
                            Node Free Memory:      ( 651 Mb 36 Kb )
                            InUse Memory:          ( 31 Gb 253 Mb 496 Kb )
                            TotalNodeMemory:       ( 31 Gb 904 Mb 532 Kb )

          The output shows some of the information stored in the underlying MI_PARTITION structure
       (whose address is given as well). Notice that the command shows memory information on a
       NUMA node basis (just one in this case). Since this is the system partition, the numbers related
       to used, free, and total memory should correspond to the values reported by tools such as Task
       Manager and Process Explorer. You can also examine the MI_PARTITION structure with the usual
       dt command.

       Future scenarios may leverage the memory partitioning capability for specific processes (through
    job objects) to be associated with a partition, such as when exclusive control over physical memory may
    be beneficial. One such scenario slated for the Creators Update release is game mode (more informa-
    tion on game mode is included in Chapter 8 in Part 2).

Memory combining
  The memory manager uses several mechanisms in an attempt to save as much RAM as possible, such as
  sharing pages for images, copy-on-write for data pages, and compression. In this section, we’ll take a
  look at yet another such mechanism called memory combining.

     The general idea is simple: Find duplicates of pages in RAM and combine them into one, thus
  removing the rest of the duplicates. Clearly there are a few issues to resolve:

     ■■   What are the “best” pages to use as candidates for combining?

     ■■   When is it appropriate to initiate memory combining?

     ■■   Should combining be targeted at a particular process, a memory partition, or the entire system?

     ■■   How can the combining process be made quick so it does not adversely impact normally
          executing code?

     ■■   If a writeable combined page is later modified by one of its clients, how would it get a private copy?

     We’ll answer these questions throughout this section, starting with the last. The copy-on-write
  mechanism is used here: as long as a combined page is not written to, do nothing. If a process tries to
  write to the page, make a private copy for the writing process, and remove the copy-on-write flag for
  that newly allocated private page.

     Note Page combining can be disabled by setting a DWORD value named DisablePageCombining
     to 1 in the HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory
     Management registry key.

     Note In this section, the terms CRC and hash are used interchangeably. They indicate a
     statistically unique (with high probability) 64-bit number referencing a page’s contents.

      The memory manager’s initialization routine, MmInitSystem, creates the system partition (see the
  previous section on memory partitions). Within the MI_PARTITION structure that describes a partition
  lies an array of 16 AVL trees that identify the duplicated pages. The array is sorted by the last 4 bits of a
  combined page CRC value. We’ll see in a moment how this fits into the algorithm.

     Two special page types are called common pages. One includes an all zero bytes, and the other in-
  cludes an all one bits (filled with the byte 0xFF); their CRC is calculated just once and stored. Such pages
  can easily be identified when scanning pages’ contents.

     To initiate memory combining, the NtSetSystemInformation native API is called with the System-
  CombinePhysicalMemoryInformation system information class. The caller must have the SeProfile-
  SingleProcessPrivilege in its token, normally granted to the local administrators group. The argu-
  ment to the API provides the following options through a combination of flags:

       ■■   Perform memory combining on the entire (system) partition or just the current process.

       ■■   Search for common pages (all zeros or all ones) to combine only, or any duplicate pages regard-
            less of content.

        The input structure also provides an optional event handle that can be passed in, and if signaled
    (by another thread), will abort the page combining. Currently, the Superfetch service (see the section
    “SuperFetch” at the end of this chapter for more information) has a special thread, running in low prior-
    ity (4) that initiates memory combining for the entire system partition when the user is away, or if the
    user is busy, every 15 minutes.

        In the Creators Update, if the amount of physical memory is higher than 3.5 GB (3584 MB), most
    built-in Svchost-ed services host a single service in each Svchost process. This creates dozens of
    processes out of the box but removes the likelihood of one service affecting another (either because
    of some instability or security issues). In this scenario, the Service Control Manager (SCM) uses a new
    option of the memory combining API, and initiates page combining in each of the Svchost processes
    every three minutes by utilizing a thread pool timer running with base priority of 6 (ScPerformPage-
    CombineOnServiceImages routine). The rationale is to try to reduce RAM consumption that may be
    higher than with fewer Svchost instances. Note that non-Svchost services are not page combined, nor
    are services running with per-user or private user accounts.

        The MiCombineIdenticalPages routine is the actual entry point to the page combining process. For
    each NUMA node of the memory partition, it allocates and stores a list of pages with their CRC inside the
    page combing support (PCS) structure, which is the one managing all the needed information for the
    page combining operation. (That’s the one holding the AVL trees array mentioned earlier.) The request-
    ing thread is the one doing the work; it should run on CPUs belonging to the current NUMA node, and its
    affinity is modified accordingly if needed. We’ll divide the memory combining algorithm into three stages
    to simplify the explanation: search, classification, and page sharing. The following sections assume that a
    complete page combining is requested (rather than for the current process) and for all pages (not just the
    common pages); the other cases are similar in principle, and somewhat simpler.

    The search phase
    The goal of this initial stage is to calculate the CRC of all the physical pages. The algorithm analyses
    each physical page that belongs to the active, modified, or standby list, skipping the zeroed and free
    pages (since they are effectively unused).

       A good page candidate for memory combining should be an active non-shared page that belongs to
    a working set, and that should not map a paging structure. The candidate could be even in the standby or
    modified state, but needs to have a reference counter of 0. Basically, the system identifies three types of
    pages for combining: user process, paged pool, and session space. Other types of pages are skipped.

       To correctly calculate the CRC of the page, the system should map the physical page to a system
    address (because the process context is mostly different from the calling thread, making the page inac-
    cessible in low user-mode addresses) using a new system PTE. The CRC of the page is then calculated
    with a customized algorithm (MiComputeHash64 routine), and the system PTE freed (the page is now
    unmapped from system address space).

   The page hashing algorithm
   The algorithm that the system uses to calculate an 8-bytes page hash (CRC) is the following: two
   64-bit large prime numbers are multiplied together, and the result is used as the starting hash.
   The page is scanned from the end to the beginning; the algorithm hashes 64 bytes per cycle.
   Each read 8-byte value from the page in question is added to the starting hash, then the hash is
   rotated right a prime-number of bits (starting with 2, then 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17 and 19). 512 memory
   access operations (4096/8) are needed to completely hash a page.

The classification phase
When all the hashes of the pages that belong to a NUMA node have been successfully calculated, the
second part of the algorithm commences. The goal of this phase is to process each CRC/PFN entry in
the list and organize them in a strategic way. The page sharing algorithm must minimize the process
contexts switches, and be as fast as possible.

    The MiProcessCrcList routine starts by sorting the CRC/PFN list by hash (using a quick sort algo-
rithm). Another key data structure, combine block, is used to keep track of all the pages that share the
same hash, and, more importantly, to store the new prototype PTE that will map the new combined
page. Each CRC/PFN of the new sorted list is processed in order. The system needs to verify if the cur-
rent hash is common (belongs to a zeroed or a complete-filled page) and if it’s equal to the previous or
next hash (remember that the list is sorted). If this is not the case, the system checks if a combine block
already exists in the PCS structure. If so, it means that a combined page has been already identified in a
previous execution of the algorithm or in another node of the system. Otherwise it means that the CRC
is unique and the page couldn’t be combined, and the algorithm continues to the next page in the list.

   If the found common hash has never been seen before, the algorithm allocates a new empty
combine block (used for the master PFN) and inserts it in a list used by the actual page-sharing code
(next stage). Otherwise if the hash already existed (the page is not the master copy), a reference to the
combine block is added in the current CRC/PFN entry.

    At this point, the algorithm has prepared all the data that the page-sharing algorithm needs: a list
of combine blocks used to store the master physical pages and their prototype PTEs, a list of CRC/PFN
entries organized by the owning working set, and some physical memory needed to store the content
of the new shared pages.

   The algorithm then obtains the address of the physical page (that should exist, due to the initial
check performed previously by the MiCombineIdenticalPages routine) and searches a data structure
used to store all the pages that belongs to the specific working set (from now on we will call this struc-
ture WS CRC node). If this doesn’t exist, it allocates a new one and inserts it in another AVL tree. The
CRC/PFN and virtual address of the page are linked together inside the WS CRC node.

   After all the identified pages have been processed, the system allocates the physical memory for the
new master shared pages (using an MDL), and processes each WS CRC node; for performance reasons,
the candidate pages located inside the node are sorted by their original virtual address. The system is
now ready to perform the actual page combining.

    The page combining phase
    The page combining phase starts with a WS CRC node structure that contains all the pages that belong
    to a specific working set and are all candidates for combining, and with a list of free combine blocks,
    used to store the prototype PTE and the actual shared page. The algorithm attaches to the target pro-
    cess and locks its working set (raising IRQL to dispatch level). In this way, it will be able to directly read
    and write each page without the need to remap it.

       The algorithm processes every CRC/PFN entry in the list, but since it’s running at dispatch level IRQL
    and execution could take some time, it checks if the processor has some DPCs or scheduled items in its
    queue (by calling KeShouldYieldProcessor) before analyzing the next entry. If the answer is yes, the
    algorithm does the right thing and takes appropriate precautions to maintain state.

       The actual page sharing strategy expects three possible scenarios:

       ■■   The page is active and valid, but it contains all zeroes, so rather than combining, it replaces
            its PTE with a demand-zero PTE. Recall that this is the initial state of normal VirtualAlloc-like
            memory allocation.

       ■■   The page is active and valid, but it is not zeroed out, meaning it has to be shared. The algorithm
            checks if the page has to be promoted as the master: if the CRC/PFN entry has a pointer to a
            valid combine block, it means that it’s not the master page; otherwise, the page is the master
            copy. The master page hash is rechecked and a new physical page assigned for the sharing.
            Otherwise, the already existing combine block is used (and its reference count incremented).
            The system is now ready to convert the private page into a shared one, and calls the MiConvert-
            PrivateToProto routine to perform the actual job.

       ■■   The page is in the modified or standby list. In this case, it’s mapped to a system address as a
            valid page and its hash recalculated. The algorithm performs the same step as the previous
            scenario, with the only difference being that the PTE is converted from shared to prototype
            using the MiConvertStandbyToProto routine.

       When the sharing of the current page ends, the system inserts the combine block of the master
    copy into the PCS structure. This is important because the combine block becomes the link between
    each private PTE and the combined page.

    From private to shared PTE
    The goal of MiConvertPrivateToProto is to convert a PTE of an active and valid page. If the routine de-
    tects that the prototype PTE inside the combine block is zero, it means that the master page must be cre-
    ated (together with the master shared prototype PTE). It then maps the free physical page into a system
    address and copies the content of the private page into the new shared one. Before actually creating the
    shared PTE, the system should free any page file reservation (see the section “Page file reservation” earlier
    in this chapter) and fill the PFN descriptor of the shared page. The shared PFN has the prototype bit set,
    and the PTE frame pointer set to the PFN of the physical page that contains the Prototype PTE. Most im-
    portantly, it has the PTE pointer set to the PTE located inside the combine block, but with the 63rd bit set
    to zero. This signifies to the system that the PFN belongs to a page that has been combined.

    Next, the system needs to modify the PTE of the private page so that its target PFN is set to the
shared physical page, its protection mask changed to copy-on-write, and the private page PTE is
marked as valid. The prototype PTE inside the combine block is marked as a valid hardware PTE too:
the content is identical to the new PTE of the private page. Finally, the page file space allocated for the
private page is freed and the original PFN of the private page is marked as deleted. The TLB cache is
flushed and the private process working set size is decremented by one page.

   Otherwise (the prototype PTE inside the combine block is non-zero), it means that the private page
should be a copy of the master one. Only the active PTE of the private page must be converted. The
PFN of the shared page is mapped to a system address and the content of the two pages is compared.
This is important because the CRC algorithm does not produce unique values in the general case. If the
two pages don’t match, the function stops processing and returns. Otherwise, it unmaps the shared
page and sets the page priority of the shared PFN to the higher of the two. Figure 5-46 shows the state
where only a master page exists.

FIGURE 5-46   Combined master page.

    The algorithm now calculates the new invalid software prototype PTE that should be inserted into
the process private page table. To do that, it reads the address of the hardware PTE that maps the
shared page (located in the combine block), shifts it, and sets the Prototype and Combined bits. A
check is made that the share count of the private PFN is 1. If it is not, processing is aborted. The algo-
rithm writes the new software PTE in the private page table of the process and decrements the share
count of the page table of the old private PFN (keep in mind that an active PFN always has a pointer to
its page table). The target process working set size is decremented by one page and the TLB is flushed.
The old private page is moved into the transition state, and its PFN is marked for deletion. Figure 5-47
shows two pages, where the new page points to the prototype PTE but is not yet valid.

    Finally, the system uses another trick to prevent working set trimming on the shared pages by
simulating a page fault. That way the share count of the shared PFN is again incremented, and no fault
would occur at a time the process will try to read the shared page. The end result is that the private PTE
is again a valid hardware PTE. Figure 5-48 shows the effect of a soft page fault on the second page,
making it valid and incrementing the share count.

    FIGURE 5-47   Combined pages before simulated page fault.

    FIGURE 5-48   Combined pages after simulated page fault.

    Combined pages release
    When the system needs to free a particular virtual address, it first locates the address of the PTE that maps
    it. The pointed PFN of a combined page has the prototype and combined bits set. The free request for a
    combined PFN is managed exactly like the one for a prototype PFN. The only difference is that the system
    (if the combined bit is set) calls MiDecrementCombinedPte after processing the prototype PFN.

   MiDecrementCombinedPte is a simple function that decrements the reference count of the combine
block of the Prototype PTE. (Keep in mind that at this stage the PTE is in transition because the memory
manager has already dereferenced the physical page that it maps. The share count of the physical page
has already dropped to zero, and so the system put the PTE in transition.) If the reference count drops
to zero, the prototype PTE will be freed, the physical page put in the free list, and the combine block
returned to the combine free list of the PCS structure of the memory partition.

   EXPERIMENT: Memory combining
   In this experiment, you will see the effects of memory combing. Follow these steps:

       1.   Start a kernel debugging session with a VM target (as described in Chapter 4, “Threads”).

       2.   Copy the MemCombine32.exe (for 32 bit targets) or MemCombine64.exe (for 64 bit
            targets), and MemCombineTest.exe executables from this book’s downloadable resources
            to the target machine.

       3.   Run MemCombineTest.exe on the target machine. You should see something like the
            following:

       4.   Note the two addresses shown. These are two buffers filled with a random generated
            pattern of bytes, repeated so that each page has the same content.

       5.   Break into the debugger. Locate the MemCombineTest process:
            0: kd> !process 0 0 memcombinetest.exe
            PROCESS ffffe70a3cb29080
                SessionId: 2 Cid: 0728     Peb: 00d08000 ParentCid: 11c4
                DirBase: c7c95000 ObjectTable: ffff918ede582640 HandleCount: <Data Not
            Accessible>
                Image: MemCombineTest.exe

       6.   Switch to the located process:
            0: kd> .process /i /r ffffe70a3cb29080
            You need to continue execution (press 'g' <enter>) for the context
            to be switched. When the debugger breaks in again, you will be in
            the new process context.
            0: kd> g
            Break instruction exception - code 80000003 (first chance)
            nt!DbgBreakPointWithStatus:
            fffff801'94b691c0 cc              int     3

          7.   Use the !pte command to locate the PFN where the two buffers are stored:
               0: kd> !pte b80000
                                                           VA 0000000000b80000
               PXE at FFFFA25128944000    PPE at FFFFA25128800000     PDE at
               FFFFA25100000028    PTE at FFFFA20000005C00
               contains 00C0000025BAC867 contains 0FF00000CAA2D867 contains
               00F000003B22F867 contains B9200000DEDFB867
               pfn 25bac     ---DA--UWEV pfn caa2d      ---DA--UWEV pfn 3b22f                ---DA--
               UWEV pfn dedfb      ---DA--UW-V

               0: kd> !pte b90000
                                                           VA 0000000000b90000
               PXE at FFFFA25128944000    PPE at FFFFA25128800000     PDE at
               FFFFA25100000028    PTE at FFFFA20000005C80
               contains 00C0000025BAC867 contains 0FF00000CAA2D867 contains
               00F000003B22F867 contains B9300000F59FD867
               pfn 25bac     ---DA--UWEV pfn caa2d      ---DA--UWEV pfn 3b22f                ---DA--
               UWEV pfn f59fd      ---DA--UW-V

          8.   Notice the PFN values are different, indicating that these pages are mapped to different
               physical addresses. Resume the target.

          9.   On the target, open an elevated command window, navigate to the directory where
               you copied MemCombine(32/64), and run it. The tool forces a full memory combining,
               which may take a few seconds.

          10. When it’s finished, break into the debugger again. Repeat steps 6 and 7. You should see
               the PFNs change:
               1: kd> !pte b80000
                                                           VA 0000000000b80000
               PXE at FFFFA25128944000    PPE at FFFFA25128800000     PDE at
               FFFFA25100000028    PTE at FFFFA20000005C00
               contains 00C0000025BAC867 contains 0FF00000CAA2D867 contains
               00F000003B22F867 contains B9300000EA886225
               pfn 25bac     ---DA--UWEV pfn caa2d      ---DA--UWEV pfn 3b22f                ---DA--
               UWEV pfn ea886      C---A--UR-V

               1: kd> !pte b90000
                                                           VA 0000000000b90000
               PXE at FFFFA25128944000    PPE at FFFFA25128800000     PDE at
               FFFFA25100000028    PTE at FFFFA20000005C80
               contains 00C0000025BAC867 contains 0FF00000CAA2D867 contains
               00F000003B22F867 contains BA600000EA886225
               pfn 25bac     ---DA--UWEV pfn caa2d      ---DA--UWEV pfn 3b22f                ---DA--
               UWEV pfn ea886      C---A--UR-V

          11. Notice the PFN values are the same, meaning the pages are mapped to the exact same
               address in RAM. Also note the C flag in the PFN, indicating copy-on-write.

          12. Resume the target and press any key in the MemCombineTest window. This changes a
               single byte in the first buffer.

          13. Break into the target again and repeat steps 6 and 7 yet again:
                 1: kd> !pte b80000
                                                             VA 0000000000b80000
                 PXE at FFFFA25128944000    PPE at FFFFA25128800000     PDE at
                 FFFFA25100000028    PTE at FFFFA20000005C00
                 contains 00C0000025BAC867 contains 0FF00000CAA2D867 contains
                 00F000003B22F867 contains B9300000813C4867
                 pfn 25bac     ---DA--UWEV pfn caa2d      ---DA--UWEV pfn 3b22f                ---DA--
                 UWEV pfn 813c4      ---DA--UW-V

                 1: kd> !pte b90000
                                                             VA 0000000000b90000
                 PXE at FFFFA25128944000    PPE at FFFFA25128800000     PDE at
                 FFFFA25100000028    PTE at FFFFA20000005C80
                 contains 00C0000025BAC867 contains 0FF00000CAA2D867 contains
                 00F000003B22F867 contains BA600000EA886225
                 pfn 25bac     ---DA--UWEV pfn caa2d      ---DA--UWEV pfn 3b22f                ---DA--
                 UWEV pfn ea886      C---A--UR-V

          14. The PFN for the first buffer has changed, and the copy-on-write flag was removed. The
                 page has changed and was relocated to a different address in RAM.

Memory enclaves
   Threads executing in a process have access to the entire process address space (as determined by page
   protection, which can be changed). This is desirable most of the time; however, in case malicious code
   manages to get itself injected into a process, it has the exact same power. It can freely read data that
   may contain sensitive information and even change it.

      Intel has created a technology called Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX) that allows the cre-
   ation of protected memory enclaves—secure zones in a process address space where code and data
   are protected by the CPU from code running outside the enclave. Conversely, code running inside an
   enclave has full (normal) access to process address space outside the enclave. Naturally, the protection
   extends to access from other processes and even code running in kernel mode. A simplified diagram of
   memory enclaves is shown in Figure 5-49.

   FIGURE 5-49    Memory enclaves.

       Intel SGX is supported by sixth generation Core processors (“Skylake”) and later generations. Intel
    has its own SDK for application developers that can be used on Windows 7 and later systems (64 bit
    only). Starting with Windows 10 version 1511 and Server 2016, Windows provide an abstraction using
    Windows API functions that removes the need to use Intel’s SDK. Other CPU vendors may create similar
    solutions in the future, and these will also be wrapped by the same API, providing a relatively portable
    layer for application developers to use for creating and populating enclaves.

       Note Not all sixth generation Core processors support SGX. Also, an appropriate BIOS update
       must be installed on the system for SGX to work. Consult the Intel SGX documentation for
       more information. The Intel SGX website can be found at https://software.intel.com/en-us/sgx.

       Note At the time of this writing, Intel produced two versions of SGX (versions 1.0 and 2.0).
       Windows currently supports version 1.0 only. The differences are outside the scope of this
       book; consult the SGX documentation for more information.

       Note Current SGX versions do not support enclaves in ring 0 (kernel mode). Only ring 3
       (user mode) enclaves are supported.

    Programmatic interface
    From an application developer’s perspective, creating and working with an enclave consists of the fol-
    lowing steps. (The internal details are described in the following sections.)

       1.   Initially the program should determine whether memory enclaves are supported by calling
            IsEnclaveTypeSupported, passing a value representing the enclave technology, which cur-
            rently can only be ENCLAVE_TYPE_SGX.

       2.   A new enclave is created by calling the CreateEnclave function, which is similar in its arguments
            to VirtualAllocEx. For example, it’s possible to create an enclave in a different process than
            the caller process. The complication in this function is the need to provide a vendor-specific
            configuration structure, which for Intel means a 4 KB data structure called SGX Enclave Control
            Structure (SECS), which Microsoft does not define explicitly. Instead, developers are expected
            to create their own structure based on the particular technology used and defined in its docu-
            mentation.

       3.   Once an empty enclave is created, the next step is to populate the enclave with code and data
            from outside of the enclave. This is accomplished by calling LoadEnclaveData where an external
            memory to the enclave is used to copy data to the enclave. Multiple calls to LoadEnclaveData
            may be used to populate the enclave.

   4.   The last step that is required to “activate” the enclave is achieved with the InitializeEnclave
        function. At that point, code that was configured to execute within the enclave can start executing.

   5.   Unfortunately, executing the code in the enclave is not wrapped by the API. Direct use of as-
        sembly language is required. The EENTER instruction transfers execution to the enclave and the
        EEXIT instruction causes return to the calling function. Abnormal termination of the enclave
        execution is also possible with Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX), such as due to a fault. The
        exact details are beyond the scope of this book, as they are not Windows-specific. Consult the
        SGX documentation to get the fine details.

   6.   Finally, to destroy the enclave, a normal VirtualFree(Ex) function can be used on the pointer
        to the enclave obtained in CreateEnclave.

Memory enclave initializations
During boot, Winload (the Windows Boot Loader) calls OslEnumerateEnclavePageRegions, which
first checks if SGX is supported using the CPUID instruction. If it is, it issues instructions to enumerate
Enclave Page Cache (EPC) descriptors. EPC is the protected memory provided by the processor for cre-
ating and using enclaves. For each enumerated EPC, OslEnumerateEnclavePageRegions calls BlMm-
AddEnclavePageRange to add the page range information to a sorted list of memory descriptors with
a type value of LoaderEnclaveMemory. This list is eventually stored in the MemoryDescriptorListHead
member of the LOADER_PARAMETER_BLOCK structure used to pass information from the boot loader to
the kernel.

    During phase 1 initialization, the memory manager routine MiCreateEnclaveRegions is called to
create an AVL tree for the discovered enclave regions (allowing quick lookups when needed); the tree
is stored in the MiState.Hardrware.EnclaveRegions data member. The kernel adds a new enclave
page list, and a special flag passed to MiInsertPageInFreeOrZeroedList enables functionality to
utilize this new list. However, since the memory manager has actually run out of list identifiers (3 bits
are used for a maximum of 8 values, all taken), the kernel actually identifies these pages as being “bad”
pages currently suffering an in-page error. The memory manager knows never to use bad pages, so
calling enclave pages “bad” keeps them from being used by normal memory management operations,
and so such pages end up in the bad page list.

Enclave construction
The CreateEnclave API ends up calling NtCreateEnclave in the kernel. As noted, a SECS structure
must be passed in, documented by Intel SGX as shown in Table 5-24.

    NtCreateEnclave first checks if memory enclaves are supported by looking at the root of the AVL
tree (not by using the slower CPUID instruction). It then creates a copy of the passed-in structure
(as is usual for kernel functions obtaining data from user mode) and attaches to the target process
(KeStackAttachProcess) if the enclave is to be created in a different process than the caller’s. Then
it transfers control to MiCreateEnclave to begin the actual work.

    TABLE 5-24   SECS structure layout
     Field            Offset (bytes)     Size (bytes)    Description

     SIZE             0                  8               Size of enclave in bytes; must be power of 2

     BASEADDR         8                  8               Enclave base linear address must be naturally aligned to size

     SSAFRAMESIZE     16                 4               Size of one SSA frame in pages (including XSAVE, pad, GPR,
                                                         and conditionally MISC)

     MRSIGNER         128                32              Measurement register extended with the public key that
                                                         verified the enclave. See SIGSTRUCT for proper format

     RESERVED         160                96

     ISVPRODID        256                2               Product ID of enclave

     ISVSVN           258                2               Security version number (SVN) of the enclave

     EID              Implementation     8               Enclave identifier
                      dependent

     PADDING          Implementation     352             Padding pattern from the signature (used for key derivation
                      dependent                          strings)

     RESERVED         260                3836            Includes EID, other non-zero reserved field and must-be-zero
                                                         fields

        The first thing MiCreateEnclave does is allocate the Address Windowing Extension (AWE) informa-
    tion structure that AWE APIs also utilize. This is because similar to the AWE functionality, an enclave
    allows a user-mode application to directly have access over physical pages (that is to say, the physical
    pages that are EPC pages based on the detection described earlier). Anytime a user-mode application
    has such direct control over physical pages, AWE data structures and locks must be used. This data
    structure is stored in the AweInfo field of the EPROCESS structure.

        Next, MiCreateEnclave calls MiAllocateEnclaveVad to allocate an enclave-type VAD describing
    the enclave virtual memory range. This VAD has the VadAwd flag (as all AWE VADs) but also an addition-
    al Enclave flag, to differentiate it from a true AWE VAD. Finally, as part of VAD allocation, this is where
    the user-mode address for the enclave memory will be chosen (if not explicitly specified in the original
    CreateEnclave call).

        The next step in MiCreateEnclave is to acquire an enclave page regardless of the enclave size
    or initial commitment. This is because, as per Intel’s SGX documentation, all enclaves require at least
    a one-page control structure to be associated with them. MiGetEnclavePage is used to obtain the
    required allocation. This function simply scans the enclave page list described earlier, and extracts one
    page as needed. The returned page is mapped using a system PTE stored as part of the enclave VAD;
    the MiInitializeEnclavePfn function sets up the related PFN data structure and marks it Modified
    and ActiveAndValid.

       There are no actual bits that would help you differentiate this enclave PFN from any other active
    region of memory (such as non-paged pool). This is where the enclave regions AVL tree comes into
    play, and MI_PFN_IS_ENCLAVE is a function that the kernel uses whenever it needs to check if a PFN is
    indeed describing an EPC region.

   With the PFN initialized, the system PTE is now converted to a final global kernel PTE, and its result-
ing virtual address is computed. The final step in MiCreateEnclave is to call KeCreateEnclave, which
will now do the low-level kernel enclave creation steps, including communication with the actual
SGX hardware implementation. One job that KeCreateEnclave is responsible for is filling in the base
address required by the SECS structure if the caller did not specify one, as it must be set in the SECS
structure before communicating with the SGX hardware to create an enclave.

Loading data into an enclave
Once an enclave has been created, it’s time to load information into it. The LoadEnclaveData func-
tion is exposed for that purpose. The function merely forwards the request to the underlying executive
function, NtLoadEnclaveData. The function resembles a combination of a memory copy operation
with some VirtualAlloc attributes (such as page protection).

    If the enclave created with CreateEnclave doesn’t yet have any committed enclave pages, they
must first be obtained, which will result in zeroed out memory being added to the enclave, which can
then be filled with non-zero memory from outside the enclave. Otherwise, if an initial pre-committed
initialization size was passed in, then the enclave’s pages can directly be filled in with non-zero memory
from outside of the enclave.

   Because enclave memory is described by a VAD, many of the traditional memory management APIs
will function, at least partly, on this memory as well. For example, calling VirtualAlloc (ending up in
NtAllocateVirtualMemory) on such an address with the MEM_COMMIT flag will result in MiCommitEn-
clavePages being called, which will validate that the protection mask for the new pages is compat-
ible (i.e., a combination of read, write, and/or execute, without any special caching or write combining
flags), and then call MiAddPagesToEnclave, passing a pointer to the enclave VAD associated with the
address range, the protection mask that was specified to VirtualAlloc, and the PTE addresses that
correspond to the virtual address range being committed.

   MiAddPagesToEnclave first checks if the enclave VAD has any existing EPC pages associated with it,
and if there’s enough of them to satisfy the commit. If not, MiReserveEnclavePages is called to obtain
a sufficient amount. MiReserveEnclavePages looks at the current enclave page list and counts the
total. If there aren’t enough physical EPC pages provided by the processor (based on the information
obtained at boot), the function fails. Otherwise, it calls MiGetEnclavePage in a loop for the required
amount of pages.

   For each PFN entry that is retrieved, it is linked into the PFN array in the enclave VAD. Essentially, this
means that once an enclave PFN is removed from the enclave page list and put into an active state, the
enclave VAD acts as the list of active enclave PFNs.

   Once the required committed pages have been obtained, MiAddPagesToEnclave translates the
page protection passed to LoadEnclaveData into their SGX equivalents. Next, it reserves the appropri-
ate number of system PTEs to hold paging information for each EPC pages that will be required. With
this information in hand, it will eventually call KeAddEnclavePage that calls the SGX hardware to do the
actual page adding.

       One special page protection attribute is PAGE_ENCLAVE_THREAD_CONTROL, which indicates the
    memory is for a Thread Control Structure (TCS) defined by SGX. Each TCS represents a different thread
    that can execute independently within the enclave.

      NtLoadEnclaveData validates parameters and then calls MiCopyPagesIntoEnclave to do the actual
    work, which may require getting committed pages as described earlier.

    Initializing an enclave
    Now that the enclave has been created and data has been transferred into it, there is another last step
    to perform before actual code in the enclave can execute. InitializeEnclave must be called to notify
    SGX that the enclave is in its final state before execution can begin. InitializeEnclave requires two
    SGX-specific structures to be passed in (SIGSTRUCT and EINITTOKEN; see the SGX documentation for
    the details).

       The executive function NtInitializeEnclave called by InitializeEnclave does some parameter
    validation and makes sure the enclave VAD obtained has the correct attributes and then passed the
    structures along to the SGX hardware. Note that an enclave can only be initialized once.

       The final step would be to use the Intel assembly instruction EENTER to start code execution (again,
    see the SGX documentation for the details).

Proactive memory management (SuperFetch)
    Traditional memory management in operating systems has focused on the demand-paging model
    discussed thus far, with some advances in clustering and prefetching so that disk I/O can be optimized
    at the time of the demand-page fault. Client versions of Windows, however, include a significant im-
    provement in the management of physical memory with the implementation of SuperFetch, a memory
    management scheme that enhances the least–recently accessed approach with historical file access
    information and proactive memory management.

        The standby list management in older versions of Windows had two limitations. First, the prioritiza-
    tion of pages relies only on the recent past behavior of processes and does not anticipate their future
    memory requirements. Second, the data used for prioritization is limited to the list of pages owned by
    a process at any given point in time. These shortcomings can result in scenarios in which the computer
    is left unattended for a brief period of time, during which a memory-intensive system application runs
    (doing work such as an antivirus scan or a disk defragmentation) and then causes subsequent interac-
    tive application use (or launch) to be sluggish. The same thing can happen when a user purposely runs
    a data- and/or memory-intensive application and then returns to use other programs, which appear to
    be significantly less responsive.

        This decline in performance occurs because the memory-intensive application forces the code and
    data that active applications had cached in memory to be overwritten by the memory-intensive activi-
    ties—applications perform sluggishly as they have to request their data and code from disk. Client
    versions of Windows take a big step toward resolving these limitations with SuperFetch.

Components
SuperFetch has several components in the system that work hand in hand to proactively manage
memory and limit the impact on user activity when SuperFetch is performing its work. These compo-
nents include the following:

   ■■   Tracer The tracer mechanisms are part of a kernel component (Pf) that allows SuperFetch to
        query detailed page-usage, session, and process information at any time. SuperFetch also uses
        the FileInfo mini-filter driver (%SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers\Fileinfo.sys) to track file usage.

   ■■   Trace collector and processor This collector works with the tracing components to provide
        a raw log based on the tracing data that has been acquired. This tracing data is kept in memory
        and handed off to the processor. The processor then hands the log entries in the trace to the
        agents, which maintain history files (described next) in memory and persist them to disk when
        the service stops, such as during a reboot.

   ■■   Agents SuperFetch keeps file page access information in history files, which keep track of
        virtual offsets. Agents group pages by attributes, such as the following:

        • Page access while the user was active
        • Page access by a foreground process
        • Hard fault while the user was active
        • Page access during an application launch
        • Page access upon the user returning after a long idle period
   ■■   Scenario manager This component, also called the context agent, manages the three Super-
        Fetch scenario plans: hibernation, standby, and fast-user switching. The kernel-mode part of the
        scenario manager provides APIs for initiating and terminating scenarios, managing the current
        scenario state, and associating tracing information with these scenarios.

   ■■   Rebalancer Based on the information provided by the SuperFetch agents, as well as the
        current state of the system (such as the state of the prioritized page lists), the rebalancer—a
        specialized agent in the Superfetch user-mode service—queries the PFN database and repri-
        oritizes it based on the associated score of each page, thus building the prioritized standby lists.
        The rebalancer can also issue commands to the memory manager that modify the working sets
        of processes on the system, and it is the only agent that actually takes action on the system.
        Other agents merely filter information for the rebalancer to use in its decisions. In addition to
        reprioritization, the rebalancer initiates prefetching through the prefetcher thread, which uses
        FileInfo and kernel services to preload memory with useful pages.

   All these components use facilities inside the memory manager that allow for the querying of
detailed information about the state of each page in the PFN database, the current page counts for
each page list and prioritized list, and more. Figure 5-50 shows an architectural diagram of SuperFetch’s
multiple components. SuperFetch components also use prioritized I/O to minimize user impact. (See
Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more on I/O priority.)

    FIGURE 5-50   SuperFetch architectural diagram.

    Tracing and logging
    SuperFetch makes most of its decisions based on information that has been integrated, parsed, and
    post-processed from raw traces and logs, making these two components among the most critical.
    Tracing is like ETW in some ways because it uses certain triggers in code throughout the system to
    generate events, but it also works in conjunction with facilities already provided by the system, such as
    power-manager notification, process callbacks, and file-system filtering. The tracer also uses traditional
    page-aging mechanisms that exist in the memory manager, as well as newer working-set aging and
    access tracking implemented for SuperFetch.

        SuperFetch always keeps a trace running and continuously queries trace data from the system,
    which tracks page usage and access through the memory manager’s access bit tracking and working-
    set aging. To track file-related information, which is as critical as page usage because it allows priori-
    tization of file data in the cache, SuperFetch leverages existing filtering functionality with the addi-
    tion of the FileInfo driver. (See Chapter 6 for more information on filter drivers.) This driver sits on the
    file-system device stack and monitors access and changes to files at the stream level, which provides
    it with fine-grained understanding of file access. (For more information on NTFS data streams, see
    Chapter 13 in Part 2.) The main job of the FileInfo driver is to associate streams—identified by a unique
    key, currently implemented as the FsContext field of the respective file object—with file names so that
    the user-mode Superfetch service can identify the specific file stream and offset that a page in the
    standby list belonging to a memory-mapped section is associated with. It also provides the interface
    for prefetching file data transparently, without interfering with locked files and other file-system state.

The rest of the driver ensures that the information stays consistent by tracking deletions, renaming
operations, truncations, and the reuse of file keys by implementing sequence numbers.

   At any time during tracing, the rebalancer might be invoked to repopulate pages differently. These
decisions are made by analyzing information such as the distribution of memory within working sets,
the zero page list, the modified page list and the standby page lists, the number of faults, the state of
PTE access bits, the per-page usage traces, current virtual address consumption, and working set size.

   A given trace can be a page-access trace, in which the tracer uses the access bit to keep track of
which pages were accessed by the process (both file page and private memory). Or, it can be a name-
logging trace, which monitors the file name–to–file key mapping updates to the actual file on disk.
These allow SuperFetch to map a page associated with a file object.

    Although a SuperFetch trace only keeps track of page accesses, the Superfetch service processes
this trace in user mode and goes much deeper, adding its own richer information such as where the
page was loaded from (for example, in resident memory or a hard page fault), whether this was the ini-
tial access to that page, and what the rate of page access actually is. Additional information, such as the
system state, is also kept, as well as information about recent scenarios in which each traced page was
last referenced. The generated trace information is kept in memory through a logger into data struc-
tures, which—in the case of page-access traces—identify traces, a virtual address–to–working set pair,
or, in the case of a name-logging trace, a file-to-offset pair. SuperFetch can thus keep track of which
range of virtual addresses for a given process have page-related events and which range of offsets for a
given file have similar events.

Scenarios
One aspect of SuperFetch that is distinct from its primary page reprioritization and prefetching mecha-
nisms (covered in more detail in the next section) is its support for scenarios, which are specific actions
on the machine for which SuperFetch strives to improve the user experience. These scenarios are as
follows:

   ■■   Hibernation The goal of hibernation is to intelligently decide which pages are saved in the
        hibernation file other than the existing working-set pages. The idea is to minimize the amount
        of time it takes for the system to become responsive after a resume.

   ■■   Standby The goal of standby is to completely remove hard faults after resume. Because a typ-
        ical system can resume in less than 2 seconds, but can take 5 seconds to spin up the hard drive
        after a long sleep, a single hard fault could cause such a delay in the resume cycle. SuperFetch
        prioritizes pages needed after a standby to remove this chance.

   ■■   Fast user switching The goal of fast user switching is to keep an accurate priority and un-
        derstanding of each user’s memory. That way, switching to another user will cause the user’s
        session to be immediately usable, and won’t require a large amount of lag time to allow pages
        to be faulted in.

  Each of these scenarios has different goals, but all are centered around the main purpose of mini-
mizing or removing hard faults.

       Scenarios are hardcoded, and SuperFetch manages them through the NtSetSystemInformation
    and NtQuerySystemInformation APIs that control system state. For SuperFetch purposes, a special
    information class, SystemSuperfetchInformation, is used to control the kernel-mode components
    and to generate requests such as starting, ending, and querying a scenario or associating one or more
    traces with a scenario.

       Each scenario is defined by a plan file, which contains, at minimum, a list of pages associated with
    the scenario. Page priority values are also assigned according to certain rules (described next). When a
    scenario starts, the scenario manager is responsible for responding to the event by generating the list
    of pages that should be brought into memory and at which priority.

    Page priority and rebalancing
    You’ve already seen that the memory manager implements a system of page priorities to define which
    standby list pages will be repurposed for a given operation and in which list a given page will be in-
    serted. This mechanism provides benefits when processes and threads have associated priorities—for
    example, ensuring that a defragmenter process doesn’t pollute the standby page list and/or steal pages
    from an interactive foreground process. But its real power is unleashed through SuperFetch’s page-
    prioritization schemes and rebalancing, which don’t require manual application input or hardcoded
    knowledge of process importance.

        SuperFetch assigns page priority based on an internal score it keeps for each page, part of which is
    based on frequency-based usage. This usage counts how many times a page was used in given relative
    time intervals, such as by hour, day, or week. The system also keeps track of time of use, recording how
    long it’s been since a given page was accessed. Finally, data such as where this page comes from (which
    list) and other access patterns is used to compute this score.

        The score is translated into a priority number, which can be anywhere from 1 to 6. (A priority of 7 is
    used for another purpose, described later.) Going down each level, the lower standby page list priori-
    ties are repurposed first, as shown in the “Viewing the prioritized standby lists” experiment. Priority
    5 is typically used for normal applications, while priority 1 is meant for background applications that
    third-party developers can mark as such. Finally, priority 6 is used to keep a certain number of high-im-
    portance pages as far away as possible from repurposing. The other priorities are a result of the score
    associated with each page.

       Because SuperFetch “learns” a user’s system, it can start from scratch with no existing historical data
    and slowly build an understanding of the different page accesses associated with the user. However,
    this would result in a significant learning curve whenever a new application, user, or service pack was
    installed. Instead, by using an internal tool, Windows can pre-train SuperFetch to capture SuperFetch
    data and then turn it into prebuilt traces. These prebuilt traces were generated by the SuperFetch team,
    who traced common usages and patterns that all users will probably encounter, such as clicking the
    Start menu, opening Control Panel, or using the File Open/Save dialog box. This trace data was then
    saved to history files (which ship as resources in Sysmain.dll) and is used to prepopulate the special
    priority 7 list. This list is where the most critical data is placed and is rarely repurposed. Pages at priority
    7 are file pages kept in memory even after the process has exited and even across reboots (by being

repopulated at the next boot). Finally, pages with priority 7 are static, in that they are never reprioritized,
and SuperFetch will never dynamically load pages at priority 7 other than the static pretrained set.

    The prioritized list is loaded into memory (or prepopulated) by the rebalancer, but the actual act
of rebalancing is handled by both SuperFetch and the memory manager. As shown, the prioritized
standby page list mechanism is internal to the memory manager, and decisions as to which pages to
throw out first and which to protect are innate, based on the priority number. The rebalancer does its
job not by manually rebalancing memory but by reprioritizing it, which causes the memory manager
to perform the needed tasks. The rebalancer is also responsible for reading the actual pages from disk,
if needed, so that they are present in memory (prefetching). It then assigns the priority that is mapped
by each agent to the score for each page, and the memory manager ensures that the page is treated
according to its importance.

   The rebalancer can take action without relying on other agents—for example, if it notices that
the distribution of pages across paging lists is suboptimal or that the number of repurposed pages
across different priority levels is detrimental. The rebalancer can also trigger working-set trimming,
which might be required for creating an appropriate budget of pages that will be used for SuperFetch
prepopulated cache data. The rebalancer will typically take low-utility pages—such as those that are
already marked as low priority, that are zeroed, or that have valid content but not in any working set
and have been unused—and build a more useful set of pages in memory, given the budget it has al-
located itself. After the rebalancer has decided which pages to bring into memory and at which priority
level they need to be loaded (as well as which pages can be thrown out), it performs the required disk
reads to prefetch them. It also works in conjunction with the I/O manager’s prioritization schemes so
that I/Os are performed with very low priority and do not interfere with the user.

   The memory consumption used by prefetching is backed by standby pages. As described in the
discussion of page dynamics, standby memory is available memory because it can be repurposed as
free memory for another allocator at any time. In other words, if SuperFetch is prefetching the wrong
data, there is no real impact on the user because that memory can be reused when needed and doesn’t
actually consume resources.

   Finally, the rebalancer also runs periodically to ensure that pages it has marked as high priority have
actually been recently used. Because these pages will rarely (sometimes never) be repurposed, it is
important not to waste them on data that is rarely accessed but may have appeared to be frequently
accessed during a certain period. If such a situation is detected, the rebalancer runs again to push those
pages down in the priority lists.

    A special agent called the application launch agent is involved in a different kind of prefetching
mechanism, which attempts to predict application launches and builds a Markov chain model that
describes the probability of certain application launches given the existence of other application
launches within a time segment. These time segments are divided across four different periods of
roughly 6 hours each—morning, noon, evening, and night—and by weekday or weekend. For example,
if on Saturday and Sunday evening a user typically launches Outlook after having launched Word, the
application launch agent will likely prefetch Outlook based on the high probability of it running after
Word during weekend evenings.

        Because systems today have sufficiently large amounts of memory—on average more than 2 GB
    (although SuperFetch works well on low-memory systems, too)—the actual real amount of memory
    that frequently used processes on a machine need resident for optimal performance ends up being a
    manageable subset of their entire memory footprint. Often, SuperFetch can fit all the pages required
    into RAM. When it can’t, technologies such as ReadyBoost and ReadyDrive can further prevent disk
    usage.

    Robust performance
    A final performance-enhancing functionality of SuperFetch is called robustness, or robust performance.
    This component—managed by the user-mode Superfetch service but ultimately implemented in
    the kernel (Pf routines)—watches for specific file I/O access that might harm system performance by
    populating the standby lists with unneeded data. For example, if a process were to copy a large file
    across the file system, the standby list would be populated with the file’s contents, even though that file
    might never be accessed again (or not for a long period of time). This would throw out any other data
    within that priority—and if this was an interactive and useful program, chances are its priority would be
    at least 5.

       SuperFetch responds to two specific kinds of I/O access patterns:

       ■■   Sequential file access With this type of I/O access pattern, the system goes through all the
            data in a file.

       ■■   Sequential directory access      With this type of I/O access, the system goes through every file
            in a directory.

       When SuperFetch detects that a certain amount of data past an internal threshold has been popu-
    lated in the standby list as a result of this kind of access, it applies aggressive deprioritization (called
    robustion) to the pages being used to map this file. This occurs within the targeted process only so
    as not to penalize other applications. These pages, which are said to be robusted, essentially become
    reprioritized to priority 2.

       Because this component of SuperFetch is reactive and not predictive, it does take some time for the
    robustion to kick in. SuperFetch will therefore keep track of this process for the next time it runs. Once
    SuperFetch has determined that it appears that this process always performs this kind of sequential ac-
    cess, it remembers this and robusts the file pages as soon as they’re mapped instead of waiting for the
    reactive behavior. At this point, the entire process is now considered robusted for future file access.

        Just by applying this logic, however, SuperFetch could potentially hurt many legitimate applications
    or user scenarios that perform sequential access in the future. For example, by using the Sysinternals
    Strings.exe utility, you can look for a string in all executables that are part of a directory. If there are
    many files, SuperFetch would likely perform robustion. Now, next time you run Strings.exe with a dif-
    ferent search parameter, it would run just as slowly as it did the first time even though you’d expect it
    to run much faster. To prevent this, SuperFetch keeps a list of processes that it watches into the future,
    as well as an internal hard-coded list of exceptions. If a process is detected to later re-access robusted
    files, robustion is disabled on the process to restore the expected behavior.

   The main point to remember when thinking about robustion—and SuperFetch optimizations in
general—is that SuperFetch constantly monitors usage patterns and updates its understanding of
the system to avoid fetching useless data. Although changes in a user’s daily activities or application
startup behavior might cause SuperFetch to pollute the cache with irrelevant data or to throw out data
that it might think is useless, it will quickly adapt to any pattern changes. If the user’s actions are erratic
and random, the worst that can happen is that the system will behave in a similar state as if SuperFetch
were not present at all. If SuperFetch is ever in doubt or cannot track data reliably, it quiets itself and
doesn’t make changes to a given process or page.

ReadyBoost
These days, RAM is easily available and relatively cheap compared to a decade ago. Still, it doesn’t beat
the cost of secondary storage such as hard disk drives. Unfortunately, mechanical hard disks contain
many moving parts, are fragile, and, more importantly, are relatively slow compared to RAM, especially
during seeking. As a result, storing active SuperFetch data on the drive would be as bad as paging out a
page and hard-faulting it inside memory.

   Solid state disks and hybrid drives offset some of these disadvantages but they are still pricier and
slower compared to RAM. Portable solid state media such as USB flash disk (UFD), CompactFlash cards,
and Secure Digital cards, however, provide a useful compromise. They are cheaper than RAM and avail-
able in larger sizes, but also have shorter seek times than mechanical hard drives because of the lack of
moving parts.

   Note In practice, CompactFlash cards and Secure Digital cards are almost always inter-
   faced through a USB adapter, so they all appear to the system as USB flash disks.

   Random disk I/O is especially expensive because disk head seek time plus rotational latency for typi-
cal desktop hard drives total about 10 milliseconds—an eternity for today’s 3 or 4 GHz processors. Flash
memory, however, can service random reads up to 10 times faster than a typical hard disk. Windows
therefore includes a feature called ReadyBoost to take advantage of flash memory storage devices by
creating an intermediate caching layer on them that logically sits between memory and disks.

   ReadyBoost (not to be confused with ReadyBoot) is implemented with the aid of a driver (%System-
Root%\System32\Drivers\Rdyboost.sys) that is responsible for writing the cached data to the non-
volatile RAM (NVRAM) device. When you insert a USB flash disk into a system, ReadyBoost looks at the
device to determine its performance characteristics and stores the results of its test in HKLM\SOFTWARE\
Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Emdmgmt. (Emd is short for external memory device, the work-
ing name for ReadyBoost during its development.)

   If the new device is between 256 MB and 32 GB in size, has a transfer rate of 2.5 MB per second or
higher for random 4 KB reads, and has a transfer rate of 1.75 MB per second or higher for random 512
KB writes, then ReadyBoost will ask if you’d like to dedicate some of the space for disk caching. If you
agree, ReadyBoost creates a file named ReadyBoost.sfcache in the root of the device, which it uses to
store cached pages.

        After initializing caching, ReadyBoost intercepts all reads and writes to local hard disk volumes
    (C:\, for example) and copies any data being read or written into the caching file that the service created.
    There are exceptions—for example, data that hasn’t been read in a long while or data that belongs to
    Volume Snapshot requests. Data stored on the cached drive is compressed and typically achieves a 2:1
    compression ratio, so a 4 GB cache file will usually contain 8 GB of data. Each block is encrypted as it is
    written using Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) encryption with a randomly generated per-boot
    session key to guarantee the privacy of the data in the cache if the device is removed from the system.

       When ReadyBoost sees random reads that can be satisfied from the cache, it services them from
    there. However, because hard disks have better sequential read access than flash memory, it lets reads
    that are part of sequential access patterns go directly to the disk even if the data is in the cache. Like-
    wise, when reading the cache, if large I/Os must be done, the on-disk cache will be read instead.

        One disadvantage of depending on flash media is that the user can remove it at any time, which
    means the system can never solely store critical data on the media. (As you’ve seen, writes always go to
    the secondary storage first.) A related technology, ReadyDrive, covered in the next section, offers ad-
    ditional benefits and solves this problem.

    ReadyDrive
    ReadyDrive is a Windows feature that takes advantage of hybrid hard disk drives (H-HDDs). An H-HDD
    is a disk with embedded NVRAM. Typical H-HDDs include between 50 MB and 512 MB of cache.

        Under ReadyDrive, the drive’s flash memory does not simply act as an automatic, transparent cache,
    as does the RAM cache common on most hard drives. Instead, Windows uses ATA-8 commands to
    define the disk data to be held in the flash memory. For example, Windows saves boot data to the
    cache when the system shuts down, allowing for faster restarting. It also stores portions of hibernation
    file data in the cache when the system hibernates so that the subsequent resume is faster. Because the
    cache is enabled even when the disk is spun down, Windows can use the flash memory as a disk-write
    cache, which avoids spinning up the disk when the system is running on battery power. Keeping the
    disk spindle turned off can save much of the power consumed by the disk drive under normal usage.

       Another consumer of ReadyDrive is SuperFetch. It offers the same advantages as ReadyBoost with
    some enhanced functionality, such as not requiring an external flash device and having the ability to
    work persistently. Because the cache is on the actual physical hard drive, which a user typically cannot
    remove while the computer is running, the hard drive controller typically doesn’t have to worry about
    the data disappearing and can avoid making writes to the actual disk using solely the cache.

    Process reflection
    There are often cases where a process exhibits problematic behavior, but because it’s still providing
    service, suspending it to generate a full memory dump or interactively debug it is undesirable. The
    length of time a process is suspended to generate a dump can be minimized by taking a minidump,
    which captures thread registers and stacks along with pages of memory referenced by registers, but
    that dump type has a very limited amount of information, which many times is sufficient for diagnosing

crashes but not for troubleshooting general problems. With process reflection, the target process is
suspended only long enough to generate a minidump and create a suspended cloned copy of the
target, and then the larger dump that captures all of a process’s valid user-mode memory can be
generated from the clone while the target is allowed to continue executing.

   Several Windows Diagnostic Infrastructure (WDI) components make use of process reflection to
capture minimally intrusive memory dumps of processes their heuristics identify as exhibiting suspi-
cious behavior. For example, the Memory Leak Diagnoser component of Windows Resource Exhaustion
Detection and Resolution (also known as RADAR), generates a reflected memory dump of a process
that appears to be leaking private virtual memory so that it can be sent to Microsoft via Windows Error
Reporting (WER) for analysis. WDI’s hung process detection heuristic does the same for processes that
appear to be deadlocked with one another. Because these components use heuristics, they can’t be certain
the processes are faulty and therefore can’t suspend them for long periods of time or terminate them.

    The RtlCreateProcessReflection function in Ntdll.dll drives the implementation of process
reflection. It works as follows:

   1.   It creates a shared memory section.

   2.   It populates the shared memory section with parameters.

   3.   It maps the shared memory section into the current and target processes.

   4.   It creates two event objects and duplicates them into the target process so that the current
        process and target process can synchronize their operations.

   5.   It injects a thread into the target process via a call to RtlpCreateUserThreadEx. The thread
        is directed to begin execution in Ntdll’s RtlpProcessReflectionStartup function. (Because
        Ntdll.dll is mapped at the same address (randomly generated at boot) into every process’s ad-
        dress space, the current process can simply pass the address of the function it obtains from its
        own Ntdll.dll mapping.

   6.   If the caller of RtlCreateProcessReflection specified that it wants a handle to the cloned
        process, RtlCreateProcessReflection waits for the remote thread to terminate, otherwise it
        returns to the caller.

   7.   The injected thread in the target process allocates an additional event object that it will use to
        synchronize with the cloned process once it’s created.

   8.   The injected thread calls RtlCloneUserProcess, passing parameters it obtains from the
        memory mapping it shares with the initiating process.

   9.   If the RtlCreateProcessReflection option that specifies the creation of the clone when the
        process is not executing in the loader, performing heap operations, modifying the process
        environment block (PEB), or modifying fiber-local storage is present, then RtlCreateProcess-
        Reflection acquires the associated locks before continuing. This can be useful for debugging
        because the memory dump’s copy of the data structures will be in a consistent state.

       10. RtlCloneUserProcess finishes by calling RtlpCreateUserProcess, the user-mode function
            responsible for general process creation, passing flags that indicate the new process should be
            a clone of the current one. RtlpCreateUserProcess in turn calls ZwCreateUserProcess to
            request the kernel to create the process.

       When creating a cloned process, ZwCreateUserProcess executes most of the same code paths as
    when it creates a new process, with the exception that PspAllocateProcess, which it calls to create the
    process object and initial thread, calls MmInitializeProcessAddressSpace with a flag specifying that
    the address should be a copy-on-write copy of the target process instead of an initial process address
    space. The memory manager uses the same support it provides for the Services for Unix Applications
    fork API to efficiently clone the address space. Once the target process continues execution, any
    changes it makes to its address space are seen only by it, not the clone. This enables the clone’s address
    space to represent a consistent point-in-time view of the target process.

        The clone’s execution begins at the point just after the return from RtlpCreateUserProcess. If the
    clone’s creation is successful, its thread receives the STATUS_PROCESS_CLONED return code, whereas the
    cloning thread receives STATUS_SUCCESS. The cloned process then synchronizes with the target and, as
    its final act, calls a function optionally passed to RtlCreateProcessReflection, which must be imple-
    mented in Ntdll.dll. RADAR, for instance, specifies RtlDetectHeapLeaks, which performs heuristic
    analysis of the process heaps and reports the results back to the thread that called RtlCreateProcess-
    Reflection. If no function was specified, the thread suspends itself or terminates, depending on the
    flags passed to RtlCreateProcessReflection.

        When RADAR and WDI use process reflection, they call RtlCreateProcessReflection, asking for
    the function to return a handle to the cloned process and for the clone to suspend itself after it has ini-
    tialized. Then they generate a minidump of the target process, which suspends the target for the dura-
    tion of the dump generation. Next, they generate a more comprehensive dump of the cloned process.
    After they finish generating the dump of the clone, they terminate the clone. The target process can
    execute during the time window between the minidump’s completion and the creation of the clone,
    but for most scenarios any inconsistencies do not interfere with troubleshooting. The Procdump utility
    from Sysinternals also follows these steps when you specify the –r switch to have it create a reflected
    dump of a target process.

Conclusion
    This chapter examined how the Windows memory manager implements virtual memory management.
    As with most modern operating systems, each process is given access to a private address space, pro-
    tecting one process’s memory from another’s but allowing processes to share memory efficiently and
    securely. Advanced capabilities, such as the inclusion of mapped files and the ability to sparsely allocate
    memory, are also available. The Windows environment subsystem makes most of the memory manager’s
    capabilities available to applications through the Windows API.

       The next chapter covers another critical part of any operating system—the I/O system.

