CHAPTER 6

I/O system

   T    he Windows I/O system consists of several executive components that, together, manage hardware
        devices and provide interfaces to hardware devices for applications and the system. This chapter
   lists the design goals of the I/O system, which have influenced its implementation. It then covers the
   components that make up the I/O system, including the I/O manager, Plug and Play (PnP) manager,
   and power manager. Then it examines the structure and components of the I/O system and the various
   types of device drivers. It discusses the key data structures that describe devices, device drivers, and I/O
   requests, after which it describes the steps necessary to complete I/O requests as they move through
   the system. Finally, it presents the way device detection, driver installation, and power management work.

I/O system components
   The design goals for the Windows I/O system are to provide an abstraction of devices, both hardware
   (physical) and software (virtual or logical), to applications with the following features:

      ■■   Uniform security and naming across devices to protect shareable resources. (See Chapter 7,
           “Security,” for a description of the Windows security model.)

      ■■   High-performance asynchronous packet-based I/O to allow for the implementation of scalable
           applications.

      ■■   Services that allow drivers to be written in a high-level language and easily ported between
           different machine architectures.

      ■■   Layering and extensibility to allow for the addition of drivers that transparently modify the be-
           havior of other drivers or devices, without requiring any changes to the driver whose behavior
           or device is modified.

      ■■   Dynamic loading and unloading of device drivers so that drivers can be loaded on demand and
           not consume system resources when unneeded.

      ■■   Support for Plug and Play, where the system locates and installs drivers for newly detected
           hardware, assigns them hardware resources they require, and allows applications to discover
           and activate device interfaces.

      ■■   Support for power management so that the system or individual devices can enter low-power
           states.

		
        ■■   Support for multiple installable file systems, including FAT (and its variants, FAT32 and exFAT),
             the CD-ROM file system (CDFS), the Universal Disk Format (UDF) file system, the Resilient File
             System (ReFS), and the Windows file system (NTFS). (See Chapter 13, “File systems,” in Part 2 of
             this book for more specific information on file system types and architecture.)

        ■■   Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) support and diagnosability so that drivers can
             be managed and monitored through WMI applications and scripts. (WMI is described in Chap-
             ter 9, “Management mechanisms,” in Part 2.)

       To implement these features, the Windows I/O system consists of several executive components as
     well as device drivers, which are shown in Figure 6-1.

     FIGURE 6-1   I/O system components.

        ■■   The I/O manager is the heart of the I/O system. It connects applications and system compo-
             nents to virtual, logical, and physical devices, and it defines the infrastructure that supports
             device drivers.

        ■■   A device driver typically provides an I/O interface for a particular type of device. A driver is a
             software module that interprets high-level commands, such as read or write commands, and
             issues low-level, device-specific commands, such as writing to control registers. Device drivers
             receive commands routed to them by the I/O manager that are directed at the devices they
             manage, and they inform the I/O manager when those commands are complete. Device drivers
             often use the I/O manager to forward I/O commands to other device drivers that share in the
             implementation of a device’s interface or control.

   ■■   The PnP manager works closely with the I/O manager and a type of device driver called a bus
        driver to guide the allocation of hardware resources as well as to detect and respond to the
        arrival and removal of hardware devices. The PnP manager and bus drivers are responsible for
        loading a device’s driver when the device is detected. When a device is added to a system that
        doesn’t have an appropriate device driver, the executive Plug and Play component calls on the
        device-installation services of the user-mode PnP manager.

   ■■   The power manager also works closely with the I/O manager and the PnP manager to guide the
        system, as well as individual device drivers, through power-state transitions.

   ■■   WMI support routines, called the Windows Driver Model (WDM) WMI provider, allow device
        drivers to indirectly act as providers, using the WDM WMI provider as an intermediary to com-
        municate with the WMI service in user mode.

   ■■   The registry serves as a database that stores a description of basic hardware devices attached
        to the system as well as driver initialization and configuration settings. (See the section “The
        registry” in Chapter 9 in Part 2 for more information.)

   ■■   INF files, which are designated by the .inf extension, are driver-installation files. INF files are the
        link between a particular hardware device and the driver that assumes primary control of that
        device. They are made up of script-like instructions describing the device they correspond to,
        the source and target locations of driver files, required driver-installation registry modifications,
        and driver-dependency information. Digital signatures that Windows uses to verify that a driver
        file has passed testing by the Microsoft Windows Hardware Quality Labs (WHQL) are stored in
        .cat files. Digital signatures are also used to prevent tampering of the driver or its INF file.

   ■■   The hardware abstraction layer (HAL) insulates drivers from the specifics of the processor and
        interrupt controller by providing APIs that hide differences between platforms. In essence, the
        HAL is the bus driver for all the devices soldered onto the computer’s motherboard that aren’t
        controlled by other drivers.

The I/O manager
The I/O manager is the core of the I/O system. It defines the orderly framework, or model, within which
I/O requests are delivered to device drivers. The I/O system is packet driven. Most I/O requests are
represented by an I/O request packet (IRP), which is a data structure that contains information com-
pletely describing an I/O request. The IRP travels from one I/O system component to another. (As you’ll
discover in the section “Fast I/O,” fast I/O is the exception; it doesn’t use IRPs.) The design allows an
individual application thread to manage multiple I/O requests concurrently. (For more information on
IRPs, see the section “I/O request packets” later in this chapter.)

   The I/O manager creates an IRP in memory to represent an I/O operation, passing a pointer to the
IRP to the correct driver and disposing of the packet when the I/O operation is complete. In contrast, a
driver receives an IRP, performs the operation the IRP specifies, and passes the IRP back to the I/O man-
ager, either because the requested I/O operation has been completed or because it must be passed on
to another driver for further processing.

        In addition to creating and disposing of IRPs, the I/O manager supplies code that is common to dif-
     ferent drivers and that the drivers can call to carry out their I/O processing. By consolidating common
     tasks in the I/O manager, individual drivers become simpler and more compact. For example, the I/O
     manager provides a function that allows one driver to call other drivers. It also manages buffers for I/O
     requests, provides timeout support for drivers, and records which installable file systems are loaded
     into the operating system. There are about 100 different routines in the I/O manager that can be called
     by device drivers.

        The I/O manager also provides flexible I/O services that allow environment subsystems, such as
     Windows and POSIX (the latter is no longer supported), to implement their respective I/O functions.
     These services include support for asynchronous I/O that allow developers to build scalable, high-
     performance server applications.

        The uniform, modular interface that drivers present allows the I/O manager to call any driver with-
     out requiring any special knowledge of its structure or internal details. The operating system treats all
     I/O requests as if they were directed at a file; the driver converts the requests from requests made to
     a virtual file to hardware-specific requests. Drivers can also call each other (using the I/O manager) to
     achieve layered, independent processing of an I/O request.

        Besides providing the normal open, close, read, and write functions, the Windows I/O system pro-
     vides several advanced features, such as asynchronous, direct, buffered, and scatter/gather I/O, which
     are described in the “Types of I/O” section later in this chapter.

     Typical I/O processing
     Most I/O operations don’t involve all the components of the I/O system. A typical I/O request starts
     with an application executing an I/O-related function (for example, reading data from a device) that is
     processed by the I/O manager, one or more device drivers, and the HAL.

        As mentioned, in Windows, threads perform I/O on virtual files. A virtual file refers to any source
     or destination for I/O that is treated as if it were a file (such as devices, files, directories, pipes, and
     mailslots). A typical user mode client calls the CreateFile or CreateFile2 functions to get a handle
     to a virtual file. The function name is a little misleading—it’s not just about files, it’s anything that is
     known as a symbolic link within the object manager’s directory called GLOBAL??. The suffix “File” in the
     CreateFile* functions really means a virtual file object (FILE_OBJECT) that is the entity created by the
     executive as a result of these functions. Figure 6-2 shows a screenshot of the WinObj Sysinternals tool
     for the GLOBAL?? directory.

         As shown in Figure 6-2, a name such as C: is just a symbolic link to an internal name under the Device
     object manager directory (in this case, \Device\HarddiskVolume7). (See Chapter 8, “System mechanisms,”
     in Part 2 for more on the object manager and the object manager namespace.) All the names in the
     GLOBAL?? directory are candidates for arguments to CreateFile(2). Kernel mode clients such as
     device drivers can use the similar ZwCreateFile to obtain a handle to a virtual file.

FIGURE 6-2   The object manager’s GLOBAL?? directory.

   Note Higher-level abstractions such as the .NET Framework and the Windows Runtime
   have their own APIs for working with files and devices (for example, the System.IO.File
   class in .NET or the Windows.Storage.StorageFile class in WinRT), but these eventually call
   CreateFile(2) to get the actual handle they hide under the covers.

   Note The GLOBAL?? object manager directory is sometimes called DosDevices, which is
   an older name. DosDevices still works because it’s defined as a symbolic link to GLOBAL?? in
   the root of the object manager’s namespace. In driver code, the ?? string is typically used to
   reference the GLOBAL?? directory.

    The operating system abstracts all I/O requests as operations on a virtual file because the I/O
manager has no knowledge of anything but files, therefore making it the responsibility of the driver to
translate file-oriented comments (open, close, read, write) into device-specific commands. This abstrac-
tion thereby generalizes an application’s interface to devices. User-mode applications call documented
functions, which in turn call internal I/O system functions to read from a file, write to a file, and perform
other operations. The I/O manager dynamically directs these virtual file requests to the appropriate
device driver. Figure 6-3 illustrates the basic structure of a typical I/O read request flow. (Other types
of I/O requests, such as write, are similar; they just use different APIs.)

     FIGURE 6-3   The flow of a typical I/O request.

        The following sections look at these components more closely, covering the various types of device
     drivers, how they are structured, how they load and initialize, and how they process I/O requests. Then
     we’ll cover the operation and roles of the PnP manager and the power manager.

Interrupt Request Levels and Deferred Procedure Calls
     Before we proceed, we must introduce two very important concepts of the Windows kernel that play an
     important role within the I/O system: Interrupt Request Levels (IRQL) and Deferred Procedure Calls (DPC).
     A thorough discussion of these concepts is reserved for Chapter 8 in Part 2, but we’ll provide enough
     information in this section to enable you to understand the mechanics of I/O processing that follow.

     Interrupt Request Levels
        The IRQL has two somewhat distinct meanings, but they converge in certain situations:

        ■■   An IRQL is a priority assigned to an interrupt source from a hardware device This num-
             ber is set by the HAL (in conjunction with the interrupt controller to which devices that require
             interrupt servicing are connected).

        ■■   Each CPU has its own IRQL value It should be considered a register of the CPU (even though
             current CPUs do not implement it as such).

   The fundamental rule of IRQLs is that lower IRQL code cannot interfere with higher IRQL code and
vice versa—code with a higher IRQL can preempt code running at a lower IRQL. You’ll see examples
of how this works in practice in a moment. A list of IRQLs for the Windows-supported architectures is
shown in Figure 6-4. Note that IRQLs are not the same as thread priorities. In fact, thread priorities have
meaning only when the IRQL is less than 2.

FIGURE 6-4   IRQLs.

   Note IRQL is not the same as IRQ (interrupt request). IRQs are hardware lines connecting
   devices to an interrupt controller. See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more on interrupts, IRQs, and
   IRQLs.

   Normally, the IRQL of a processor is 0. This means “nothing special” is happening in that regard, and
that the kernel’s scheduler that schedules threads based on priorities and so on works as described in
Chapter 4, “Threads.” In user mode, the IRQL can only be 0. There is no way to raise IRQL from user mode.
(That’s why user-mode documentation never mentions the IRQL concept at all; there would be no point.)

   Kernel-mode code can raise and lower the current CPU IRQL with the KeRaiseIrql and KeLower-
Irql functions. However, most of the time-specific functions are called with the IRQL raised to some
expected level, as you’ll see shortly when we discuss a typical I/O processing by a driver.

   The most important IRQLs for this I/O-related discussions are the following:

   ■■   Passive(0) This is defined by the PASSIVE_LEVEL macro in the WDK header wdm.h. It is the
        normal IRQL where the kernel scheduler is working normally, as described at length in Chapter 4.

        ■■   Dispatch/DPC (2) (DISPATCH_LEVEL) This is the IRQL the kernel’s scheduler works at. This
             means if a thread raises the current IRQL to 2 (or higher), the thread has essentially an infinite
             quantum and will not be preempted by another thread. Effectively, the scheduler cannot wake
             up on the current CPU until the IRQL drops below 2. This implies a few things:

             • With the IRQL at level 2 or above, any waiting on kernel dispatcher objects (such as mutexes,
                semaphores, and events) would crash the system. This is because waiting implies that the
                thread might enter a wait state and another should be scheduled on the same CPU. How-
                ever, because the scheduler is not around at this level, this cannot happen; instead, the
                system will bug-check (the only exception is if the wait timeout is zero, meaning no waiting
                is requested, just getting back the signaled state of the object).

             • No page faults can be handled. This is because a page fault would require a context switch
                to one of the modified page writers. However, context switches are not allowed, so the
                system would crash. This means code running at IRQL 2 or above can access only non-paged
                memory—typically memory allocated from non-paged pool, which by definition is always
                resident in physical memory.

        ■■   Device IRQL (3–26 on x86; 3–12 on x64 and ARM) (DIRQL) These are the levels assigned to
             hardware interrupts. When an interrupt arrives, the kernel’s trap dispatcher calls the appropri-
             ate interrupt service routine (ISR) and raises its IRQL to that of the associated interrupt. Because
             this value is always higher than DISPATCH_LEVEL (2), all rules associated with IRQL 2 apply for
             DIRQL as well.

        Running at a particular IRQL masks interrupts with that and lower IRQLs. For example, an ISR run-
     ning with IRQL of 8 would not let any code interfere (on that CPU) with IRQL of 7 or lower. Specifically,
     no user mode code is able to run because it always runs at IRQL 0. This implies that running in high
     IRQL is not desirable in the general case; there are a few specific scenarios (which we’ll look at in this
     chapter) where this makes sense and is in fact required for normal system operation.

     Deferred Procedure Calls
     A Deferred Procedure Call (DPC) is an object that encapsulates calling a function at IRQL DPC_LEVEL
     (2). DPCs exist primarily for post-interrupt processing because running at DIRQL masks (and thus de-
     lays) other interrupts waiting to be serviced. A typical ISR would do the minimum work possible, mostly
     reading the state of the device and telling it to stop its interrupt signal and then deferring further
     processing to a lower IRQL (2) by requesting a DPC. The term Deferred means the DPC will not execute
     immediately—it can’t because the current IRQL is higher than 2. However, when the ISR returns, if there
     are no pending interrupts waiting to be serviced, the CPU IRQL will drop to 2 and it will execute the
     DPCs that have accumulated (maybe just one). Figure 6-5 shows a simplified example of the sequence
     of events that may occur when interrupts from hardware devices (which are asynchronous in nature,
     meaning they can arrive at any time) occur while code executes normally at IRQL 0 on some CPU.

FIGURE 6-5   Example of interrupt and DPC processing.

   Here is a rundown of the sequence of events shown in Figure 6-5:

   1.   Some user-mode or kernel-mode code is executing while the CPU is at IRQL 0, which is the case
        most of the time.

   2.   A hardware interrupt arrives with an IRQL of 5 (remember that Device IRQLs have a minimum
        value of 3). Because 5 is greater than zero (the current IRQL), the CPU state is saved, the IRQL
        is raised to 5, and the ISR associated with that interrupt is called. Note that there is no context
        switch; it’s the same thread that now happens to execute the ISR code. (If the thread was in user
        mode, it switches to kernel mode whenever an interrupt arrives.)

   3.   ISR 1 starts executing while the CPU IRQL is 5. At this point, any interrupt with IRQL 5 or lower
        cannot interrupt.

   4.   Suppose another interrupt arrives with an IRQL of 8. Assume the system decides that the same
        CPU should handle it. Because 8 is greater than 5, the code is interrupted again, the CPU state is
        saved, the IRQL is raised to 8, and the CPU jumps to ISR 2. Note again that it’s the same thread.
        No context switch can happen because the thread scheduler cannot wake up if the IRQL is 2 or
        higher.

   5.   ISR 2 is executing. Before it’s done, ISR 2 would like to do some more processing at a lower IRQL
        so that interrupts with IRQLs less than 8 could be services as well.

   6.   As its final act, ISR 2 inserts a DPC initialized properly to point to a driver routine to do any post
        processing after the interrupt is dismissed by calling the KeInsertQueueDpc function. (We’ll
        discuss what this post-processing typically includes in the next section.) Then the ISR returns,
        restoring the CPU state saved before entering ISR 2.

   7.   At this point, the IRQL drops to its previous level (5) and the CPU continues execution of ISR 1
        that was interrupted before.

        8.   Just before ISR 1 finishes, it queues a DPC of its own to do its required post-processing. These
             DPCs are collected in a DPC queue that has not been examined yet. Then ISR 1 returns, restor-
             ing the CPU state saved before ISR 1 started execution.

        9.   At this point, the IRQL would want to drop to the old value of zero before all the interrupt han-
             dling began. However, the kernel notices that there are DPCs pending and so drops the IRQL to
             level 2 (DPC_LEVEL) and enters a DPC processing loop that iterates over the accumulated DPCs
             and calls each DPC routine in sequence. When the DPC queue is empty, DPC processing ends.

        10. Finally, the IRQL can drop back to zero, restore the state of the CPU again, and resume execu-
             tion of the original user or kernel code that got interrupted in the first place. Again, notice that
             all the processing described was done by the same thread (whichever one that may be). This
             fact implies that ISRs and DPC routines should not rely on any particular thread (and hence part
             of a particular process) to execute their code. It could be any thread, the significance of which
             will be discussed in the next section.

        The preceding description is a bit simplified. It doesn’t mention DPC importance, other CPUs that
     may handle DPCs for quicker DPC processing, and more. These details are not important for the discus-
     sion in this chapter. However, they are described fully in Chapter 8 in Part 2.

Device drivers
     To integrate with the I/O manager and other I/O system components, a device driver must conform to
     implementation guidelines specific to the type of device it manages and the role it plays in managing
     the device. This section discusses the types of device drivers Windows supports as well as the internal
     structure of a device driver.

        Note Most kernel-mode device drivers are written in C. Starting with the Windows Driver
        Kit 8.0, drivers can also be safely written in C++ due to specific support for kernel-mode C++
        in the new compilers. Use of assembly language is highly discouraged because of the com-
        plexity it introduces and its effect of making a driver difficult to port between the hardware
        architectures supported by Windows (x86, x64, and ARM).

     Types of device drivers
     Windows supports a wide range of device-driver types and programming environments. Even within a
     particular type of device driver, programming environments can differ depending on the specific type
     of device for which a driver is intended.

        The broadest classification of a driver is whether it is a user-mode or kernel-mode driver. Windows
     supports a couple of types of user-mode drivers:

   ■■   Windows subsystem printer drivers These translate device-independent graphics requests
        to printer-specific commands. These commands are then typically forwarded to a kernel-mode
        port driver such as the universal serial bus (USB) printer port driver (Usbprint.sys).

   ■■   User-Mode Driver Framework (UMDF) drivers These are hardware device drivers that run
        in user mode. They communicate to the kernel-mode UMDF support library through advanced
        local procedure calls (ALPC). See the “User-Mode Driver Framework” section later in this chap-
        ter for more information.

   In this chapter, the focus is on kernel-mode device drivers. There are many types of kernel-mode
drivers, which can be divided into the following basic categories:

   ■■   File-system drivers These accept I/O requests to files and satisfy the requests by issuing their
        own more explicit requests to mass storage or network device drivers.

   ■■   Plug and Play drivers These work with hardware and integrate with the Windows power
        manager and PnP manager. They include drivers for mass storage devices, video adapters, input
        devices, and network adapters.

   ■■   Non–Plug and Play drivers These include kernel extensions, which are drivers or modules
        that extend the functionality of the system. They do not typically integrate with the PnP
        manager or power manager because they usually do not manage an actual piece of hardware.
        Examples include network API and protocol drivers. The Sysinternals tool Process Monitor has a
        driver, and is an example of a non-PnP driver.

  Within the category of kernel-mode drivers are further classifications based on the driver model to
which the driver adheres and its role in servicing device requests.

WDM drivers
WDM drivers are device drivers that adhere to the Windows Driver Model (WDM). WDM includes sup-
port for Windows power management, Plug and Play, and WMI, and most Plug and Play drivers adhere
to WDM. There are three types of WDM drivers:

   ■■   Bus drivers These manage a logical or physical bus. Examples of buses include PCMCIA, PCI,
        USB, and IEEE 1394. A bus driver is responsible for detecting and informing the PnP manager of
        devices attached to the bus it controls and for managing the power setting of the bus. These are
        typically provided by Microsoft out of the box.

   ■■   Function drivers These manage a particular type of device. Bus drivers present devices to
        function drivers via the PnP manager. The function driver is the driver that exports the opera-
        tional interface of the device to the operating system. In general, it’s the driver with the most
        knowledge about the operation of the device.

   ■■   Filter drivers These logically layer either above function drivers (these are called upper filters or
        function filters) or above the bus driver (these are called lower filters or bus filters), augmenting or
        changing the behavior of a device or another driver. For example, a keyboard-capture utility could
        be implemented with a keyboard filter driver that layers above the keyboard function driver.

       Figure 6-6 shows a device node (also called a devnode) with a bus driver that creates a physical
     device object (PDO), lower filters, a function driver that creates a functional device object (FDO), and
     upper filters. The only required layers are the PDO and FDO. The various filters may or may not exist.

     FIGURE 6-6   WDM device node (devnode).

         In WDM, no one driver is responsible for controlling all aspects of a particular device. The bus driver
     is responsible for detecting bus membership changes (device addition or removal), assisting the PnP
     manager in enumerating the devices on the bus, accessing bus-specific configuration registers, and,
     in some cases, controlling power to devices on the bus. The function driver is generally the only driver
     that accesses the device’s hardware. The exact manner in which these devices came to be is described
     in “The Plug and Play manager” section later in this chapter.

     Layered drivers
     Support for an individual piece of hardware is often divided among several drivers, each providing a
     part of the functionality required to make the device work properly. In addition to WDM bus drivers,
     function drivers, and filter drivers, hardware support might be split between the following components:

        ■■   Class drivers These implement the I/O processing for a particular class of devices, such as
             disk, keyboard, or CD-ROM, where the hardware interfaces have been standardized so one
             driver can serve devices from a wide variety of manufacturers.

        ■■   Miniclass drivers These implement I/O processing that is vendor-defined for a particular
             class of devices. For example, although Microsoft has written a standardized battery class driver,
             both uninterruptible power supplies (UPS) and laptop batteries have highly specific interfaces
             that differ wildly between manufacturers, such that a miniclass is required from the vendor.
             Miniclass drivers are essentially kernel-mode DLLs and do not perform IRP processing directly.
             Instead, the class driver calls into them and they import functions from the class driver.

        ■■   Port drivers These implement the processing of an I/O request specific to a type of I/O port,
             such as SATA, and are implemented as kernel-mode libraries of functions rather than actual
             device drivers. Port drivers are almost always written by Microsoft because the interfaces are
             typically standardized in such a way that different vendors can still share the same port driver.

        However, in certain cases, third parties may need to write their own for specialized hardware.
        In some cases, the concept of I/O port extends to cover logical ports as well. For example,
        Network Driver Interface Specification (NDIS) is the network “port” driver.

   ■■   Miniport drivers These map a generic I/O request to a type of port into an adapter type,
        such as a specific network adapter. Miniport drivers are actual device drivers that import the
        functions supplied by a port driver. Miniport drivers are written by third parties, and they pro-
        vide the interface for the port driver. Like miniclass drivers, they are kernel-mode DLLs and do
        not perform IRP processing directly.

   Figure 6-7 shows a simplified example for illustrative purposes that will help demonstrate how
device drivers and layering work at a high level. As you can see, a file-system driver accepts a request
to write data to a certain location within a particular file. It translates the request into a request to write
a certain number of bytes to the disk at a particular (that is, the logical) location. It then passes this
request (via the I/O manager) to a simple disk driver. The disk driver, in turn, translates the request into
a physical location on the disk and communicates with the disk to write the data.

FIGURE 6-7 Layering of a file-system driver and a disk driver.

   This figure illustrates the division of labor between two layered drivers. The I/O manager receives a
write request that is relative to the beginning of a particular file. The I/O manager passes the request to
the file-system driver, which translates the write operation from a file-relative operation to a starting
location (a sector boundary on the disk) and a number of bytes to write. The file-system driver calls the
I/O manager to pass the request to the disk driver, which translates the request to a physical disk loca-
tion and transfers the data.

        Because all drivers—both device drivers and file-system drivers—present the same framework to
     the operating system, another driver can easily be inserted into the hierarchy without altering the exist-
     ing drivers or the I/O system. For example, several disks can be made to seem like a very large single
     disk by adding a driver. This logical volume manager driver is located between the file system and
     the disk drivers, as shown in the conceptual simplified architectural diagram presented in Figure 6-8.
     (For the actual storage driver stack diagram as well as volume manager drivers, see Chapter 12, “Storage
     management” in Part 2.)

     FIGURE 6-8   Adding a layered driver.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing the loaded driver list
        You can see a list of registered drivers by executing the Msinfo32.exe utility from the Run dialog
        box, accessible from the Start menu. Select the System Drivers entry under Software Environ-
        ment to see the list of drivers configured on the system. Those that are loaded contain the text
        Yes in the Started column, as shown here:

    The list of drivers comes from the registry subkeys under HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\
Services. This key is shared between drivers and services. Both can be started by the Service
Control Manager (SCM). The way to distinguish between a driver and a service for each subkey
is by looking at the Type value. A small value (1, 2, 4, 8) indicates a driver, while 16 (0x10) and
32 (0x20) indicate a Windows service. For more information on the Services subkey, consult
Chapter 9 in Part 2.

   You can also view the list of loaded kernel-mode drivers with Process Explorer. Run Process
Explorer, select the System process, and select DLLs from the Lower Pane View menu entry in
the View menu:

   Process Explorer lists the loaded drivers, their names, version information (including company
and description), and load address (assuming you have configured Process Explorer to display
the corresponding columns).

    Finally, if you’re looking at a crash dump (or live system) with the kernel debugger, you can get
a similar display with the kernel debugger lm kv command:
         kd> lm kv
         start     end       module name
         80626000 80631000   kdcom       (deferred)
             Image path: kdcom.dll

                       Image name: kdcom.dll
                       Browse all global symbols functions data
                       Timestamp:         Sat Jul 16 04:27:27 2016 (57898D7F)
                       CheckSum:          0000821A
                       ImageSize:         0000B000
                       Translations:      0000.04b0 0000.04e4 0409.04b0 0409.04e4
                  81009000 81632000    nt          (pdb symbols)          e:\symbols\ntkrpamp.
                  pdb\A54DF85668E54895982F873F58C984591\ntkrpamp.pdb
                       Loaded symbol image file: ntkrpamp.exe
                       Image path: ntkrpamp.exe
                       Image name: ntkrpamp.exe
                       Browse all global symbols functions data
                       Timestamp:         Wed Sep 07 07:35:39 2016 (57CF991B)
                       CheckSum:          005C6B08
                       ImageSize:         00629000
                       Translations:      0000.04b0 0000.04e4 0409.04b0 0409.04e4
                  81632000 81693000    hal         (deferred)
                       Image path: halmacpi.dll
                       Image name: halmacpi.dll
                       Browse all global symbols functions data
                       Timestamp:         Sat Jul 16 04:27:33 2016 (57898D85)
                       CheckSum:          00061469
                       ImageSize:         00061000
                       Translations:      0000.04b0 0000.04e4 0409.04b0 0409.04e4
                  8a800000 8a84b000    FLTMGR      (deferred)
                       Image path: \SystemRoot\System32\drivers\FLTMGR.SYS
                       Image name: FLTMGR.SYS
                       Browse all global symbols functions data
                       Timestamp:         Sat Jul 16 04:27:37 2016 (57898D89)
                       CheckSum:          00053B90
                       ImageSize:         0004B000
                       Translations:      0000.04b0 0000.04e4 0409.04b0 0409.04e4
                   ...

     Structure of a driver
     The I/O system drives the execution of device drivers. Device drivers consist of a set of routines that
     are called to process the various stages of an I/O request. Figure 6-9 illustrates the key driver-function
     routines, which are described next.

     FIGURE 6-9   Primary device driver routines.

   ■■   An initialization routine The I/O manager executes a driver’s initialization routine, which
        is set by the WDK to GSDriverEntry when it loads the driver into the operating system.
        GSDriverEntry initializes the compiler’s protection against stack-overflow errors (called
        a cookie) and then calls DriverEntry, which is what the driver writer must implement. The
        routine fills in system data structures to register the rest of the driver’s routines with the I/O
        manager and performs any necessary global driver initialization.

   ■■   An add-device routine A driver that supports Plug and Play implements an add-device
        routine. The PnP manager sends a notification to the driver via this routine whenever a device
        for which the driver is responsible is detected. In this routine, a driver typically creates a device
        object (described later in this chapter) to represent the device.

   ■■   A set of dispatch routines Dispatch routines are the main entry points that a device driver
        provides. Some examples are open, close, read, write, and Plug and Play. When called on to
        perform an I/O operation, the I/O manager generates an IRP and calls a driver through one of
        the driver’s dispatch routines.

   ■■   A start I/O routine A driver can use a start I/O routine to initiate a data transfer to or from a
        device. This routine is defined only in drivers that rely on the I/O manager to queue their incom-
        ing I/O requests. The I/O manager serializes IRPs for a driver by ensuring that the driver processes
        only one IRP at a time. Drivers can process multiple IRPs concurrently, but serialization is usually
        required for most devices because they cannot concurrently handle multiple I/O requests.

   ■■   An interrupt service routine (ISR) When a device interrupts, the kernel’s interrupt dis-
        patcher transfers control to this routine. In the Windows I/O model, ISRs run at device interrupt
        request level (DIRQL), so they perform as little work as possible to avoid blocking lower IRQL
        interrupts (as discussed in the previous section). An ISR usually queues a DPC, which runs at a
        lower IRQL (DPC/dispatch level) to execute the remainder of interrupt processing. Only drivers
        for interrupt-driven devices have ISRs; a file-system driver, for example, doesn’t have one.

   ■■   An interrupt-servicing DPC routine A DPC routine performs most of the work involved in
        handling a device interrupt after the ISR executes. The DPC routine executes at IRQL 2, which
        is a “compromise” between the high DIRQL and the low passive level (0). A typical DPC routine
        initiates I/O completion and starts the next queued I/O operation on a device.

   Although the following routines aren’t shown in Figure 6-9, they’re found in many types of device
drivers:

   ■■   One or more I/O completion routines A layered driver might have I/O completion routines
        that notify it when a lower-level driver finishes processing an IRP. For example, the I/O manager
        calls a file-system driver’s I/O completion routine after a device driver finishes transferring data
        to or from a file. The completion routine notifies the file-system driver about the operation’s
        success, failure, or cancellation, and allows the file-system driver to perform cleanup operations.

   ■■   A cancel I/O routine If an I/O operation can be canceled, a driver can define one or more
        cancel I/O routines. When the driver receives an IRP for an I/O request that can be canceled, it
        assigns a cancel routine to the IRP. As the IRP goes through various stages of processing, this

             routine can change or outright disappear if the current operation is not cancellable. If a thread
             that issues an I/O request exits before the request is completed or the operation is cancelled
             (for example, with the CancelIo or CancelIoEx Windows functions), the I/O manager executes
             the IRP’s cancel routine if one is assigned to it. A cancel routine is responsible for performing
             whatever steps are necessary to release any resources acquired during the processing that has
             already taken place for the IRP as well as for completing the IRP with a canceled status.

        ■■   Fast-dispatch routines Drivers that make use of the cache manager, such as file-system driv-
             ers, typically provide these routines to allow the kernel to bypass typical I/O processing when
             accessing the driver. (See Chapter 14, “Cache manager,” in Part 2, for more information on the
             cache manager.) For example, operations such as reading or writing can be quickly performed by
             accessing the cached data directly instead of taking the I/O manager’s usual path that generates
             discrete I/O operations. Fast dispatch routines are also used as a mechanism for callbacks from the
             memory manager and cache manager to file-system drivers. For instance, when creating a sec-
             tion, the memory manager calls back into the file-system driver to acquire the file exclusively.

        ■■   An unload routine An unload routine releases any system resources a driver is using so that
             the I/O manager can remove the driver from memory. Any resources acquired in the initializa-
             tion routine (DriverEntry) are usually released in the unload routine. A driver can be loaded
             and unloaded while the system is running if the driver supports it, but the unload routine will be
             called only after all file handles to the device are closed.

        ■■   A system shutdown notification routine           This routine allows driver cleanup on system
             shutdown.

        ■■   Error-logging routines When unexpected errors occur (for example, when a disk block goes
             bad), a driver’s error-logging routines note the occurrence and notify the I/O manager. The I/O
             manager then writes this information to an error log file.

     Driver objects and device objects
     When a thread opens a handle to a file object (described in the “I/O processing” section later in this
     chapter), the I/O manager must determine from the file object’s name which driver it should call to
     process the request. Furthermore, the I/O manager must be able to locate this information the next
     time a thread uses the same file handle. The following system objects fill this need:

        ■■   A driver object This represents an individual driver in the system (DRIVER_OBJECT structure).
             The I/O manager obtains the address of each of the driver’s dispatch routines (entry points)
             from the driver object.

        ■■   A device object This represents a physical or logical device on the system and describes its
             characteristics (DEVICE_OBJECT structure), such as the alignment it requires for buffers and the
             location of its device queue to hold incoming IRPs. It is the target for all I/O operations because
             this object is what the handle communicates with.

         The I/O manager creates a driver object when a driver is loaded into the system. It then calls the driver’s
     initialization routine (DriverEntry), which fills in the object attributes with the driver’s entry points.

   At any time after loading, a driver creates device objects to represent logical or physical devices—or
even a logical interface or endpoint to the driver—by calling IoCreateDevice or IoCreateDevice-
Secure. However, most Plug and Play drivers create devices in their add-device routine when the PnP
manager informs them of the presence of a device for them to manage. Non–Plug and Play drivers, on
the other hand, usually create device objects when the I/O manager invokes their initialization routine.
The I/O manager unloads a driver when the driver’s last device object has been deleted and no refer-
ences to the driver remain.

   The relationship between a driver object and its device objects is shown in Figure 6-10.

FIGURE 6-10   A driver object and its device objects.

   A driver object holds a pointer to its first device object in the DeviceObject member. The second
device object is pointed to by the NextDevice member of DEVICE_OBJECT until the last one points to
NULL. Each device object points back to its driver object with the DriverObject member. All the arrows
shown in Figure 6-10 are built by the device-creation functions (IoCreateDevice or IoCreateDevice-
Secure). The DeviceExtension pointer shown is a way a driver can allocate an extra piece of memory
that is attached to each device object it manages.

   Note It’s important to distinguish driver objects from device objects. A driver object rep-
   resents the behavior of a driver, while individual device objects represent communication
   endpoints. For example, on a system with four serial ports, there would be one driver object
   (and one driver binary) but four instances of device objects, each representing a single serial
   port, that can be opened individually with no effect on the other serial ports. For hardware
   devices, each device also represents a distinct set of hardware resources, such as I/O ports,
   memory-mapped I/O, and interrupt line. Windows is device-centric, rather than driver-centric.

    When a driver creates a device object, the driver can optionally assign the device a name. A name
places the device object in the object manager namespace. A driver can either explicitly define a name
or let the I/O manager auto-generate one. By convention, device objects are placed in the \Device
directory in the namespace, which is inaccessible by applications using the Windows API.

        Note Some drivers place device objects in directories other than \Device. For example, the
        IDE driver creates the device objects that represent IDE ports and channels in the \Device\
        Ide directory. See Chapter 12 in Part 2 for a description of storage architecture, including the
        way storage drivers use device objects.

        If a driver needs to make it possible for applications to open the device object, it must create a
     symbolic link in the \GLOBAL?? directory to the device object’s name in the \Device directory. (The
     IoCreateSymbolicLink function accomplishes this.) Non–Plug and Play and file-system drivers
     typically create a symbolic link with a well-known name (for example, \Device\HarddiskVolume2).
     Because well-known names don’t work well in an environment in which hardware appears and disap-
     pears dynamically, PnP drivers expose one or more interfaces by calling the IoRegisterDeviceInter-
     face function, specifying a globally unique identifier (GUID) that represents the type of functionality
     exposed. GUIDs are 128-bit values that can be generated by using tools such as uuidgen and guidgen,
     which are included with the WDK and the Windows SDK. Given the range of values that 128 bits repre-
     sents (and the formula used to generate them), it’s statistically almost certain that each GUID gener-
     ated will be forever and globally unique.

        IoRegisterDeviceInterface generates the symbolic link associated with a device instance. How-
     ever, a driver must call IoSetDeviceInterfaceState to enable the interface to the device before the
     I/O manager actually creates the link. Drivers usually do this when the PnP manager starts the device
     by sending the driver a start-device IRP—in this case, IRP_MJ_PNP (major function code) with IRP_MN_
     START_DEVICE (minor function code). IRPs are discussed in the “I/O request packets” section later in
     this chapter.

        An application that wants to open a device object whose interfaces are represented with a GUID can
     call Plug and Play setup functions in user space, such as SetupDiEnumDeviceInterfaces, to enumer-
     ate the interfaces present for a particular GUID and to obtain the names of the symbolic links it can use
     to open the device objects. For each device reported by SetupDiEnumDeviceInterfaces, the applica-
     tion executes SetupDiGetDeviceInterfaceDetail to obtain additional information about the device,
     such as its auto-generated name. After obtaining a device’s name from SetupDiGetDeviceInterface-
     Detail, the application can execute the Windows function CreateFile or CreateFile2 to open the
     device and obtain a handle.

        EXPERIMENT: Looking at device objects
        You can use the WinObj tool from Sysinternals or the !object kernel debugger command to
        view the device names under \Device in the object manager namespace. The following screen-
        shot shows an I/O manager–assigned symbolic link that points to a device object in \Device with
        an auto-generated name:

   When you run the !object kernel debugger command and specify the \Device directory, you
should see output similar to the following:
1: kd> !object \device
Object: 8200c530 Type: (8542b188) Directory
    ObjectHeader: 8200c518 (new version)
    HandleCount: 0 PointerCount: 231
    Directory Object: 82007d20 Name: Device

    Hash Address Type                          Name
    ---- ------- ----                          ----
     00 d024a448 Device                        NisDrv
         959afc08 Device                       SrvNet
         958beef0 Device                       WUDFLpcDevice
         854c69b8 Device                       FakeVid1
         8befec98 Device                       RdpBus
         88f7c338 Device                       Beep
         89d64500 Device                       Ndis
         8a24e250 SymbolicLink                 ScsiPort2
         89d6c580 Device                       KsecDD
         89c15810 Device                       00000025
         89c17408 Device                       00000019
     01 854c6898 Device                        FakeVid2
         88f98a70 Device                       Netbios
         8a48c6a8 Device                       NameResTrk
         89c2fe88 Device                       00000026
     02 854c6778 Device                        FakeVid3
         8548fee0 Device                       00000034
         8a214b78 SymbolicLink                 Ip
         89c31038 Device                       00000027
     03 9c205c40 Device                        00000041
         854c6658 Device                       FakeVid4
         854dd9d8 Device                       00000035
         8d143488 Device                       Video0
         8a541030 Device                       KeyboardClass0
         89c323c8 Device                       00000028

                   8554fb50 Device                           KMDF0
              04   958bb040 Device                           ProcessManagement
                   97ad9fe0 SymbolicLink                     MailslotRedirector
                   854f0090 Device                           00000036
                   854c6538 Device                           FakeVid5
                   8bf14e98 Device                           Video1
                   8bf2fe20 Device                           KeyboardClass1
                   89c332a0 Device                           00000029
                   89c05030 Device                           VolMgrControl
                   89c3a1a8 Device                           VMBus
            ...

            When you enter the !object command and specify an object manager directory object, the
        kernel debugger dumps the contents of the directory according to the way the object manager
        organizes it internally. For fast lookups, a directory stores objects in a hash table based on a hash
        of the object names, so the output shows the objects stored in each bucket of the directory’s
        hash table.

        As Figure 6-10 illustrates, a device object points back to its driver object, which is how the I/O man-
     ager knows which driver routine to call when it receives an I/O request. It uses the device object to find
     the driver object representing the driver that services the device. It then indexes into the driver object
     by using the function code supplied in the original request. Each function code corresponds to a driver
     entry point (called a dispatch routine).

        A driver object often has multiple device objects associated with it. When a driver is unloaded from
     the system, the I/O manager uses the queue of device objects to determine which devices will be af-
     fected by the removal of the driver.

        EXPERIMENT: Displaying driver and device objects
        You can display driver and device objects with the !drvobj and !devobj kernel debugger com-
        mands, respectively. In the following example, the driver object for the keyboard class driver is
        examined, and one of its device objects viewed:
        1: kd> !drvobj kbdclass
        Driver object (8a557520) is for:
         \Driver\kbdclass
        Driver Extension List: (id , addr)

        Device Object list:
        9f509648 8bf2fe20 8a541030
        1: kd> !devobj 9f509648
        Device object (9f509648) is for:
         KeyboardClass2 \Driver\kbdclass DriverObject 8a557520
        Current Irp 00000000 RefCount 0 Type 0000000b Flags 00002044
        Dacl 82090960 DevExt 9f509700 DevObjExt 9f5097f0
        ExtensionFlags (0x00000c00) DOE_SESSION_DEVICE, DOE_DEFAULT_SD_PRESENT

Characteristics (0x00000100) FILE_DEVICE_SECURE_OPEN
AttachedTo (Lower) 9f509848 \Driver\terminpt
Device queue is not busy.

   Notice that the !devobj command also shows you the addresses and names of any device objects
that the object you’re viewing is layered over (the AttachedTo line). It can also show the device
objects layered on top of the object specified (the AttachedDevice line), although not in this case.

   The !drvobj command can accept an optional argument that indicates more information to
show. Here is an example with the most information to show:
1: kd> !drvobj kbdclass 7
Driver object (8a557520) is for:
 \Driver\kbdclass
Driver Extension List: (id , addr)

Device Object list:
9f509648 8bf2fe20 8a541030

DriverEntry:   8c30a010          kbdclass!GsDriverEntry
DriverStartIo: 00000000
DriverUnload: 00000000
AddDevice:     8c307250          kbdclass!KeyboardAddDevice

Dispatch routines:
[00] IRP_MJ_CREATE                             8c301d80           kbdclass!KeyboardClassCreate
[01] IRP_MJ_CREATE_NAMED_PIPE                  81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[02] IRP_MJ_CLOSE                              8c301c90           kbdclass!KeyboardClassClose
[03] IRP_MJ_READ                               8c302150           kbdclass!KeyboardClassRead
[04] IRP_MJ_WRITE                              81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[05] IRP_MJ_QUERY_INFORMATION                  81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[06] IRP_MJ_SET_INFORMATION                    81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[07] IRP_MJ_QUERY_EA                           81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[08] IRP_MJ_SET_EA                             81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[09] IRP_MJ_FLUSH_BUFFERS                      8c303678           kbdclass!KeyboardClassFlush
[0a] IRP_MJ_QUERY_VOLUME_INFORMATION           81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[0b] IRP_MJ_SET_VOLUME_INFORMATION             81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[0c] IRP_MJ_DIRECTORY_CONTROL                  81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[0d] IRP_MJ_FILE_SYSTEM_CONTROL                81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[0e] IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL                     8c3076d0           kbdclass!KeyboardClassDevice
Control
[0f] IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_DEVICE_CONTROL            8c307ff0           kbdclass!KeyboardClassPass
Through
[10] IRP_MJ_SHUTDOWN                           81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[11] IRP_MJ_LOCK_CONTROL                       81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[12] IRP_MJ_CLEANUP                           8c302260            kbdclass!KeyboardClassCleanup
[13] IRP_MJ_CREATE_MAILSLOT                    81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[14] IRP_MJ_QUERY_SECURITY                     81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[15] IRP_MJ_SET_SECURITY                       81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
[16] IRP_MJ_POWER                              8c301440           kbdclass!KeyboardClassPower
[17] IRP_MJ_SYSTEM_CONTROL                     8c307f40           kbdclass!KeyboardClassSystem
Control

       [18] IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CHANGE                       81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
       [19] IRP_MJ_QUERY_QUOTA                         81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
       [1a] IRP_MJ_SET_QUOTA                           81142342           nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
       [1b] IRP_MJ_PNP                                 8c301870           kbdclass!KeyboardPnP

         The dispatch routines array is clearly shown, and will be discussed in the next section.
       Note that operations that are not supported by the driver point to an I/O manager’s routine
       IopInvalidDeviceRequest.

          The address to the !drvobj command is for a DRIVER_OBJECT structure, and the address for
       the !devobj command is for a DEVICE_OBJECT. You can view these structures directly using the
       debugger:
       1: kd> dt nt!_driver_object 8a557520
          +0x000 Type             : 0n4
          +0x002 Size             : 0n168
          +0x004 DeviceObject     : 0x9f509648 _DEVICE_OBJECT
          +0x008 Flags            : 0x412
          +0x00c DriverStart      : 0x8c300000 Void
          +0x010 DriverSize       : 0xe000
          +0x014 DriverSection    : 0x8a556ba8 Void
          +0x018 DriverExtension : 0x8a5575c8 _DRIVER_EXTENSION
          +0x01c DriverName       : _UNICODE_STRING "\Driver\kbdclass"
          +0x024 HardwareDatabase : 0x815c2c28 _UNICODE_STRING "\REGISTRY\MACHINE\HARDWARE\
       DESCRIPTION\SYSTEM"
          +0x028 FastIoDispatch   : (null)
          +0x02c DriverInit       : 0x8c30a010      long +ffffffff8c30a010
          +0x030 DriverStartIo    : (null)
          +0x034 DriverUnload     : (null)
          +0x038 MajorFunction    : [28] 0x8c301d80      long +ffffffff8c301d80
       1: kd> dt nt!_device_object 9f509648
          +0x000 Type             : 0n3
          +0x002 Size             : 0x1a8
          +0x004 ReferenceCount   : 0n0
          +0x008 DriverObject     : 0x8a557520 _DRIVER_OBJECT
          +0x00c NextDevice       : 0x8bf2fe20 _DEVICE_OBJECT
          +0x010 AttachedDevice   : (null)
          +0x014 CurrentIrp       : (null)
          +0x018 Timer            : (null)
          +0x01c Flags            : 0x2044
          +0x020 Characteristics : 0x100
          +0x024 Vpb              : (null)
          +0x028 DeviceExtension : 0x9f509700 Void
          +0x02c DeviceType       : 0xb
          +0x030 StackSize        : 7 ''
          +0x034 Queue            : <unnamed-tag>
          +0x05c AlignmentRequirement : 0
          +0x060 DeviceQueue      : _KDEVICE_QUEUE
          +0x074 Dpc              : _KDPC
          +0x094 ActiveThreadCount : 0
          +0x098 SecurityDescriptor : 0x82090930 Void
          ...

          There are some interesting fields in these structures, which we’ll discuss in the next section.

   Using objects to record information about drivers means that the I/O manager doesn’t need to
know details about individual drivers. The I/O manager merely follows a pointer to locate a driver,
thereby providing a layer of portability and allowing new drivers to be loaded easily.

Opening devices
A file object is a kernel-mode data structure that represents a handle to a device. File objects clearly
fit the criteria for objects in Windows: They are system resources that two or more user-mode pro-
cesses can share; they can have names; they are protected by object-based security; and they support
synchronization. Shared resources in the I/O system, like those in other components of the Windows
executive, are manipulated as objects. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more on object management.)

   File objects provide a memory-based representation of resources that conform to an I/O-centric
interface, in which they can be read from or written to. Table 6-1 lists some of the file object’s attributes.
For specific field declarations and sizes, see the structure definition for FILE_OBJECT in wdm.h.

TABLE 6-1   File object attributes
Attribute                            Purpose

File name                            This identifies the virtual file that the file object refers to, which was passed in to
                                     the CreateFile or CreateFile2 APIs.

Current byte offset                  This identifies the current location in the file (valid only for synchronous I/O).

Share modes                          These indicate whether other callers can open the file for read, write, or delete
                                     operations while the current caller is using it.

Open mode flags                      These indicate whether I/O will be synchronous or asynchronous, cached or
                                     non-cached, sequential or random, and so on.

Pointer to device object             This indicates the type of device the file resides on.

Pointer to the volume parameter      This indicates the volume, or partition, that the file resides on (in the case of file
block (VPB)                          system files).

Pointer to section object pointers   This indicates a root structure that describes a mapped/cached file. This structure
                                     also contains the shared cache map, which identifies which parts of the file are
                                     cached (or rather, mapped) by the cache manager and where they reside in
                                     the cache.

Pointer to private cache map         This is used to store per-handle caching information such as the read patterns
                                     for this handle or the page priority for the process. See Chapter 5, “Memory
                                     management,” for more information on page priority.

List of I/O request packets (IRPs)   If thread-agnostic I/O (described in the section “Thread-agnostic I/O” later in
                                     this chapter) is used and the file object is associated with a completion port
                                     (described in the section “I/O completion ports”), this is a list of all the I/O
                                     operations that are associated with this file object.

I/O completion context               This is context information for the current I/O completion port, if one is active.

File object extension                This stores the I/O priority (explained later in this chapter) for the file and whether
                                     share-access checks should be performed on the file object, and contains op-
                                     tional file object extensions that store context-specific information.

    To maintain some level of opacity toward driver code that uses the file object, and to enable extending
the file object functionality without enlarging the structure, the file object also contains an extension
field, which allows for up to six different kinds of additional attributes, described in Table 6-2.

     TABLE 6-2   File object extensions
     Extension                      Purpose

     Transaction parameters         This contains the transaction parameter block, which contains information about a
                                    transacted file operation. It’s returned by IoGetTransactionParameterBlock.

     Device object hint             This identifies the device object of the filter driver with which this file should be associ-
                                    ated. It’s set with IoCreateFileEx or IoCreateFileSpecifyDeviceObjectHint.

     I/O status block range         This allows applications to lock a user-mode buffer into kernel-mode memory to
                                    optimize asynchronous I/Os. It’s set with SetFileIoOverlappedRange.

     Generic                        This contains filter driver–specific information, as well as extended create parameters
                                    (ECPs) that were added by the caller. It’s set with IoCreateFileEx.

     Scheduled file I/O             This stores a file’s bandwidth reservation information, which is used by the storage
                                    system to optimize and guarantee throughput for multimedia applications. (See the
                                    section “Bandwidth reservation (scheduled file I/O)” later in this chapter.) It’s set with
                                    SetFileBandwidthReservation.

     Symbolic link                  This is added to the file object upon creation, when a mount point or directory junc-
                                    tion is traversed (or a filter explicitly reparses the path). It stores the caller-supplied
                                    path, including information about any intermediate junctions, so that if a relative
                                    symbolic link is hit, it can walk back through the junctions. See Chapter 13 in Part 2 for
                                    more information on NTFS symbolic links, mount points, and directory junctions.

        When a caller opens a file or a simple device, the I/O manager returns a handle to a file object.
     Before that happens, the driver responsible for the device in question is asked via its Create dispatch
     routine (IRP_MJ_CREATE) whether it’s OK to open the device and allow the driver to perform any initial-
     ization necessary if the open request is to succeed.

        Note File objects represent open instances of files, not files themselves. Unlike UNIX
        systems, which use vnodes, Windows does not define the representation of a file; Windows
        file-system drivers define their own representations.

        Similar to executive objects, files are protected by a security descriptor that contains an access con-
     trol list (ACL). The I/O manager consults the security subsystem to determine whether a file’s ACL allows
     the process to access the file in the way its thread is requesting. If it does, the object manager grants
     the access and associates the granted access rights with the file handle that it returns. If this thread
     or another thread in the process needs to perform additional operations not specified in the original
     request, the thread must open the same file again with a different request (or duplicate the handle with
     the requested access) to get another handle, which prompts another security check. (See Chapter 7 for
     more information about object protection.)

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing device handles
        Any process that has an open handle to a device will have a file object in its handle table correspond-
        ing to the open instance. You can view these handles with Process Explorer by selecting a process and
        checking Handles in the Lower Pane View submenu of the View menu. Sort by the Type column
        and scroll to where you see the handles that represent file objects, which are labeled as File.

    In this example, the Desktop Windows Manager (dwm.exe) process has a handle open to a
device created by the kernel security device driver (Ksecdd.sys). You can look at the specific
file object in the kernel debugger by first identifying the address of the object. The following
command reports information on the highlighted handle (handle value 0xD4) in the preceding
screenshot, which is in the Dwm.exe process that has a process ID of 452 decimal:
lkd> !handle 348 f 0n452

PROCESS ffffc404b62fb780
    SessionId: 1 Cid: 01c4     Peb: b4c3db0000 ParentCid: 0364
    DirBase: 7e607000 ObjectTable: ffffe688fd1c38c0 HandleCount: <Data Not Accessible>
    Image: dwm.exe

Handle Error reading handle count.

0348: Object: ffffc404b6406ef0 GrantedAccess: 00100003 (Audit) Entry: ffffe688fd396d20
Object: ffffc404b6406ef0 Type: (ffffc404b189bf20) File
    ObjectHeader: ffffc404b6406ec0 (new version)
        HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 32767

   Because the object is a file object, you can get information about it with the !fileobj command
(notice it’s also the same object address shown in Process Explorer):
lkd> !fileobj ffffc404b6406ef0

Device Object: 0xffffc404b2fa7230         \Driver\KSecDD
Vpb is NULL
Event signalled

Flags:   0x40002
          Synchronous IO
          Handle Created

CurrentByteOffset: 0

          Because a file object is a memory-based representation of a shareable resource and not the re-
      source itself, it’s different from other executive objects. A file object contains only data that is unique to
      an object handle, whereas the file itself contains the data or text to be shared. Each time a thread opens
      a file, a new file object is created with a new set of handle-specific attributes. For example, for files
      opened synchronously, the current byte offset attribute refers to the location in the file at which the
      next read or write operation using that handle will occur. Each handle to a file has a private byte offset
      even though the underlying file is shared. A file object is also unique to a process—except when a pro-
      cess duplicates a file handle to another process (by using the Windows DuplicateHandle function) or
      when a child process inherits a file handle from a parent process. In these situations, the two processes
      have separate handles that refer to the same file object.

          Although a file handle is unique to a process, the underlying physical resource is not. Therefore,
      as with any shared resource, threads must synchronize their access to shareable resources such as
      files, file directories, and devices. If a thread is writing to a file, for example, it should specify exclusive
      write access when opening the file to prevent other threads from writing to the file at the same time.
      Alternatively, by using the Windows LockFile function, the thread could lock a portion of the file while
      writing to it when exclusive access is required.

          When a file is opened, the file name includes the name of the device object on which the file resides.
      For example, the name \Device\HarddiskVolume1\Myfile.dat may refer to the file Myfile.dat on the
      C: volume. The substring \Device\HarddiskVolume1 is the name of the internal Windows device object
      representing that volume. When opening Myfile.dat, the I/O manager creates a file object and stores
      a pointer to the HarddiskVolume1 device object in the file object and then returns a file handle to the
      caller. Thereafter, when the caller uses the file handle, the I/O manager can find the HarddiskVolume1
      device object directly.

         Keep in mind that internal Windows device names can’t be used in Windows applications—instead,
      the device name must appear in a special directory in the object manager’s namespace, which is
      \GLOBAL??. This directory contains symbolic links to the real, internal Windows device names. As was
      described earlier, device drivers are responsible for creating links in this directory so that their devices
      will be accessible to Windows applications. You can examine or even change these links programmati-
      cally with the Windows QueryDosDevice and DefineDosDevice functions.

I/O processing
      Now that we’ve covered the structure and types of drivers and the data structures that support them,
      let’s look at how I/O requests flow through the system. I/O requests pass through several predictable
      stages of processing. The stages vary depending on whether the request is destined for a device oper-
      ated by a single-layered driver or for a device reached through a multilayered driver. Processing varies
      further depending on whether the caller specified synchronous or asynchronous I/O, so we’ll begin our
      discussion of I/O types with these two and then move on to others.

Types of I/O
Applications have several options for the I/O requests they issue. Furthermore, the I/O manager gives
drivers the choice of implementing a shortcut I/O interface that can often mitigate IRP allocation for
I/O processing. In this section, we’ll explain these options for I/O requests.

Synchronous and asynchronous I/O
Most I/O operations issued by applications are synchronous (which is the default). That is, the applica-
tion thread waits while the device performs the data operation and returns a status code when the I/O
is complete. The program can then continue and access the transferred data immediately. When used
in their simplest form, the Windows ReadFile and WriteFile functions are executed synchronously.
They complete the I/O operation before returning control to the caller.

   Asynchronous I/O allows an application to issue multiple I/O requests and continue executing while
the device performs the I/O operation. This type of I/O can improve an application’s throughput be-
cause it allows the application thread to continue with other work while an I/O operation is in progress.
To use asynchronous I/O, you must specify the FILE_FLAG_OVERLAPPED flag when you call the Windows
CreateFile or CreateFile2 functions. Of course, after issuing an asynchronous I/O operation, the
thread must be careful not to access any data from the I/O operation until the device driver has finished
the data operation. The thread must synchronize its execution with the completion of the I/O request
by monitoring a handle of a synchronization object (whether that’s an event object, an I/O completion
port, or the file object itself) that will be signaled when the I/O is complete.

    Regardless of the type of I/O request, I/O operations issued to a driver on behalf of the application
are performed asynchronously. That is, once an I/O request has been initiated, the device driver must
return to the I/O system as soon as possible. Whether or not the I/O system returns immediately to the
caller depends on whether the handle was opened for synchronous or asynchronous I/O. Figure 6-3
illustrates the flow of control when a read operation is initiated. Notice that if a wait is done, which de-
pends on the overlapped flag in the file object, it is done in kernel mode by the NtReadFile function.

   You can test the status of a pending asynchronous I/O operation with the Windows HasOverlapped-
IoCompleted macro or get more details with the GetOverlappedResult(Ex) functions. If you’re using
I/O completion ports (described in the “I/O completion ports” section later in this chapter), you can use
the GetQueuedCompletionStatus(Ex) function(s).

Fast I/O
Fast I/O is a special mechanism that allows the I/O system to bypass the generation of an IRP and
instead go directly to the driver stack to complete an I/O request. This mechanism is used for optimiz-
ing certain I/O paths, which are somewhat slower when using IRPs. (Fast I/O is described in detail in
Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 in Part 2.) A driver registers its fast I/O entry points by entering them in a
structure pointed to by the PFAST_IO_DISPATCH pointer in its driver object.

        EXPERIMENT: Looking at a driver’s registered fast I/O routines
        The !drvobj kernel debugger command can list the fast I/O routines that a driver registers in its
        driver object. Typically, however, only file-system drivers have any use for fast I/O routines—
        although there are exceptions, such as network protocol drivers and bus filter drivers. The following
        output shows the fast I/O table for the NTFS file-system driver object:
        lkd> !drvobj \filesystem\ntfs 2
        Driver object (ffffc404b2fbf810) is for:
         \FileSystem\NTFS
        DriverEntry:   fffff80e5663a030                                        NTFS!GsDriverEntry
        DriverStartIo: 00000000
        DriverUnload: 00000000
        AddDevice:     00000000

        Dispatch routines:
        ...
        Fast I/O routines:
        FastIoCheckIfPossible                       fffff80e565d6750
        NTFS!NtfsFastIoCheckIfPossible
        FastIoRead                                  fffff80e56526430           NTFS!NtfsCopyReadA
        FastIoWrite                                 fffff80e56523310           NTFS!NtfsCopyWriteA
        FastIoQueryBasicInfo                        fffff80e56523140
        NTFS!NtfsFastQueryBasicInfo
        FastIoQueryStandardInfo                     fffff80e56534d20           NTFS!NtfsFastQueryStdInfo
        FastIoLock                                  fffff80e5651e610           NTFS!NtfsFastLock
        FastIoUnlockSingle                          fffff80e5651e3c0           NTFS!NtfsFastUnlockSingle
        FastIoUnlockAll                             fffff80e565d59e0           NTFS!NtfsFastUnlockAll
        FastIoUnlockAllByKey                        fffff80e565d5c50
        NTFS!NtfsFastUnlockAllByKey
        ReleaseFileForNtCreateSection               fffff80e5644fd90           NTFS!NtfsReleaseForCreate
        Section
        FastIoQueryNetworkOpenInfo                  fffff80e56537750           NTFS!NtfsFastQueryNetwork
        OpenInfo
        AcquireForModWrite                          fffff80e5643e0c0
        NTFS!NtfsAcquireFileForModWrite
        MdlRead                                     fffff80e5651e950           NTFS!NtfsMdlReadA
        MdlReadComplete                             fffff802dc6cd844
        nt!FsRtlMdlReadCompleteDev
        PrepareMdlWrite                             fffff80e56541a10           NTFS!NtfsPrepareMdlWriteA
        MdlWriteComplete                            fffff802dcb76e48
        nt!FsRtlMdlWriteCompleteDev
        FastIoQueryOpen                             fffff80e5653a520
        NTFS!NtfsNetworkOpenCreate
        ReleaseForModWrite                          fffff80e5643e2c0
        NTFS!NtfsReleaseFileForModWrite
        AcquireForCcFlush                           fffff80e5644ca60
        NTFS!NtfsAcquireFileForCcFlush
        ReleaseForCcFlush                           fffff80e56450cf0
        NTFS!NtfsReleaseFileForCcFlush

      The output shows that NTFS has registered its NtfsCopyReadA routine as the fast I/O table’s
   FastIoRead entry. As the name of this fast I/O entry implies, the I/O manager calls this function
   when issuing a read I/O request if the file is cached. If the call doesn’t succeed, the standard IRP
   path is selected.

Mapped-file I/O and file caching
Mapped-file I/O is an important feature of the I/O system—one that the I/O system and the memory
manager produce jointly. (See Chapter 5 for details on how mapped files are implemented.) Mapped-
file I/O refers to the ability to view a file residing on disk as part of a process’s virtual memory. A
program can access the file as a large array without buffering data or performing disk I/O. The program
accesses memory, and the memory manager uses its paging mechanism to load the correct page
from the disk file. If the application writes to its virtual address space, the memory manager writes the
changes back to the file as part of normal paging.

    Mapped-file I/O is available in user mode through the Windows CreateFileMapping, MapViewOf-
File, and related functions. Within the operating system, mapped-file I/O is used for important
operations such as file caching and image activation (loading and running executable programs). The
other major consumer of mapped-file I/O is the cache manager. File systems use the cache manager to
map file data in virtual memory to provide better response time for I/O-bound programs. As the caller
uses the file, the memory manager brings accessed pages into memory. Whereas most caching systems
allocate a fixed number of bytes for caching files in memory, the Windows cache grows or shrinks de-
pending on how much memory is available. This size variability is possible because the cache manager
relies on the memory manager to automatically expand (or shrink) the size of the cache using the nor-
mal working set mechanisms explained in Chapter 5—in this case applied to the system working set. By
taking advantage of the memory manager’s paging system, the cache manager avoids duplicating the
work that the memory manager already performs. (The workings of the cache manager are explained
in detail in Chapter 14 in Part 2.)

Scatter/gather I/O
Windows supports a special kind of high-performance I/O called scatter/gather, available via the Win-
dows ReadFileScatter and WriteFileGather functions. These functions allow an application to issue
a single read or write from more than one buffer in virtual memory to a contiguous area of a file on
disk instead of issuing a separate I/O request for each buffer. To use scatter/gather I/O, the file must be
opened for non-cached I/O, the user buffers being used must be page-aligned, and the I/Os must be
asynchronous (overlapped). Furthermore, if the I/O is directed at a mass storage device, the I/O must
be aligned on a device sector boundary and have a length that is a multiple of the sector size.

I/O request packets
An I/O request packet (IRP) is where the I/O system stores information it needs to process an I/O
request. When a thread calls an I/O API, the I/O manager constructs an IRP to represent the operation
as it progresses through the I/O system. If possible, the I/O manager allocates IRPs from one of three
per-processor IRP non-paged look-aside lists:

         ■■   The small-IRP look-aside list      This stores IRPs with one stack location. (IRP stack locations are
              described shortly.)

         ■■   The medium-IRP look-aside list This contains IRPs with four stack locations (which can also
              be used for IRPs that require only two or three stack locations).

         ■■   The large-IRP look-aside list This contains IRPs with more than four stack locations. By
              default, the system stores IRPs with 14 stack locations on the large-IRP look-aside list, but once
              per minute, the system adjusts the number of stack locations allocated and can increase it up to
              a maximum of 20, based on how many stack locations have been recently required.

          These lists are also backed by global look-aside lists as well, allowing efficient cross-CPU IRP flow. If
      an IRP requires more stack locations than are contained in the IRPs on the large-IRP look-aside list, the
      I/O manager allocates IRPs from non-paged pool. The I/O manager allocates IRPs with the IoAllocate-
      Irp function, which is also available for device-driver developers, because in some cases a driver may
      want to initiate an I/O request directly by creating and initializing its own IRPs. After allocating and
      initializing an IRP, the I/O manager stores a pointer to the caller’s file object in the IRP.

         Note If defined, the DWORD registry value LargeIrpStackLocations in the HKLM\
         System\CurrentControlSet\Session Manager\I/O System key specifies how many stack
         locations are contained in IRPs stored on the large-IRP look-aside list. Similarly, the
         MediumIrpStackLocations value in the same key can be used to change the size of IRP stack
         locations on the medium-IRP look-aside list.

        Figure 6-11 shows some of the important members of the IRP structure. It is always accompanied by
      one or more IO_STACK_LOCATION objects (described in the next section).

      FIGURE 6-11   Important members of the IRP structure.

Here is a quick rundown of the members:

   ■■   IoStatus This is the status of the IRP, consisting of two members; Status, which is the actual
        code itself and Information, a polymorphic value that has meaning in some cases. For ex-
        ample, for a read or write operation, this value (set by the driver) indicates the number of bytes
        read or written. This same value is the one reported as an output value from the functions
        ReadFile and WriteFile.

   ■■   MdlAddress This is an optional pointer to a memory descriptor list (MDL). An MDL is a struc-
        ture that represents information for a buffer in physical memory. We’ll discuss its main usage in
        device drivers in the next section. If an MDL was not requested, the value is NULL.

   ■■   I/O stack locations count and current stack location These store the total number of trail-
        ing I/O stack location objects and point to the current one that this driver layer should look at,
        respectively. The next section discusses I/O stack locations in detail.

   ■■   User buffer This is the pointer to the buffer provided by the client that initiated the I/O op-
        eration. For example, it is the buffer provided to the ReadFile or WriteFile functions.

   ■■   User event This is the kernel event object that was used with an overlapped (asynchronous)
        I/O operation (if any). An event is one way to be notified when the I/O operation completes.

   ■■   Cancel routine    This is the function to be called by the I/O manager in case the IRP is can-
        celled.

   ■■   AssociatedIrp This is a union of one of three fields. The SystemBuffer member is used in case
        the I/O manager used the buffered I/O technique for passing the user’s buffer to the driver. The
        next section discusses buffered I/O, as well as other options for passing user mode buffers to
        drivers. The MasterIrp member provides a way to create a “master IRP” that splits its work into
        sub-IRPs, where the master is considered complete only when all its sub-IRPs have completed.

I/O stack locations
An IRP is always followed by one or more I/O stack locations. The number of stack locations is equal to
the number of layered devices in the device node the IRP is destined for. The I/O operation information is
split between the IRP body (the main structure) and the current I/O stack location, where current means
the one set up for the particular layer of devices. Figure 6-12 shows the important fields of an I/O stack
location. When an IRP is created, the number of requested I/O stack locations is passed to IoAllocateIrp.
The I/O manager then initializes the IRP body and the first I/O stack location only, destined for the top-
most device in the device node. Each layer in the device node is responsible for initializing the next I/O
stack location if it decides to pass the IRP down to the next device.

   Here is a rundown of the members shown in Figure 6-12:

   ■■   Major function This is the primary code that indicates the type of request (read, write, create,
        Plug and Play, and so on), also known as dispatch routine code. It’s one of 28 constants (0 to 27)
        starting with IRP_MJ_ in wdm.h. This index is used by the I/O manager into the MajorFunction
        array of function pointers in the driver object to jump to the appropriate routine within a driver.

             Most drivers specify dispatch routines to handle only a subset of possible major function codes,
             including create (open), read, write, device I/O control, power, Plug and Play, system control (for
             WMI commands), cleanup, and close. File-system drivers are an example of a driver type that
             often fills in most or all of its dispatch entry points with functions. In contrast, a driver for a sim-
             ple USB device would probably fill in only the routines needed for open, close, read, write, and
             sending I/O control codes. The I/O manager sets any dispatch entry points that a driver doesn’t
             fill to point to its own IopInvalidDeviceRequest, which completes the IRP with an error status
             indicating that the major function specified in the IRP is invalid for that device.

        ■■   Minor function This is used to augment the major function code for some functions. For
             example, IRP_MJ_READ (read) and IRP_MJ_WRITE (write) have no minor functions. But Plug and
             Play and Power IRPs always have a minor IRP code that specializes the general major code. For
             example, the Plug and Play IRP_MJ_PNP major code is too generic; the exact instruction is given
             by the minor IRP, such as IRP_MN_START_DEVICE, IRP_MN_REMOVE_DEVICE, and so on.

        ■■   Parameters This is a monstrous union of structures, each of which valid for a particular
             major function code or a combination of major/minor codes. For example, for a read operation
             (IRP_MJ_READ), the Parameters.Read structure holds information on the read request, such as
             the buffer size.

        ■■   File object and Device object       These point to the associated FILE_OBJECT and DEVICE_
             OBJECT for this I/O request.

        ■■   Completion routine       This is an optional function that a driver can register with the
             IoSetCompletionRoutine(Ex) DDI, to be called when the IRP is completed by a lower layer
             driver. At that point, the driver can look at the completion status of the IRP and do any needed
             post-processing. It can even undo the completion (by returning the special value STATUS_MORE_
             PROCESSING_REQUIRED from the function) and resend the IRP (perhaps with modified param-
             eters) to the device node—or even a different device node—again.

        ■■   Context This is an arbitrary value set with the IoSetCompletionRoutine(Ex) call that is
             passed, as is, to the completion routine.

             FIGURE 6-12   Important members of the IO_STACK_LOCATION structure.

   The split of information between the IRP body and its I/O stack location allows for the changing of
I/O stack location parameters for the next device in the device stack, while keeping the original request
parameters. For example, a read IRP targeted at a USB device is often changed by the function driver to
a device I/O control IRP where the input buffer argument of the device control points to a USB request
packet (URB) that is understood by the lower-layer USB bus driver. Also, note that completion routines
can be registered by any layer (except the bottom-most one), each having its own place in an I/O stack
location (the completion routine is stored in the next lower I/O stack location).

   EXPERIMENT: Looking at driver dispatch routines
   You can obtain a list of the functions a driver has defined for its dispatch routines by using bit 1
   (value of 2) with the !drvobj kernel debugger command. The following output shows the major
   function codes supported by the NTFS driver. (This is the same experiment as with fast I/O.)
   lkd> !drvobj \filesystem\ntfs 2
   Driver object (ffffc404b2fbf810) is for:
    \FileSystem\NTFS
   DriverEntry:   fffff80e5663a030                                      NTFS!GsDriverEntry
   DriverStartIo: 00000000
   DriverUnload: 00000000
   AddDevice:     00000000

   Dispatch routines:
   [00] IRP_MJ_CREATE                           fffff80e565278e0        NTFS!NtfsFsdCreate
   [01] IRP_MJ_CREATE_NAMED_PIPE                fffff802dc762c80        nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
   [02] IRP_MJ_CLOSE                            fffff80e565258c0        NTFS!NtfsFsdClose
   [03] IRP_MJ_READ                             fffff80e56436060        NTFS!NtfsFsdRead
   [04] IRP_MJ_WRITE                            fffff80e564461d0        NTFS!NtfsFsdWrite
   [05] IRP_MJ_QUERY_INFORMATION                fffff80e565275f0        NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatchWait
   [06] IRP_MJ_SET_INFORMATION                  fffff80e564edb80        NTFS!NtfsFsdSetInformation
   [07] IRP_MJ_QUERY_EA                         fffff80e565275f0        NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatchWait
   [08] IRP_MJ_SET_EA                           fffff80e565275f0        NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatchWait
   [09] IRP_MJ_FLUSH_BUFFERS                    fffff80e5653c9a0        NTFS!NtfsFsdFlushBuffers
   [0a] IRP_MJ_QUERY_VOLUME_INFORMATION         fffff80e56538d10        NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatch
   [0b] IRP_MJ_SET_VOLUME_INFORMATION           fffff80e56538d10        NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatch
   [0c] IRP_MJ_DIRECTORY_CONTROL                fffff80e564d7080
   NTFS!NtfsFsdDirectoryControl
   [0d] IRP_MJ_FILE_SYSTEM_CONTROL              fffff80e56524b20
   NTFS!NtfsFsdFileSystemControl
   [0e] IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL                   fffff80e564f9de0        NTFS!NtfsFsdDeviceControl
   [0f] IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_DEVICE_CONTROL          fffff802dc762c80        nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
   [10] IRP_MJ_SHUTDOWN                         fffff80e565efb50        NTFS!NtfsFsdShutdown
   [11] IRP_MJ_LOCK_CONTROL                     fffff80e5646c870        NTFS!NtfsFsdLockControl
   [12] IRP_MJ_CLEANUP                          fffff80e56525580        NTFS!NtfsFsdCleanup
   [13] IRP_MJ_CREATE_MAILSLOT                  fffff802dc762c80        nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
   [14] IRP_MJ_QUERY_SECURITY                   fffff80e56538d10        NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatch
   [15] IRP_MJ_SET_SECURITY                       fffff80e56538d10      NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatch
   [16] IRP_MJ_POWER                              fffff802dc762c80      nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
   [17] IRP_MJ_SYSTEM_CONTROL                     fffff802dc762c80      nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest
   [18] IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CHANGE                      fffff802dc762c80      nt!IopInvalidDeviceRequest

         [19] IRP_MJ_QUERY_QUOTA                     fffff80e565275f0         NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatchWait
         [1a] IRP_MJ_SET_QUOTA                       fffff80e565275f0         NTFS!NtfsFsdDispatchWait
         [1b] IRP_MJ_PNP                             fffff80e56566230         NTFS!NtfsFsdPnp

         Fast I/O routines:
         ...

          While active, each IRP is usually queued in an IRP list associated with the thread that requested the
      I/O. (Otherwise, it is stored in the file object when performing thread-agnostic I/O, which is described
      in the “Thread agnostic I/O” section, later in this chapter.) This allows the I/O system to find and cancel
      any outstanding IRPs if a thread terminates with I/O requests that have not been completed. Addition-
      ally, paging I/O IRPs are also associated with the faulting thread (although they are not cancellable).
      This allows Windows to use the thread-agnostic I/O optimization—when an asynchronous procedure
      call (APC) is not used to complete I/O if the current thread is the initiating thread. This means page
      faults occur inline instead of requiring APC delivery.

         EXPERIMENT: Looking at a thread’s outstanding IRPs
         The !thread command prints any IRPs associated with the thread. The !process command
         does this as well, if requested. Run the kernel debugger with local or live debugging and list the
         threads of an explorer process:
         lkd> !process 0 7 explorer.exe
         PROCESS ffffc404b673c780
             SessionId: 1 Cid: 10b0      Peb: 00cbb000 ParentCid: 1038
             DirBase: 8895f000 ObjectTable: ffffe689011b71c0 HandleCount: <Data Not
         Accessible>
             Image: explorer.exe
             VadRoot ffffc404b672b980 Vads 569 Clone 0 Private 7260. Modified 366527. Locked 784.
             DeviceMap ffffe688fd7a5d30
             Token                               ffffe68900024920
             ElapsedTime                         18:48:28.375
             UserTime                            00:00:17.500
             KernelTime                          00:00:13.484
             ...
             MemoryPriority                      BACKGROUND
             BasePriority                        8
             CommitCharge                        10789
             Job                                 ffffc404b6075060

                 THREAD ffffc404b673a080 Cid 10b0.10b4 Teb: 0000000000cbc000 Win32Thread:
         ffffc404b66e7090 WAIT: (WrUserRequest) UserMode Non-Alertable
                     ffffc404b6760740 SynchronizationEvent
                 Not impersonating
         ...

                 THREAD ffffc404b613c7c0 Cid 153c.15a8 Teb: 00000000006a3000 Win32Thread:
         ffffc404b6a83910 WAIT: (UserRequest) UserMode Non-Alertable

                  ffffc404b58d0d60 SynchronizationEvent
                  ffffc404b566f310 SynchronizationEvent
              IRP List:
                  ffffc404b69ad920: (0006,02c8) Flags: 00060800          Mdl: 00000000
   ...

       You should see many threads, with most of them having IRPs reported in the IRP List section
   of the thread information (note that the debugger will show only the first 17 IRPs for a thread that
   has more than 17 outstanding I/O requests). Choose an IRP and examine it with the !irp command:
   lkd> !irp ffffc404b69ad920
   Irp is active with 2 stacks 1 is current (= 0xffffc404b69ad9f0)
    No Mdl: No System Buffer: Thread ffffc404b613c7c0: Irp stack trace.
        cmd flg cl Device     File     Completion-Context
   >[IRP_MJ_FILE_SYSTEM_CONTROL(d), N/A(0)]
               5 e1 ffffc404b253cc90 ffffc404b5685620 fffff80e55752ed0-ffffc404b63c0e00
   Success Error Cancel pending
                   \FileSystem\Npfs       FLTMGR!FltpPassThroughCompletion
                                Args: 00000000 00000000 00110008 00000000
    [IRP_MJ_FILE_SYSTEM_CONTROL(d), N/A(0)]
               5 0 ffffc404b3cdca00 ffffc404b5685620 00000000-00000000
                   \FileSystem\FltMgr
                                Args: 00000000 00000000 00110008 00000000

      The IRP has two stack locations and is targeted at a device owned by the Named Pipe File
   System (NPFS) driver. (NPFS is described in Chapter 10, “Networking,” in Part 2.)

IRP flow
IRPs are typically created by the I/O manager, and then sent to the first device on the target device
node. Figure 6-13 shows a typical IRP flow for hardware-based device drivers.

FIGURE 6-13   IRP flow.

       The I/O manager is not the only entity that creates IRPs. The Plug and Play manager and the Power
     manager are also responsible for creating IRPs with major function code IRP_MJ_PNP and IRP_MJ_
     POWER, respectively.

        Figure 6-13 shows an example device node with six layered device objects: two upper filters, the
     FDO, two lower filters, and the PDO. This means an IRP targeted at this devnode is created with six I/O
     stack locations—one for each layer. An IRP is always delivered to the highest layered device, even if a
     handle was opened to a named device that is lower in the device stack.

        A driver that receives an IRP can do one of the following:

        ■■   It can complete the IRP then and there by calling IoCompleteRequest. This could be because
             the IRP has some invalid parameters (for example, insufficient buffer size or bad I/O control
             code), or because the operation requested is quick and can be accomplished immediately, such
             as getting some status from the device or reading a value from the registry. The driver calls
             IoGetCurrentIrpStackLocation to get a pointer to the stack location that it should refer to.

        ■■   The driver can forward the IRP to the next layer after optionally doing some processing. For
             example, an upper filter can do some logging of the operation and send the IRP down to be
             executed normally. Before sending the request down, the driver must prepare the next I/O stack
             location that would be looked at by the next driver in line. It can use the IoSkipCurrentIrp-
             StackLocation macro if it does not wish to make changes, or it can make a copy with IoCopy-
             IrpStackLocationToNext and make changes to the copied stack location by getting a pointer
             with IoGetNextIrpStackLocation and making appropriate changes. Once the next I/O stack
             location is prepared, the driver calls IoCallDriver to do the actual IRP forwarding.

        ■■   As an extension of the previous point, the driver can also register for a completion routine
             by calling IoSetCompletionRoutine(Ex) before passing down the IRP. Any layer except the
             bottom-most one can register a completion routine (there is no point in registering for the
             bottom-most layer since that driver must complete the IRP, so no callback is needed). After
             IoCompleteRequest is called by a lower-layer driver, the IRP travels up (refer to Figure 6-13),
             calling any completion routines on the way up in reverse order of registration. In fact, the IRP
             originator (I/O manager, PnP manager, or power manager) use this mechanism to do any post-
             IRP processing and finally free the IRP.

        Note Because the number of devices on a given stack is known in advance, the I/O manager
        allocates one stack location per device driver on the stack. However, there are situations in
        which an IRP might be directed into a new driver stack. This can happen in scenarios involving
        the filter manager, which allows one filter to redirect an IRP to another filter (for example,
        going from a local file system to a network file system). The I/O manager exposes an API,
        IoAdjustStackSizeForRedirection, that enables this functionality by adding the required
        stack locations because of devices present on the redirected stack.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing a device stack
The !devstack kernel debugger command shows you the device stack of layered device objects
associated with a specified device object. This example shows the device stack associated with a
device object, \device\keyboardclass0, which is owned by the keyboard class driver:
lkd> !devstack keyboardclass0
  !DevObj           !DrvObj            !DevExt                     ObjectName
> ffff9c80c0424440 \Driver\kbdclass    ffff9c80c0424590            KeyboardClass0
  ffff9c80c04247c0 \Driver\kbdhid      ffff9c80c0424910
  ffff9c80c0414060 \Driver\mshidkmdf ffff9c80c04141b0              0000003f
!DevNode ffff9c80c0414d30 :
  DeviceInst is "HID\MSHW0029&Col01\5&1599b1c7&0&0000"
  ServiceName is "kbdhid"

    The output highlights the entry associated with KeyboardClass0 with the > character in the
first column. The entries above that line are drivers layered above the keyboard class driver, and
those below are layered beneath it.

EXPERIMENT: Examining IRPs
In this experiment, you’ll find an uncompleted IRP on the system, and will determine the IRP
type, the device at which it’s directed, the driver that manages the device, the thread that issued
the IRP, and what process the thread belongs to. This experiment is best performed on a 32-bit
system with non-local kernel debugging. It will work with local kernel debugging as well, but
IRPs may complete during the period between when commands are issued, so some instability of
data should be expected.

   At any point in time, there are at least a few uncompleted IRPs on a system. This occurs
because there are many devices to which applications can issue IRPs that a driver will complete
only when a particular event occurs, such as data becoming available. One example is a blocking
read from a network endpoint. You can see the outstanding IRPs on a system with the !irpfind
kernel debugger command (this may take some time; you can stop after some IRPs appear):
kd> !irpfind
Scanning large pool allocation table for tag 0x3f707249 (Irp?) (a5000000 : a5200000)

  Irp    [ Thread ] irpStack: (Mj,Mn)          DevObj [Driver]          MDL Process
9515ad68 [aa0c04c0] irpStack: ( e, 5)         8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0xaa1a3540
8bd5c548 [91deeb80] irpStack: ( e,20)         8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0x91da5c40

Searching nonpaged pool (80000000 : ffc00000) for tag 0x3f707249 (Irp?)

86264a20 [86262040] irpStack: ( e, 0)         8a7b4ef0 [ \Driver\vmbus]
86278720 [91d96b80] irpStack: ( e,20)         8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0x86270040
86279e48 [91d96b80] irpStack: ( e,20)         8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0x86270040
862a1868 [862978c0] irpStack: ( d, 0)         8bca4030 [ \FileSystem\Npfs]

       862a24c0 [86297040] irpStack: ( d, 0) 8bca4030 [ \FileSystem\Npfs]
       862c3218 [9c25f740] irpStack: ( c, 2) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS]
       862c4988 [a14bf800] irpStack: ( e, 5) 8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0xaa1a3540
       862c57d8 [a8ef84c0] irpStack: ( d, 0) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS] 0xa8e6f040
       862c91c0 [99ac9040] irpStack: ( 3, 0) 8a7ace48 [ \Driver\vmbus] 0x9517ac40
       862d2d98 [9fd456c0] irpStack: ( e, 5) 8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0x9fc11780
       862d6528 [9aded800] irpStack: ( c, 2) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS]
       862e3230 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 2 > StackCount 1)
       862ec248 [862e2040] irpStack: ( d, 0) 8bca4030 [ \FileSystem\Npfs]
       862f7d70 [91dd0800] irpStack: ( d, 0) 8bca4030 [ \FileSystem\Npfs]
       863011f8 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 2 > StackCount 1)
       86327008 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 43 > StackCount 42)
       86328008 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 43 > StackCount 42)
       86328960 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 43 > StackCount 42)
       86329008 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 43 > StackCount 42)
       863296d8 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 2 > StackCount 1)
       86329960 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 43 > StackCount 42)
       89feeae0 [00000000] irpStack: ( e, 0) 8a765030 [ \Driver\ACPI]
       8a6d85d8 [99aa1040] irpStack: ( d, 0) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS] 0x00000000
       8a6dc828 [8bc758c0] irpStack: ( 4, 0) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS] 0x00000000
       8a6f42d8 [8bc728c0] irpStack: ( 4,34) 8b0b8030 [ \Driver\disk] 0x00000000
       8a6f4d28 [8632e6c0] irpStack: ( 4,34) 8b0b8030 [ \Driver\disk] 0x00000000
       8a767d98 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 6 > StackCount 5)
       8a788d98 [00000000] irpStack: ( f, 0) 00000000 [00000000: Could not read device
       object or _DEVICE_OBJECT not found
       ]
       8a7911a8 [9fdb4040] irpStack: ( e, 0) 86325768 [ \Driver\DeviceApi]
       8b03c3f8 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 2 > StackCount 1)
       8b0b8bc8 [863d6040] irpStack: ( e, 0) 8a78f030 [ \Driver\vmbus]
       8b0c48c0 [91da8040] irpStack: ( e, 5) 8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD] 0xaa1a3540
       8b118d98 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 9 > StackCount 8)
       8b1263b8 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 8 > StackCount 7)
       8b174008 [aa0aab80] irpStack: ( 4, 0) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS] 0xa15e1c40
       8b194008 [aa0aab80] irpStack: ( 4, 0) 8b127018 [ \FileSystem\NTFS] 0xa15e1c40
       8b196370 [8b131880] irpStack: ( e,31) 8bcb2ca0 [ \Driver\AFD]
       8b1a8470 [00000000] Irp is complete (CurrentLocation 2 > StackCount 1)
       8b1b3510 [9fcd1040] irpStack: ( e, 0) 86325768 [ \Driver\DeviceApi]
       8b1b35b0 [a4009b80] irpStack: ( e, 0) 86325768 [ \Driver\DeviceApi]
       8b1cd188 [9c3be040] irpStack: ( e, 0) 8bc73648 [ \Driver\Beep]
       …

         Some IRPs are complete, and may be de-allocated very soon, or they have been de-allocated,
       but because the allocation from lookaside lists, the IRP has not yet been replaced with a new one.

          For each IRP, its address is given, followed by the thread that issued the request. Next, the
       major and minor function codes for the current stack location are shown in parentheses. You can
       examine any IRP with the !irp command:
       kd> !irp 8a6f4d28
       Irp is active with 15 stacks 6 is current (= 0x8a6f4e4c)
        Mdl=8b14b250: No System Buffer: Thread 8632e6c0: Irp stack trace.
            cmd flg cl Device    File     Completion-Context

 [N/A(0), N/A(0)]
            0 0 00000000 00000000 00000000-00000000

                           Args: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
 [N/A(0), N/A(0)]
            0 0 00000000 00000000 00000000-00000000

                           Args: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
 [N/A(0), N/A(0)]
            0 0 00000000 00000000 00000000-00000000

                           Args: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
 [N/A(0), N/A(0)]
            0 0 00000000 00000000 00000000-00000000

                           Args: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
 [N/A(0), N/A(0)]
            0 0 00000000 00000000 00000000-00000000

                             Args: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
>[IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(34)]
           14 e0 8b0b8030 00000000 876c2ef0-00000000 Success Error Cancel
                \Driver\disk           partmgr!PmIoCompletion
                            Args: 0004b000 00000000 4b3a0000 00000002
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(3)]
           14 e0 8b0fc058 00000000 876c36a0-00000000 Success Error Cancel
                \Driver\partmgr        partmgr!PartitionIoCompletion
                             Args: 4b49ace4 00000000 4b3a0000 00000002
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
           14 e0 8b121498 00000000 87531110-8b121a30 Success Error Cancel
                \Driver\partmgr        volmgr!VmpReadWriteCompletionRoutine
                             Args: 0004b000 00000000 2bea0000 00000002
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
            4 e0 8b121978 00000000 82d103e0-8b1220d9 Success Error Cancel
                \Driver\volmgr         fvevol!FvePassThroughCompletionRdpLevel2
                             Args: 0004b000 00000000 4b49acdf 00000000
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
            4 e0 8b122020 00000000 82801a40-00000000 Success Error Cancel
                \Driver\fvevol         rdyboost!SmdReadWriteCompletion
                             Args: 0004b000 00000000 2bea0000 00000002
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
            4 e1 8b118538 00000000 828637d0-00000000 Success Error Cancel pending
                \Driver\rdyboost       iorate!IoRateReadWriteCompletion
                             Args: 0004b000 3fffffff 2bea0000 00000002
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
            4 e0 8b11ab80 00000000 82da1610-8b1240d8 Success Error Cancel
                \Driver\iorate         volsnap!VspRefCountCompletionRoutine
                             Args: 0004b000 00000000 2bea0000 00000002
 [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
            4 e1 8b124020 00000000 87886ada-89aec208 Success Error Cancel pending
                \Driver\volsnap        NTFS!NtfsMasterIrpSyncCompletionRoutine
                             Args: 0004b000 00000000 2bea0000 00000002

        [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
                   4 e0 8b127018 a6de4bb8 871227b2-9ef8eba8 Success Error Cancel
                       \FileSystem\NTFS           FLTMGR!FltpPassThroughCompletion
                                   Args: 0004b000 00000000 00034000 00000000
        [IRP_MJ_WRITE(4), N/A(0)]
                   4 1 8b12a3a0 a6de4bb8 00000000-00000000     pending
                       \FileSystem\FltMgr
                                   Args: 0004b000 00000000 00034000 00000000

       Irp Extension present at 0x8a6f4fb4:

          This is a monstrous IRP with 15 stack locations (6 is current, shown in bold above, and is also
       specified by the debugger with the > character). The major and minor functions are shown for
       each stack location along with information on the device object and completion routines
       addresses.

         The next step is to see what device object the IRP is targeting by executing the !devobj
       command on the device object address in the active stack location:
       kd> !devobj 8b0b8030
       Device object (8b0b8030) is for:
        DR0 \Driver\disk DriverObject 8b0a7e30
       Current Irp 00000000 RefCount 1 Type 00000007 Flags 01000050
       Vpb 8b0fc420 SecurityDescriptor 87da1b58 DevExt 8b0b80e8 DevObjExt 8b0b8578 Dope
       8b0fc3d0
       ExtensionFlags (0x00000800) DOE_DEFAULT_SD_PRESENT
       Characteristics (0x00000100) FILE_DEVICE_SECURE_OPEN
       AttachedDevice (Upper) 8b0fc058 \Driver\partmgr
       AttachedTo (Lower) 8b0a4d10 \Driver\storflt
       Device queue is not busy.

          Finally, you can see details about the thread and process that issued the IRP by using the
       !thread command:

       kd> !thread 8632e6c0
       THREAD 8632e6c0 Cid 0004.0058 Teb: 00000000 Win32Thread: 00000000 WAIT:
       (Executive) KernelMode Non-Alertable
           89aec20c NotificationEvent
       IRP List:
           8a6f4d28: (0006,02d4) Flags: 00060043 Mdl: 8b14b250
       Not impersonating
       DeviceMap                 87c025b0
       Owning Process            86264280       Image:         System
       Attached Process          N/A            Image:         N/A
       Wait Start TickCount      8083           Ticks: 1 (0:00:00:00.015)
       Context Switch Count      2223           IdealProcessor: 0
       UserTime                  00:00:00.000
       KernelTime                00:00:00.046
       Win32 Start Address nt!ExpWorkerThread (0x81e68710)
       Stack Init 89aecca0 Current 89aebeb4 Base 89aed000 Limit 89aea000 Call 00000000
       Priority 13 BasePriority 13 PriorityDecrement 0 IoPriority 2 PagePriority 5

I/O request to a single-layered hardware-based driver
This section traces I/O requests to a single-layered kernel-mode device driver. Figure 6-14 shows a typi-
cal IRP processing scenario for such a driver.

FIGURE 6-14   Typical single layer I/O request processing for hardware drivers.

   Before we dig into the various steps outlined in Figure 6-14, some general comments are in order:

   ■■   There are two types of horizontal divider lines. The first (solid line) is the usual user-mode/
        kernel-mode divider. The second (dotted line) separates code that runs in the requesting thread
        context versus the arbitrary thread context. These contexts are defined as follows:

        • The requesting thread context region indicates that the executing thread is the original one
           that requested the I/O operation. This is important because if the thread is the one that made
           the original call, it means the process context is the original process, and so the user-mode ad-
           dress space that contains the user’s buffer supplied to the I/O operation is directly accessible.

        • The arbitrary thread context region indicates that the thread running those functions
           can be any thread. More specifically, it’s most likely not the requesting thread, and so the
           user-mode process address space visible is not likely to be the original one. In this context,
           accessing the user’s buffer with a user-mode address can be disastrous. You’ll see in the next
           section how this issue is handled.

              Note The explanations for the steps outlined in Figure 6-14 will prove why the
              divider lines reside where they are.

       ■■   The large rectangle consisting of the four blocks (labeled Dispatch Routine, Start I/O Routine,
            ISR, and DPC Routine) represents the driver-provided code. All other blocks are provided by the
            system.

       ■■   The figure assumes the hardware device can handle one operation at a time, which is true of
            many types of devices. Even if the device can handle multiple requests, the basic flow of opera-
            tions is still the same.

       Here is the sequence of events as outlined in Figure 6-14:

       1.   A client application calls a Windows API such as ReadFile. ReadFile calls the native NtReadFile
            (in Ntdll.dll), which makes the thread transition to kernel mode to the executive NtReadFile
            (these steps have already been discussed earlier in this chapter).

       2.   The I/O manager, in its NtReadFile implementation, performs some sanity checks on the
            request, such as whether the buffer provided by the client is accessible with the right page
            protection. Next, the I/O manager locates the associated driver (using the file handle provided),
            allocates and initializes an IRP, and calls the driver into the appropriate dispatch routine (in this
            case, corresponding to the IRP_MJ_READ index) using IoCallDriver with the IRP.

       3.   This is the first time the driver sees the IRP. This call is usually invoked using the requesting
            thread; the only way for that not to happen is if an upper filter held on to the IRP and called
            IoCallDriver later from a different thread. For the sake of this discussion, we’ll assume this
            is not the case (and in most cases involving hardware devices, this does not happen; even if
            there are upper filters, they do some processing and call the lower driver immediately from the
            same thread). The dispatch read callback in the driver has two tasks on its hand: first, it should
            perform more checking that the I/O manager can’t do because it has no idea what the request
            really means. For example, the driver could check if the buffer provided to a read or write op-
            eration is large enough; or for a DeviceIoControl operation, the driver would check whether
            the I/O control code provided is a supported one. If any such check fails, the driver completes
            the IRP (IoCompleteRequest) with the failed status and returns immediately. If the checks turn
            up OK, the driver calls its Start I/O routine to initiate the operation. However, if the hardware
            device is currently busy (handling a previous IRP), then the IRP should be inserted into a queue
            managed by the driver and a STATUS_PENDING is returned without completing the IRP. The I/O
            manager caters for such a scenario with the IoStartPacket function, that checks a busy bit in
            the device object and, if the device is busy, inserts the IRP into a queue (also part of the device
            object structure). If the device is not busy, it sets the device bit as busy and calls the registered
            Start I/O routine (recall that there is such a member in the driver object that would have been
            initialized in DriverEntry). Even if a driver chooses not to use IoStartPacket, it would still
            follow similar logic.

       4.   If the device is not busy, the Start I/O routine is called from the dispatch routine directly—
            meaning it’s still the requesting thread that is making the call. Figure 6-14, however, shows that
            the Start I/O routine is called in an arbitrary thread context; this will be proven to be true in the
            general case when we look at the DPC routine in step 8. The purpose of the Start I/O routine is
            to take the IRP relevant parameters and use them to program the hardware device (for example,

     by writing to its ports or registers using HAL hardware access routines such as WRITE_PORT_UCHAR,
     WRITE_REGISTER_ULONG, etc.). After the Start I/O completes, the call returns, and no particular
     code is running in the driver, the hardware is working and “does its thing.” While the hard-
     ware device is working, more requests can come in to the device by the same thread (if using
     asynchronous operations) or other threads that also opened handles to the device. In this case
     the dispatch routine would realize the device is busy and insert the IRP into the IRP queue (as
     mentioned, one way to achieve this is with a call to IoStartPacket).

5.   When the device is done with the current operation, it raises an interrupt. The kernel trap
     handler saves the CPU context for whatever thread was running on the CPU that was selected
     to handle the interrupt, raises the IRQL of that CPU to the IRQL associated with the interrupt
     (DIRQL) and jumps to the registered ISR for the device.

6.   The ISR, running at Device IRQL (above 2) does as little work as possible, telling the device to
     stop the interrupt signal and getting the status or other required information from the hard-
     ware device. As its last act, the ISR queues a DPC for further processing at a lower IRQL. The
     advantage of using a DPC to perform most of the device servicing is that any blocked interrupt
     whose IRQL lies between the Device IRQL and the DPC/dispatch IRQL (2) is allowed to occur be-
     fore the lower-priority DPC processing occurs. Intermediate-level interrupts are thus serviced
     more promptly than they otherwise would be, and this reduces latency on the system.

7.   After the interrupt is dismissed, the kernel notices that the DPC queue is not empty and so uses
     a software interrupt at IRQL DPC_LEVEL (2) to jump to the DPC processing loop.

8.   Eventually, the DPC is de-queued and executes at IRQL 2, typically performing two main operations:

     • It gets the next IRP in the queue (if any) and starts the new operation for the device. This is done
        first to prevent the device from being idle for too long. If the dispatch routine used IoStart-
        Packet, then the DPC routine would call its counterpart, IoStartNextPacket, which does
        just that. If an IRP is available, the Start I/O routine is called from the DPC. This is why in the
        general case, the Start I/O routine is called in an arbitrary thread context. If there are no IRPs
        in the queue, the device is marked not busy—that is, ready for the next request that comes in.

     • It completes the IRP, whose operation has just finished by the driver by calling IoComplete-
        Request. From that point, the driver is no longer responsible for the IRP and it shouldn’t
        be touched, as it can be freed at any moment after the call. IoCompleteRequest calls any
        completion routines that have been registered. Finally, the I/O manager frees the IRP (it’s
        actually using a completion routine of its own to do that).

9.   The original requesting thread needs to be notified of the completion. Because the current
     thread executing the DPC is arbitrary, it’s not the original thread with its original process ad-
     dress space. To execute code in the context of the requesting thread, a special kernel APC is
     issued to the thread. An APC is a function that is forced to execute in the context of a particular
     thread. When the requesting thread gets CPU time, the special kernel APC executes first (at
     IRQL APC_LEVEL=1). It does what’s needed, such as releasing the thread from waiting, signaling
     an event that was registered in an asynchronous operation, and so on. (For more on APCs, see
     Chapter 8 in Part 2.)

         A final note about I/O completion: the asynchronous I/O functions ReadFileEx and WriteFileEx
     allow a caller to supply a callback function as a parameter. If the caller does so, the I/O manager queues
     a user mode APC to the caller’s thread APC queue as the last step of I/O completion. This feature allows
     a caller to specify a subroutine to be called when an I/O request is completed or canceled. User-mode
     APC completion routines execute in the context of the requesting thread and are delivered only when
     the thread enters an alertable wait state (by calling functions such as SleepEx, WaitForSingleObjectEx,
     or WaitForMultipleObjectsEx).

     User address space buffer access
     As shown in Figure 6-14, there are four main driver functions involved in processing an IRP. Some or all
     of these routines may need to access the buffer in user space provided by the client application. When
     an application or a device driver indirectly creates an IRP by using the NtReadFile, NtWriteFile,
     or NtDeviceIoControlFile system services (or the Windows API functions corresponding to these
     services, which are ReadFile, WriteFile, and DeviceIoControl), the pointer to the user’s buffer is
     provided in the UserBuffer member of the IRP body. However, accessing this buffer directly can be
     done only in the requesting thread context (the client’s process address space is visible) and in IRQL 0
     (paging can be handled normally).

        As discussed in the previous section, only the dispatch routine meets the criteria of running in the
     requesting thread context and in IRQL 0. And even this is not always the case—it’s possible for an
     upper filter to hold on to the IRP and not pass it down immediately, possibly passing it down later on
     using a different thread, and could even be done when the CPU IRQL is 2 or higher.

       The other three functions (Start I/O, ISR, DPC) clearly run on an arbitrary thread (could be any thread),
     and with IRQL 2 (DIRQL for the ISR). Accessing the user’s buffer directly from any of these routine is
     mostly fatal. Here’s why:

        ■■   Because the IRQL is 2 or higher, paging is not allowed. Since the user’s buffer (or part of it) may
             be paged out, accessing the non-resident memory would crash the system.

        ■■   Because the thread executing these functions could be any thread, and thus a random process
             address space would be visible, the original user’s address has no meaning and would likely lead
             to an access violation, or worse—accessing data from some random process (the parent process
             of whatever thread was running at the time).

        Clearly, there must be a safe way to access the user’s buffer in any of these routines. The I/O man-
     ager provides two options, for which it does the heavy lifting. These are known as Buffered I/O and
     Direct I/O. A third option, which is not really an option, is called Neither I/O, in which the I/O manager
     does nothing special and lets the driver handle the problem on its own.

        A driver selects the method in the following way:

        ■■   For read and write requests (IRP_MJ_READ and IRP_MJ_WRITE), it sets the Flags member (with
             an OR boolean operation so as not to disturb other flags) of the device object (DEVICE_OBJECT)
             to DO_BUFFERED_IO (for buffered I/O) or DO_DIRECT_IO (for direct I/O). If neither flag is set,
             neither I/O is implied. (DO is short for device object.)

   ■■   For device I/O control requests (IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL), each control code is constructed
        using the CTL_CODE macro, where some of the bits indicate the buffering method. This means
        the buffering method can be set on a control code–by–control code basis, which is very useful.

   The following sections describe each buffering method in detail.

Buffered I/O With buffered I/O, the I/O manager allocates a mirror buffer that is the same size as
the user’s buffer in non-paged pool and stores the pointer to the new buffer in the AssociatedIrp.
SystemBuffer member of the IRP body. Figure 6-15 shows the main stages in buffered I/O for a read
operation (write is similar).

FIGURE 6-15   Buffered I/O.

   The driver can access the system buffer (address q in Figure 6-15) from any thread and any IRQL:

   ■■   The address is in system space, meaning it’s valid in any process context.

   ■■   The buffer is allocated from non-paged pool, so a page fault will not happen.

   For write operations, the I/O manager copies the caller’s buffer data into the allocated buffer when
creating the IRP. For read operations, the I/O manager copies data from the allocated buffer to the
user’s buffer when the IRP completes (using a special kernel APC) and then frees the allocated buffer.

  Buffered I/O clearly is very simple to use because the I/O manager does practically everything. Its
main downside is that it always requires copying, which is inefficient for large buffers. Buffered I/O is
commonly used when the buffer size is no larger than one page (4 KB) and when the device does not

     support direct memory access (DMA), because DMA is used to transfer data from a device to RAM or
     vice versa without CPU intervention—but with buffered I/O, there is always copying done with the
     CPU, which makes DMA pointless.

     Direct I/O Direct I/O provides a way for a driver to access the user’s buffer directly without any need
     for copying. Figure 6-16 shows the main stages in direct I/O for a read or write operation.

     FIGURE 6-16   Direct I/O.

         When the I/O manager creates the IRP, it locks the user’s buffer into memory (that is, makes it non-
     pageable) by calling the MmProbeAndLockPages function (documented in the WDK). The I/O manager
     stores a description of the memory in the form of a memory descriptor list (MDL), which is a structure
     that describes the physical memory occupied by a buffer. Its address is stored in the MdlAddress mem-
     ber of the IRP body. Devices that perform DMA require only physical descriptions of buffers, so an MDL
     is sufficient for the operation of such devices. If a driver must access the contents of a buffer, however, it
     can map the buffer into the system’s address space using the MmGetSystemAddressForMdlSafe func-
     tion, passing in the provided MDL. The resulting pointer (q in Figure 6-16) is safe to use in any thread
     context (it’s a system address) and in any IRQL (the buffer cannot be paged out). The user’s buffer is
     effectively double-mapped, where the user’s direct address (p in Figure 6-16) is usable only from the
     original process context, but the second mapping into system space is usable in any context. Once the
     IRP is complete, the I/O manager unlocks the buffer (making it pageable again) by calling MmUnlock-
     Pages (documented in the WDK).

       Direct I/O is useful for large buffers (more than one page) because no copying is done, especially for
     DMA transfers (for the same reason).

Neither I/O With neither I/O, the I/O manager doesn’t perform any buffer management. Instead,
buffer management is left to the discretion of the device driver, which can choose to manually perform
the steps the I/O manager performs with the other buffer-management types. In some cases, access-
ing the buffer in the dispatch routine is sufficient, so the driver may get away with neither I/O. The main
advantage of neither I/O is its zero overhead.

    Drivers that use neither I/O to access buffers that might be located in user space must take special care
to ensure that buffer addresses are valid and do not reference kernel-mode memory. Scalar values,
however, are perfectly safe to pass, although very few drivers have only a scalar value to pass around.
Failure to do so could result in crashes or in security vulnerabilities, where applications have access to
kernel-mode memory or can inject code into the kernel. The ProbeForRead and ProbeForWrite func-
tions that the kernel makes available to drivers verify that a buffer resides entirely in the user-mode
portion of the address space. To avoid a crash from referencing an invalid user-mode address, drivers
can access user-mode buffers protected with structured exception handling (SEH), expressed with
__try/__except blocks in C/C++, that catch any invalid memory faults and translate them into error
codes to return to the application. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more information on SEH.) Additionally,
drivers should also capture all input data into a kernel buffer instead of relying on user-mode addresses
because the caller could always modify the data behind the driver’s back, even if the memory address
itself is still valid.

Synchronization
Drivers must synchronize their access to global driver data and hardware registers for two reasons:

   ■■   The execution of a driver can be preempted by higher-priority threads and time-slice (or quan-
        tum) expiration or can be interrupted by higher IRQL interrupts.

   ■■   On multiprocessor systems (the norm), Windows can run driver code simultaneously on more
        than one processor.

    Without synchronization, corruption could occur—for example, device-driver code running at pas-
sive IRQL (0) (say, a dispatch routine) when a caller initiates an I/O operation can be interrupted by a
device interrupt, causing the device driver’s ISR to execute while its own device driver is already running.
If the device driver was modifying data that its ISR also modifies—such as device registers, heap storage,
or static data—the data can become corrupted when the ISR executes.

   To avoid this situation, a device driver written for Windows must synchronize its access to any data
that can be accessed at more than one IRQL. Before attempting to update shared data, the device
driver must lock out all other threads (or, in the case of a multiprocessor system, CPUs) to prevent them
from updating the same data structure.

    On a single-CPU system, synchronizing between two or more functions that run at different IRQLs is
easy enough. Such function just needs to raise the IRQL (KeRaiseIrql) to the highest IRQL these func-
tions execute in. For example, to synchronize between a dispatch routine (IRQL 0) and a DPC routine
(IRQL 2), the dispatch routine needs to raise IRQL to 2 before accessing the shared data. If synchroniza-
tion between a DPC and ISR is required, the DPC would raise IRQL to the Device IRQL (this information
is provided to the driver when the PnP manager informs the driver of the hardware resources a device

     is connected to.) On multiprocessing systems, raising IRQL is not enough because the other routine—
     for example, ISR—could be serviced on another CPU (remember that IRQL is a CPU attribute, and not a
     global system attribute).

        To allow high IRQL synchronization across CPUs, the kernel provides a specialized synchronization
     object: the spinlock. Here, we’ll take a brief look at spinlocks as they apply to driver synchronization.
     (A full treatment of spinlocks is reserved for Chapter 8 in Part 2.) In principle, a spinlock resembles a
     mutex (also discussed in detail in Chapter 8 in Part 2) in the sense that it allows one piece of code to
     access shared data, but it works and is used quite differently. Table 6-3 summarizes the differences
     between mutexes and spinlocks.

     TABLE 6-3   Mutexes versus spinlocks

                              Mutex                                           Spinlock

     Synchronization nature   One thread out of any number of threads         One CPU out of any number of CPUs that is
                              that is allowed enters a critical region and    allowed enters a critical region and accesses
                              accesses shared data.                           shared data.

     Usable at IRQL           < DISPATCH_LEVEL (2)                            >= DISPATCH_LEVEL (2)

     Wait kind                Normal. That is, it does not waste CPU cycles   Busy. That is, the CPU is constantly testing the
                              while waiting.                                  spinlock bit until it’s free.

     Ownership                The owner thread is tracked, and recursive      The CPU owner is not tracked, and recursive
                              acquisition is allowed.                         acquisition will cause a deadlock.

        A spinlock is just a bit in memory that is accessed by an atomic test and modify operation. A spin-
     lock may be owned by a CPU or free (unowned). As shown in Table 6-3, spinlocks are necessary when
     synchronization is needed in high IRQLs (>=2), because a mutex can’t be used in these cases as a sched-
     uler is needed, but as we’ve seen the scheduler cannot wake up on a CPU whose IRQL is 2 or higher.
     This is why waiting for a spinlock is a busy wait operation: The thread cannot go to a normal wait state
     because that implies the scheduler waking up and switching to another thread on that CPU.

         Acquiring a spinlock by a CPU is always a two-step operation. First, the IRQL is raised to the associ-
     ated IRQL on which synchronization is to occur—that is, the highest IRQL on which the function that
     needs to synchronize executes. For example, synchronizing between a dispatch routine (IRQL 0) and a
     DPC (2) would need to raise IRQL to 2; synchronizing between DPC (2) and ISR (DIRQL) would need to
     raise IRQL to DIRQL (the IRQL for that particular interrupt). Second, the spinlock is attempted acquisi-
     tion by atomically testing and setting the spinlock bit.

        Note The steps outlined for spinlock acquisition are simplified and omit some details that
        are not important for this discussion. The complete spinlock story is described in Chapter 8
        in Part 2.

        The functions that acquire spinlocks determine the IRQL on which to synchronize, as we shall see in
     a moment.

        Figure 6-17 shows a simplified view of the two-step process of acquiring a spinlock.

FIGURE 6-17 Spinlock acquisition.

   When synchronizing at IRQL 2—for example, between a dispatch routine and a DPC or between a
DPC and another DPC (running on another CPU, of course)—the kernel provides the KeAcquireSpin-
Lock and KeReleaseSpinLock functions (there are other variations that are discussed in Chapter 8 in
Part 2). These functions perform the steps in Figure 6-17 where the “associated IRQL” is 2. The driver in
this case must allocate a spinlock (KSPIN_LOCK, which is just 4 bytes on 32-bit systems and 8 bytes on
64-bit systems), typically in the device extension (where driver-managed data for the device is kept)
and initialize it with KeInitializeSpinLock.

    For synchronizing between any function (such as DPC or a dispatch routine) and the ISR, differ-
ent functions must be used. Every interrupt object (KINTERRUPT) holds inside it a spinlock, which is
acquired before the ISR executes (this implies that the same ISR cannot run concurrently on other
CPUs). Synchronization in this case would be with that particular spinlock (no need to allocate another
one), which can be acquired indirectly with the KeAcquireInterruptSpinLock function and released
with KeReleaseInterruptSpinLock. Another option is to use the KeSynchronizeExecution function,
which accepts a callback function the driver provides that is called between the acquisition and release
of the interrupt spinlock.

   By now, you should realize that although ISRs require special attention, any data that a device driver
uses is subject to being accessed by the same device driver (one of its functions) running on another
processor. Therefore, it’s critical for device-driver code to synchronize its use of any global or shared
data or any accesses to the physical device itself.

I/O requests to layered drivers
The “IRP flow” section showed the general options drivers have for dealing with IRPs, with a focus on
a standard WDM device node. The preceding section showed how an I/O request to a simple device
controlled by a single device driver is handled. I/O processing for file-based devices or for requests
to other layered drivers happens in much the same way, but it’s worthwhile to take a closer look at a
request targeted at file-system drivers. Figure 6-18 shows a very simplified illustrative example of how
an asynchronous I/O request might travel through layered drivers for non–hardware based devices as
primary targets. It uses as an example a disk controlled by a file system.

     FIGURE 6-18   Queuing an asynchronous request to layered drivers.

         Once again, the I/O manager receives the request and creates an IRP to represent it. This time, howev-
     er, it delivers the packet to a file-system driver. The file-system driver exercises great control over the I/O
     operation at that point. Depending on the type of request the caller made, the file system can send the
     same IRP to the disk driver or it can generate additional IRPs and send them separately to the disk driver.

         The file system is most likely to reuse an IRP if the request it receives translates into a single straight-
     forward request to a device. For example, if an application issues a read request for the first 512 bytes in
     a file stored on a volume, the NTFS file system would simply call the volume manager driver, asking it to
     read one sector from the volume, beginning at the file’s starting location.

        After the disk controller’s DMA adapter finishes a data transfer, the disk controller interrupts the
     host, causing the ISR for the disk controller to run, which requests a DPC callback completing the IRP, as
     shown in Figure 6-19.

        As an alternative to reusing a single IRP, a file system can establish a group of associated IRPs that
     work in parallel on a single I/O request. For example, if the data to be read from a file is dispersed
     across the disk, the file-system driver might create several IRPs, each of which reads some portion of
     the request from a different sector. This queuing is illustrated in Figure 6-20.

FIGURE 6-19   Completing a layered I/O request.

FIGURE 6-20   Queuing associated IRPs.

         The file-system driver delivers the associated IRPs to the volume manager, which in turn sends them
     to the disk-device driver, which queues them to the disk device. They are processed one at a time, and
     the file-system driver keeps track of the returned data. When all the associated IRPs complete, the I/O
     system completes the original IRP and returns to the caller, as shown in Figure 6-21.

     FIGURE 6-21   Completing associated IRPs.

        Note All Windows file-system drivers that manage disk-based file systems are part of a
        stack of drivers that is at least three layers deep. The file-system driver sits at the top, a vol-
        ume manager in the middle, and a disk driver at the bottom. In addition, any number of
        filter drivers can be interspersed above and below these drivers. For clarity, the preceding
        example of layered I/O requests includes only a file-system driver and the volume-manager
        driver. See Chapter 12 in Part 2 for more information.

     Thread-agnostic I/O
     In the I/O models described thus far, IRPs are queued to the thread that initiated the I/O and are com-
     pleted by the I/O manager issuing an APC to that thread so that process-specific and thread-specific
     context are accessible by completion processing. Thread-specific I/O processing is usually sufficient
     for the performance and scalability needs of most applications, but Windows also includes support for
     thread-agnostic I/O via two mechanisms:

   ■■   I/O completion ports, which are described at length in the section “I/O completion ports” later
        in this chapter

   ■■   Locking the user buffer into memory and mapping it into the system address space

   With I/O completion ports, the application decides when it wants to check for the completion of I/O.
Therefore, the thread that happens to have issued an I/O request is not necessarily relevant because any
other thread can perform the completion request. As such, instead of completing the IRP inside the specific
thread’s context, it can be completed in the context of any thread that has access to the completion port.

   Likewise, with a locked and kernel-mapped version of the user buffer, there’s no need to be in the
same memory address space as the issuing thread because the kernel can access the memory from
arbitrary contexts. Applications can enable this mechanism by using SetFileIoOverlappedRange as
long as they have the SeLockMemoryPrivilege.

   With both completion port I/O and I/O on file buffers set by SetFileIoOverlappedRange, the I/O
manager associates the IRPs with the file object to which they have been issued instead of with the issu-
ing thread. The !fileobj extension in WinDbg shows an IRP list for file objects that are used with these
mechanisms.

  In the next sections, you’ll see how thread-agnostic I/O increases the reliability and performance of
applications in Windows.

I/O cancellation
While there are many ways in which IRP processing occurs and various methods to complete an I/O
request, a great many I/O processing operations actually end in cancellation rather than completion.
For example, a device may require removal while IRPs are still active, or the user might cancel a long-
running operation to a device—for example, a network operation. Another situation that requires I/O
cancellation support is thread and process termination. When a thread exits, the I/Os associated with
the thread must be cancelled. This is because the I/O operations are no longer relevant and the thread
cannot be deleted until the outstanding I/Os have completed.

    The Windows I/O manager, working with drivers, must deal with these requests efficiently and reli-
ably to provide a smooth user experience. Drivers manage this need by registering a cancel routine, by
calling IoSetCancelRoutine, for their cancellable I/O operations (typically, those operations that are
still enqueued and not yet in progress), which is invoked by the I/O manager to cancel an I/O operation.
When drivers fail to play their role in these scenarios, users may experience unkillable processes, which
have disappeared visually but linger and still appear in Task Manager or Process Explorer.

User-initiated I/O cancellation
Most software uses one thread to handle user interface (UI) input and one or more threads to perform
work, including I/O. In some cases, when a user wants to abort an operation that was initiated in the
UI, an application might need to cancel outstanding I/O operations. Operations that complete quickly
might not require cancellation, but for operations that take arbitrary amounts of time—like large data
transfers or network operations—Windows provides support for cancelling both synchronous and
asynchronous operations.

        ■■   Cancelling synchronous I/Os A thread can call CancelSynchronousIo. This enables even
             create (open) operations to be cancelled when supported by a device driver. Several drivers in
             Windows support this functionality. These include drivers that manage network file systems (for
             example, MUP, DFS, and SMB), which can cancel open operations to network paths.

        ■■   Cancelling asynchronous I/Os A thread can cancel its own outstanding asynchronous I/Os
             by calling CancelIo. It can cancel all asynchronous I/Os issued to a specific file handle, regard-
             less of which thread initiated them, in the same process with CancelIoEx. CancelIoEx also
             works on operations associated with I/O completion ports through the aforementioned thread-
             agnostic support in Windows. This is because the I/O system keeps track of a completion port’s
             outstanding I/Os by linking them with the completion port.

        Figure 6-22 and Figure 6-23 show synchronous and asynchronous I/O cancellation. (To a driver, all
     cancel processing looks the same.)

     FIGURE 6-22   Synchronous I/O cancellation.

     FIGURE 6-23   Asynchronous I/O cancellation.

I/O cancellation for thread termination
The other scenario in which I/Os must be cancelled is when a thread exits, either directly or as a result of
its process terminating (which causes the threads of the process to terminate). Because every thread has a
list of IRPs associated with it, the I/O manager can walk this list, look for cancellable IRPs, and cancel them.
Unlike CancelIoEx, which does not wait for an IRP to be cancelled before returning, the process manager
will not allow thread termination to proceed until all I/Os have been cancelled. As a result, if a driver fails
to cancel an IRP, the process and thread object will remain allocated until the system shuts down.

   Note Only IRPs for which a driver sets a cancel routine are cancellable. The process man-
   ager waits until all I/Os associated with a thread are either cancelled or completed before
   deleting the thread.

   EXPERIMENT: Debugging an unkillable process
   In this experiment, we’ll use Notmyfault from Sysinternals to force an unkillable process by caus-
   ing the Myfault.sys driver, which Notmyfault.exe uses, to indefinitely hold an IRP without having
   registered a cancel routine for it. (Notmyfault is covered in detail in the “Crash dump analysis”
   section of Chapter 15, “Crash dump analysis,” in Part 2.) Follow these steps:

        1.   Run Notmyfault.exe.

        2.   The Not My Fault dialog box appears. Click the Hang tab and choose Hang with IRP, as
             shown in the following screenshot. Then click the Hang button.

        3.   You shouldn’t see anything happen, and you should be able to click the Cancel button to
             quit the application. However, you should still see the Notmyfault process in Task Manager or
             Process Explorer. Attempts to terminate the process will fail because Windows will wait
             forever for the IRP to complete given that the Myfault driver doesn’t register a cancel routine.

           4.   To debug an issue such as this, you can use WinDbg to look at what the thread is cur-
                rently doing. Open a local kernel debugger session and start by listing the information
                about the Notmyfault.exe process with the !process command (notmyfault64 is the
                64-bit version):
                lkd> !process 0 7 notmyfault64.exe
                PROCESS ffff8c0b88c823c0
                    SessionId: 1 Cid: 2b04     Peb: 4e5c9f4000 ParentCid: 0d40
                    DirBase: 3edfa000 ObjectTable: ffffdf08dd140900 HandleCount: <Data Not
                Accessible>
                    Image: notmyfault64.exe
                    VadRoot ffff8c0b863ed190 Vads 81 Clone 0 Private 493. Modified 8. Locked
                0….
                        THREAD ffff8c0b85377300 Cid 2b04.2714 Teb: 0000004e5c808000
                Win32Thread: 0000000000000000 WAIT: (UserRequest) UserMode Non-Alertable
                            fffff80a4c944018 SynchronizationEvent
                        IRP List:
                            ffff8c0b84f1d130: (0006,0118) Flags: 00060000 Mdl: 00000000
                        Not impersonating
                        DeviceMap                  ffffdf08cf4d7d20
                        Owning Process             ffff8c0b88c823c0       Image:
                notmyfault64.exe
                ...
                        Child-SP          RetAddr            : Args to Child
                : Call Site
                        ffffb881'3ecf74a0 fffff802'cfc38a1c : 00000000'00000100
                00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 :
                nt!KiSwapContext+0x76
                        ffffb881'3ecf75e0 fffff802'cfc384bf : 00000000'00000000
                00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 :
                nt!KiSwapThread+0x17c
                        ffffb881'3ecf7690 fffff802'cfc3a287 : 00000000'00000000
                00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 :
                nt!KiCommitThreadWait+0x14f
                        ffffb881'3ecf7730 fffff80a'4c941fce : fffff80a'4c944018
                fffff802'00000006 00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 :
                nt!KeWaitForSingleObject+0x377
                        ffffb881'3ecf77e0 fffff802'd0067430 : ffff8c0b'88d2b550
                00000000'00000001 00000000'00000001 00000000'00000000 : myfault+0x1fce
                        ffffb881'3ecf7820 fffff802'd0066314 : ffff8c0b'00000000
                ffff8c0b'88d2b504 00000000'00000000 ffffb881'3ecf7b80 : nt!IopSynchronousSer
                viceTail+0x1a0
                        ffffb881'3ecf78e0 fffff802'd0065c96 : 00000000'00000000
                00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 :
                nt!IopXxxControlFile+0x674
                        ffffb881'3ecf7a20 fffff802'cfd57f93 : ffff8c0b'85377300
                fffff802'cfcb9640 00000000'00000000 fffff802'd005b32f :
                nt!NtDeviceIoControlFile+0x56
                        ffffb881'3ecf7a90 00007ffd'c1564f34 : 00000000'00000000
                00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 00000000'00000000 :
                nt!KiSystemServiceCopyEnd+0x13 (TrapFrame @ ffffb881'3ecf7b00)

       5.   From the stack trace, you can see that the thread that initiated the I/O is now waiting
            for cancellation or completion. The next step is to use the same debugger extension
            command used in the previous experiments, !irp, and attempt to analyze the problem.
            Copy the IRP pointer, and examine it with !irp:
            lkd> !irp ffff8c0b84f1d130
            Irp is active with 1 stacks 1 is current (= 0xffff8c0b84f1d200)
             No Mdl: No System Buffer: Thread ffff8c0b85377300: Irp stack trace.
                 cmd flg cl Device     File     Completion-Context
            >[IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL(e), N/A(0)]
                        5 0 ffff8c0b886b5590 ffff8c0b88d2b550 00000000-00000000
                        \Driver\MYFAULT
                                 Args: 00000000 00000000 83360020 00000000

       6.   From this output, it is obvious who the culprit driver is: \Driver\MYFAULT, or Myfault.sys.
            The name of the driver highlights the fact that the only way this situation can occur is
            through a driver problem—not a buggy application. Unfortunately, although you now
            know which driver caused the problem, there isn’t much you can do about it apart from
            rebooting the system. This is necessary because Windows can never safely assume it is
            OK to ignore the fact that cancellation hasn’t yet occurred. The IRP could return at any
            time and cause corruption of system memory.

              Tip If you encounter this situation in practice, you should check for a newer
              version of the driver, which might include a fix for the bug.

I/O completion ports
Writing a high-performance server application requires implementing an efficient threading model.
Having either too few or too many server threads to process client requests can lead to performance
problems. For example, if a server creates a single thread to handle all requests, clients can become
starved because the server will be tied up processing one request at a time. A single thread could
simultaneously process multiple requests, switching from one to another as I/O operations are started.
However, this architecture introduces significant complexity and can’t take advantage of systems with
more than one logical processor. At the other extreme, a server could create a big pool of threads so
that virtually every client request is processed by a dedicated thread. This scenario usually leads to
thread-thrashing, in which lots of threads wake up, perform some CPU processing, block while wait-
ing for I/O, and then, after request processing is completed, block again waiting for a new request. If
nothing else, having too many threads results in excessive context switching, caused by the scheduler
having to divide processor time among multiple active threads; such a scheme will not scale.

    The goal of a server is to incur as few context switches as possible by having its threads avoid un-
necessary blocking, while at the same time maximizing parallelism by using multiple threads. The ideal
is for there to be a thread actively servicing a client request on every processor and for those threads

     not to block when they complete a request if additional requests are waiting. For this optimal process
     to work correctly, however, the application must have a way to activate another thread when a thread
     processing a client request blocks I/O (such as when it reads from a file as part of the processing).

     The IoCompletion object
     Applications use the IoCompletion executive object, which is exported to the Windows API as a com-
     pletion port, as the focal point for the completion of I/O associated with multiple file handles. Once a
     file is associated with a completion port, any asynchronous I/O operations that complete on the file re-
     sult in a completion packet being queued to the completion port. A thread can wait for any outstand-
     ing I/Os to complete on multiple files simply by waiting for a completion packet to be queued to the
     completion port. The Windows API provides similar functionality with the WaitForMultipleObjects
     API function, but completion ports have one important advantage: concurrency. Concurrency refers to
     the number of threads that an application has actively servicing client requests, which is controlled with
     the aid of the system.

         When an application creates a completion port, it specifies a concurrency value. This value indicates
     the maximum number of threads associated with the port that should be running at any given time. As
     stated earlier, the ideal is to have one thread active at any given time for every processor in the system.
     Windows uses the concurrency value associated with a port to control how many threads an applica-
     tion has active. If the number of active threads associated with a port equals the concurrency value,
     a thread that is waiting on the completion port won’t be allowed to run. Instead, an active thread will
     finish processing its current request, after which it will check whether another packet is waiting at the
     port. If one is, the thread simply grabs the packet and goes off to process it. When this happens, there
     is no context switch, and the CPUs are utilized nearly to their full capacity.

     Using completion ports
     Figure 6-24 shows a high-level illustration of completion-port operation. A completion port is created
     with a call to the CreateIoCompletionPort Windows API function. Threads that block on a completion
     port become associated with the port and are awakened in last in, first out (LIFO) order so that the thread
     that blocked most recently is the one that is given the next packet. Threads that block for long periods of
     time can have their stacks swapped out to disk, so if there are more threads associated with a port than
     there is work to process, the in-memory footprints of threads blocked the longest are minimized.

         A server application will usually receive client requests via network endpoints that are identified by
     file handles. Examples include Windows Sockets 2 (Winsock2) sockets or named pipes. As the server
     creates its communications endpoints, it associates them with a completion port and its threads wait
     for incoming requests by calling GetQueuedCompletionStatus(Ex) on the port. When a thread is
     given a packet from the completion port, it will go off and start processing the request, becoming an
     active thread. A thread will block many times during its processing, such as when it needs to read or
     write data to a file on disk or when it synchronizes with other threads. Windows detects this activity
     and recognizes that the completion port has one less active thread. Therefore, when a thread becomes
     inactive because it blocks, a thread waiting on the completion port will be awakened if there is a packet
     in the queue.

FIGURE 6-24   I/O completion-port operation.

    Microsoft’s guidelines are to set the concurrency value roughly equal to the number of processors
in a system. Keep in mind that it’s possible for the number of active threads for a completion port to
exceed the concurrency limit. Consider a case in which the limit is specified as 1:

   1.   A client request comes in and a thread is dispatched to process the request, becoming active.

   2.   A second request arrives, but a second thread waiting on the port isn’t allowed to proceed
        because the concurrency limit has been reached.

   3.   The first thread blocks, waiting for a file I/O, so it becomes inactive.

   4.   The second thread is released.

   5.   While the second thread is still active, the first thread’s file I/O is completed, making it active
        again. At that point—and until one of the threads blocks—the concurrency value is 2, which
        is higher than the limit of 1. Most of the time, the count of active threads will remain at or just
        above the concurrency limit.

   The completion port API also makes it possible for a server application to queue privately defined
completion packets to a completion port by using the PostQueuedCompletionStatus function. A
server typically uses this function to inform its threads of external events, such as the need to shut
down gracefully.

    Applications can use thread-agnostic I/O, described earlier, with I/O completion ports to avoid
associating threads with their own I/Os and associating them with a completion port object instead.
In addition to the other scalability benefits of I/O completion ports, their use can minimize context
switches. Standard I/O completions must be executed by the thread that initiated the I/O, but when
an I/O associated with an I/O completion port completes, the I/O manager uses any waiting thread to
perform the completion operation.

     I/O completion port operation
     Windows applications create completion ports by calling the CreateIoCompletionPort Windows API
     and specifying a NULL completion port handle. This results in the execution of the NtCreateIoComple-
     tion system service. The executive’s IoCompletion object contains a kernel synchronization object
     called a kernel queue. Thus, the system service creates a completion port object and initializes a queue
     object in the port’s allocated memory. (A pointer to the port also points to the queue object because
     the queue is the first member of the completion port.) A kernel queue object has a concurrency value
     that is specified when a thread initializes it, and in this case the value that is used is the one that was
     passed to CreateIoCompletionPort. KeInitializeQueue is the function that NtCreateIoCompletion
     calls to initialize a port’s queue object.

        When an application calls CreateIoCompletionPort to associate a file handle with a port, the
     NtSetInformationFile system service is executed with the file handle as the primary parameter.
     The information class that is set is FileCompletionInformation, and the completion port’s handle
     and the CompletionKey parameter from CreateIoCompletionPort are the data values. NtSetInfor-
     mationFile dereferences the file handle to obtain the file object and allocates a completion context
     data structure.

         Finally, NtSetInformationFile sets the CompletionContext field in the file object to point at the
     context structure. When an asynchronous I/O operation completes on a file object, the I/O manager
     checks whether the CompletionContext field in the file object is non-NULL. If it is, the I/O manager
     allocates a completion packet and queues it to the completion port by calling KeInsertQueue with the
     port as the queue on which to insert the packet (this works because the completion port object and
     queue object have the same address).

        When a server thread invokes GetQueuedCompletionStatus, the NtRemoveIoCompletion sys-
     tem service is executed. After validating parameters and translating the completion port handle to
     a pointer to the port, NtRemoveIoCompletion calls IoRemoveIoCompletion, which eventually calls
     KeRemoveQueueEx. For high-performance scenarios, it’s possible that multiple I/Os may have been
     completed, and although the thread will not block, it will still call into the kernel each time to get one
     item. The GetQueuedCompletionStatus or GetQueuedCompletionStatusEx API allows applications to
     retrieve more than one I/O completion status at the same time, reducing the number of user-to-­kernel
     roundtrips and maintaining peak efficiency. Internally, this is implemented through the NtRemoveIo-
     CompletionEx function. This calls IoRemoveIoCompletion with a count of queued items, which is
     passed on to KeRemoveQueueEx.

        As you can see, KeRemoveQueueEx and KeInsertQueue are the engine behind completion ports.
     They are the functions that determine whether a thread waiting for an I/O completion packet should
     be activated. Internally, a queue object maintains a count of the current number of active threads and
     the maximum number of active threads. If the current number equals or exceeds the maximum when a
     thread calls KeRemoveQueueEx, the thread will be put (in LIFO order) onto a list of threads waiting for a
     turn to process a completion packet. The list of threads hangs off the queue object. A thread’s control
     block data structure (KTHREAD) has a pointer in it that references the queue object of a queue that it’s
     associated with; if the pointer is NULL, the thread isn’t associated with a queue.

   Windows keeps track of threads that become inactive because they block on something other than
the completion port by relying on the queue pointer in a thread’s control block. The scheduler routines
that possibly result in a thread blocking (such as KeWaitForSingleObject, KeDelayExecutionThread,
and so on) check the thread’s queue pointer. If the pointer isn’t NULL, the functions call KiActivate-
WaiterQueue, a queue-related function that decrements the count of active threads associated with
the queue. If the resulting number is less than the maximum and at least one completion packet is in
the queue, the thread at the front of the queue’s thread list is awakened and given the oldest packet.
Conversely, whenever a thread that is associated with a queue wakes up after blocking, the scheduler
executes the KiUnwaitThread function, which increments the queue’s active count.

   The PostQueuedCompletionStatus Windows API function results in the execution of the NtSet-
IoCompletion system service. This function simply inserts the specified packet onto the completion
port’s queue by using KeInsertQueue.

   Figure 6-25 shows an example of a completion port object in operation. Even though two threads
are ready to process completion packets, the concurrency value of 1 allows only one thread associated
with the completion port to be active, and so the two threads are blocked on the completion port.

FIGURE 6-25   I/O completion port object in operation.

    You can fine-tune the exact notification model of the I/O completion port through the SetFile-
CompletionNotificationModes API, which allows application developers to take advantage of addition-
al, specific improvements that usually require code changes but can offer even more throughput. Three
notification-mode optimizations are supported, which are listed in Table 6-4. Note that these modes
are per file handle and cannot be changed after being set.

TABLE 6-4   I/O completion port notification modes
Notification Mode                               Meaning

Skip completion port on success (FILE_SKIP_     If the following three conditions are true, the I/O manager does not
COMPLETION_PORT_ON_SUCCESS=1)                   queue a completion entry to the port when it would ordinarily do
                                                so. First, a completion port must be associated with the file handle.
                                                Second, the file must be opened for asynchronous I/O. Third, the
                                                request must return success immediately without returning ERROR_
                                                PENDING.

                                                                                                            Continues...

     TABLE 6-4   I/O completion port notification modes (continued)
     Notification Mode                                 Meaning

     Skip set event on handle (FILE_SKIP_SET_          The I/O manager does not set the event for the file object if
     EVENT_ON_HANDLE=2)                                a request returns with a success code or the error returned is
                                                       ERROR_PENDING and the function that is called is not a synchronous
                                                       function. If an explicit event is provided for the request, it is still
                                                       signaled.

     Skip set user event on fast I/O (FILE_SKIP_SET_   The I/O manager does not set the explicit event provided for the
     USER_EVENT_ON_FAST_IO=4)                          request if a request takes the fast I/O path and returns with a success
                                                       code or the error returned is ERROR_PENDING and the function that
                                                       is called is not a synchronous function.

     I/O prioritization
     Without I/O priority, background activities like search indexing, virus scanning, and disk defragmenting
     can severely impact the responsiveness of foreground operations. For example, a user who launches an
     application or opens a document while another process is performing disk I/O will experience delays as
     the foreground task waits for disk access. The same interference also affects the streaming playback of
     multimedia content like music from a disk.

        Windows includes two types of I/O prioritization to help foreground I/O operations get preference:
     priority on individual I/O operations and I/O bandwidth reservations.

     I/O priorities
     The Windows I/O manager internally includes support for five I/O priorities, as shown in Table 6-5, but
     only three of the priorities are used. (Future versions of Windows may support High and Low.)

     TABLE 6-5   I/O priorities
     I/O Priority           Usage

     Critical               Memory manager

     High                   Not used

     Normal                 Normal application I/O

     Low                    Not used

     Very Low               Scheduled tasks, SuperFetch, defragmenting, content indexing, background activities

         I/O has a default priority of Normal, and the memory manager uses Critical when it wants to write
     dirty memory data out to disk under low-memory situations to make room in RAM for other data and
     code. The Windows Task Scheduler sets the I/O priority for tasks that have the default task priority
     to Very Low. The priority specified by applications that perform background processing is Very Low.
     All the Windows background operations, including Windows Defender scanning and desktop search
     indexing, use Very Low I/O priority.

Prioritization strategies
Internally, the five I/O priorities are divided into two I/O prioritization modes, called strategies. These
are the hierarchy prioritization and the idle prioritization strategies. Hierarchy prioritization deals with
all the I/O priorities except Very Low. It implements the following strategy:

   ■■   All critical-priority I/O must be processed before any high-priority I/O.

   ■■   All high-priority I/O must be processed before any normal-priority I/O.

   ■■   All normal-priority I/O must be processed before any low-priority I/O.

   ■■   All low-priority I/O is processed after any higher-priority I/O.

   As each application generates I/Os, IRPs are put on different I/O queues based on their priority, and
the hierarchy strategy decides the ordering of the operations.

   The idle prioritization strategy, on the other hand, uses a separate queue for non-idle priority I/O.
Because the system processes all hierarchy prioritized I/O before idle I/O, it’s possible for the I/Os in this
queue to be starved, as long as there’s even a single non-idle I/O on the system in the hierarchy priority
strategy queue.

   To avoid this situation, as well as to control back-off (the sending rate of I/O transfers), the idle strat-
egy uses a timer to monitor the queue and guarantee that at least one I/O is processed per unit of time
(typically, half a second). Data written using non-idle I/O priority also causes the cache manager to
write modifications to disk immediately instead of doing it later and to bypass its read-ahead logic for
read operations that would otherwise preemptively read from the file being accessed. The prioritization
strategy also waits for 50 milliseconds after the completion of the last non-idle I/O in order to issue the
next idle I/O. Otherwise, idle I/Os would occur in the middle of non-idle streams, causing costly seeks.

    Combining these strategies into a virtual global I/O queue for demonstration purposes, a snapshot
of this queue might look similar to Figure 6-26. Note that within each queue, the ordering is first-in,
first-out (FIFO). The order in the figure is shown only as an example.

FIGURE 6-26   Sample entries in a global I/O queue.

   User-mode applications can set I/O priority on three different objects. The functions SetPriority-
Class (with the PROCESS_MODE_BACKGROUND_BEGIN value) and SetThreadPriority (with the THREAD_
MODE_BACKGROUND_BEGIN value), set the priority for all the I/Os that are generated by either the entire
process or specific threads (the priority is stored in the IRP of each request). These functions work only
on the current process or thread and lower the I/O priority to Very Low. In addition, these also lower
the scheduling priority to 4 and the memory priority to 1. The function SetFileInformationByHandle
can set the priority for a specific file object (the priority is stored in the file object). Drivers can also set
I/O priority directly on an IRP by using the IoSetIoPriorityHint API.

        Note The I/O priority field in the IRP and/or file object is a hint. There is no guarantee that
        the I/O priority will be respected or even supported by the different drivers that are part of
        the storage stack.

        The two prioritization strategies are implemented by two different types of drivers. The hierarchy
     strategy is implemented by the storage port drivers, which are responsible for all I/Os on a specific
     port, such as ATA, SCSI, or USB. Only the ATA port driver (Ataport.sys) and USB port driver (Usbstor.sys)
     implement this strategy, while the SCSI and storage port drivers (Scsiport.sys and Storport.sys) do not.

        Note All port drivers check specifically for Critical priority I/Os and move them ahead of
        their queues, even if they do not support the full hierarchy mechanism. This mechanism is in
        place to support critical memory manager paging I/Os to ensure system reliability.

        This means that consumer mass storage devices such as IDE or SATA hard drives and USB flash disks
     will take advantage of I/O prioritization, while devices based on SCSI, Fibre Channel, and iSCSI will not.

        On the other hand, it is the system storage class device driver (Classpnp.sys) that enforces the idle
     strategy, so it automatically applies to I/Os directed at all storage devices, including SCSI drives. This
     separation ensures that idle I/Os will be subject to back-off algorithms to ensure a reliable system
     during operation under high idle I/O usage and so that applications that use them can make forward
     progress. Placing support for this strategy in the Microsoft-provided class driver avoids performance
     problems that would have been caused by lack of support for it in legacy third-party port drivers.

       Figure 6-27 displays a simplified view of the storage stack that shows where each strategy is imple-
     mented. See Chapter 12 in Part 2 for more information on the storage stack.

     FIGURE 6-27 Implementation of I/O prioritization across the storage stack.

I/O priority inversion avoidance
To avoid I/O priority inversion, in which a high I/O priority thread is starved by a low I/O priority thread,
the executive resource (ERESOURCE) locking functionality uses several strategies. The ERESOURCE was
picked for the implementation of I/O priority inheritance specifically because of its heavy use in file
system and storage drivers, where most I/O priority inversion issues can appear. (See Chapter 8 in Part
2 for more on executive resources.)

   If an ERESOURCE is being acquired by a thread with low I/O priority, and there are currently waiters
on the ERESOURCE with normal or higher priority, the current thread is temporarily boosted to normal
I/O priority by using the PsBoostThreadIo API, which increments the IoBoostCount in the ETHREAD
structure. It also notifies Autoboost if the thread I/O priority was boosted or the boost was removed.
(Refer to Chapter 4 for more on Autoboost.)

   It then calls the IoBoostThreadIoPriority API, which enumerates all the IRPs queued to the target
thread (recall that each thread has a list of pending IRPs) and checks which ones have a lower priority
than the target priority (normal in this case), thus identifying pending idle I/O priority IRPs. In turn,
the device object responsible for each of those IRPs is identified, and the I/O manager checks whether
a priority callback has been registered, which driver developers can do through the IoRegisterPriority-
Callback API and by setting the DO_PRIORITY_CALLBACK_ENABLED flag on their device object.
Depending on whether the IRP was a paging I/O, this mechanism is called threaded boost or paging
boost. Finally, if no matching IRPs were found, but the thread has at least some pending IRPs, all are
boosted regardless of device object or priority, which is called blanket boosting.

I/O priority boosts and bumps
Windows uses a few other subtle modifications to normal I/O paths to avoid starvation, inversion, or
otherwise unwanted scenarios when I/O priority is being used. Typically, these modifications are done
by boosting I/O priority when needed. The following scenarios exhibit this behavior:

   ■■   When a driver is being called with an IRP targeted to a particular file object, Windows makes
        sure that if the request comes from kernel mode, the IRP uses normal priority even if the file
        object has a lower I/O priority hint. This is called a kernel bump.

   ■■   When reads or writes to the paging file are occurring (through IoPageRead and IoPageWrite),
        Windows checks whether the request comes from kernel mode and is not being performed on
        behalf of Superfetch (which always uses idle I/O). In this case, the IRP uses normal priority even if
        the current thread has a lower I/O priority. This is called a paging bump.

   The following experiment will show you an example of Very Low I/O priority and how you can use
Process Monitor to look at I/O priorities on different requests.

   EXPERIMENT: Very low versus normal I/O throughput
   You can use the IO Priority sample application (included in this book’s utilities) to look at the
   throughput difference between two threads with different I/O priorities. Follow these steps:

           1.   Launch IoPriority.exe.

           2.   In the dialog box, under Thread 1, check the Low Priority check box.

           3.   Click the Start I/O button. You should notice a significant difference in speed between
                the two threads, as shown in the following screenshot:

                 Note If both threads run at low priority and the system is relatively idle, their
                 throughput will be roughly equal to the throughput of a single normal I/O prior-
                 ity in the example. This is because low-priority I/Os are not artificially throttled or
                 otherwise hindered if there isn’t any competition from higher-priority I/O.

           4.   Open the process in Process Explorer and look at the low I/O priority thread to see the
                priorities:

           5.   You can also use Process Monitor to trace IO Priority’s I/Os and look at their I/O priority
                hint. To do so, launch Process Monitor, configure a filter for IoPriority.exe, and repeat the
                experiment. In this application, each thread reads from a file named _File_ concatenated
                with the thread ID.

         6.   Scroll down until you see a write to File_1. You should see output similar to the following:

         7.   Notice that I/Os directed at _File_7920 in the screenshot have a priority of very low.
              Looking at the Time of Day and Relative Time columns, you’ll also notice that the I/Os
              are spaced half a second from each other, which is another sign of the idle strategy in
              action.

   EXPERIMENT: Performance analysis of I/O priority boosting/bumping
   The kernel exposes several internal variables that can be queried through the undocumented
   SystemLowPriorityIoInformation system class available in NtQuerySystemInformation.
   However, even without writing or relying on such an application, you can use the local kernel
   debugger to view these numbers on your system. The following variables are available:

    ■■   IoLowPriorityReadOperationCount and IoLowPriorityWriteOperationCount

    ■■   IoKernelIssuedIoBoostedCount

    ■■   IoPagingReadLowPriorityCount and IoPagingWriteLowPriorityCount

    ■■   IoPagingReadLowPriorityBumpedCount and IoPagingWriteHighPriorityBumpedCount

    ■■   IoBoostedThreadedIrpCount and IoBoostedPagingIrpCount

    ■■   IoBlanketBoostCount

      You can use the dd memory-dumping command in the kernel debugger to see the values of
   these variables (all are 32-bit values).

Bandwidth reservation (scheduled file I/O)
Windows I/O bandwidth-reservation support is useful for applications that desire consistent I/O
throughput. For example, using the SetFileBandwidthReservation call, a media player application
can ask the I/O system to guarantee it the ability to read data from a device at a specified rate. If the
device can deliver data at the requested rate and existing reservations allow it, the I/O system gives the
application guidance as to how fast it should issue I/Os and how large the I/Os should be.

          The I/O system won’t service other I/Os unless it can satisfy the requirements of applications that
     have made reservations on the target storage device. Figure 6-28 shows a conceptual timeline of I/Os
     issued on the same file. The shaded regions are the only ones that will be available to other applications.
     If I/O bandwidth is already taken, new I/Os will have to wait until the next cycle.

     FIGURE 6-28   Effect of I/O requests during bandwidth reservation.

        Like the hierarchy prioritization strategy, bandwidth reservation is implemented at the port driver
     level, which means it is available only for IDE, SATA, or USB-based mass-storage devices.

     Container notifications
     Container notifications are specific classes of events that drivers can register for through an asynchro-
     nous callback mechanism by using the IoRegisterContainerNotification API and selecting the
     notification class that interests them. Thus far, one such class is implemented in Windows: IoSession-
     StateNotification. This class allows drivers to have their registered callback invoked whenever a
     change in the state of a given session is registered. The following changes are supported:

        ■■   A session is created or terminated.

        ■■   A user connects to or disconnects from a session.

        ■■   A user logs on to or logs off from a session.

         By specifying a device object that belongs to a specific session, the driver callback will be active only
     for that session. In contrast, by specifying a global device object (or no device object at all), the driver will
     receive notifications for all events on a system. This feature is particularly useful for devices that participate
     in the Plug and Play device redirection functionality that is provided through Terminal Services, which allows
     a remote device to be visible on the connecting host’s Plug and Play manager bus as well (such as audio or
     printer device redirection). Once the user disconnects from a session with audio playback, for example, the
     device driver needs a notification in order to stop redirecting the source audio stream.

Driver Verifier
     Driver Verifier is a mechanism that can be used to help find and isolate common bugs in device drivers
     or other kernel-mode system code. Microsoft uses Driver Verifier to check its own device drivers as well
     as all device drivers that vendors submit for WHQL testing. Doing so ensures that the drivers submit-
     ted are compatible with Windows and free from common driver errors. (Although not described in this
     book, there is also a corresponding Application Verifier tool that has resulted in quality improvements
     for user-mode code in Windows.)

   Note Although Driver Verifier serves primarily as a tool to help device driver developers
   discover bugs in their code, it is also a powerful tool for system administrators experiencing
   crashes. Chapter 15 in Part 2 describes its role in crash analysis troubleshooting.

    Driver Verifier consists of support in several system components: the memory manager, I/O man-
ager, and HAL all have driver verification options that can be enabled. These options are configured
using the Driver Verifier Manager (%SystemRoot%\System32\Verifier.exe). When you run Driver Verifier
with no command-line arguments, it presents a wizard-style interface, as shown in Figure 6-29. (You
can also enable and disable Driver Verifier, as well as display current settings, by using its command-
line interface. From a command prompt, type verifier /? to see the switches.)

FIGURE 6-29   Driver Verifier Manager.

    Driver Verifier Manager distinguishes between two sets of settings: standard and additional. This
is somewhat arbitrary, but the standard settings represent the more common options that should be
probably selected for every driver being tested, while the additional settings represent those settings
that are less common or specific to some types of drivers. Selecting Create Custom Settings from the
main wizard’s page shows all options with a column indicating which is standard and which is addi-
tional, as shown in Figure 6-30.

    Regardless of which options are selected, Driver Verifier always monitors drivers selected for veri-
fication, looking for a number of illegal and boundary operations, including calling kernel-memory
pool functions at invalid IRQL, double-freeing memory, releasing spinlocks inappropriately, not freeing
timers, referencing a freed object, delaying shutdown for longer than 20 minutes, and requesting a
zero-size memory allocation.

     FIGURE 6-30   Driver Verifier settings.

        Driver Verifier settings are stored in the registry under the HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
     Control\Session Manager\Memory Management key. The VerifyDriverLevel value contains a
     bitmask that represents the verification options that are enabled. The VerifyDrivers value contains
     the names of the drivers to monitor. (These values won’t exist in the registry until you select drivers
     to verify in the Driver Verifier Manager.) If you choose to verify all drivers (which you should never do,
     since this will cause considerable system slowdown), VerifyDrivers is set to an asterisk (*) character.
     Depending on the settings you have made, you might need to reboot the system for the selected
     verification to occur.

        Early in the boot process, the memory manager reads the Driver Verifier registry values to deter-
     mine which drivers to verify and which Driver Verifier options you enabled. (Note that if you boot in
     safe mode, any Driver Verifier settings are ignored.) Subsequently, if you’ve selected at least one driver
     for verification, the kernel checks the name of every device driver it loads into memory against the list
     of drivers you’ve selected for verification. For every device driver that appears in both places, the kernel
     invokes the VfLoadDriver function, which calls other internal Vf* functions to replace the driver’s
     references to a number of kernel functions with references to Driver Verifier–equivalent versions of
     those functions. For example, ExAllocatePool is replaced with a call to VerifierAllocatePool. The
     windowing system driver (Win32k.sys) also makes similar changes to use Driver Verifier–equivalent
     functions.

     I/O-related verification options
     The various I/O-related verification options are as follows:

        ■■   I/O Verification When this option is selected, the I/O manager allocates IRPs for verified
             drivers from a special pool and their usage is tracked. In addition, the Driver Verifier crashes
             the system when an IRP is completed that contains an invalid status or when an invalid device

        object is passed to the I/O manager. This option also monitors all IRPs to ensure that drivers
        mark them correctly when completing them asynchronously, that they manage device-stack
        locations correctly, and that they delete device objects only once. In addition, the Verifier ran-
        domly stresses drivers by sending them fake power management and WMI IRPs, changing the
        order in which devices are enumerated, and adjusting the status of PnP and power IRPs when
        they complete to test for drivers that return incorrect status from their dispatch routines. Finally,
        the Verifier also detects incorrect re-initialization of remove locks while they are still being held
        due to pending device removal.

   ■■   DMA Checking DMA is a hardware-supported mechanism that allows devices to transfer
        data to or from physical memory without involving the CPU. The I/O manager provides several
        functions that drivers use to initiate and control DMA operations, and this option enables
        checks for the correct use of the functions and buffers that the I/O manager supplies for DMA
        operations.

   ■■   Force Pending I/O Requests For many devices, asynchronous I/Os complete immediately,
        so drivers may not be coded to properly handle the occasional asynchronous I/O. When this
        option is enabled, the I/O manager randomly returns STATUS_PENDING in response to a driver’s
        calls to IoCallDriver, which simulates the asynchronous completion of an I/O.

   ■■   IRP Logging This option monitors a driver’s use of IRPs and makes a record of IRP usage,
        which is stored as WMI information. You can then use the Dc2wmiparser.exe utility in the
        WDK to convert these WMI records to a text file. Note that only 20 IRPs for each device will be
        recorded—each subsequent IRP will overwrite the least recently added entry. After a reboot,
        this information is discarded, so Dc2wmiparser.exe should be run if the contents of the trace are
        to be analyzed later.

Memory-related verification options
The following are memory-related verification options supported by Driver Verifier. (Some are also
related to I/O operations.)

Special Pool
Selecting the Special Pool option causes the pool allocation routines to bracket pool allocations with
an invalid page so that references before or after the allocation will result in a kernel-mode access
violation, thus crashing the system with the finger pointed at the buggy driver. Special pool also causes
some additional validation checks to be performed when a driver allocates or frees memory. With
special pool enabled, the pool allocation routines allocate a region of kernel memory for Driver Verifier
to use. Driver Verifier redirects memory allocation requests that drivers under verification make to
the special pool area rather than to the standard kernel-mode memory pools. When a device driver
allocates memory from special pool, Driver Verifier rounds up the allocation to an even-page bound-
ary. Because Driver Verifier brackets the allocated page with invalid pages, if a device driver attempts to
read or write past the end of the buffer, the driver will access an invalid page, and the memory manager
will raise a kernel-mode access violation.

        Figure 6-31 shows an example of the special pool buffer that Driver Verifier allocates to a device
     driver when Driver Verifier checks for overrun errors.

     FIGURE 6-31   Layout of special pool allocations.

        By default, Driver Verifier performs overrun detection. It does this by placing the buffer that the
     device driver uses at the end of the allocated page and filling the beginning of the page with a random
     pattern. Although the Driver Verifier Manager doesn’t let you specify underrun detection, you can set
     this type of detection manually by adding the DWORD registry value PoolTagOverruns to the HKLM\
     SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management key and setting it to 0 (or
     by running the Gflags.exe utility and selecting the Verify Start option in the Kernel Special Pool Tag
     section instead of the default option, Verify End). When Windows enforces underrun detection, Driver
     Verifier allocates the driver’s buffer at the beginning of the page rather than at the end.

        The overrun-detection configuration includes some measure of underrun detection as well. When
     the driver frees its buffer to return the memory to Driver Verifier, Driver Verifier ensures that the pat-
     tern preceding the buffer hasn’t changed. If the pattern is modified, the device driver has underrun the
     buffer and written to memory outside the buffer.

       Special pool allocations also check to ensure that the processor IRQL at the time of an allocation and
     deallocation is legal. This check catches an error that some device drivers make: allocating pageable
     memory from an IRQL at DPC/dispatch level or above.

         You can also configure special pool manually by adding the DWORD registry value PoolTag in the
     HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management key, which repre-
     sents the allocation tags the system uses for special pool. Thus, even if Driver Verifier isn’t configured
     to verify a particular device driver, if the tag the driver associates with the memory it allocates matches
     what is specified in the PoolTag registry value, the pool allocation routines will allocate the memory
     from special pool. If you set the value of PoolTag to 0x2a or to the wildcard (*), all memory that drivers
     allocate will be from special pool, provided there’s enough virtual and physical memory (drivers will
     revert to allocating from regular pool if there aren’t enough free pages).

     Pool tracking
     If pool tracking is enabled, the memory manager checks at driver unload time whether the driver freed
     all the memory allocations it made. If it didn’t, it crashes the system, indicating the buggy driver. Driver
     Verifier also shows general pool statistics on the Driver Verifier Manager’s Pool Tracking tab (accessible
     from the main wizard UI by selecting Display Information About the Currently Verified Drivers

and selecting Next twice). You can also use the !verifier kernel debugger command. This command
shows more information than Driver Verifier and is useful to driver writers.

   Pool tracking and special pool cover not only explicit allocation calls, such as ExAllocatePoolWith-
Tag, but also calls to other kernel APIs that implicitly allocate memory from pools: IoAllocateMdl,
IoAllocateIrp, and other IRP allocation calls; various Rtl string APIs; and IoSetCompletionRoutineEx.

   Another driver verified function enabled by the Pool Tracking option pertains to pool quota charges.
The call to ExAllocatePoolWithQuotaTag charges the current process’s pool quota for the number of
bytes allocated. If such a call is made from a DPC routine, the process that is charged is unpredictable
because DPC routines may execute in the context of any process. The Pool Tracking option checks for
calls to this routine from the DPC routine context.

   Driver Verifier can also perform locked memory page tracking, which additionally checks for pages
that have been left locked after an I/O operation completes and generates a DRIVER_LEFT_LOCKED_
PAGES_IN_PROCESS crash code instead of PROCESS_HAS_LOCKED_PAGES—the former indicates the
driver responsible for the error as well as the function responsible for the locking of the pages.

Force IRQL Checking
One of the most common device driver bugs occurs when a driver accesses pageable data or code
when the processor on which the device driver is executing is at an elevated IRQL. The memory man-
ager can’t service a page fault when the IRQL is DPC/dispatch level or above. The system often doesn’t
detect instances of a device driver accessing pageable data when the processor is executing at a high
IRQL level because the pageable data being accessed happens to be physically resident at the time.
At other times, however, the data might be paged out, which results in a system crash with the stop
code IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL (that is, the IRQL wasn’t less than or equal to the level required for the
operation attempted—in this case, accessing pageable memory).

    Although testing device drivers for this kind of bug is usually difficult, Driver Verifier makes it easy.
If you select the Force IRQL Checking option, Driver Verifier forces all kernel-mode pageable code and
data out of the system working set whenever a device driver under verification raises the IRQL. The in-
ternal function that does this is MiTrimAllSystemPagableMemory. With this setting enabled, whenever
a device driver under verification accesses pageable memory when the IRQL is elevated, the system
instantly detects the violation, and the resulting system crash identifies the faulty driver.

   Another common driver crash that results from incorrect IRQL usage occurs when synchronization
objects are part of data structures that are paged and then waited on. Synchronization objects should
never be paged because the dispatcher needs to access them at an elevated IRQL, which would cause a
crash. Driver Verifier checks whether any of the following structures are present in pageable memory:
KTIMER, KMUTEX, KSPIN_LOCK, KEVENT, KSEMAPHORE, ERESOURCE, and FAST_MUTEX.

Low Resources Simulation
Enabling Low Resources Simulation causes Driver Verifier to randomly fail memory allocations that
verified device drivers perform. In the past, developers wrote many device drivers under the assump-
tion that kernel memory would always be available, and that if memory ran out, the device driver

     didn’t have to worry about it because the system would crash anyway. However, because low-memory
     conditions can occur temporarily, and today’s mobile devices are not as powerful as larger machines,
     it’s important that device drivers properly handle allocation failures that indicate kernel memory is
     exhausted.

        The driver calls that will be injected with random failures include the functions ExAllocatePool*,
     MmProbeAndLockPages, MmMapLockedPagesSpecifyCache, MmMapIoSpace, MmAllocateContiguous-
     Memory, MmAllocatePagesForMdl, IoAllocateIrp, IoAllocateMdl, IoAllocateWorkItem, IoAllo-
     cateErrorLogEntry, IOSetCompletionRoutineEx, and various Rtl string APIs that allocate from the
     pool. Driver Verifier also fails some allocations made by kernel GDI functions (see the WDK documenta-
     tion for a complete list). Additionally, you can specify the following:

        ■■   The probability that allocation will fail       This is 6 percent by default.

        ■■   Which applications should be subject to the simulation              All are by default.

        ■■   Which pool tags should be affected           All are by default.

        ■■   What delay should be used before fault injection starts The default is 7 minutes after the
             system boots, which is enough time to get past the critical initialization period in which a low-
             memory condition might prevent a device driver from loading.

        You can change these customizations with command line options to verifier.exe.

        After the delay period, Driver Verifier starts randomly failing allocation calls for device drivers it is veri-
     fying. If a driver doesn’t correctly handle allocation failures, this will likely show up as a system crash.

     Systematic Low Resources Simulation
     Similar to the Low Resources Simulation option, this option fails certain calls to the kernel and Ndis.Sys
     (for network drivers), but does so in a systematic way, by examining the call stack at the point of failure
     injection. If the driver handles the failure correctly, that call stack will not be failure injected again. This
     allows the driver writer to see issues in a systematic way, fix a reported issue, and then move on to the
     next. Examining call stacks is a relatively expensive operation, therefore verifying more than a single
     driver at a time with this setting is not recommended.

     Miscellaneous checks
     Some of the checks that Driver Verifier calls miscellaneous allow it to detect the freeing of certain system
     structures in the pool that are still active. For example, Driver Verifier will check for:

        ■■   Active work items in freed memory A driver calls ExFreePool to free a pool block in which
             one or more work items queued with IoQueueWorkItem are present.

        ■■   Active resources in freed memory A driver calls ExFreePool before calling ExDelete-
             Resource to destroy an ERESOURCE object.

        ■■   Active look-aside lists in freed memory A driver calls ExFreePool before calling ExDelete-
             NPagedLookasideList or ExDeletePagedLookasideList to delete the look-aside list.

      Finally, when verification is enabled, Driver Verifier performs certain automatic checks that cannot
   be individually enabled or disabled. These include the following:

      ■■   Calling MmProbeAndLockPages or MmProbeAndLockProcessPages on an MDL having incorrect
           flags. For example, it is incorrect to call MmProbeAndLockPages for an MDL that was set up by
           calling MmBuildMdlForNonPagedPool.

      ■■   Calling MmMapLockedPages on an MDL having incorrect flags. For example, it is incorrect to call
           MmMapLockedPages for an MDL that is already mapped to a system address. Another example
           of incorrect driver behavior is calling MmMapLockedPages for an MDL that was not locked.

      ■■   Calling MmUnlockPages or MmUnmapLockedPages on a partial MDL (created by using IoBuild-
           PartialMdl).

      ■■   Calling MmUnmapLockedPages on an MDL that is not mapped to a system address.

      ■■   Allocating synchronization objects such as events or mutexes from NonPagedPoolSession memory.

      Driver Verifier is a valuable addition to the arsenal of verification and debugging tools available to
   device driver writers. Many device drivers that first ran with Driver Verifier had bugs that Driver Verifier
   was able to expose. Thus, Driver Verifier has resulted in an overall improvement in the quality of all
   kernel-mode code running in Windows.

The Plug and Play manager
   The PnP manager is the primary component involved in supporting the ability of Windows to recog-
   nize and adapt to changing hardware configurations. A user doesn’t need to understand the intricacies
   of hardware or manual configuration to install and remove devices. For example, it’s the PnP manager
   that enables a running Windows laptop that is placed on a docking station to automatically detect ad-
   ditional devices located in the docking station and make them available to the user.

      Plug and Play support requires cooperation at the hardware, device driver, and operating system
   levels. Industry standards for the enumeration and identification of devices attached to buses are the
   foundation of Windows Plug and Play support. For example, the USB standard defines the way that de-
   vices on a USB bus identify themselves. With this foundation in place, Windows Plug and Play support
   provides the following capabilities:

      ■■   The PnP manager automatically recognizes installed devices, a process that includes enumerat-
           ing devices attached to the system during a boot and detecting the addition and removal of
           devices as the system executes.

      ■■   Hardware resource allocation is a role the PnP manager fills by gathering the hardware resource
           requirements (interrupts, I/O memory, I/O registers, or bus-specific resources) of the devices at-
           tached to a system and, in a process called resource arbitration, optimally assigning resources so
           that each device meets the requirements necessary for its operation. Because hardware devices
           can be added to the system after boot-time resource assignment, the PnP manager must also
           be able to reassign resources to accommodate the needs of dynamically added devices.

        ■■   Loading appropriate drivers is another responsibility of the PnP manager. The PnP manager de-
             termines, based on the identification of a device, whether a driver capable of managing the device
             is installed on the system, and if one is, it instructs the I/O manager to load it. If a suitable driver
             isn’t installed, the kernel-mode PnP manager communicates with the user-mode PnP manager to
             install the device, possibly requesting the user’s assistance in locating a suitable driver.

        ■■   The PnP manager also implements application and driver mechanisms for the detection of
             hardware configuration changes. Applications or drivers sometimes require a specific hardware
             device to function, so Windows includes a means for them to request notification of the presence,
             addition, or removal of devices.

        ■■   It provides a place for storing device state, and it participates in system setup, upgrade, migra-
             tion, and offline image management.

        ■■   It supports network connected devices, such as network projectors and printers, by allowing
             specialized bus drivers to detect the network as a bus and create device nodes for the devices
             running on it.

     Level of Plug and Play support
     Windows aims to provide full support for Plug and Play, but the level of support possible depends on
     the attached devices and installed drivers. If a single device or driver doesn’t support Plug and Play, the
     extent of Plug and Play support for the system can be compromised. In addition, a driver that doesn’t
     support Plug and Play might prevent other devices from being usable by the system. Table 6-6 shows
     the outcome of various combinations of devices and drivers that can and can’t support Plug and Play.

     TABLE 6-6   Device and driver plug-and-play capability
     Type of Device               Plug-and-Play Driver        Non–Plug and Play Driver

     Plug and play                Full plug and play          No plug and play

     Non–plug and play            Possible partial plug and   No plug and play
                                  play

         A device that isn’t Plug and Play–compatible is one that doesn’t support automatic detection, such
     as a legacy ISA sound card. Because the operating system doesn’t know where the hardware physically
     lies, certain operations—such as laptop undocking, sleep, and hibernation—are disallowed. However,
     if a Plug and Play driver is manually installed for the device, the driver can at least implement PnP man-
     ager–directed resource assignment for the device.

         Drivers that aren’t Plug and Play–compatible include legacy drivers, such as those that ran on
     Windows NT 4. Although these drivers might continue to function on later versions of Windows, the
     PnP manager can’t reconfigure the resources assigned to such devices in the event that resource real-
     location is necessary to accommodate the needs of a dynamically added device. For example, a device
     might be able to use I/O memory ranges A and B, and during the boot, the PnP manager assigns it
     range A. If a device that can use only A is attached to the system later, the PnP manager can’t direct the
     first device’s driver to reconfigure itself to use range B. This prevents the second device from obtaining
     required resources, which results in the device being unavailable for use by the system. Legacy drivers

also impair a machine’s ability to sleep or hibernate. (See the section “The power manager” later in this
chapter for more details.)

Device enumeration
Device enumeration occurs when the system boots, resumes from hibernation, or is explicitly instruct-
ed to do so (for example, by clicking Scan for Hardware Changes in the Device Manager UI). The PnP
manager builds a device tree (described momentarily) and compares it to its known stored tree from a
previous enumeration, if any. For a boot or resume from hibernation, the stored device tree is empty.
Newly discovered devices and removed devices require special treatment, such as loading appropriate
drivers (for a newly discovered device) and notifying drivers of a removed device.

   The PnP manager begins device enumeration with a virtual bus driver called Root, which represents
the entire computer system and acts as the bus driver for non–Plug and Play drivers and the HAL.
The HAL acts as a bus driver that enumerates devices directly attached to the motherboard as well as
system components such as batteries. Instead of actually enumerating, however, the HAL relies on the
hardware description the Setup process recorded in the registry to detect the primary bus (in most
cases, a PCI bus) and devices such as batteries and fans.

   The primary bus driver enumerates the devices on its bus, possibly finding other buses, for which the
PnP manager initializes drivers. Those drivers in turn can detect other devices, including other subsid-
iary buses. This recursive process of enumeration, driver loading (if the driver isn’t already loaded), and
further enumeration proceeds until all the devices on the system have been detected and configured.

   As the bus drivers report detected devices to the PnP manager, the PnP manager creates an internal
tree called a device tree that represents the relationships between devices. Nodes in the tree are called
device nodes, or devnodes. A devnode contains information about the device objects that represent the
device as well as other Plug and Play–related information stored in the devnode by the PnP manager.
Figure 6-32 shows an example of a simplified device tree. A PCI bus serves as the system’s primary bus,
which USB, ISA, and SCSI buses are connected to.

FIGURE 6-32   An example of a device tree.

         The Device Manager utility, which is accessible from the Computer Management snap-in in the
     Programs/Administrative Tools folder of the Start menu (and also from the Device Manager link of the
     System utility in Control Panel), shows a simple list of devices present on a system in its default configu-
     ration. You can also select the Devices by Connection option from the Device Manager’s View menu to
     see the devices as they relate to the device tree. Figure 6-33 shows an example of the Device Manager’s
     Devices by connection view.

     FIGURE 6-33   Device Manager, with the device tree shown.

        EXPERIMENT: Dumping the device tree
        A more detailed way to view the device tree than using Device Manager is to use the !devnode
        kernel debugger command. Specifying 0 1 as command options dumps the internal device tree
        devnode structures, indenting entries to show their hierarchical relationships, as shown here:
        lkd> !devnode 0 1
        Dumping IopRootDeviceNode (= 0x85161a98)
        DevNode 0x85161a98 for PDO 0x84d10390
          InstancePath is "HTREE\ROOT\0"
          State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
          Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
          DevNode 0x8515bea8 for PDO 0x8515b030
          DevNode 0x8515c698 for PDO 0x8515c820
            InstancePath is "Root\ACPI_HAL\0000"
            State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)

         Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
         DevNode 0x84d1c5b0 for PDO 0x84d1c738
           InstancePath is "ACPI_HAL\PNP0C08\0"
           ServiceName is "ACPI"
           State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
           Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
           DevNode 0x85ebf1b0 for PDO 0x85ec0210
             InstancePath is "ACPI\GenuineIntel_-_x86_Family_6_Model_15\_0"
             ServiceName is "intelppm"
             State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
             Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
           DevNode 0x85ed6970 for PDO 0x8515e618
             InstancePath is "ACPI\GenuineIntel_-_x86_Family_6_Model_15\_1"
             ServiceName is "intelppm"
             State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
             Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
           DevNode 0x85ed75c8 for PDO 0x85ed79e8
             InstancePath is "ACPI\ThermalZone\THM_"
             State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
             Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
           DevNode 0x85ed6cd8 for PDO 0x85ed6858
             InstancePath is "ACPI\pnp0c14\0"
             ServiceName is "WmiAcpi"
             State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
             Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
           DevNode 0x85ed7008 for PDO 0x85ed6730
             InstancePath is "ACPI\ACPI0003\2&daba3ff&2"
             ServiceName is "CmBatt"
             State = DeviceNodeStarted (0x308)
             Previous State = DeviceNodeEnumerateCompletion (0x30d)
           DevNode 0x85ed7e60 for PDO 0x84d2e030
             InstancePath is "ACPI\PNP0C0A\1"
             ServiceName is "CmBatt"
   ...

      Information shown for each devnode includes the InstancePath, which is the name of the
   device’s enumeration registry key stored under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Enum, and
   the ServiceName, which corresponds to the device’s driver registry key under HKLM\SYSTEM\
   CurrentControlSet\Services. To see the resources assigned to each devnode, such as interrupts,
   ports, and memory, specify 0 3 as the command options for the !devnode command.

Device stacks
As devnodes are created by the PnP manager, driver objects and device objects are created to manage
and logically represent the linkage between the devices that make up the devnode. This linkage is
called a device stack (briefly discussed in the “IRP flow” section earlier in this chapter). You can think of
the device stack as an ordered list of device object/driver pairs. Each device stack is built from the bot-
tom to the top. Figure 6-34 shows an example of a devnode (a reprint of Figure 6-6), with seven device
objects (all managing the same physical device). Each devnode contains at least two devices (PDO and
FDO), but can contain more device objects. A device stack consists of the following:

     FIGURE 6-34   Devnode (device stack).

        ■■   A physical device object (PDO) that the PnP manager instructs a bus driver to create when the
             bus driver reports the presence of a device on its bus during enumeration. The PDO represents
             the physical interface to the device and is always at the bottom of the device stack.

        ■■   One or more optional filter device objects (FiDOs) that layer between the PDO and the func-
             tional device object (FDO; described in the next bullet), called lower filters (the term “lower” is
             always considered in relation to the FDO). These may be used for intercepting IRPs coming out
             of the FDO and towards the bus driver (which may be of interest to bus filters).

        ■■   One (and only one) functional device object (FDO) that is created by the driver, which is called
             a function driver, that the PnP manager loads to manage a detected device. An FDO represents
             the logical interface to a device, having the most “intimate” knowledge of the functionality
             provided by the device. A function driver can also act as a bus driver if devices are attached to
             the device represented by the FDO. The function driver often creates an interface (essentially a
             name) to the FDO’s corresponding PDO so that applications and other drivers can open the de-
             vice and interact with it. Sometimes function drivers are divided into a separate class/port driver
             and miniport driver that work together to manage I/O for the FDO.

        ■■   One or more optional FiDOs that layer above the FDO, called upper filters. These get first crack
             at an IRP header for the FDO.

        Note The various device objects have different names in Figure 6-34 to make them easier
        to describe. However, they are all instances of DEVICE_OBJECT structures.

        Device stacks are built from the bottom up and rely on the I/O manager’s layering functionality, so
     IRPs flow from the top of a device stack toward the bottom. However, any level in the device stack can
     choose to complete an IRP, as described in the “IRP flow” section earlier in this chapter.

Device-stack driver loading
How does the PnP manager find the correct drivers as part of building the device stack? The registry
has this information scattered in three important keys (and their subkeys), shown in Table 6-7. (Note
that CCS is short for CurrentControlSet.)

TABLE 6-7   Important registry keys for plug-and-play driver loading
Registry Key                         Short Name                          Description

HKLM\System\CCS\Enum                 Hardware key                        Settings for known hardware devices

HKLM\System\CCS\Control\Class        Class key                           Settings for device types

HKLM\System\CCS\Services             Software key                        Settings for drivers

   When a bus driver performs device enumeration and discovers a new device, it first creates a PDO to
represent the existence of the physical device that has been detected. Next, it informs the PnP manager
by calling IoInvalidateDeviceRelations (documented in the WDK) with the BusRelations enumer-
ation value and the PDO, indicating to the PnP manager that a change on its bus has been detected. In
response, the PnP manager asks the bus driver (through an IRP) for the device identifier.

    The identifiers are bus-specific; for example, a USB device identifier consists of a vendor ID (VID)
for the hardware vendor that made the device and a product ID (PID) that the vendor assigned to the
device. For a PCI device, a similar vendor ID is required, along with a device ID, to uniquely identify the
device within a vendor (plus some optional components; see the WDK for more information on device
ID formats). Together, these IDs form what Plug and Play calls a device ID. The PnP manager also que-
ries the bus driver for an instance ID to help it distinguish different instances of the same hardware. The
instance ID can describe either a bus-relative location (for example, the USB port) or a globally unique
descriptor (for example, a serial number).

   The device ID and instance ID are combined to form a device instance ID (DIID), which the PnP man-
ager uses to locate the device’s key under the Hardware key shown in Table 6-7. The subkeys under that
key have the form <Enumerator>\<Device ID>\<Instance ID>, where the enumerator is a bus driver,
the device ID is a unique identifier for a type of device, and the instance ID uniquely identifies different
instances of the same hardware.

   Figure 6-35 presents an example of an enumeration subkey of an Intel display card. The device’s key
contains descriptive data and includes values named Service and ClassGUID (which are obtained from a
driver’s INF file upon installation) that help the PnP manager locate the device’s drivers as follows:

   ■■   The Service value is looked up in the Software key, and there the path to the driver (SYS file) is
        stored in the ImagePath value. Figure 6-36 shows the Software subkey named igfx (from Figure
        6-35) where the Intel display driver can be located. The PnP manager will load that driver (if it’s
        not already loaded), call its add-device routine, and there the driver will create the FDO.

   ■■   If a value named LowerFilters is present, it contains a multiple string list of drivers to load as
        lower filters, which can be located in the Software subkey. The PnP manager loads these drivers
        before loading the driver associated with the Service value above.

            FIGURE 6-35   Example of a Hardware subkey.

            FIGURE 6-36   Example of a Software subkey.

       ■■   If a value named UpperFilters is present, it indicates a list of driver names (under the Software
            key, similar to LowerFilters) which the PnP manager will load in much the same way after it
            loads the driver pointed to by the Service value.

       ■■   The ClassGUID value represents the general type of device (display, keyboard, disk, etc.), and
            points to a subkey under the Class key (from Table 6-7). The key represents settings applicable to
            all drivers for that type of device. In particular, if the values LowerFilters and/or UpperFilters
            are present, they are treated just like the same values in the Hardware key of the particular
            device. This allows, for example, the loading of an upper filter for keyboard devices, regardless
            of the particular keyboard or the vendor. Figure 6-37 shows the class key for keyboard devices.
            Notice the friendly name (Keyboard), although the GUID is what matters (the decision on the
            particular class is provided as part of the installation INF file). An UpperFilters value exists,
            listing the system provided keyboard class driver that always loads as part of any keyboard
            devnode. (You can also see the IconPath value that is used as the icon for the keyboard type
            in the Device Manager’s UI.)

FIGURE 6-37 The keyboard class key.

   To summarize, the order of driver loading for a devnode is as follows:

   1.   The bus driver is loaded, creating the PDO.

   2.   Any lower filters listed in the Hardware instance key are loaded, in the order listed (multi string),
        creating their filter device objects (FiDOs in Figure 6-34).

   3.   Any lower filters listed in the corresponding Class key are loaded in the order listed, creating
        their FiDOs.

   4.   The driver listed in the Service value is loaded, creating the FDO.

   5.   Any upper filters listed in the Hardware instance key are loaded, in the order listed, creating
        their FiDOs.

   6.   Any upper filters listed in the corresponding Class key are loaded in the order listed creating
        their FiDOs.

   To deal with multifunction devices (such as all-in-one printers or cell phones with integrated camera
and music player functionalities), Windows also supports a container ID property that can be associ-
ated with a devnode. The container ID is a GUID that is unique to a single instance of a physical device
and shared between all the function devnodes that belong to it, as shown in Figure 6-38.

FIGURE 6-38   All-in-one printer with a unique ID as seen by the PnP manager.

        The container ID is a property that, similar to the instance ID, is reported back by the bus driver of
     the corresponding hardware. Then, when the device is being enumerated, all devnodes associated with
     the same PDO share the container ID. Because Windows already supports many buses out of the box—
     such as PnP-X, Bluetooth, and USB—most device drivers can simply return the bus-specific ID, from
     which Windows will generate the corresponding container ID. For other kinds of devices or buses, the
     driver can generate its own unique ID through software.

        Finally, when device drivers do not supply a container ID, Windows can make educated guesses by
     querying the topology for the bus, when that’s available, through mechanisms such as ACPI. By under-
     standing whether a certain device is a child of another, and whether it is removable, hot-pluggable,
     or user-reachable (as opposed to an internal motherboard component), Windows is able to assign
     container IDs to device nodes that reflect multifunction devices correctly.

         The final end-user benefit of grouping devices by container IDs is visible in the Devices and Printers
     UI. This feature is able to display the scanner, printer, and faxing components of an all-in-one printer as
     a single graphical element instead of three distinct devices. For example, in Figure 6-39, the HP 6830
     printer/fax/scanner is identified as a single device.

     FIGURE 6-39   The Devices and Printers Control Panel applet.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing detailed devnode information in Device Manager
        The Device Manager applet shows detailed information about a device node on its Details tab.
        The tab allows you to view an assortment of fields, including the devnode’s device instance ID,
        hardware ID, service name, filters, and power capabilities.

          The following screen shows the selection combo box of the Details tab expanded to reveal
        some of the types of information you can access:

Driver support for Plug and Play
To support Plug and Play, a driver must implement a Plug and Play dispatch routine (IRP_MJ_PNP), a
power-management dispatch routine (IRP_MJ_POWER, described in the section “The power manager”
later in this chapter), and an add-device routine. Bus drivers must support Plug and Play requests that
are different than the ones that function or filter drivers support, however. For example, when the PnP
manager guides device enumeration during the system boot, it asks bus drivers for a description of the
devices that they find on their respective buses through PnP IRPs.

    Function and filter drivers prepare to manage their devices in their add-device routines, but they
don’t actually communicate with the device hardware. Instead, they wait for the PnP manager to send
a start-device command (IRP_MN_START_DEVICE minor PnP IRP code) for the device to their Plug and
Play dispatch routine. Before sending the start-device command, the PnP manager performs resource
arbitration to decide what resources to assign the device. The start-device command includes the
resource assignment that the PnP manager determines during resource arbitration. When a driver
receives a start-device command, it can configure its device to use the specified resources. If an appli-
cation tries to open a device that hasn’t finished starting, it receives an error indicating that the device
does not exist.

   After a device has started, the PnP manager can send the driver additional Plug and Play com-
mands, including ones related to the device’s removal from the system or to resource reassignment.
For example, when the user invokes the remove/eject device utility, shown in Figure 6-40 (accessible
by clicking the USB connector icon in the taskbar notification area), to tell Windows to eject a USB flash
drive, the PnP manager sends a query-remove notification to any applications that have registered
for Plug and Play notifications for the device. Applications typically register for notifications on their
handles, which they close during a query-remove notification. If no applications veto the query-remove

     request, the PnP manager sends a query-remove command to the driver that owns the device being
     ejected (IRP_MN_QUERY_REMOVE_DEVICE). At that point, the driver has a chance to deny the removal or
     to ensure that any pending I/O operations involving the device have completed, and to begin reject-
     ing further I/O requests aimed at the device. If the driver agrees to the remove request and no open
     handles to the device remain, the PnP manager next sends a remove command to the driver (IRP_MN_
     REMOVE_DEVICE) to request that the driver stop accessing the device and release any resources the
     driver has allocated on behalf of the device.

     FIGURE 6-40   The remove/eject device utility.

        When the PnP manager needs to reassign a device’s resources, it first asks the driver whether it
     can temporarily suspend further activity on the device by sending the driver a query-stop command
     (IRP_MN_QUERY_STOP_DEVICE). The driver either agrees to the request (if doing so won’t cause data
     loss or corruption) or denies the request. As with a query-remove command, if the driver agrees to the
     request, the driver completes pending I/O operations and won’t initiate further I/O requests for the
     device that can’t be aborted and subsequently restarted. The driver typically queues new I/O requests
     so that the resource reshuffling is transparent to applications currently accessing the device. The PnP
     manager then sends the driver a stop command (IRP_MN_STOP_DEVICE). At that point, the PnP man-
     ager can direct the driver to assign different resources to the device and once again send the driver a
     start-device command for the device.

         The various Plug and Play commands essentially guide a device through an operational state ma-
     chine, forming a well-defined state-transition table, which is shown in Figure 6-41. (The state diagram
     reflects the state machine implemented by function drivers. Bus drivers implement a more complex
     state machine.) Each transition in Figure 6-41 is marked by its minor IRP constant name without the
     IRP_MN_ prefix. One state that we haven’t discussed is the one that results from the PnP manager’s
     command (IRP_MN_SURPRISE_REMOVAL). This command results when either a user removes a device
     without warning, as when the user ejects a PCMCIA card without using the remove/eject utility, or the
     device fails. The command tells the driver to immediately cease all interaction with the device because
     the device is no longer attached to the system and to cancel any pending I/O requests.

FIGURE 6-41   Device plug-and-play state transitions.

Plug-and-play driver installation
If the PnP manager encounters a device for which no driver is installed, it relies on the user-mode PnP
manager to guide the installation process. If the device is detected during the system boot, a devnode
is defined for the device, but the loading process is postponed until the user-mode PnP manager starts.
(The user-mode PnP manager service is implemented in Umpnpmgr.dll hosted in a standard Svchost.
exe instance.)

    The components involved in a driver’s installation are shown in Figure 6-42. Dark-shaded objects
in the figure correspond to components generally supplied by the system, whereas lighter-shaded
objects are those included in a driver’s installation files. First, a bus driver informs the PnP manager of
a device it enumerates using a Device ID (1). The PnP manager checks the registry for the presence of
a corresponding function driver, and when it doesn’t find one, it informs the user-mode PnP manager
(2) of the new device by its Device ID. The user-mode PnP manager first tries to perform an automatic
install without user intervention. If the installation process involves the posting of dialog boxes that
require user interaction and the currently logged-on user has administrator privileges, the user-mode
PnP manager launches the Rundll32.exe application (the same application that hosts classic .cpl Control
Panel utilities) to execute the Hardware Installation Wizard (3) (%SystemRoot%\System32\Newdev.
dll). If the currently logged-on user doesn’t have administrator privileges (or if no user is logged on)
and the installation of the device requires user interaction, the user-mode PnP manager defers the
installation until a privileged user logs on. The Hardware Installation Wizard uses Setupapi.dll and
CfgMgr32.dll (configuration manager) API functions to locate INF files that correspond to drivers that
are compatible with the detected device. This process might involve having the user insert installation
media containing a vendor’s INF files, or the wizard might locate a suitable INF file in the driver store
(%SystemRoot%\System32\DriverStore) that contains drivers that ship with Windows or others that are
downloaded through Windows Update. Installation is performed in two steps. In the first, the third-

     party driver developer imports the driver package into the driver store, and in the second, the system
     performs the actual installation, which is always done through the %SystemRoot%\System32\Drvinst.
     exe process.

     FIGURE 6-42   Driver installation components.

        To find drivers for the new device, the installation process gets a list of hardware IDs (discussed
     earlier) and compatible IDs from the bus driver. Compatible IDs are more generic—for example a USB
     mouse from a specific vendor might have a special button that does something unique, but a compat-
     ible ID for a generic mouse can utilize a more generic driver that ships with Windows if the specific
     driver is not available and at least provide the basic, common functionality of a mouse.

        These IDs describe all the various ways the hardware might be identified in a driver installation file
     (INF). The lists are ordered so that the most specific description of the hardware is listed first. If matches
     are found in multiple INFs, the following points apply:

        ■■   More-precise matches are preferred over less-precise matches.

        ■■   Digitally signed INFs are preferred over unsigned ones.

        ■■   Newer signed INFs are preferred over older signed ones.

        Note If a match is found based on a compatible ID, the Hardware Installation wizard can
        prompt for media in case a more up-to-date driver came with the hardware.

        The INF file locates the function driver’s files and contains instructions that fill in the driver’s enu-
     meration and class keys in the registry, copy required files, and the INF file might direct the Hardware
     Installation Wizard to (4) launch class or device co-installer DLLs that perform class-specific or device-
     specific installation steps, such as displaying configuration dialog boxes that let the user specify settings
     for a device. Finally, when the drivers that make up a devnode load, the device/driver stack is built (5).

   EXPERIMENT: Looking at a driver’s INF file
   When a driver or other software that has an INF file is installed, the system copies its INF file to
   the %SystemRoot%\Inf directory. One file that will always be there is Keyboard.inf because it’s
   the INF file for the keyboard class driver. View its contents by opening it in Notepad and you
   should see something like this (anything after a semicolon is a comment):
   ;
   ; KEYBOARD.INF -- This file contains descriptions of Keyboard class devices
   ;
   ;
   ; Copyright (c) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

   [Version]
   Signature   ="$Windows NT$"
   Class       =Keyboard
   ClassGUID   ={4D36E96B-E325-11CE-BFC1-08002BE10318}
   Provider    =%MSFT%
   DriverVer=06/21/2006,10.0.10586.0

   [SourceDisksNames]
   3426=windows cd

   [SourceDisksFiles]
   i8042prt.sys    = 3426
   kbdclass.sys    = 3426
   kbdhid.sys      = 3426
   ...

      An INF has the classic INI format, with sections in square brackets and underneath are key/
   value pairs separated by an equal sign. An INF is not “executed” from start to end sequentially;
   instead, it’s built more like a tree, where certain values point to sections with the value name
   where execution continues. (Consult the WDK for the details.)

     If you search the file for .sys, you’ll come across sections that direct the user-mode PnP man-
   ager to install the i8042prt.sys and kbdclass.sys drivers:
   ...
   [i8042prt_CopyFiles]
   i8042prt.sys,,,0x100

   [KbdClass.CopyFiles]
   kbdclass.sys,,,0x100
   ...

    Before installing a driver, the user-mode PnP manager checks the system’s driver-signing policy.
If the settings specify that the system should block or warn of the installation of unsigned drivers, the
user-mode PnP manager checks the driver’s INF file for an entry that locates a catalog (a file that ends
with the .cat extension) containing the driver’s digital signature.

        Microsoft’s WHQL tests the drivers included with Windows and those submitted by hardware ven-
     dors. When a driver passes the WHQL tests, it is “signed” by Microsoft. This means that WHQL obtains
     a hash, or unique value representing the driver’s files, including its image file, and then cryptographi-
     cally signs it with Microsoft’s private driver-signing key. The signed hash is stored in a catalog file and
     included on the Windows installation media or returned to the vendor that submitted the driver for
     inclusion with its driver.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing catalog files
        When you install a component such as a driver that includes a catalog file, Windows copies the
        catalog file to a directory under %SystemRoot%\System32\Catroot. Navigate to that directory in
        Explorer, and you’ll find a subdirectory that contains .cat files. For example, Nt5.cat and Nt5ph.
        cat store the signatures and page hashes for Windows system files.

           If you open one of the catalog files, a dialog box appears with two pages. The page labeled
        “General” shows information about the signature on the catalog file, and the Security Catalog
        page has the hashes of the components that are signed with the catalog file. This screenshot of a
        catalog file for an Intel audio driver shows the hash for the audio driver SYS file. Other hashes in
        the catalog are associated with the various support DLLs that ship with the driver.

        As it installs a driver, the user-mode PnP manager extracts the driver’s signature from its catalog file,
     decrypts the signature using the public half of Microsoft’s driver-signing private/public key pair, and
     compares the resulting hash with a hash of the driver file it’s about to install. If the hashes match, the
     driver is verified as having passed WHQL testing. If a driver fails the signature verification, the user-
     mode PnP manager acts according to the settings of the system driver-signing policy, either failing the
     installation attempt, warning the user that the driver is unsigned, or silently installing the driver.

      Note Drivers installed using setup programs that manually configure the registry and copy
      driver files to a system and driver files that are dynamically loaded by applications aren’t
      checked for signatures by the PnP manager’s signing policy. Instead, they are checked by
      the kernel-mode code-signing policy described in Chapter 8 in Part 2. Only drivers installed
      using INF files are validated against the PnP manager’s driver-signing policy.

      Note The user-mode PnP manager also checks whether the driver it’s about to install is on
      the protected driver list maintained by Windows Update and, if so, blocks the installation with
      a warning to the user. Drivers that are known to have incompatibilities or bugs are added to
      the list and blocked from installation.

General driver loading and installation
   The preceding section showed how drivers for hardware devices are discovered and loaded by the PnP
   manager. These drivers mostly load “on demand,” meaning such a driver is not loaded unless needed—
   a device that the driver is responsible for enters the system; conversely, if all devices managed by a
   driver are removed, the driver will be unloaded.

   More generally, the Software key in the registry holds settings for drivers (as well as Windows Ser-
   vices). Although services are managed within the same registry key, they are user-mode programs and
   have no connection to kernel drivers (although the Service Control Manager can be used to load both
   services and device drivers). This section focuses on drivers; for a complete treatment of services, see
   Chapter 9 in Part 2.

   Driver loading
   Each subkey under the Software key (HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Services) holds a set of values
   that control some static aspects of a driver (or service). One such value, ImagePath, was encountered
   already when we discussed the loading process of PnP drivers. Figure 6-36 shows an example of a
   driver key and Table 6-8 summarizes the most important values in a driver’s Software key (see Chapter
   9 in Part 2 for a complete list).

      The Start value indicates the phase in which a driver (or service) is loaded. There are two main dif-
   ferences between device drivers and services in this regard:

      ■■   Only device drivers can specify Start values of boot-start (0) or system-start (1). This is because
           at these phases, no user mode exists yet, so services cannot be loaded.

      ■■   Device drivers can use the Group and Tag values (not shown in Table 6-8) to control the order
           of loading within a phase of the boot, but unlike services, they can’t specify DependOnGroup or
           DependOnService values (see Chapter 9 in Part 2 for more details).

     TABLE 6-8   Important values in a driver’s registry key
     Value Name            Description

     ImagePath             This is the path to the driver’s image file (SYS).

     Type                  This indicates whether this key represents a service or a driver. A value of 1 means a driver and a
                           value of 2 means a file system (or filter) driver. Values of 16 (0x10) and 32 (0x20) mean a service.
                           See Chapter 9 in Part 2 for more information.

     Start                 This indicates when the driver should load. The options are as follows:
                           0 (SERVICE_BOOT_START) The driver is loaded by the boot loader.
                           1 (SERVICE_SYSTEM_START) The driver is loaded after the executive is initialized.
                           2 (SERVICE_AUTO_START) The driver is loaded by the service control manager.
                           3 (SERVICE_DEMAND_START) The driver is loaded on demand.
                           4 (SERVICE_DISABLED) The driver is not loaded.

         Chapter 11, “Startup and shutdown, in Part 2 describes the phases of the boot process and explains
     that a driver Start value of 0 means that the operating system loader loads the driver. A Start value
     of 1 means that the I/O manager loads the driver after the executive subsystems have finished initial-
     izing. The I/O manager calls driver initialization routines in the order that the drivers load within a boot
     phase. Like Windows services, drivers use the Group value in their registry key to specify which group
     they belong to; the registry value HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\ServiceGroupOrder\List
     determines the order that groups are loaded within a boot phase.

        A driver can further refine its load order by including a Tag value to control its order within a group.
     The I/O manager sorts the drivers within each group according to the Tag values defined in the drivers’
     registry keys. Drivers without a tag go to the end of the list in their group. You might assume that the
     I/O manager initializes drivers with lower-number tags before it initializes drivers with higher-number
     tags, but such isn’t necessarily the case. The registry key HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\
     GroupOrderList defines tag precedence within a group; with this key, Microsoft and device-driver
     developers can take liberties with redefining the integer number system.

        Note The use of Group and Tag is reminiscent from the early Windows NT days. These tags
        are rarely used in practice. Most drivers should not have dependencies on other drivers (only
        on kernel libraries linked to the driver, such as NDIS.sys).

        Here are the guidelines by which drivers set their Start value:

        ■■   Non–Plug and Play drivers set their Start value to reflect the boot phase they want to load in.

        ■■   Drivers, including both Plug and Play and non–Plug and Play drivers, that must be loaded by
             the boot loader during the system boot specify a Start value of boot-start (0). Examples in-
             clude system bus drivers and the boot file-system driver.

        ■■   A driver that isn’t required for booting the system and that detects a device that a system bus
             driver can’t enumerate specifies a Start value of system-start (1). An example is the serial port
             driver, which informs the PnP manager of the presence of standard PC serial ports that were
             detected by Setup and recorded in the registry.

   ■■   A non–Plug and Play driver or file-system driver that doesn’t have to be present when the
        system boots specifies a Start value of auto-start (2). An example is the Multiple Universal
        Naming Convention (UNC) Provider (MUP) driver, which provides support for UNC-based path
        names to remote resources (for example, \\RemoteComputerName\SomeShare).

   ■■   Plug and Play drivers that aren’t required to boot the system specify a Start value of demand-
        start (3). Examples include network adapter drivers.

   The only purpose that the Start values for Plug and Play drivers and drivers for enumerable devices
have is to ensure that the operating system loader loads the driver—if the driver is required for the
system to boot successfully. Beyond that, the PnP manager’s device enumeration process determines
the load order for Plug and Play drivers.

Driver installation
As we’ve seen, Plug and Play drivers require an INF file for installation. The INF includes the hardware
device IDs this driver can handle and the instructions for copying files and setting registry values. Other
type of drivers (such as file system drivers, file system filters and network filters) require an INF as well,
which includes a unique set of values for the particular type of driver.

   Software-only drivers (such as the one Process Explorer uses) can use an INF for installation, but
don’t have to. These can be installed by a call to the CreateService API (or use a tool such as sc.exe
that wraps it), as Process Explorer does after extracting its driver from a resource within the execut-
able (if running with elevated permissions). As the API name suggests, it’s used to install services as
well as drivers. The arguments to CreateService indicate whether it’s installing a driver or a service,
the Start value and other parameters (see the Windows SDK documentation for the details). Once in-
stalled, a call to StartService loads the driver (or service), calling DriverEntry (for a driver) as usual.

   A software-only driver typically creates a device object with a name its clients know. For example,
Process Explorer creates a device named PROCEXP152 that is then used by Process Explorer in a Create-
File call, followed by calls such as DeviceIoControl to send requests to the driver (turned into IRPs
by the I/O manager). Figure 6-43 shows the Process Explorer object symbolic link (using the WinObj
Sysinternals tool) in the \GLOBAL?? directory (recall that the names in this directory are accessible to
user mode clients) that’s created by Process Explorer the first time it’s running with elevated privileges.
Notice that it points to the real device object under the \Device directory and it has the same name
(which is not a requirement).

FIGURE 6-43   Process Explorer’s symbolic link and device name.

The Windows Driver Foundation
     The Windows Driver Foundation (WDF) is a framework for developing drivers that simplifies common
     tasks such as handing Plug and Play and Power IRPs correctly. WDF includes the Kernel-Mode Driver
     Framework (KMDF) and the User-Mode Driver Framework (UMDF). WDF is now open source and can
     be found at https://github.com/Microsoft/Windows-Driver-Frameworks. Table 6-9 shows the Windows
     version support (for Windows 7 and later) for KMDF. Table 6-10 shows the same for UMDF.

     TABLE 6-9    KMDF versions
     KMDF Version      Release Method                  Included in Windows        Drivers Using It Run On

     1.9               Windows 7 WDK                   Windows 7                  Windows XP and later

     1.11              Windows 8 WDK                   Windows 8                  Windows Vista and later

     1.13              Windows 8.1 WDK                 Windows 8.1                Windows 8.1 and later

     1.15              Windows 10 WDK                  Windows 10                 Windows 10, Windows Server
                                                                                  2016

     1.17              Windows 10 version 1511 WDK     Windows 10 version 1511    Windows 10 version 1511 and
                                                                                  later, Windows Server 2016

     1.19              Windows 10 version 1607 WDK     Windows 10 version 1607    Windows 10 version 1607 and
                                                                                  later, Windows Server 2016

     TABLE 6-10   UMDF versions
     UMDF Version       Release Method                 Included in Windows        Drivers Using It Run On

     1.9                Windows 7 WDK                  Windows 7                  Windows XP and later

     1.11               Windows 8 WDK                  Windows 8                  Windows Vista and later

     2.0                Windows 8.1 WDK                Windows 8.1                Windows 8.1 and later

     2.15               Windows 10 WDK                 Windows 10                 Windows 10 and later, Windows
                                                                                  Server 2016

     2.17               Windows 10 version 1511 WDK    Windows 10 version 1511    Windows 10 version 1511 and
                                                                                  later, Windows Server 2016

     2.19               Windows 10 version 1607 WDK    Windows 10 version 1607    Windows 10 version 1607,
                                                                                  Windows Server 2016

        Windows 10 introduced the concept of Universal Drivers, briefly described in Chapter 2, “System ar-
     chitecture.” These drivers use a common set of DDIs implemented in multiple editions of Windows 10—
     from IoT Core, to Mobile, to desktops. Universal drivers can be built with KMDF, UMDF 2.x, or WDM.
     Building such drivers is relatively easy with the aid of Visual Studio, where the Target Platform setting is
     set to Universal. Any DDI that is outside the boundaries of Universal will be flagged by the compiler.

        UMDF versions 1.x used a COM based model for programming drivers, which is a very different
     programming model than KMDF, which is using object-based C. UMDF 2 has been aligned with KMDF
     and provides an almost identical API, reducing overall cost associated with WDF driver development; in
     fact, UMDF 2.x drivers can be converted to KMDF if the need arises with little work. UMDF 1.x will not
     be discussed in this book; consult the WDK for more information.

  The following sections discuss KMDF and UMDF, which essentially behave in a consistent manner, no
matter the exact OS they’re running on.

Kernel-Mode Driver Framework
We’ve already discussed some details about the Windows Driver Foundation (WDF) in Chapter 2. In
this section, we’ll take a deeper look at the components and functionality provided by the kernel-
mode part of the framework, KMDF. Note that this section will only briefly touch on some of the core
architecture of KMDF. For a much more complete overview on the subject, please refer to the Windows
Driver Kit documentation.

   Note Most of the details presented in this section are the same for UMDF 2.x, with the ex-
   ceptions discussed in the next section.

Structure and operation of a KMDF driver
First, let’s look at which kinds of drivers or devices are supported by KMDF. In general, any WDM-con-
formant driver should be supported by KMDF, as long as it performs standard I/O processing and IRP
manipulation. KMDF is not suitable for drivers that don’t use the Windows kernel API directly but in-
stead perform library calls into existing port and class drivers. These types of drivers cannot use KMDF
because they only provide callbacks for the actual WDM drivers that do the I/O processing. Addition-
ally, if a driver provides its own dispatch functions instead of relying on a port or class driver, IEEE 1394,
ISA, PCI, PCMCIA, and SD Client (for Secure Digital storage devices) drivers can also use KMDF.

   Although KMDF provides an abstraction on top of WDM, the basic driver structure shown earlier
also generally applies to KMDF drivers. At their core, KMDF drivers must have the following functions:

   ■■   An initialization routine Like any other driver, a KMDF driver has a DriverEntry function
        that initializes the driver. KMDF drivers initiate the framework at this point and perform any
        configuration and initialization steps that are part of the driver or part of describing the driver
        to the framework. For non–Plug and Play drivers, this is where the first device object should be
        created.

   ■■   An add-device routine KMDF driver operation is based on events and callbacks (described
        shortly), and the EvtDriverDeviceAdd callback is the single most important one for PnP de-
        vices because it receives notifications when the PnP manager in the kernel enumerates one of
        the driver’s devices.

   ■■   One or more EvtIo* routines Similar to a WDM driver’s dispatch routines, these callback
        routines handle specific types of I/O requests from a particular device queue. A driver typically
        creates one or more queues in which KMDF places I/O requests for the driver’s devices. These
        queues can be configured by request type and dispatching type.

        The simplest KMDF driver might need to have only an initialization and add-device routine because
     the framework will provide the default, generic functionality that’s required for most types of I/O pro-
     cessing, including power and Plug and Play events. In the KMDF model, events refer to run-time states
     to which a driver can respond or during which a driver can participate. These events are not related to
     the synchronization primitives (synchronization is discussed in Chapter 8 in Part 2), but are internal to
     the framework.

         For events that are critical to a driver’s operation, or that need specialized processing, the driver reg-
     isters a given callback routine to handle this event. In other cases, a driver can allow KMDF to perform
     a default, generic action instead. For example, during an eject event (EvtDeviceEject), a driver can
     choose to support ejection and supply a callback or to fall back to the default KMDF code that will tell
     the user that the device does not support ejection. Not all events have a default behavior, however, and
     callbacks must be provided by the driver. One notable example is the EvtDriverDeviceAdd event just
     described that is at the core of any Plug and Play driver.

        EXPERIMENT: Displaying KMDF and UMDF 2 drivers
        The Wdfkd.dll extension that ships with the Debugging Tools for Windows package provides
        many commands that can be used to debug and analyze KMDF drivers and devices (instead of
        using the built-in WDM-style debugging extension, which may not offer the same kind of WDF-
        specific information). You can display installed KMDF drivers with the !wdfkd.wdfldr debug-
        ger command. In the following example, the output from a Windows 10 32-bit Hyper-V virtual
        machine is shown, displaying the built-in drivers that are installed.
        lkd> !wdfkd.wdfldr
        ---------------------------------------------------------------
         KMDF Drivers
        ---------------------------------------------------------------
         LoadedModuleList       0x870991ec
        ----------------------------------
        LIBRARY_MODULE 0x8626aad8
          Version       v1.19
          Service       \Registry\Machine\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\Wdf01000
          ImageName     Wdf01000.sys
          ImageAddress 0x87000000
          ImageSize     0x8f000
          Associated Clients: 25

          ImageName                             Ver   WdfGlobals FxGlobals ImageAddress ImageSize
          umpass.sys                            v1.15 0xa1ae53f8 0xa1ae52f8 0x9e5f0000  0x00008000
          peauth.sys                            v1.7 0x95e798d8 0x95e797d8 0x9e400000   0x000ba000
          mslldp.sys                            v1.15 0x9aed1b50 0x9aed1a50 0x8e300000  0x00014000
          vmgid.sys                             v1.15 0x97d0fd08 0x97d0fc08 0x8e260000  0x00008000
          monitor.sys                           v1.15 0x97cf7e18 0x97cf7d18 0x8e250000  0x0000c000
          tsusbhub.sys                          v1.15 0x97cb3108 0x97cb3008 0x8e4b0000  0x0001b000
          NdisVirtualBus.sys                    v1.15 0x8d0fc2b0 0x8d0fc1b0 0x87a90000  0x00009000
          vmgencounter.sys                      v1.15 0x8d0fefd0 0x8d0feed0 0x87a80000  0x00008000
          intelppm.sys                          v1.15 0x8d0f4cf0 0x8d0f4bf0 0x87a50000  0x00021000

     vms3cap.sys                    v1.15 0x8d0f5218 0x8d0f5118 0x87a40000                 0x00008000
     netvsc.sys                     v1.15 0x8d11ded0 0x8d11ddd0 0x87a20000                 0x00019000
     hyperkbd.sys                   v1.15 0x8d114488 0x8d114388 0x87a00000                 0x00008000
     dmvsc.sys                      v1.15 0x8d0ddb28 0x8d0dda28 0x879a0000                 0x0000c000
     umbus.sys                      v1.15 0x8b86ffd0 0x8b86fed0 0x874f0000                 0x00011000
     CompositeBus.sys               v1.15 0x8b869910 0x8b869810 0x87df0000                 0x0000d000
     cdrom.sys                      v1.15 0x8b863320 0x8b863220 0x87f40000                 0x00024000
     vmstorfl.sys                   v1.15 0x8b2b9108 0x8b2b9008 0x87c70000                 0x0000c000
     EhStorClass.sys                v1.15 0x8a9dacf8 0x8a9dabf8 0x878d0000                 0x00015000
     vmbus.sys                      v1.15 0x8a9887c0 0x8a9886c0 0x82870000                 0x00018000
     vdrvroot.sys                   v1.15 0x8a970728 0x8a970628 0x82800000                 0x0000f000
     msisadrv.sys                   v1.15 0x8a964998 0x8a964898 0x873c0000                 0x00008000
     WindowsTrustedRTProxy.sys      v1.15 0x8a1f4c10 0x8a1f4b10 0x87240000                 0x00008000
     WindowsTrustedRT.sys           v1.15 0x8a1f1fd0 0x8a1f1ed0 0x87220000                 0x00017000
     intelpep.sys                   v1.15 0x8a1ef690 0x8a1ef590 0x87210000                 0x0000d000
     acpiex.sys                     v1.15 0x86287fd0 0x86287ed0 0x870a0000                 0x00019000
   ----------------------------------
   Total: 1 library loaded

       If UMDF 2.x drivers were loaded, they would have been shown as well. This is one of the ben-
   efits of the UMDF 2.x library (see the UMDF section later in this chapter for more on this subject).

       Notice that the KMDF library is implemented in Wdf01000.sys, which is the current version
   1.x of KMDF. Future versions of KMDF may have a major version of 2 and will be implemented in
   another kernel module, Wdf02000.sys. This future module can live side by side with the version
   1.x module, each loaded with the drivers that compiled against it. This ensures isolation and inde-
   pendence between drivers built against different KMDF major version libraries.

KMDF object model
The KMDF object model is object-based, with properties, methods and events, implemented in C, much
like the model for the kernel, but it does not make use of the object manager. Instead, KMDF manages
its own objects internally, exposing them as handles to drivers and keeping the actual data structures
opaque. For each object type, the framework provides routines to perform operations on the object
(called methods), such as WdfDeviceCreate, which creates a device. Additionally, objects can have specific
data fields or members that can be accessed by Get/Set (used for modifications that should never fail)
or Assign/Retrieve APIs (used for modifications that can fail), which are called properties. For example,
the WdfInterruptGetInfo function returns information on a given interrupt object (WDFINTERRUPT).

    Also unlike the implementation of kernel objects, which all refer to distinct and isolated object
types, KMDF objects are all part of a hierarchy—most object types are bound to a parent. The root
object is the WDFDRIVER structure, which describes the actual driver. The structure and meaning is
analogous to the DRIVER_OBJECT structure provided by the I/O manager, and all other KMDF struc-
tures are children of it. The next most important object is WDFDEVICE, which refers to a given instance
of a detected device on the system, which must have been created with WdfDeviceCreate. Again, this
is analogous to the DEVICE_OBJECT structure that’s used in the WDM model and by the I/O manager.
Table 6-11 lists the object types supported by KMDF.

     TABLE 6-11      KMDF object types
     Object                      Type                Description

     Child list                  WDFCHILDLIST        This is a list of child WDFDEVICE objects associated with the de-
                                                     vice. It is used only by bus drivers.

     Collection                  WDFCOLLECTION       This is a list of objects of a similar type, such as a group of
                                                     WDFDEVICE objects being filtered.

     Deferred Procedure Call     WDFDPC              This is an instance of a DPC object.

     Device                      WDFDEVICE           This is an instance of a device.

     DMA common buffer           WDFCOMMONBUFFER     This is a region of memory that a device and driver can access for
                                                     DMA.

     DMA enabler                 WDFDMAENABLER       This enables DMA on a given channel for a driver.

     DMA transaction             WDFDMATRANSACTION   This is an instance of a DMA transaction.

     Driver                      WDFDRIVER           This is an object for the driver. It represents the driver, its param-
                                                     eters, and its callbacks, among other items.

     File                        WDFFILEOBJECT       This is an instance of a file object that can be used as a channel for
                                                     communication between an application and the driver.

     Generic object              WDFOBJECT           This allows driver-defined custom data to be wrapped inside the
                                                     framework’s object data model as an object.

     Interrupt                   WDFINTERRUPT        This is an instance of an interrupt that the driver must handle.

     I/O queue                   WDFQUEUE            This represents a given I/O queue.

     I/O request                 WDFREQUEST          This represents a given request on a WDFQUEUE.

     I/O target                  WDFIOTARGET         This represents the device stack being targeted by a given
                                                     WDFREQUEST.

     Look-aside list             WDFLOOKASIDE        This describes an executive look-aside list. (See Chapter 5.)

     Memory                      WDFMEMORY           This describes a region of paged or nonpaged pool.

     Registry key                WDFKEY              This describes a registry key.

     Resource list               WDFCMRESLIST        This identifies the hardware resources assigned to a WDFDEVICE.

     Resource range list         WDFIORESLIST        This identifies a given possible hardware resource range for a
                                                     WDFDEVICE.

     Resource requirements list WDFIORESREQLIST      This contains an array of WDFIORESLIST objects describing all
                                                     possible resource ranges for a WDFDEVICE.

     Spinlock                    WDFSPINLOCK         This describes a spinlock.

     String                      WDFSTRING           This describes a Unicode string structure.

     Timer                       WDFTIMER            This describes an executive timer. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for
                                                     more information.)

     USB device                  WDFUSBDEVICE        This identifies the one instance of a USB device.

     USB interface               WDFUSBINTERFACE     This identifies one interface on the given WDFUSBDEVICE.

     USB pipe                    WDFUSBPIPE          This identifies a pipe to an endpoint on a given
                                                     WDFUSBINTERFACE.

     Wait lock                   WDFWAITLOCK         This represents a kernel dispatcher event object.

Object                     Type                   Description

WMI instance               WDFWMIINSTANCE         This represents a WMI data block for a given WDFWMIPROVIDER.

WMI provider               WDFWMIPROVIDER         This describes the WMI schema for all the WDFWMIINSTANCE
                                                  objects supported by the driver.

Work item                  WDFWORKITEM            This describes an executive work item.

   For each of these objects, other KMDF objects can be attached as children. Some objects have only
one or two valid parents, while others can be attached to any parent. For example, a WDFINTERRUPT ob-
ject must be associated with a given WDFDEVICE, but a WDFSPINLOCK or WDFSTRING object can have any
object as a parent. This allows for fine-grained control over their validity and usage and the reduction
of global state variables. Figure 6-44 shows the entire KMDF object hierarchy.

FIGURE 6-44    KMDF object hierarchy.

    The associations mentioned earlier and shown in Figure 6-44 are not necessarily immediate. The
parent must simply be on the hierarchy chain, meaning one of the ancestor nodes must be of this type.
This relationship is useful to implement because object hierarchies affect not only an object’s locality
but also its lifetime. Each time a child object is created, a reference count is added to it by its link to its
parent. Therefore, when a parent object is destroyed, all the child objects are also destroyed, which
is why associating objects such as WDFSTRING or WDFMEMORY with a given object instead of the default
WDFDRIVER object can automatically free up memory and state information when the parent object is
destroyed.

         Closely related to the concept of hierarchy is KMDF’s notion of object context. Because KMDF objects
     are opaque (as discussed) and are associated with a parent object for locality, it becomes important to
     allow drivers to attach their own data to an object in order to track certain specific information outside
     the framework’s capabilities or support. Object contexts allow all KMDF objects to contain such infor-
     mation. They also allow multiple object context areas, which permit multiple layers of code inside the
     same driver to interact with the same object in different ways. In WDM, the device extension custom
     data structure allows such information to be associated with a given device, but with KMDF even a
     spinlock or string can contain context areas. This extensibility enables each library or layer of code re-
     sponsible for processing an I/O request to interact independently of other code, based on the context
     area that it works with.

         Finally, KMDF objects are also associated with a set of attributes, shown in Table 6-12. These at-
     tributes are usually configured to their defaults, but the values can be overridden by the driver when
     creating the object by specifying a WDF_OBJECT_ATTRIBUTES structure (similar to the object manager’s
     OBJECT_ATTRIBUTES structure that’s used when creating a kernel object).

     TABLE 6-12   KMDF object attributes
     Attribute                     Description

     ContextSizeOverride           This is the size of the object context area.

     ContextTypeInfo               This is the type of the object context area.

     EvtCleanupCallback            This is the callback to notify the driver of the object’s cleanup before deletion.
                                   (References may still exist.)

     EvtDestroyCallback            This is the callback to notify the driver of the object’s imminent deletion. (The refer-
                                   ence count will be 0.)

     ExecutionLevel                This describes the maximum IRQL at which the callbacks may be invoked by KMDF.

     ParentObject                  This identifies the parent of the object.

     SynchronizationScope          Specifies whether callbacks should be synchronized with the parent, a queue, a device,
                                   or nothing.

     KMDF I/O model
     The KMDF I/O model follows the WDM mechanisms discussed earlier in this chapter. In fact, you can
     even think of the framework itself as a WDM driver, since it uses kernel APIs and WDM behavior to
     abstract KMDF and make it functional. Under KMDF, the framework driver sets its own WDM-style IRP
     dispatch routines and takes control of all IRPs sent to the driver. After being handled by one of three
     KMDF I/O handlers (described shortly), it then packages these requests in the appropriate KMDF ob-
     jects, inserts them in the appropriate queues (if required), and performs driver callback if the driver is
     interested in those events. Figure 6-45 describes the flow of I/O in the framework.

FIGURE 6-45   KMDF I/O flow and IRP processing.

   Based on the IRP processing discussed previously for WDM drivers, KMDF performs one of the fol-
lowing three actions:

   ■■   It sends the IRP to the I/O handler, which processes standard device operations.

   ■■   It sends the IRP to the PnP and power handler that processes these kinds of events and notifies
        other drivers if the state has changed.

   ■■   It sends the IRP to the WMI handler, which handles tracing and logging.

    These components then notify the driver of any events it registered for, potentially forward the
request to another handler for further processing, and then complete the request based on an internal
handler action or as the result of a driver call. If KMDF has finished processing the IRP but the request
itself has still not been fully processed, KMDF will take one of the following actions:

   ■■   For bus drivers and function drivers, it completes the IRP with STATUS_INVALID_DEVICE_REQUEST.

   ■■   For filter drivers, it forwards the request to the next lower driver.

   I/O processing by KMDF is based on the mechanism of queues (WDFQUEUE, not the KQUEUE object
discussed earlier in this chapter). KMDF queues are highly scalable containers of I/O requests (pack-
aged as WDFREQUEST objects) and provide a rich feature set beyond merely sorting the pending I/Os
for a given device. For example, queues track currently active requests and support I/O cancellation,
I/O concurrency (the ability to perform and complete more than one I/O request at a time), and I/O
synchronization (as noted in the list of object attributes in Table 6-12). A typical KMDF driver creates at
least one queue (if not more) and associates one or more events with each queue, as well as some of
the following options:

        ■■   The callbacks registered with the events associated with this queue.

        ■■   The power management state for the queue. KMDF supports both power-managed and non–
             power managed queues. For the former, the I/O handler wakes up the device when required
             (and when possible), arms the idle timer when the device has no I/Os queued up, and calls the
             driver’s I/O cancellation routines when the system is switching away from a working state.

        ■■   The dispatch method for the queue. KMDF can deliver I/Os from a queue in sequential, parallel,
             or manual mode. Sequential I/Os are delivered one at a time (KMDF waits for the driver to com-
             plete the previous request), while parallel I/Os are delivered to the driver as soon as possible. In
             manual mode, the driver must manually retrieve I/Os from the queue.

        ■■   Whether the queue can accept zero-length buffers, such as incoming requests that don’t actu-
             ally contain any data.

       Note The dispatch method only affects the number of requests that can be active inside
       a driver’s queue at one time. It does not determine whether the event callbacks themselves
       will be called concurrently or serially. That behavior is determined through the synchroniza-
       tion scope object attribute described earlier. Therefore, it is possible for a parallel queue to
       have concurrency disabled but still have multiple incoming requests.

        Based on the mechanism of queues, the KMDF I/O handler can perform various tasks upon receiv-
     ing a create, close, cleanup, write, read, or device control (IOCTL) request:

        ■■   For create requests, the driver can request to be immediately notified through the EvtDevice-
             FileCreate callback event, or it can create a non-manual queue to receive create requests.
             It must then register an EvtIoDefault callback to receive the notifications. Finally, if none of
             these methods are used, KMDF will simply complete the request with a success code, meaning
             that by default, applications will be able to open handles to KMDF drivers that don’t supply their
             own code.

        ■■   For cleanup and close requests, the driver will be immediately notified through EvtFileClean-
             up and EvtFileClose callbacks, if registered. Otherwise, the framework will simply complete
             with a success code.

        ■■   For write, read, and IOCTL requests, the flow shown in Figure 6-46 applies.

        FIGURE 6-46   Handling read, write, and IOCTL I/O requests by KMDF.

User-Mode Driver Framework
Windows includes a growing number of drivers that run in user mode, using the User-Mode Driver
Framework (UMDF), which is part of the WDF. UMDF version 2 is aligned with KMDF in terms of object
model, programming model and I/O model. The frameworks are not identical, however, because of
some of the inherent differences between user mode and kernel mode. For example, some KMDF
objects listed in Table 6-12 don’t exist in UMDF, including WDFCHILDLIST, DMA-related objects,
WDFLOOKASIDELIST (look-aside lists can be allocated only in kernel mode), WDFIORESLIST, WDFIORES-
REQLIST, WDFDPC, and WMI objects. Still, most KMDF objects and concepts apply equally to UMDF 2.x.

UMDF provides several advantages over KMDF:

   ■■   UMDF drivers execute in user mode, so any unhandled exception crashes the UMDF host
        process, but not the entire system.

   ■■   The UMDF host process runs with the Local Service account, which has very limited privileges
        on the local machine and only anonymous access in network connections. This reduces the
        security attack surface.

   ■■   Running in user mode means the IRQL is always 0 (PASSIVE_LEVEL). Thus, the driver can always
        take page faults and use kernel dispatcher objects for synchronization (events, mutexes, and so on).

   ■■   Debugging UMDF drivers is easier than debugging KMDF drivers because the debugging setup
        does not require two separate machines (virtual or physical).

        The main drawback to UMDF is increased latency because of the kernel/user transitions and com-
     munication required (as described shortly). Also, some types of drivers, such as drivers for high-speed
     PCI devices, are simply not meant to execute in user mode and thus cannot be written with UMDF.

        UMDF is designed specifically to support protocol device classes, which refers to devices that all use
     the same standardized, generic protocol and offer specialized functionality on top of it. These protocols
     currently include IEEE 1394 (FireWire), USB, Bluetooth, human interface devices (HIDs) and TCP/IP. Any
     device running on top of these buses (or connected to a network) is a potential candidate for UMDF.
     Examples include portable music players, input devices, cell phones, cameras and webcams, and so
     on. Two other users of UMDF are SideShow-compatible devices (auxiliary displays) and the Windows
     Portable Device (WPD) Framework, which supports USB-removable storage (USB bulk transfer devices).
     Finally, as with KMDF, it’s possible to implement software-only drivers, such as for a virtual device, in
     UMDF.

         Unlike KMDF drivers, which run as driver objects representing a SYS image file, UMDF drivers run
     in a driver host process (running the image %SystemRoot%\System32\WUDFHost.exe), similar to a
     service-hosting process. The host process contains the driver itself, the User-Mode Driver Framework
     (implemented as a DLL), and a run-time environment (responsible for I/O dispatching, driver loading,
     device-stack management, communication with the kernel, and a thread pool).

         As in the kernel, each UMDF driver runs as part of a stack. This can contain multiple drivers that are
     responsible for managing a device. Naturally, because user-mode code can’t access the kernel address
     space, UMDF also includes components that allow this access to occur through a specialized interface
     to the kernel. This is implemented by a kernel-mode side of UMDF that uses ALPC—essentially an ef-
     ficient inter-process communication mechanism to talk to the run-time environment in the user-mode
     driver host processes. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more information on ALPC.) Figure 6-47 shows the
     architecture of the UMDF driver model.

     FIGURE 6-47 UMDF architecture.

    Figure 6-47 shows two different device stacks that manage two different hardware devices, each
with a UMDF driver running inside its own driver host process. From the diagram, you can see that the
following components comprise the architecture:

   ■■   Applications These are the clients of the drivers. They are standard Windows applications that
        use the same APIs to perform I/Os as they would with a KMDF-managed or WDM-managed
        device. Applications don’t know (nor care) that they’re talking to a UMDF-based device, and the
        calls are still sent to the kernel’s I/O manager.

   ■■   Windows kernel (I/O manager) Based on the application I/O APIs, the I/O manager builds
        the IRPs for the operations, just like for any other standard device.

   ■■   Reflector The reflector is what makes UMDF “tick.” It is a standard WDM filter driver
        (%SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers\WUDFRd.Sys) that sits at the top of the device stack of each
        device that is being managed by a UMDF driver. The reflector is responsible for managing the
        communication between the kernel and the user-mode driver host process. IRPs related to
        power management, Plug and Play, and standard I/O are redirected to the host process through
        ALPC. This enables the UMDF driver to respond to the I/Os and perform work, as well as be
        involved in the Plug and Play model, by providing enumeration, installation, and management
        of its devices. Finally, the reflector is responsible for keeping an eye on the driver host processes
        by making sure they remain responsive to requests within an adequate time to prevent drivers
        and applications from hanging.

   ■■   Driver manager The driver manager is responsible for starting and quitting the driver host
        processes, based on which UMDF-managed devices are present, and also for managing infor-
        mation on them. It is also responsible for responding to messages coming from the reflector
        and applying them to the appropriate host process (such as reacting to device installation). The
        driver manager runs as a standard Windows service implemented in %SystemRoot%\System32\
        WUDFsvc.dll (hosted in a standard Svchost.exe), and is configured for automatic startup as soon
        as the first UMDF driver for a device is installed. Only one instance of the driver manager runs
        for all driver host processes (as is always the case with services), and it must always be running
        to allow UMDF drivers to work.

   ■■   Host process The host process provides the address space and run-time environment for
        the actual driver (WUDFHost.exe). Although it runs in the local service account, it is not actu-
        ally a Windows service and is not managed by the SCM—only by the driver manager. The host
        process is also responsible for providing the user-mode device stack for the actual hardware,
        which is visible to all applications on the system. Currently, each device instance has its own
        device stack, which runs in a separate host process. In the future, multiple instances may share
        the same host process. Host processes are child processes of the driver manager.

   ■■   Kernel-mode drivers If specific kernel support for a device that is managed by a UMDF
        driver is needed, it is also possible to write a companion kernel-mode driver that fills that role.
        In this way, it is possible for a device to be managed both by a UMDF and a KMDF (or WDM)
        driver.

        You can easily see UMDF in action on your system by inserting a USB flash drive with some content
     on it. Run Process Explorer, and you should see a WUDFHost.exe process that corresponds to a driver
     host process. Switch to DLL view and scroll down until you see DLLs like the ones shown in Figure 6-48.

     FIGURE 6-48   DLL in UMDF host process.

        You can identify three main components, which match the architectural overview described earlier:

        ■■   WUDFHost.exe This is the UMDF host executable.

        ■■   WUDFx02000.dll       This is the UMDF 2.x framework DLL.

        ■■   WUDFPlatform.dll       This is the run-time environment.

The power manager
     Just as Windows Plug and Play features require support from a system’s hardware, its power-manage-
     ment capabilities require hardware that complies with the Advanced Configuration and Power Inter-
     face (ACPI) specification, which is now part of the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI). (The
     ACPI spec is available at http://www.uefi.org/specifications.)

        The ACPI standard defines various power levels for a system and for devices. The six system power
     states are described in Table 6-13. They are referred to as S0 (fully on or working) through S5 (fully off).
     Each state has the following characteristics:

        ■■   Power consumption        This is the amount of power the system consumes.

        ■■   Software resumption This is the software state from which the system resumes when moving
             to a “more on” state.

        ■■   Hardware latency      This is the length of time it takes to return the system to the fully on state.

TABLE 6-13       System power-state definitions
State                 Power Consumption                Software Resumption                         Hardware Latency

S0 (fully on)         Maximum                          Not applicable                              None

S1 (sleeping)         Less than S0, more than S2       System resumes where it left off (returns   Less than 2 seconds
                                                       to S0)

S2 (sleeping)         Less than S1, more than S3       System resumes where it left off (returns   2 or more seconds
                                                       to S0)

S3 (sleeping)         Less than S2; processor is off   System resumes where it left off (returns   Same as S2
                                                       to S0)

S4 (hibernating)      Trickle current to power button System restarts from saved hibernation       Long and undefined
                      and wake circuitry              file and resumes where it left off before
                                                      hibernation (returns to S0)

S5 (fully off)        Trickle current to power button System boot                                  Long and undefined

   As noted in Table 6-13, states S1 through S4 are sleeping states, in which the system appears to
be off because of reduced power consumption. However, in these sleeping states, the system retains
enough information—either in memory or on disk—to move to S0. For states S1 through S3, enough
power is required to preserve the contents of the computer’s memory so that when the transition is
made to S0 (when the user or a device wakes up the computer), the power manager continues execut-
ing where it left off before the suspend.

   When the system moves to S4, the power manager saves the compressed contents of memory to
a hibernation file named Hiberfil.sys, which is large enough to hold the uncompressed contents of
memory, in the root directory of the system volume (hidden file). (Compression is used to minimize disk
I/O and to improve hibernation and resume-from-hibernation performance.) After it finishes saving
memory, the power manager shuts off the computer. When a user subsequently turns on the computer,
a normal boot process occurs, except that the boot manager checks for and detects a valid memory
image stored in the hibernation file. If the hibernation file contains the saved system state, the boot
manager launches %SystemRoot%\System32\Winresume.exe, which reads the contents of the file into
memory, and then resumes execution at the point in memory that is recorded in the hibernation file.

    On systems with hybrid sleep enabled, a user request to put the computer to sleep will actually be
a combination of both the S3 state and the S4 state. While the computer is put to sleep, an emergency
hibernation file will also be written to disk. Unlike typical hibernation files, which contain almost all
active memory, the emergency hibernation file includes only data that could not be paged in at a later
time, making the suspend operation faster than a typical hibernation (because less data is written to disk).
Drivers will then be notified that an S4 transition is occurring, allowing them to configure themselves
and save state just as if an actual hibernation request had been initiated. After this point, the system
is put in the normal sleep state just like during a standard sleep transition. However, if the power goes
out, the system is now essentially in an S4 state—the user can power on the machine, and Windows will
resume from the emergency hibernation file.

   Note You can disable hibernation completely and gain some disk space by running power-
   cfg /h off from an elevated command prompt.

        The computer never directly transitions between states S1 and S4 (because that requires code ex-
     ecution, but the CPU is off in these states); instead, it must move to state S0 first. As illustrated in Figure
     6-49, when the system is moving from any of states S1 through S5 to state S0, it’s said to be waking, and
     when it’s transitioning from state S0 to any of states S1 through S5, it’s said to be sleeping.

     FIGURE 6-49   System power-state transitions.

        Experiment: System power states
        To view the supported power states, open an elevated command window and type in the com-
        mand powercfg /a. You’ll see output similar to the following:
        C:\WINDOWS\system32>powercfg /a
        The following sleep states are available on this system:
            Standby (S3)
            Hibernate
            Fast Startup

        The following sleep states are not available on this system:
            Standby (S1)
                The system firmware does not support this standby state.

             Standby (S2)
                 The system firmware does not support this standby state.

             Standby (S0 Low Power Idle)
                 The system firmware does not support this standby state.

             Hybrid Sleep
                 The hypervisor does not support this standby state.

           Notice that the standby state is S3 and hibernation is available. Let’s turn off hibernation and
        re-execute the command:
        C:\WINDOWS\system32>powercfg /h off

        C:\WINDOWS\system32>powercfg /a

   The following sleep states are available on this system:
       Standby (S3)

   The following sleep states are not available on this system:
       Standby (S1)
           The system firmware does not support this standby state.

       Standby (S2)
           The system firmware does not support this standby state.

       Hibernate
           Hibernation has not been enabled.

       Standby (S0 Low Power Idle)
           The system firmware does not support this standby state.

       Hybrid Sleep
           Hibernation is not available.
           The hypervisor does not support this standby state.

       Fast Startup
           Hibernation is not available.

   For devices, ACPI defines four power states, from D0 through D3. State D0 is fully on, while state
D3 is fully off. The ACPI standard leaves it to individual drivers and devices to define the meanings of
states D1 and D2, except that state D1 must consume an amount of power less than or equal to that
consumed in state D0, and when the device is in state D2, it must consume power less than or equal to
that consumed in D1.

   Windows 8 (and later) splits the D3 state into two sub-states, D3-hot and D3-cold. In D3-hot state,
the device is mostly turned off, but is not disconnected from its main power source, and its parent
bus controller can detect the presence of the device on the bus. In D3-cold, the main power source is
removed from the device, and the bus controller cannot detect the device. This state provides another
opportunity for saving power. Figure 6-50 shows the device states and the possible state transitions.

   Figure 6-50 shows the device states and the possible state transitions.

FIGURE 6-50   Device power-state transitions.

        Before Windows 8, devices could only reach D3-hot state while the system is fully on (S0). The transi-
     tion to D3-cold was implicit when the system went into a sleep state. Starting with Windows 8, a de-
     vice’s power state can be set to D3-cold while the system is fully on. The driver that controls the device
     cannot put the device into D3-cold state directly; instead, it can put the device into D3-hot state, and
     then, depending on other devices on the same bus entering D3-hot states, the bus driver and firmware
     may decide to move all the devices to D3-cold. The decision whether to move the devices to D3-cold
     states depends on two factors: first, the actual ability of the bus driver and firmware, and second on the
     driver that must enable the transition to D3-cold either by specifying that in the installation INF file or
     by calling the SetD3DColdSupport function dynamically.

        Microsoft, in conjunction with the major hardware OEMs, has defined a series of power manage-
     ment reference specifications that specify the device power states that are required for all devices in
     a particular class (for the major device classes: display, network, SCSI, and so on). For some devices,
     there’s no intermediate power state between fully on and fully off, which results in these states being
     undefined.

     Connected Standby and Modern Standby
     You may have noticed in the experiment above another system state called Standby (S0 Low Power
     Idle). Although not an official ACPI state, it is a variant of S0 known as Connected Standby on Windows
     8.x and later enhanced in Windows 10 (desktop and mobile editions) and called Modern Standby. The
     “normal” standby state (S3 above) is sometimes referred to as Legacy Standby.

        The main problem with Legacy Standby is that the system is not working, and therefore, for example,
     the user receives an email, the system can’t pick that up without waking to S0, which may or may not
     happen, depending on configuration and device capabilities. Even if the system wakes up to get that
     email, it won’t go immediately to sleep again. Modern Standby solves both issues.

        Systems that support Modern Standby normally go into this state when the system is instructed to
     go to Standby. The system is technically still at S0, meaning the CPU is active and code can execute.
     However, desktop processes (non-UWP apps) are suspended, as well as UWP apps (most are not in
     the foreground and suspended anyway), but background tasks created by UWP apps are allowed to
     execute. For example, an email client would have a background task that periodically polls for new
     messages.

        Being in Modern Standby also means that the system is able to wake to full S0 very quickly, some-
     times referred to as Instant On. Note that not all systems support Modern Standby, as it depends on the
     chipset and other platform components (as can be seen in the last experiment, the system on which the
     experiment ran does not support Modern Standby and thus supports Legacy Standby).

        For more information on Modern Standby, consult the Windows Hardware documentation at
     https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/hardware/mt282515(v=vs.85).aspx.

Power manager operation
Windows power-management policy is split between the power manager and the individual device
drivers. The power manager is the owner of the system power policy. This ownership means the power
manager decides which system power state is appropriate at any given point, and when a sleep, hiber-
nation, or shutdown is required, the power manager instructs the power-capable devices in the system
to perform appropriate system power-state transitions.

   The power manager decides when a system power-state transition is necessary by considering
several factors:

   ■■   System activity level

   ■■   System battery level

   ■■   Shutdown, hibernate, or sleep requests from applications

   ■■   User actions, such as pressing the power button

   ■■   Control Panel power settings

   When the PnP manager performs device enumeration, part of the information it receives about a
device is its power-management capabilities. A driver reports whether its devices support device states
D1 and D2 and, optionally, the latencies, or times required, to move from states D1 through D3 to D0.
To help the power manager determine when to make system power-state transitions, bus drivers also
return a table that implements a mapping between each of the system power states (S0 through S5)
and the device power states that a device supports.

    The table lists the lowest possible device power state for each system state and directly reflects the
state of various power planes when the machine sleeps or hibernates. For example, a bus that supports
all four device power states might return the mapping table shown in Table 6-14. Most device driv-
ers turn their devices completely off (D3) when leaving S0 to minimize power consumption when the
machine isn’t in use. Some devices, however, such as network adapter cards, support the ability to wake
up the system from a sleeping state. This ability, along with the lowest device power state in which the
capability is present, is also reported during device enumeration.

TABLE 6-14       An example of system-to-device power mappings
System Power State             Device Power State

S0 (fully on)                  D0 (fully on)

S1 (sleeping)                  D1

S2 (sleeping)                  D2

S3 (sleeping)                  D2

S4 (hibernating)               D3 (fully off)

S5 (fully off)                 D3 (fully off)

     Driver power operation
     When the power manager decides to make a transition between system power states, it sends power
     commands to a driver’s power dispatch routine (IRP_MJ_POWER). More than one driver can be responsi-
     ble for managing a device, but only one of the drivers is designated as the device power-policy owner.
     This is typically the driver that manages the FDO. This driver determines, based on the system state,
     a device’s power state. For example, if the system transitions between state S0 and S3, a driver might
     decide to move a device’s power state from D0 to D1.

         Instead of directly informing the other drivers that share the management of the device of its deci-
     sion, the device power-policy owner asks the power manager, via the PoRequestPowerIrp function, to
     tell the other drivers by issuing a device power command to their power dispatch routines. This behav-
     ior enables the power manager to control the number of power commands that are active on a system
     at any given time. For example, some devices in the system might require a significant amount of cur-
     rent to power up. The power manager ensures that such devices aren’t powered up simultaneously.

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing a driver’s power mappings
        You can use Device Manager to see a driver’s system power state–to–driver power state mappings.
        To do so, open the Properties dialog box for a device, click the Details tab, click the Property
        drop-down list, and choose Power Data. The Properties dialog box also displays the current
        power state of the device, the device-specific power capabilities that it provides, and the power
        states from which it can wake the system:

        Many power commands have corresponding query commands. For example, when the system is
     moving to a sleep state, the power manager will first ask the devices on the system whether the transi-
     tion is acceptable. A device that is busy performing time-critical operations or interacting with device
     hardware might reject the command, which results in the system maintaining its current system power-
     state setting.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing the system power capabilities and policy
You can view a computer’s system power capabilities by using the !pocaps kernel debugger
command. Here’s the output of the command when run on an x64 Windows 10 laptop:
lkd> !pocaps
PopCapabilities @ 0xfffff8035a98ce60
  Misc Supported Features: PwrButton SlpButton Lid S3 S4 S5 HiberFile FullWake
VideoDim
  Processor Features:       Thermal
  Disk Features:
  Battery Features:         BatteriesPresent
    Battery 0 - Capacity:        0 Granularity:        0
    Battery 1 - Capacity:        0 Granularity:        0
    Battery 2 - Capacity:        0 Granularity:        0
  Wake Caps
    Ac OnLine Wake:         Sx
    Soft Lid Wake:          Sx
    RTC Wake:               S4
    Min Device Wake:        Sx
    Default Wake:           Sx

   The Misc Supported Features line reports that, in addition to S0 (fully on), the system
supports system power states of S3, S4 and S5 (it doesn’t implement S1 or S2) and has a valid
hibernation file to which it can save system memory when it hibernates (state S4).

    The Power Options page, which you open by selecting Power Options in the Control Panel,
lets you configure various aspects of the system’s power policy. The exact properties you can
configure depend on the system’s power capabilities.

          Notice that OEMs can add power schemes. These schemes can be listed by typing the power-
       cfg /list command as shown here:
       C:\WINDOWS\system32>powercfg /list

       Existing Power Schemes (* Active)
       -----------------------------------
       Power Scheme GUID: 381b4222-f694-41f0-9685-ff5bb260df2e           (Balanced)
       Power Scheme GUID: 8759706d-706b-4c22-b2ec-f91e1ef6ed38           (HP Optimized
       (recommended)) *
       Power Scheme GUID: 8c5e7fda-e8bf-4a96-9a85-a6e23a8c635c           (High performance)
       Power Scheme GUID: a1841308-3541-4fab-bc81-f71556f20b4a           (Power saver)

          By changing any of the preconfigured plan settings, you can set the idle detection timeouts
       that control when the system turns off the monitor, spins down hard disks, goes to standby
       mode (moves to system power state S3 in the previous experiment), and hibernates (moves the
       system to power state S4). In addition, selecting the Change Plan Settings link lets you specify
       the power-related behavior of the system when you press the power or sleep buttons or close a
       laptop’s lid.

         The Change Advanced Power Settings link directly affects values in the system’s power policy,
       which you can display with the !popolicy debugger command. Here’s the output of the com-
       mand on the same system:
       lkd> !popolicy
       SYSTEM_POWER_POLICY (R.1) @ 0xfffff8035a98cc64
         PowerButton:         Sleep Flags: 00000000           Event: 00000000
         SleepButton:         Sleep Flags: 00000000           Event: 00000000
         LidClose:             None Flags: 00000000           Event: 00000000
         Idle:                Sleep Flags: 00000000           Event: 00000000

     OverThrottled:             None Flags: 00000000         Event: 00000000
     IdleTimeout:                  0 IdleSensitivity:              90%
     MinSleep:                    S3 MaxSleep:                     S3
     LidOpenWake:                 S0 FastSleep:                    S3
     WinLogonFlags:                1 S4Timeout:                     0
     VideoTimeout:               600 VideoDim:                      0
     SpinTimeout:                4b0 OptForPower:                   0
     FanTolerance:                 0% ForcedThrottle:               0%
     MinThrottle:                  0% DyanmicThrottle:           None (0)

      The first lines of the display correspond to the button behaviors specified in the Power Op-
   tions Advanced Settings window. On this system, both the power and the sleep buttons put the
   computer in a sleep state. Closing the lid, however, does nothing. The timeout values shown near
   the end of the output are expressed in seconds and displayed in hexadecimal notation. The val-
   ues reported here directly correspond to the settings configured in the Power Options window.
   For example, the video timeout is 600, meaning the monitor turns off after 600 seconds (because
   of a bug in the debugging tools used here, it’s displayed in decimal), or 10 minutes. Similarly, the
   hard disk spin-down timeout is 0x4b0, which corresponds to 1200 seconds, or 20 minutes.

Driver and application control of device power
In addition to responding to power manager commands related to system power-state transitions, a
driver can unilaterally control the device power state of its devices. In some cases, a driver might want
to reduce the power consumption of a device it controls if the device is left inactive for a period of time.
Examples include monitors that support a dimmed mode and disks that support spin-down. A driver
can either detect an idle device itself or use facilities provided by the power manager. If the device uses
the power manager, it registers the device with the power manager by calling the PoRegisterDevice-
ForIdleDetection function.

    This function informs the power manager of the timeout values to use to detect whether a device
is idle and, if so, the device power state that the power manager should apply. The driver specifies two
timeouts: one to use when the user has configured the computer to conserve energy and the other
to use when the user has configured the computer for optimum performance. After calling PoRegis-
terDeviceForIdleDetection, the driver must inform the power manager, by calling the PoSetDe-
viceBusy or PoSetDeviceBusyEx functions, whenever the device is active, and then register for idle
detection again to disable and re-enable it as needed. The PoStartDeviceBusy and PoEndDeviceBusy
APIs are available as well, which simplify the programming logic required to achieve the behavior just
described.

   Although a device has control over its own power state, it does not have the ability to manipulate
the system power state or to prevent system power transitions from occurring. For example, if a badly
designed driver doesn’t support any low-power states, it can choose to remain on or turn itself com-
pletely off without hindering the system’s overall ability to enter a low-power state—this is because the
power manager only notifies the driver of a transition and doesn’t ask for consent. Drivers do receive a
power query IRP (IRP_MN_QUERY_POWER) when the system is about to transition to a lower power state.

     The driver may veto the request, but the power manager does not have to comply; it may delay transi-
     tion if possible (e.g., the device is running on a battery that is not critically low); transition to hibernation,
     however, can never fail.

         Although drivers and the kernel are chiefly responsible for power management, applications are also
     allowed to provide their input. User-mode processes can register for a variety of power notifications,
     such as when the battery is low or critically low, when the machine has switched from DC (battery) to
     AC (adapter/charger) power, or when the system is initiating a power transition. Applications can never
     veto these operations, and they can have up to two seconds to clean up any state necessary before a
     sleep transition.

     Power management framework
     Starting with Windows 8, the kernel provides a framework for managing power states of individual
     components (sometimes called functions) within a device. For example, suppose an audio device
     has playback and recording components, but if the playback component is active and the recording
     component is not, it would be beneficial to put the recording component into a lower power state. The
     power management framework (PoFx) provides an API that drivers can use to indicate their compo-
     nents’ power states and requirements. All components must support the fully-on state, identified as F0.
     Higher-number F-states indicate lower power states that a component may be in, where each higher
     F-state represents a lower power consumption and higher transition time to F0. Note that F-state
     management has meaning only when the device is in power state D0, because it’s not working at all in
     higher D-states.

        The power policy owner of the device (typically the FDO) must register with PoFx by calling the
     PoFxRegisterDevice function. The driver passes along the following information in the call:

        ■■   The number of components within the device.

        ■■   A set of callbacks the driver can implement to be notified by PoFx when various events occur,
             such as switching to active or idle state, switching the device to D0 state and sending power
             control codes (see the WDK for more information).

        ■■   For each component, the number of F-states it supports.

        ■■   For each component, the deepest F-state from which the component can wake.

        ■■   For each component, for each F-state, the time required to return from this state to F0, the min-
             imum amount of time the component can be in this F-state to make the transition worthwhile,
             and the nominal power the component consumes in this F-state. Or, it can be set to indicate
             that the power consumption is negligible and is not worth considering when PoFx decides to
             wake several components simultaneously.

         PoFx uses this information—combined with information from other devices and system-wide power
     state information, such as the current power profile—to make intelligent decisions for which power
     F-state a particular component should be in. The challenge is to reconcile two conflicting objectives:
     first, ensuring that an idle component consumes as little power as possible, and second, making sure a

component can transition to the F0 state quickly enough so that the component is perceived as always
on and always connected.

   The driver must notify PoFx when a component needs to be active (F0 state) by calling PoFxActivate-
Component. Sometime after this call, the corresponding callback is invoked by PoFx, indicating to the
driver that the component is now at F0. Conversely, when the driver determines the component is not
currently needed, it calls PoFxIdleComponent to tell PoFx, which responds by transitioning the compo-
nent to a lower-power F-state and notifies the driver once it does.

Performance state management
The mechanisms just described allow a component in an idle condition (non-F0 states) to consume less
power than in F0. But some components can consume less power even in state F0, related to the actual
work a device is doing. For example, a graphic card may be able to use less power when showing a mostly
static display, whereas it would need higher power when rendering 3D content in 60 frames per second.

    In Windows 8.x, such drivers would have to implement a propriety performance state selection al-
gorithm and notify an OS service called platform extension plug-in (PEP). PEP is specific to a particular
line of processors or system on a chip (SoC). This makes the driver code tightly coupled to the PEP.

   Windows 10 extends the PoFx API for performance state management, prompting the driver code to
use standard APIs and not worry about the particular PEP on the platform. For each component, PoFx
provides the following types of performance states:

   ■■   A discrete number of states in the frequency (Hz), bandwidth (bits per second), or an opaque
        number meaningful to the driver.

   ■■   A continuous distribution of states between a minimum and maximum (frequency, bandwidth,
        or custom).

   An example of this is for a graphic card to define a discrete set of frequencies in which it can oper-
ate, thus indirectly affecting its power consumption. Similar performance sets could be defined for its
bandwidth usage, if appropriate.

   To register with PoFx for performance state management, a driver must first register the device with
PoFx (PoFxRegisterDevice) as described in the previous section. Then, the driver calls PoFxRegister-
ComponentPerfStates, passing performance details (discrete or range-based, frequency, bandwidth,
or custom) and a callback when state changes actually occur.

    When a driver decides that a component should change performance state, it calls PoFxIssue-
PerfStateChange or PoFxIssuePerfStateChangeMultiple. These calls request the PEP to place the
component in the specified state (based on the provided index or value, depending on whether the set
is for a discrete state or range-based). The driver may also specify that the call should be synchronous,
asynchronous or “don’t care,” in which case the PEP decides. Either way, PoFx will eventually call into
the driver-registered callback with the performance state, which may be the requested one, but it can
also be denied by the PEP. If accepted, the driver should make the appropriate calls to its hardware to
make the actual change. If the PEP denies the request, the driver may try again with a new call to one of
the aforementioned functions. Only a single call can be made before the driver’s callback is invoked.

     Power availability requests
     Applications and drivers cannot veto sleep transitions that are already initiated. However, certain
     scenarios demand a mechanism for disabling the ability to initiate sleep transitions when a user is
     interacting with the system in certain ways. For example, if the user is currently watching a movie and
     the machine would normally go idle (based on a lack of mouse or keyboard input after 15 minutes), the
     media player application should have the capability to temporarily disable idle transitions as long as
     the movie is playing. You can probably imagine other power-saving measures that the system would
     normally undertake, such as turning off or even just dimming the screen, that would also limit your en-
     joyment of visual media. In legacy versions of Windows, SetThreadExecutionState was a user-mode
     API capable of controlling system and display idle transitions by informing the power manager that a
     user was still present on the machine. However, this API did not provide any sort of diagnostic capabili-
     ties, nor did it allow sufficient granularity for defining the availability request. Also, drivers could not
     issue their own requests, and even user applications had to correctly manage their threading model,
     because these requests were at the thread level, not at the process or system level.

         Windows now supports power request objects, which are implemented by the kernel and are bona-
     fide object manager–defined objects. You can use the WinObj utility from Sysinternals (more details on
     this tool are in Chapter 8 in Part 2) and see the PowerRequest object type in the \ObjectTypes directory,
     or use the !object kernel debugger command on the \ObjectTypes\PowerRequest object type, to
     validate this.

        Power availability requests are generated by user-mode applications through the PowerCreate-
     Request API and then enabled or disabled with the PowerSetRequest and PowerClearRequest APIs,
     respectively. In the kernel, drivers use PoCreatePowerRequest, PoSetPowerRequest, and PoClear-
     PowerRequest. Because no handles are used, PoDeletePowerRequest is needed to remove the refer-
     ence on the object (while user mode can simply use CloseHandle).

        There are four kinds of requests that can be used through the Power Request API:

        ■■   System request This type request asks that the system not automatically go to sleep due to
             the idle timer (although the user can still close the lid to enter sleep, for example).

        ■■   Display request This type of request does the same as a system request, but for the display.

        ■■   Away-mode request This is a modification to the normal sleep (S3 state) behavior of Windows,
             which is used to keep the computer in full powered-on mode but with the display and sound
             card turned off, making it appear to the user as though the machine is really sleeping. This be-
             havior is normally used only by specialized set-top boxes or media center devices when media
             delivery must continue even though the user has pressed a physical sleep button, for example.

        ■■   Execution required request This type of request (available starting with Windows 8 and Server
             2012) requests a UWP app process continue execution even if normally the Process Lifecycle Man-
             ager (PLM) would have terminated it (for whatever reason); the extended length of time depends
             on factors such as the power policy settings. This request type is only supported for systems that
             support Modern Standby, otherwise this request is interpreted as a system request.

      EXPERIMENT: Viewing power availability requests
      Unfortunately, the power request kernel object that’s created with a call such as PowerCreate-
      Request is unavailable in the public symbols. However, the Powercfg utility provides a way to
      list power requests without any need for a kernel debugger. Here’s the output of the utility while
      playing a video and a stream audio from the web on a Windows 10 laptop:
      C:\WINDOWS\system32>powercfg /requests
      DISPLAY:
      [PROCESS] \Device\HarddiskVolume4\Program Files\WindowsApps\Microsoft.
      ZuneVideo_10.16092.10311.0_x64__8wekyb3d8bbwe\Video.UI.exe
      Windows Runtime Package: Microsoft.ZuneVideo_8wekyb3d8bbwe

      SYSTEM:
      [DRIVER] Conexant ISST Audio (INTELAUDIO\FUNC_01&VEN_14F1&DEV_50F4&SUBSYS_103C80D3&R
      EV_1001\4&1a010da&0&0001)
      An audio stream is currently in use.
      [PROCESS] \Device\HarddiskVolume4\Program Files\WindowsApps\Microsoft.
      ZuneVideo_10.16092.10311.0_x64__8wekyb3d8bbwe\Video.UI.exe
      Windows Runtime Package: Microsoft.ZuneVideo_8wekyb3d8bbwe

      AWAYMODE:
      None.

      EXECUTION:
      None.

      PERFBOOST:
      None.

      ACTIVELOCKSCREEN:
      None.

         The output shows six request types (as opposed to the four described previously). The last
      two—perfboost and active lockscreen—are declared as part of an internal power request type in
      a kernel header, but are otherwise currently unused.

Conclusion
   The I/O system defines the model of I/O processing on Windows and performs functions that are com-
   mon to or required by more than one driver. Its chief responsibilities are to create IRPs representing
   I/O requests and to shepherd the packets through various drivers, returning results to the caller when
   an I/O is complete. The I/O manager locates various drivers and devices by using I/O system objects,
   including driver and device objects. Internally, the Windows I/O system operates asynchronously to
   achieve high performance and provides both synchronous and asynchronous I/O capabilities to user-
   mode applications.

         Device drivers include not only traditional hardware device drivers but also file-system, network,
     and layered filter drivers. All drivers have a common structure and communicate with each other and
     the I/O manager by using common mechanisms. The I/O system interfaces allow drivers to be written
     in a high-level language to lessen development time and to enhance their portability. Because drivers
     present a common structure to the operating system, they can be layered one on top of another to
     achieve modularity and reduce duplication between drivers. By using the Universal DDI baseline, driv-
     ers can target multiple devices and form factors with no code changes.

         Finally, the role of the PnP manager is to work with device drivers to dynamically detect hardware
     devices and to build an internal device tree that guides hardware device enumeration and driver instal-
     lation. The power manager works with device drivers to move devices into low-power states when
     applicable to conserve energy and prolong battery life.

        The next chapter touches on one of the most important aspects of today’s computer systems: security.

