CHAPTER 7

Security

   P   reventing unauthorized access to sensitive data is essential in any environment in which multiple
       users have access to the same physical or network resources. An operating system, as well as indi-
   vidual users, must be able to protect files, memory, and configuration settings from unwanted viewing
   and modification. Operating system security includes obvious mechanisms such as accounts, passwords,
   and file protection. It also includes less obvious mechanisms, such as protecting the operating system
   from corruption, preventing less privileged users from performing actions (rebooting the computer,
   for example), and not allowing user programs to adversely affect the programs of other users or the
   operating system.

     In this chapter, we explain how every aspect of the design and implementation of Microsoft
   Windows was influenced in some way by the stringent requirements of providing robust security.

Security ratings
   Having software, including operating systems, rated against well-defined standards helps the gov-
   ernment, corporations, and home users protect proprietary and personal data stored in computer
   systems. The current security rating standard used by the United States and many other countries is
   the Common Criteria (CC). To understand the security capabilities designed into Windows, however,
   it’s useful to know the history of the security ratings system that influenced the design of Windows:
   the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC).

   Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
   The National Computer Security Center (NCSC) was established in 1981 as part of the U.S. Department
   of Defense’s (DoD) National Security Agency (NSA). One goal of the NCSC was to create a range of
   security ratings, listed in Table 7-1, to indicate the degree of protection commercial operating systems,
   network components, and trusted applications offer. These security ratings, which can be found at
   http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/history/dod85.pdf, were defined in 1983 and are commonly referred
   to as the Orange Book.

		
     TABLE 7-1    TCSEC rating levels
     Rating             Description

     A1                 Verified design

     B3                 Security domains

     B2                 Structured protection

     B1                 Labeled security protection

     C2                 Controlled access protection

     C1                 Discretionary access protection (obsolete)

     D                  Minimal protection

        The TCSEC standard consists of levels-of-trust ratings, where higher levels build on lower levels
     by adding more rigorous protection and validation requirements. No operating system meets the A1
     (verified design) rating. Although a few operating systems have earned one of the B-level ratings, C2 is
     considered sufficient and the highest rating practical for a general-purpose operating system.

        The following were the key requirements for a C2 security rating, and they are still considered the
     core requirements for any secure operating system:

          ■■   A secure logon facility This requires that users be able to be uniquely identified and that they
               must be granted access to the computer only after they have been authenticated in some way.

          ■■   Discretionary access control This allows the owner of a resource (such as a file) to determine
               who can access the resource and what they can do with it. The owner grants rights that permit
               various kinds of access to a user or to a group of users.

          ■■   Security auditing This affords the ability to detect and record security-related events or any
               attempts to create, access, or delete system resources. Logon identifiers record the identities of
               all users, making it easy to trace anyone who performs an unauthorized action.

          ■■   Object reuse protection This prevents users from seeing data that another user has deleted
               or from accessing memory that another user previously used and then released. For example,
               in some operating systems, it’s possible to create a new file of a certain length and then exam-
               ine the contents of the file to see data that happens to have occupied the location on the disk
               where the file is allocated. This data might be sensitive information that was stored in another
               user’s file but had been deleted. Object reuse protection prevents this potential security hole by
               initializing all objects, including files and memory, before they are allocated to a user.

          Windows also meets two requirements of B-level security:

          ■■   Trusted path functionality This prevents Trojan horse programs from being able to in-
               tercept users’ names and passwords as they try to log on. The trusted path functionality in
               Windows comes in the form of its Ctrl+Alt+Delete logon-attention sequence, which cannot be
               intercepted by nonprivileged applications. This sequence of keystrokes, which is also known

        as the secure attention sequence (SAS), always displays a system-controlled Windows security
        screen (if a user is already logged on) or the logon screen so that would-be Trojan horses can
        easily be recognized. (The SAS can also be sent programmatically via the SendSAS API if Group
        Policy and other restrictions allow it.) A Trojan horse presenting a fake logon dialog box will be
        bypassed when the SAS is entered.

   ■■   Trusted facility management This requires support for separate account roles for ad-
        ministrative functions. For example, separate accounts are provided for administration
        (Administrators), user accounts charged with backing up the computer, and standard users.

   Windows meets all these requirements through its security subsystem and related components.

The Common Criteria
In January 1996, the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Canada, and the Netherlands
released the jointly developed Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (CCITSE)
specification. CCITSE, usually referred to as the Common Criteria (CC), is the recognized multinational
standard for product security evaluation. The CC home page is at http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme.

    The CC is more flexible than the TCSEC trust ratings and has a structure closer to the ITSEC standard
than to the TCSEC standard. The CC includes the concept of a Protection Profile (PP), used to collect
security requirements into easily specified and compared sets, and the concept of a Security Target
(ST), which contains a set of security requirements that can be made by reference to a PP. The CC also
defines a range of seven Evaluation Assurance Levels (EALs), which indicate a level of confidence in the
certification. In this way, the CC (like the ITSEC standard before it) removes the link between functional-
ity and assurance level that was present in TCSEC and earlier certification schemes.

  Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, and Windows Vista Enterprise all achieved
Common Criteria certification under the Controlled Access Protection Profile (CAPP). This is roughly
equivalent to a TCSEC C2 rating. All received a rating of EAL 4+, the “plus” denoting “flaw remediation.”
EAL 4 is the highest level recognized across national boundaries.

    In March 2011, Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 were evaluated as meeting the
requirements of the US Government Protection Profile for General-Purpose Operating Systems
in a Networked Environment, version 1.0 (GPOSPP) (http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/
ppfiles/pp_gpospp_v1.0.pdf ). The certification includes the Hyper-V hypervisor. Again, Windows
achieved Evaluation Assurance Level 4 with flaw remediation (EAL 4+). The validation report can be
found at http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/epfiles/st_vid10390-vr.pdf, and the description
of the security target, giving details of the requirements satisfied, can be found at http://www.
commoncriteriaportal.org/files/epfiles/st_vid10390-st.pdf. Similar certifications were achieved by
Windows 10 and Windows Server 2012 R2 in June 2016. The report can be found at
http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/epfiles/cr_windows10.pdf.

Security system components
     These are the core components and databases that implement Windows security. (All files mentioned
     are in the %SystemRoot%\System32 directory unless otherwise specified.)

        ■■   Security reference monitor (SRM) This component in the Windows executive (Ntoskrnl.exe)
             is responsible for defining the access token data structure to represent a security context, per-
             forming security access checks on objects, manipulating privileges (user rights), and generating
             any resulting security audit messages.

        ■■   Local Security Authority Subsystem Service (Lsass) This user-mode process runs the
             image Lsass.exe that is responsible for the local system security policy (such as which users are
             allowed to log on to the machine, password policies, privileges granted to users and groups,
             and the system security auditing settings), user authentication, and sending security audit mes-
             sages to the event log. The Local Security Authority service (Lsasrv.dll), a library that Lsass loads,
             implements most of this functionality.

        ■■   LSAIso.exe This is used by Lsass (if so configured on supported Windows 10 and Server 2016
             systems), also known as Credential Guard (see the upcoming “Credential Guard” section for more
             on Credential Guard), to store users’ token hashes instead of keeping them in Lsass’s memory.
             Because Lsaiso.exe is a Trustlet (Isolated User Mode process) running in VTL 1, no normal pro-
             cess—not even the normal kernel—can access the address space of this process. Lsass itself stores
             an encrypted blob of the password hash needed when it communicates with Lsaiso (via ALPC).

        ■■   Lsass policy database This database contains the local system security policy settings. It is
             stored in the registry in an ACL-protected area under HKLM\SECURITY. It includes such infor-
             mation as what domains are entrusted to authenticate logon attempts, who has permission to
             access the system and how (interactive, network, and service logons), who is assigned which
             privileges, and what kind of security auditing is to be performed. The Lsass policy database also
             stores “secrets” that include logon information used for cached domain logons and Windows
             service user-account logons. (See Chapter 9, “Management mechanisms,” in Windows Internals
             Part 2 for more information on Windows services.)

        ■■   Security Accounts Manager (SAM) This service is responsible for managing the database
             that contains the user names and groups defined on the local machine. The SAM service, which
             is implemented in Samsrv.dll, is loaded into the Lsass process.

        ■■   SAM database This database contains the defined local users and groups along with their
             passwords and other attributes. On domain controllers, the SAM does not store the domain-
             defined users, but stores the system’s administrator recovery account definition and password.
             This database is stored in the registry under HKLM\SAM.

■■   Active Directory This is a directory service that contains a database that stores informa-
     tion about objects in a domain. A domain is a collection of computers and their associated
     security groups that are managed as a single entity. Active Directory stores information about
     the objects in the domain, including users, groups, and computers. Password information and
     privileges for domain users and groups are stored in Active Directory, which is replicated across
     the computers that are designated as domain controllers of the domain. The Active Directory
     server, implemented as Ntdsa.dll, runs in the Lsass process. For more information on Active
     Directory, see Chapter 10, “Networking,” in Part 2.

■■   Authentication packages These include dynamic link libraries (DLLs) that run in the context
     of both Lsass process and client processes and implement Windows authentication policy. An au-
     thentication DLL is responsible for authenticating a user by checking whether a given user name
     and password match (or whatever mechanism was used to provide credentials), and if so, return-
     ing to Lsass information detailing the user’s security identity, which Lsass uses to generate a token.

■■   Interactive logon manager (Winlogon) This is a user-mode process running Winlogon.
     exe that is responsible for responding to the SAS and for managing interactive logon sessions.
     Winlogon creates a user’s first process when the user logs on, for example.

■■   Logon user interface (LogonUI) This is a user-mode process running the image LogonUI.
     exe that presents users with the user interface they can use to authenticate themselves on the
     system. LogonUI uses credential providers to query user credentials through various methods.

■■   Credential providers (CPs) These are in-process COM objects that run in the LogonUI pro-
     cess (started on demand by Winlogon when the SAS is performed) and used to obtain a user’s
     name and password, smartcard PIN, biometric data (such as a fingerprint), or other identifica-
     tion mechanism. The standard CPs are authui.dll, SmartcardCredentialProvider.dll, BioCredProv.
     Dll, and FaceCredentialProvider.dll, a face-detection provider added in Windows 10.

■■   Network logon service (Netlogon) This is a Windows service (Netlogon.dll, hosted in a
     standard SvcHost) that sets up the secure channel to a domain controller, over which security
     requests—such as an interactive logon (if the domain controller is running Windows NT 4) or
     LAN Manager and NT LAN Manager (v1 and v2) authentication validation—are sent. Netlogon
     is also used for Active Directory logons.

■■   Kernel Security Device Driver (KSecDD) This is a kernel-mode library (%SystemRoot%\
     System32\Drivers\Ksecdd.sys) of functions that implement the advanced local procedure call
     (ALPC) interfaces that other kernel mode security components, including the Encrypting File
     System (EFS), use to communicate with Lsass in user mode.

■■   AppLocker This mechanism allows administrators to specify which executable files, DLLs, and
     scripts can be used by specified users and groups. AppLocker consists of a driver (%SystemRoot%\
     System32\Drivers\AppId.sys) and a service (AppIdSvc.dll) running in a standard SvcHost process.

Figure 7-1 shows the relationships among some of these components and the databases they manage.

      FIGURE 7-1   Windows security components.

         EXPERIMENT: Looking inside HKLM\SAM and HKLM\Security
         The security descriptors associated with the SAM and Security keys in the registry prevent ac-
         cess by any account other than the local system account. One way to gain access to these keys
         for exploration is to reset their security, but that can weaken the system’s security. Another way
         is to execute Regedit.exe while running as the local system account. This can be done using the
         PsExec tool from Sysinternals with the –s option, as shown here:

         C:\>psexec –s –i –d c:\windows\regedit.exe

            The -i switch instructs PsExec to run the target executable under the interactive window
         station. Without it, the process would run in a non-interactive window station, on an invisible
         desktop. The -d switch just indicates PsExec should not wait until the target process exits.

       The SRM, which runs in kernel mode, and Lsass, which runs in user mode, communicate using the
   ALPC facility described in Chapter 8, “System mechanisms,” in Part 2. During system initialization, the
   SRM creates a port, named SeRmCommandPort, to which Lsass connects. When the Lsass process starts,
   it creates an ALPC port named SeLsaCommandPort. The SRM connects to this port, resulting in the cre-
   ation of private communication ports. The SRM creates a shared memory section for messages longer
   than 256 bytes, passing a handle in the connect call. Once the SRM and Lsass connect to each other
   during system initialization, they no longer listen on their respective connect ports. Therefore, a later
   user process has no way to connect successfully to either of these ports for malicious purposes. The
   connect request will never complete.

Virtualization-based security
   It is common to refer to the kernel as trusted, due to its inherently higher level of privilege and isolation
   from user-mode applications. Yet, countless third-party drivers are written each month—Microsoft has
   stated that a million unique driver hashes are seen through telemetry, monthly! Each of these can con-
   tain any number of vulnerabilities, not to mention purposefully malicious kernel-mode code. In such a
   reality, the idea that the kernel is a small, protected component, and that user-mode applications are
   “safe” from attack, is clearly an unrealized ideal. This state of affairs leads to an inability to fully trust
   the kernel, and leaves key user-mode applications, which may contain highly private user data, open to
   compromise from other malicious user-mode applications (which exploit buggy kernel-mode compo-
   nents) or malicious kernel-mode programs.

      As discussed in Chapter 2, “System architecture,” Windows 10 and Server 2016 include a virtualization-
   based security (VBS) architecture that enables an additional orthogonal level of trust: the virtual trust
   level (VTL). In this section, you will see how Credential Guard and Device Guard leverage VTLs to protect
   user data and provide an additional hardware-trust-based layer of security for digital code-signing pur-
   poses. At the end of this chapter, you will also see how Kernel Patch Protection (KPP) is provided through
   the PatchGuard component and enhanced by the VBS-powered HyperGuard technology.

      As a reminder, normal user-mode and kernel code runs in VTL 0 and is unaware of the existence of
   VTL 1. This means anything placed at VTL 1 is hidden and inaccessible to VTL 0 code. If malware is able
   to penetrate the normal kernel, it still cannot gain access to anything stored in VTL 1, including even
   user-mode code running in VTL 1 (which is called Isolated User Mode). Figure 7-2 shows the main VBS
   components we’ll be looking at in this section:

      ■■   Hypervisor-Based Code Integrity (HVCI) and Kernel-Mode Code Integrity (KMCI), which power
           Device Guard

      ■■   LSA (Lsass.exe) and isolated LSA (LsaIso.exe), which power Credential Guard

      Additionally, recall that the implementation of Trustlets, which run in IUM, was shown in Chapter 3,
   “Process and jobs.”

      FIGURE 7-2   VBS components.

         Of course, like any trusted component, VTL 1 also makes certain assumptions that the components it
      depends on can also be trusted. As such, VTL 1 requires Secure Boot (and thus, firmware) to function cor-
      rectly, the hypervisor to not have been compromised, and hardware elements such as the IOMMU and Intel
      Management Engine to be free of VTL 0–accessible vulnerabilities. For more information on the hardware
      chain of trust and boot-related security technologies, see Chapter 11, “Startup and shutdown," in Part 2.

      Credential Guard
      To understand the security boundary and protection that Credential Guard provides, it is important to
      understand the various components that provide access to a user’s resources and data or login capa-
      bilities on a networked environment:

         ■■   Password This is the primary credential used by interactive users to identify themselves on
              the machine. This credential is used for authentication and to derive the other components of
              the credential model. It is the most highly sought after piece of a user’s identity.

         ■■   NT one-way function (NT OWF) This is a hash used by legacy components to identify the
              user (after a successful password logon) using the NT LAN Manager (NTLM) protocol. While
              modern networked systems no longer use NTLM to authenticate the user, many local compo-
              nents still do, as do some types of legacy network components (such as NTLM-based authen-
              ticating proxies). Because NTOWF is an MD4 hash, its algorithmic complexity in the face of
              today’s hardware, and its lack of anti-repeatability protection, means that intercepting the hash
              leads to instant compromise and even possible recovery of the password.

         ■■   Ticket-granting ticket (TGT) This is the equivalent of the NTOWF when a much more
              modern remote authentication mechanism is used: Kerberos. This is the default on Windows
              Active Directory–based domains and is enforced on Server 2016. The TGT and a corresponding
              key are provided to the local machine after a successful logon (just like the NTOWF on NTLM),
              and intercepting both components will result in instant compromise of the user’s credentials,
              although reuse and password recovery will not be possible.

        Without Credential Guard enabled, some or all of these components of a user’s authentication cre-
      dentials are present in the memory of Lsass.

   Note To enable Credential Guard on Windows 10 Enterprise and Server 2016 editions,
   open the Group Policy editor (gpedit.msc), choose Computer Configuration, select
   Administrative Templates, choose System, choose Device Guard, and select Turn on
   Virtualization Based Security. In the top-left part of the dialog box that appears, select
   Enabled. Finally, select one of the Enabled options in the Credential Guard Configuration
   combo box.

Protecting the password
The password, encrypted with a local symmetric key, is stored to provide single sign-on (SSO) capabili-
ties over protocols such as digest authentication (WDigest, used for HTTP-based authentication since
Windows XP) or Terminal Services/RDP. As these protocols use plaintext authentication, the password
must be kept in memory, which is then accessible through code injection, debugger, or other exploit
techniques, and decrypted. Credential Guard cannot change the nature of these inherently unsafe pro-
tocols. Therefore, the only possible solution, which Credential Guard employs, is to disable SSO func-
tionality for such protocols. This causes a loss of compatibility and forces the user to re-authenticate.

   Obviously, a preferable solution is to remove the usage of a password completely, which Windows
Hello, described in the “Windows Hello” section later in this chapter, allows. Authenticating with
biometric credentials such as a user’s face or fingerprint removes the need to ever type a password, se-
curing the interactive credential against hardware key loggers, kernel sniffing/hooking tools, and user
mode–based spoofing applications. If the user never has a password to type, there is no password to
steal. Another similar secure credential is the combination of a smart card and associated PIN. While a
PIN may be stolen as its typed in, the smart card is a physical element whose key cannot be intercepted
without a complex hardware-based attack. This is a type of two-factor authentication (TFA), of which
many other implementations exist.

Protecting the NTOWF/TGT key
Even with protected interactive credentials, a successful login results in a domain controller’s key distribution
center (KDC) returning the TGT and its key, as well as the NTOWF for legacy applications. Later, the user sim-
ply uses the NTOWF for accessing legacy resources and uses the TGT and its key to generate a service ticket.
This can then be used to access remote resources (such as files on a share), as shown in Figure 7-3.

FIGURE 7-3   Accessing remote resources.
         Thus, with either the NTOWF or the TGT and its key (stored in Lsass) in the attacker’s hands, ac-
      cess to resources is possible even without the smart card, PIN, or user’s face or fingerprint. Protecting
      Lsass from access by an attacker is thus one option that can be used, and which is possible using the
      Protected Process Light (PPL) architecture described in Chapter 3.

         Lsass can be configured to run protected by setting the DWORD value RunAsPPL in the HKLM\
      System\CurrentControlSet\Consol\Lsa registry key to 1. (This is not a default option, as legitimate third-
      party authentication providers [DLLs] load and execute in the context of Lsass, which would not be
      possible if Lsass would run protected.) Unfortunately, while this protection does guard the NTOWF and
      TGT key from user-mode attackers, it does not protect against kernel attackers or user-mode attackers
      that leverage vulnerabilities in any of the millions of drivers that are produced monthly. Credential
      Guard solves this problem by using another process, Lsaiso.exe, which runs as a Trustlet in VTL 1. This
      process therefore stores the user’s s secrets in its memory, not in Lsass.

      Secure communication
      As shown in Chapter 2, VTL 1 has a minimal attack surface, as it does not have the full regular “NT”
      kernel, nor does it have any drivers or access to I/O of hardware of any kind. As such, isolated LSA,
      which is a VTL 1 Trustlet, cannot directly communicate with the KDC. This is still the responsibility of
      the Lsass process, which serves as a proxy and protocol implementer, communicating with the KDC to
      authenticate the user and to receive the TGT and the key and NTOWF, as well as communicating with
      the file server by using service ticket. This seemingly results in a problem: the TGT and its key/NTOWF
      transiently pass through Lsass during authentication, and the TGT and its key are somehow available to
      Lsass for the generation of service tickets. This leads to two questions: How does Lsass send and receive
      the secrets from isolated ISA, and how can we prevent an attacker from doing the same?

          To answer the first question, recall that Chapter 3, “Processes and jobs,” described which services are
      available to Trustlets. One was the Advanced Local Procedure Call (ALPC), which the Secure Kernel sup-
      ports by proxying the NtAlpc* calls to the Normal Kernel. Then, the Isolated User Mode environment
      implements support for the RPC runtime library (Rpcrt4.dll) over the ALPC protocol, which allows a VTL
      0 and VTL 1 application to communicate using local RPC just like any other application and service. In
      Figure 7-4, which shows Process Explorer, you can see the LsaIso.exe process, which has a handle to the
      LSA_ISO_RPC_SERVER ALPC port. This is used to communicate with the Lsass.exe process. (See Chapter
      8 in Part 2 for more information on ALPC.)

         To answer the second question, some understanding of cryptographic protocols and challenge/
      response models is required. If you’re already familiar with some of the basic concepts of SSL/TLS tech-
      nology and its use in Internet communications to prevent man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks, you can
      think of the KDC and isolated LSA protocol in a similar way. Although Lsass sits in the middle as a proxy
      would, it only sees encrypted traffic between the KDC and isolated LSA, without the ability to under-
      stand its contents. Because isolated LSA establishes a local “session key,” which only lives in VTL 1, and
      then uses a secure protocol to send this session key encrypted with yet another key, which only the KDC
      has, the KDC can then respond with the TGT and its key after encrypting it with the isolated LSA session
      key. Therefore, Lsass sees an encrypted message to the KDC (which it can’t decrypt) and an encrypted
      message from the KDC (which it can’t decrypt).

FIGURE 7-4   LsaIso.exe and its ALPC port.

   This model can even be used to protect legacy NTLM authentication, which is based on a challenge/
response model. For example, when a user logs in with a plaintext credential, LSA sends it to isolated
LSA, which then encrypts it with its session key and returns the encrypted credential to Lsass. Later,
when an NTLM challenge/response is required, Lsass sends the NTLM challenge and the previously
encrypted credentials to isolated LSA. At this point, only isolated LSA has the encryption key, so it
decrypts the credentials and generates an NTLM response based on the challenge.

   Note, however, that four possible attacks exist in this model:

   ■■   If the machine is already physically compromised, the plaintext password can be intercepted
        either as it is inputted or as it is sent to isolated LSA (if Lsass is already compromised). Using
        Windows Hello can mitigate against this.

   ■■   As mentioned, NTLM does not have anti-replay properties. Therefore, if the NTLM response is
        captured, it can be replayed for the same challenge. Alternatively, if the attacker can compro-
        mise Lsass after logon, it can capture the encrypted credential and force isolated LSA to gener-
        ate new NTLM responses for arbitrary NTLM challenges. This attack, however, only works until
        reboot, because isolated LSA generates a new session key at that point.

   ■■   In the case of Kerberos logon, the NTOWF (which is not encrypted) can be intercepted and then
        reused, just like in a standard pass-the-hash attack. Again, however, this requires an already
        compromised machine (or physical network interception).

   ■■   The user, with physical access, may be able to disable Credential Guard. In this situation, the
        legacy authentication model is used (a so-called “downgrade attack”), and older attack models
        can now be employed.

      UEFI lock
      Because disabling Credential Guard (which is ultimately nothing more than a registry setting) is
      trivial for an attacker, Secure Boot and UEFI can be leveraged to prevent a non-physically present
      administrator (such as malware with admin rights) from disabling Credential Guard. This is done by
      enabling Credential Guard with UEFI Lock. In this mode, an EFI runtime variable is written to firmware
      memory and a reboot is required. At the reboot, the Windows boot loader, which still operates in EFI
      Boot Services mode, will write an EFI boot variable (which has the property of not being readable or
      writeable once EFI Boot Services mode is exited) to record the fact that Credential Guard is enabled.
      Additionally, a Boot Configuration Database (BCD) option will be recorded.

         When the kernel boots, it will automatically rewrite the required Credential Guard registry key in the
      presence of the BCD option and/or UEFI runtime variable. If the BCD option is deleted by an attacker,
      BitLocker (if enabled) and TPM-based remote attestation (if enabled) will detect the change and require
      physical input of the admin’s recovery key before booting, which will then restore the BCD option based
      on the UEFI runtime variable. If the UEFI runtime variable is deleted, the Windows boot loader will restore it
      based on the UEFI boot variable. As such, without special code to delete the UEFI boot variable—which can
      only be done in EFI Boot Services mode—there is no way to disable Credential Guard in UEFI lock mode.

         The only such code that exists is in a special Microsoft binary called SecComp.efi. This must be
      downloaded by the administrator, who must then either boot the computer from an alternate EFI-
      based device and manually execute it (which will require the BitLocker recovery key as well as physical
      access) or modify the BCD (which will require the BitLocker recovery key). At the reboot, SecComp.efi
      will require user confirmation while in UEFI mode (which can only be done by a physical user).

      Authentication policies and armored Kerberos
      Using a security model of “secure, unless already compromised before logon or by a physical adminis-
      trator” is definitely an improvement over the traditional non-Credential Guard–based security model.
      However, some enterprises and organizations may want an even stronger security guarantee: that
      even a compromised machine cannot be used to fake or replay a user’s credentials, and that if a user’s
      credentials have been compromised, they cannot be used outside of specific systems. By leveraging a
      Server 2016 feature called Authentication Policies, and armored Kerberos, Credential Guard can oper-
      ate in this heightened security mode.

          In this mode, the VTL 1 Secure Kernel will collect, using the TPM (a file on disk can also be used, but
      makes the security moot), a special machine ID key. This key is then used to generate a machine TGT
      key during the initial domain join operation as the machine is provisioned (obviously, it is important to
      ensure the machine is in a trusted state during provisioning), and this TGT key is sent to the KDC. Once
      configured, when the user logs in with his or her credential, it is combined with the machine’s creden-
      tial (which only isolated LSA has access to), which forms a proof-of-origin key. The KDC will then reply
      with the NTOWF and user TGT and its key after encrypting it with the proof-of-origin key. In this mode,
      two security guarantees are provided:

         ■■   The user is authenticating from a known machine If the user, or an attacker, has the
              original credentials, and attempts to use them on a different machine, its TPM-based machine
              credential will be different.

   ■■   The NTLM response/user ticket is coming from isolated LSA and has not been manually
        generated from Lsass This guarantees that Credential Guard is enabled on the machine,
        even if the physical user can disable it in some way.

    Unfortunately, once again, if the machine is compromised in such a way that the proof-of-origin-
encrypted KDC response that contains the user TGT and its key is intercepted, it can be stored and used
to request session key–encrypted service tickets from isolated LSA. This can then be sent to a file server
(for example) to access it until a reboot is issued to wipe the session key. As such, on a system with
Credential Guard, it is recommended to reboot each time a user logs off. Otherwise, an attacker may
be able to issue valid tickets even after the user is no longer present.

Future improvements
As discussed in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3, the Secure Kernel in VTL 1 is currently undergoing improve-
ments to add support for specialized classes of PCI and USB hardware, which can exclusively be com-
municated with only through the hypervisor and VTL 1 code using the Secure Device Framework (SDF).
Combined with BioIso.exe and FsIso.exe, which are new Trustlets to securely obtain biometric data and
video frames (from a webcam), a VTL 0 kernel mode–based component cannot intercept the con-
tents of a Windows Hello authentication attempt (which we’ve classified as safe compared to a user’s
plaintext password, but still technically capturable through custom driver-based interception). Once
released, Windows Hello credentials will be guaranteed at the hardware level to not ever be available
to VTL 0. In this mode, Lsass will not need to be involved in a Windows Hello authentication. Isolated
LSA will obtain the credentials directly from the isolated biometrics or isolated frame service.

   Note The Secure Driver Framework (SDF) is the WDF-equivalent for VTL 1 drivers. This
   framework is not currently public, but is shared with Microsoft partners only for creating
   VTL 1 drivers.

Device Guard
While Credential Guard is concerned with safeguarding the user’s credentials, Device Guard has a
completely different goal: protecting the user’s machine itself from different kinds of software- and
hardware-based attacks. Device Guard leverages the Windows Code Integrity services, such as Kernel-
Mode Code Signing (KMCS) and User-Mode Code Integrity (UMCI), and strengthens them through
HyperVisor Code Integrity (HVCI). (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more information on Code Integrity.)

    Additionally, Device Guard is fully configurable, thanks to Custom Code Integrity (CCI) and signing
policies that are protected by Secure Boot and defined by the enterprise administrator. These policies,
which are explained in Chapter 8, allow the enforcement of inclusion/exclusion lists that are based on
cryptographically sound information (such as certificate signers or SHA-2 hashes) instead of file paths
or file names as with AppLocker’s policies. (See the section “AppLocker” later in this chapter for more
on AppLocker.)

          Therefore, while we won’t describe here the different ways in which Code Integrity policies can be
      defined and customized, we will show how Device Guard enforces whatever these policies may be set
      to, through the following guarantees:

         ■■   If kernel-mode code signing is enforced, only signed code can load, regardless of the
              kernel itself being compromised This is because the kernel-loading process will notify the
              Secure Kernel in VTL 1 whenever it loads a driver, and only successfully load it once HVCI has
              validated its signature.

         ■■   If kernel-mode code signing is enforced, signed code cannot be modified once loaded,
              even by the kernel itself This is because the executable code pages will be marked as read-
              only through the hypervisor’s Second Level Address Translation (SLAT) mechanism, which is
              further explained in Chapter 8 in Part 2.

         ■■   If kernel-mode code signing is enforced, dynamically allocated code is prohibited (a
              tautology of the first two bullets) This is because the kernel does not have the ability to
              allocate executable entries in the SLAT page table entries, even though the kernel’s page tables
              themselves may mark such code as executable.

         ■■   If kernel-mode code signing is enforced, UEFI runtime code cannot be modified, even by
              other UEFI runtime code or by the kernel itself Additionally, Secure Boot should already
              have validated that this code was signed at the time it was loaded. (Device Guard relies on this
              assumption.) Furthermore, UEFI runtime data cannot be made executable. This is done by read-
              ing all the UEFI runtime code and data, enforcing the correct permissions, and duplicating them
              in the SLAT page table entries, which are protected in VTL 1.

         ■■   If kernel-mode code signing is enforced, only kernel-mode (ring 0) signed code can
              execute This may once again sound like a tautology of the first three bullets, but consider
              signed ring 3 code. Such code is valid from UMCI’s perspective and has been authorized as
              executable code in the SLAT page table entries. The Secure Kernel relies on the Mode-Based
              Execution Control (MBEC) feature, if present in hardware, which enhances the SLAT with a user/
              kernel executable bit, or the hypervisor’s software emulation of this feature, called Restricted
              User Mode (RUM).

         ■■   If user-mode code signing is enforced, only signed user-mode images can be loaded
              This means all executable processes must be signed (.exe) files as well as the libraries they load (.dll).

         ■■   If user-mode code signing is enforced, the kernel does not allow user-mode applications
              to make existing executable code pages writable Obviously, it is impossible for user-mode
              code to allocate executable memory or to modify existing memory without asking the kernel
              permission. As such, the kernel can apply its usual enforcement rules. But even in the case of a
              compromised kernel, the SLAT ensures that no user-mode pages will be executable without the
              Secure Kernel’s knowledge and approval, and that such executable pages can never be writeable.

         ■■   If user-mode code signing is enforced, and hard code guarantees are requested by the
              signing policy, dynamically allocated code is prohibited This is an important distinction
              from the kernel scenarios. By default, signed user-mode code is allowed to allocate additional

           executable memory to support JIT scenarios unless a special enhanced key usage (EKU) is
           present in the application’s certificate, which serves as a dynamic code generation entitlement.
           At present, NGEN.EXE (.NET Native Image Generation) has this EKU, which allows IL-only .NET
           executables to function even in this mode.

      ■■   If user-mode PowerShell constrained language mode is enforced, all PowerShell scripts
           that use dynamic types, reflection, or other language features that allow the execution
           or arbitrary code and/or marshalling to Windows/.NET API functions must also be signed
           This prevents possibly malicious PowerShell scripts from escaping constrained mode.

      SLAT page table entries are protected in VTL 1 and contain the “ground truth” for what permissions
   a given page of memory can have. By withholding the executable bit as needed, and/or withholding
   the writable bit from existing executable pages (a security model known as W^X, pronounced double-
   you xor ex), Device Guard moves all code-signing enforcement into VTL 1 (in a library called SKCI.DLL,
   or Secure Kernel Code Integrity).

      Additionally, even if not configured explicitly on the machine, Device Guard operates in a third
   mode if Credential Guard is enabled by enforcing that all Trustlets have a specific Microsoft signature
   with a certificate that includes the Isolated User Mode EKU. Otherwise, an attacker with ring 0 privi-
   leges could attack the regular KMCS mechanism and load a malicious Trustlet to attack the isolated LSA
   component. Furthermore, all user-mode code-signing enforcements are active for the Trustlet, which
   executes in hard code guarantees mode.

       Finally, as a performance optimization, it is important to understand that the HVCI mechanism will
   not reauthenticate every single page when the system resumes from hibernation (S4 sleep state). In
   some cases, the certificate data may not even be available. Even if this were the case, the SLAT data
   must be reconstructed, which means that the SLAT page table entries are stored in the hibernation
   file itself. As such, the hypervisor needs to trust the hibernation file has not been modified in any
   way. This is done by encrypting the hibernation file with a local machine key that is stored in the TPM.
   Unfortunately, without a TPM present, this key must be stored in a UEFI runtime variable, which allows
   a local attacker to decrypt the hibernation file, modify it, and re-encrypt it.

Protecting objects
   Object protection and access logging are the essence of discretionary access control and auditing.
   The objects that can be protected on Windows include files, devices, mailslots, pipes (named and
   anonymous), jobs, processes, threads, events, keyed events, event pairs, mutexes, semaphores, shared
   memory sections, I/O completion ports, LPC ports, waitable timers, access tokens, volumes, window
   stations, desktops, network shares, services, registry keys, printers, Active Directory objects, and so
   on—theoretically, anything managed by the executive object manager. In practice, objects that are not
   exposed to user mode (such as driver objects) are usually not protected. Kernel-mode code is trusted
   and usually uses interfaces to the object manager that do not perform access checking. Because system
   resources that are exported to user mode (and hence require security validation) are implemented as
   objects in kernel mode, the Windows object manager plays a key role in enforcing object security.

         You can view object protection with the WinObj Sysinternals tool (for named objects), shown
     in Figure 7-5. Figure 7-6 shows the Security property page of a section object in the user’s session.
     Although files are the resources most commonly associated with object protection, Windows uses the
     same security model and mechanism for executive objects as it does for files in the file system. As far as
     access controls are concerned, executive objects differ from files only in the access methods supported
     by each type of object.

     FIGURE 7-5   WinObj with a section object selected.

     FIGURE 7-6   An executive object and its security descriptor, viewed by WinObj.

   What is shown in Figure 7-6 is actually the object’s discretionary access control list (DACL). We will
describe DACLs in detail in the section “Security descriptors and access control.”

    You can use Process Explorer to view the security properties of objects by double-clicking a handle
in the lower pane view (when configured to show handles). This has the added benefit of displaying
objects that are unnamed. The Property page shown is the same in both tools, as the page itself is
provided by Windows.

    To control who can manipulate an object, the security system must first be sure of each user’s
identity. This need to guarantee the user’s identity is the reason that Windows requires authenticated
logon before accessing any system resources. When a process requests a handle to an object, the
object manager and the security system use the caller’s security identification and the object’s security
descriptor to determine whether the caller should be assigned a handle that grants the process access
to the object it desires.

    As discussed later in this chapter, a thread can assume a different security context than that of its
process. This mechanism is called impersonation. When a thread is impersonating, security validation
mechanisms use the thread’s security context instead of that of the thread’s process. When a thread
isn’t impersonating, security validation falls back on using the security context of the thread’s owning
process. It’s important to keep in mind that all the threads in a process share the same handle table, so
when a thread opens an object—even if it’s impersonating—all the threads of the process have access
to the object.

    Sometimes, validating the identity of a user isn’t enough for the system to grant access to a resource
that should be accessible by the account. Logically, one can think of a clear distinction between a ser-
vice running under the Alice account and an unknown application that Alice downloaded while brows-
ing the Internet. Windows achieves this kind of intra-user isolation with the Windows integrity mecha-
nism, which implements integrity levels. The Windows integrity mechanism is used by User Account
Control (UAC) elevations, User Interface Privilege Isolation (UIPI) and AppContainers, all described later
in this chapter.

Access checks
The Windows security model requires that a thread specify up front, at the time that it opens an object,
what types of actions it wants to perform on the object. The object manager calls the SRM to perform
access checks based on a thread’s desired access. If the access is granted, a handle is assigned to the
thread’s process with which the thread (or other threads in the process) can perform further operations
on the object.

    One event that causes the object manager to perform security access validation is when a thread
opens an existing object using a name. When an object is opened by name, the object manager per-
forms a lookup of the specified object in the object manager namespace. If the object isn’t located in a
secondary namespace, such as the configuration manager’s registry namespace or a file system driver’s
file system namespace, the object manager calls the internal function ObpCreateHandle once it locates
the object. As its name implies, ObpCreateHandle creates an entry in the process handle table that be-
comes associated with the object. ObpCreateHandle first calls ObpGrantAccess to see if the thread has

     permission to access the object. If so, ObpCreateHandle calls the executive function ExCreateHandle
     to create the entry in the process handle table. ObpGrantAccess calls ObCheckObjectAccess to initiate
     the security access check.

        ObpGrantAccess passes to ObCheckObjectAccess the security credentials of the thread opening
     the object, the types of access to the object that the thread is requesting (read, write, delete, and so
     forth, including object-specific operations), and a pointer to the object. ObCheckObjectAccess first
     locks the object’s security descriptor and the security context of the thread. The object security lock
     prevents another thread in the system from changing the object’s security while the access check is in
     progress. The lock on the thread’s security context prevents another thread (from that process or a dif-
     ferent process) from altering the security identity of the thread while security validation is in progress.
     ObCheckObjectAccess then calls the object’s security method to obtain the security settings of the
     object. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for a description of object methods.) The call to the security method
     might invoke a function in a different executive component. However, many executive objects rely on
     the system’s default security management support.

         When an executive component defining an object doesn’t want to override the SRM’s default
     security policy, it marks the object type as having default security. Whenever the SRM calls an object’s
     security method, it first checks to see whether the object has default security. An object with default se-
     curity stores its security information in its header, and its security method is SeDefaultObjectMethod.
     An object that doesn’t rely on default security must manage its own security information and supply
     a specific security method. Objects that rely on default security include mutexes, events, and sema-
     phores. A file object is an example of an object that overrides default security. The I/O manager, which
     defines the file object type, has the file system driver on which a file resides manage (or choose not
     to implement) the security for its files. Thus, when the system queries the security on a file object that
     represents a file on an NTFS volume, the I/O manager file object security method retrieves the file’s
     security using the NTFS file system driver. Note, however, that ObCheckObjectAccess isn’t executed
     when files are opened because they reside in secondary namespaces. The system invokes a file object’s
     security method only when a thread explicitly queries or sets the security on a file (with the Windows
     SetFileSecurity or GetFileSecurity functions, for example).

        After obtaining an object’s security information, ObCheckObjectAccess invokes the SRM function
     SeAccessCheck. SeAccessCheck is one of the functions at the heart of the Windows security model.
     Among the input parameters SeAccessCheck accepts are the object’s security information, the security
     identity of the thread as captured by ObCheckObjectAccess, and the access that the thread is request-
     ing. SeAccessCheck returns true or false, depending on whether the thread is granted the access it
     requested to the object.

         Here is an example: Suppose a thread wants to know when a specific process exits (or terminates in
     some way). It needs to get a handle to the target process by calling the OpenProcess API, passing in
     two important arguments: the unique process ID (let’s assume it’s known or has been obtained in some
     way) and an access mask indicating the operations that the thread wants to perform using the returned
     handle. Lazy developers may just pass PROCESS_ALL_ACCESS for the access mask, specifying they want
     all possible access rights for the process. One of the following two results would occur:

   ■■   If the calling thread can be granted all the permissions, it would get back a valid handle and
        then could call WaitForSingleObject to wait for the process to exit. However, another thread
        in the process, perhaps with fewer privileges, can use the same handle to do other operations
        with the process, such as terminate it prematurely with TerminateProcess, because the handle
        allows all possible operations on the process.

   ■■   The call can fail if the calling thread does not have sufficient privileges to be granted all possible
        access and the result is an invalid handle, meaning no access to the process. This is unfortunate,
        because the thread just needed to ask for the SYNCHRONIZE access mask. That has a much bet-
        ter chance of succeeding than asking for PROCESS_ALL_ACCESS.

   The simple conclusion here is that a thread should request the exact access it requires—no more,
no less.

    Another event that causes the object manager to execute access validation is when a process refer-
ences an object using an existing handle. Such references often occur indirectly, as when a process calls
on a Windows API to manipulate an object and passes an object handle. For example, a thread opening a
file can request read permission to the file. If the thread has permission to access the object in this way, as
dictated by its security context and the security settings of the file, the object manager creates a handle—
representing the file—in the handle table of the thread’s process. The types of accesses the threads in the
process are granted through the handle are stored with the handle by the object manager.

    Subsequently, the thread could attempt to write to the file using the WriteFile Windows function,
passing the file’s handle as a parameter. The system service NtWriteFile, which WriteFile calls via
Ntdll.dll, uses the object manager function ObReferenceObjectByHandle (documented in the WDK)
to obtain a pointer to the file object from the handle. ObReferenceObjectByHandle accepts the access
that the caller wants from the object as a parameter. After finding the handle entry in the process han-
dle table, ObReferenceObjectByHandle compares the access being requested with the access granted
at the time the file was opened. In this example, ObReferenceObjectByHandle will indicate that the
write operation should fail because the caller didn’t obtain write access when the file was opened.

   The Windows security functions also enable Windows applications to define their own private
objects and to call on the services of the SRM (through the AuthZ user-mode APIs, described later) to
enforce the Windows security model on those objects. Many kernel-mode functions that the object
manager and other executive components use to protect their own objects are exported as Windows
user-mode APIs. The user-mode equivalent of SeAccessCheck is the AuthZ API AccessCheck.
Windows applications can therefore leverage the flexibility of the security model and transparently
integrate with the authentication and administrative interfaces that are present in Windows.

    The essence of the SRM’s security model is an equation that takes three inputs: the security iden-
tity of a thread, the access that the thread wants to an object, and the security settings of the object.
The output is either yes or no and indicates whether the security model grants the thread the access
it desires. The following sections describe the inputs in more detail and then document the model’s
access-validation algorithm.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing handle access masks
       Process Explorer can show the access mask associated with open handles. Follow these steps:

           1.   Open Process Explorer.

           2.   Open the View menu, choose Lower Pane View, and select Handles to configure the
                lower pane to show handles.

           3.   Right-click the column headers of the lower pane and choose Select Columns to open
                the dialog box shown here:

           4.   Select the Access Mask and Decoded Access Mask check boxes (the latter is available
                in version 16.10 and later) and click OK.

           5.   Select Explorer.exe from the process list and look at the lower pane handles. Each
                handle has an access mask, indicating the access granted using this handle. To help
                with interpreting the bits of the access mask, the decoded access mask column shows
                a textual representation of the access masks for many types of objects:

          Notice there are generic access rights (for example, READ_CONTROL and SYNCHRONIZE) and
       specific ones (for example, KEY_READ and MODIFY_STATE). Most of the specific ones are short-
       ened versions of the actual defines in the windows headers (for example, MODIFY_STATE instead
       of EVENT_MODIFY_STATE, TERMINATE instead of PROCESS_TERMINATE).

Security identifiers
Instead of using names (which might or might not be unique) to identify entities that perform actions
in a system, Windows uses security identifiers (SIDs). Users have SIDs, as do local and domain groups,
local computers, domains, domain members, and services. A SID is a variable-length numeric value that
consists of a SID structure revision number, a 48-bit identifier authority value, and a variable number
of 32-bit subauthority or relative identifier (RID) values. The authority value identifies the agent that
issued the SID, and this agent is typically a Windows local system or a domain. Subauthority values
identify trustees relative to the issuing authority, and RIDs are simply a way for Windows to create
unique SIDs based on a common base SID. Because SIDs are long and Windows takes care to generate
truly random values within each SID, it is virtually impossible for Windows to issue the same SID twice
on machines or domains anywhere in the world.

   When displayed textually, each SID carries an S prefix, and its various components are separated
with hyphens like so:

   S-1-5-21-1463437245-1224812800-863842198-1128

    In this SID, the revision number is 1, the identifier authority value is 5 (the Windows security author-
ity), and four subauthority values plus one RID (1128) make up the remainder of the SID. This SID is a
domain SID, but a local computer on the domain would have a SID with the same revision number,
identifier authority value, and number of subauthority values.

    When you install Windows, the Windows Setup program issues the computer a machine SID.
Windows assigns SIDs to local accounts on the computer. Each local-account SID is based on the source
computer’s SID and has a RID at the end. RIDs for user accounts and groups start at 1000 and increase
in increments of 1 for each new user or group. Similarly, Domain Controller Promote (Dcpromo.exe),
the utility used to create a new Windows domain, reuses the computer SID of the computer being pro-
moted to domain controller as the domain SID and re-creates a new SID for the computer if it is ever
demoted. Windows issues to new domain accounts SIDs that are based on the domain SID and have
an appended RID (again starting at 1000 and increasing in increments of 1 for each new user or group).
A RID of 1028 indicates that the SID is the twenty-ninth SID the domain issued.

   Windows issues SIDs that consist of a computer or domain SID with a predefined RID to many pre-
defined accounts and groups. For example, the RID for the Administrator account is 500, and the RID
for the guest account is 501. A computer’s local Administrator account, for example, has the computer
SID as its base with the RID of 500 appended to it:

   S-1-5-21-13124455-12541255-61235125-500

   Windows also defines a number of built-in local and domain SIDs to represent well-known groups.
For example, a SID that identifies any and all accounts (except anonymous users) is the Everyone SID:
S-1-1-0. Another example of a group that a SID can represent is the Network group, which is the group
that represents users who have logged on to a machine from the network. The Network group SID is
S-1-5-2. Table 7-2, reproduced here from the Windows SDK documentation, shows some basic well-
known SIDs, their numeric values, and their use. Unlike users’ SIDs, these SIDs are predefined con-
stants, and have the same values on every Windows system and domain in the world. Thus, a file that

     is accessible by members of the Everyone group on the system where it was created is also accessible
     to Everyone on any other system or domain to which the hard drive where it resides happens to be
     moved. Users on those systems must, of course, authenticate to an account on those systems before
     becoming members of the Everyone group.

     TABLE 7-2   A few well-known SIDs
     SID             Name                      Use

     S-1-0-0         Nobody                    Used when the SID is unknown

     S-1-1-0         Everyone                  A group that includes all users except anonymous users

     S-1-2-0         Local                     Users who log on to terminals locally (physically) connected to the system

     S-1-3-0         Creator Owner ID          A security identifier to be replaced by the security identifier of the user
                                               who created a new object (used in inheritable ACEs)

     S-1-3-1         Creator Group ID          Identifies a security identifier to be replaced by the Primary group SID of
                                               the user who created a new object (used in inheritable ACEs)

     S-1-5-18        Local System account      Used by services

     S-1-5-19        Local Service account     Used by services

     S-1-5-20        Network Service account   Used by services

        Note See Microsoft Knowledge Base article 243330 for a list of defined SIDs at
        http://support.microsoft.com/kb/243330.

        Finally, Winlogon creates a unique logon SID for each interactive logon session. A typical use of a
     logon SID is in an access control entry (ACE) that allows access for the duration of a client’s logon ses-
     sion. For example, a Windows service can use the LogonUser function to start a new logon session. The
     LogonUser function returns an access token from which the service can extract the logon SID. The ser-
     vice can then use the SID in an ACE (described in the section “Security descriptors and access control”
     later in this chapter) that allows the client’s logon session to access the interactive window station and
     desktop. The SID for a logon session is S-1-5-5-X-Y, where the X and Y are randomly generated.

        EXPERIMENT: Using PsGetSid and Process Explorer to view SIDs
        You can easily see the SID representation for any account you’re using by running the PsGetSid
        utility from Sysinternals. PsGetSid’s options allow you to translate machine and user account
        names to their corresponding SIDs and vice versa.

           If you run PsGetSid with no options, it prints the SID assigned to the local computer. Because
        the Administrator account always has a RID of 500, you can determine the name assigned to the
        account (in cases where a system administrator has renamed the account for security reasons)
        simply by passing the machine SID appended with -500 as PsGetSid’s command-line argument.

   To obtain the SID of a domain account, enter the user name with the domain as a prefix:
c:\>psgetsid redmond\johndoe

   You can determine the SID of a domain by specifying the domain’s name as the argument to
PsGetSid:

c:\>psgetsid Redmond

    Finally, by examining the RID of your own account, you know at least a number of security
accounts (equal to the number resulting from subtracting 999 from your RID) have been created
in your domain or on your local machine (depending on whether you are using a domain or local
machine account). You can determine what accounts have been assigned RIDs by passing a SID
with the RID you want to query to PsGetSid. If PsGetSid reports that no mapping between the
SID and an account name was possible and the RID is lower than that of your account, you know
that the account assigned the RID has been deleted.

  For example, to find out the name of the account assigned the 28th RID, pass the domain SID
appended with -1027 to PsGetSid:
c:\>psgetsid S-1-5-21-1787744166-3910675280-2727264193-1027
Account for S-1-5-21-1787744166-3910675280-2727264193-1027:
User: redmond\johndoe

   Process Explorer can also show you information on account and group SIDs on your system
through its Security tab. This tab shows you information such as who owns this process and which
groups the account is a member of. To view this information, simply double-click any process (for
example, Explorer.exe) in the Process list and then click the Security tab. You should see some-
thing similar to the following:

   The information displayed in the User field contains the friendly name of the account owning
this process, while the SID field contains the actual SID value. The Group list includes information
on all the groups that this account is a member of (groups are described later in this chapter).

     Integrity levels
     As mentioned, integrity levels can override discretionary access to differentiate a process and objects
     running as and owned by the same user, offering the ability to isolate code and data within a user
     account. The mechanism of Mandatory Integrity Control (MIC) allows the SRM to have more detailed
     information about the nature of the caller by associating it with an integrity level. It also provides infor-
     mation on the trust required to access the object by defining an integrity level for it.

     The integrity level of a token can be obtained with the GetTokenInformation API with the Token-
     IntegrityLevel enumeration value. These integrity levels are specified by a SID. Although integrity
     levels can be arbitrary values, the system uses six primary levels to separate privilege levels, as described
     in Table 7-3.

     TABLE 7-3    Integrity level SIDs
     SID                Name (Level)     Use

     S-1-16-0x0         Untrusted (0)    Used by processes started by the Anonymous group. It blocks most write access.

     S-1-16-0x1000      Low (1)          Used by AppContainer processes (UWP) and Protected Mode Internet Explorer. It
                                         blocks write access to most objects (such as files and registry keys) on the system.

     S-1-16-0x2000      Medium (2)       Used by normal applications being launched while UAC is enabled.

     S-1-16-0x3000      High (3)         Used by administrative applications launched through elevation when UAC is
                                         enabled, or normal applications if UAC is disabled and the user is an administrator.

     S-1-16-0x4000      System (4)       Used by services and other system-level processes (such as Wininit, Winlogon, Smss,
                                         and so on).

     S-1-16-0x5000      Protected (5)    Currently unused by default. Can be set by kernel-mode caller only.

        Another, seemingly additional, integrity level is called AppContainer, used by UWP apps. Although
     seemingly another level, it’s in fact equal to Low. UWP process tokens have another attribute that
     indicates they are running inside an AppContainer (described in the “AppContainers” section).
     This information is available with the GetTokenInformation API with the TokenIsAppContainer
     enumeration value.

        EXPERIMENT: Looking at the integrity level of processes
        You can use Process Explorer to quickly display the integrity level for the processes on your system.
        The following steps demonstrate this functionality.

             1.    Launch Microsoft Edge browser and Calc.exe (Windows 10).

             2.    Open an elevated command prompt window.

             3.    Open Notepad normally (without elevating it).

             4.    Open an elevated Process Explorer, right-click any column header in the Process list,
                   and then click Select Columns.

5.   Select the Process Image tab and select the Integrity Level check box. The dialog box
     should look similar to the one shown here:

6.   Process Explorer shows you the integrity level of the processes on your system. You
     should see the Notepad process at medium, the Edge (MicrosoftEdge.exe) process at
     AppContainer, and the elevated command prompt at High. Also note that the services
     and system processes are running at an even higher integrity level, System.

         Every process has an integrity level that is represented in its token and propagated according to the
     following rules:

        ■■   A process normally inherits the integrity level of its parent (which means an elevated command
             prompt will spawn other elevated processes).

        ■■   If the file object for the executable image to which the child process belongs has an integrity
             level and the parent process’s integrity level is medium or higher, the child process will inherit
             the lower of the two.

        ■■   A parent process can create a child process with an explicit integrity level lower than its own.
             To do this, it uses DuplicateTokenEx to duplicate its own access token, it uses SetToken-
             Information to change the integrity level in the new token to the desired level, and then it calls
             CreateProcessAsUser with that new token.

        Table 7-3 lists the integrity level associated with processes, but what about objects? Objects
     also have an integrity level stored as part of their security descriptor, in a structure that is called the
     mandatory label.

        To support migrating from previous versions of Windows (whose registry keys and files would
     not include integrity-level information), and to make it simpler for application developers, all objects
     have an implicit integrity level to avoid having to manually specify one. This implicit integrity level is
     medium, meaning that the mandatory policy (described shortly) on the object will be performed on
     tokens accessing this object with an integrity level lower than medium.

        When a process creates an object without specifying an integrity level, the system checks the
     integrity level in the token. For tokens with a level of medium or higher, the implicit integrity level of
     the object remains medium. However, when a token contains an integrity level lower than medium, the
     object is created with an explicit integrity level that matches the level in the token.

        Objects that are created by high- or system-integrity-level processes have a medium integrity level
     themselves so that users can disable and enable UAC. If object integrity levels always inherited their
     creator’s integrity level, the applications of an administrator who disables UAC and subsequently re-
     enables it could fail because the administrator would not be able to modify any registry settings or files
     created when running at the high integrity level. Objects can also have an explicit integrity level that is
     set by the system or by the creator of the object. For example, processes, threads, tokens, and jobs are
     given an explicit integrity level by the kernel when it creates them. The reason for assigning an integrity
     level to these objects is to prevent a process for the same user, but one running at a lower integrity
     level, from accessing these objects and modifying their content or behavior (for example, DLL injection
     or code modification).

        Apart from an integrity level, objects also have a mandatory policy, which defines the actual level
     of protection that’s applied based on the integrity-level check. Three types are possible, shown in
Table 7-4. The integrity level and the mandatory policy are stored together in the same ACE.

TABLE 7-4     Object mandatory policies
Policy              Present on, by Default     Description

No-Write-Up         Implicit on all objects    Used to restrict write access coming from a lower integrity level pro-
                                               cess to the object.

No-Read-Up          Only on process objects    Used to restrict read access coming from a lower integrity level process
                                               to the object. Specific use on process objects protects against informa-
                                               tion leakage by blocking address space reads from an external process.

No-Execute-Up       Only on binaries imple-    Used to restrict execute access coming from a lower integrity level
                    menting COM classes        process to the object. Specific use on COM classes is to restrict launch-
                                               activation permissions on a COM class.

   EXPERIMENT: Looking at the integrity level of objects
   You can use the AccessChk tool from Sysinternals to display the integrity level of objects on the
   system, such as files, processes, and registry keys. Here’s an experiment showing the purpose of
   the LocalLow directory in Windows:

         1.    Browse to C:\Users\<UserName>\ in a command prompt window, where <username> is
               your user name.

         2.    Try running AccessChk on the AppData folder, as follows:
               C:\Users\UserName> accesschk –v appdata

         3.    Note the differences between the Local and LocalLow subfolders in your output, similar
               to that shown here:
               C:\Users\UserName\AppData\Local
                 Medium Mandatory Level (Default) [No-Write-Up]
                 [...]
               C:\Users\UserName\AppData\LocalLow
                 Low Mandatory Level [No-Write-Up]
                 [...]
               C:\Users\UserName\AppData\Roaming
                 Medium Mandatory Level (Default) [No-Write-Up]
                 [...]

         4.    Notice that the LocalLow directory has an integrity level set to Low, while the Local and
               Roaming directories have integrity levels of Medium (default). The default means the
               system is using an implicit integrity level.

         5.    Pass the –e flag to AccessChk so it displays only explicit integrity levels. If you run
               the tool on the AppData folder again, you’ll notice only the LocalLow information
               is displayed.

      The –o (object), –k (registry key), and –p (process) flags allow you to specify something other
   than a file or directory.

     Tokens
     The SRM uses an object called a token (or access token) to identify the security context of a process or
     thread. A security context consists of information that describes the account, groups, and privileges as-
     sociated with the process or thread. Tokens also include information such as the session ID, the integrity
     level, and the UAC virtualization state. (We’ll describe both privileges and UAC’s virtualization mecha-
     nism later in this chapter.)

        During the logon process (described later in this chapter), Lsass creates an initial token to represent
     the user logging on. It then determines whether the user logging on is a member of a powerful group
     or possesses a powerful privilege. The groups checked for in this step are as follows:
        ■■   Built-In Administrators
        ■■   Certificate Administrators
        ■■   Domain Administrators
        ■■   Enterprise Administrators
        ■■   Policy Administrators
        ■■   Schema Administrators
        ■■   Domain Controllers
        ■■   Enterprise Read-Only Domain Controllers
        ■■   Read-Only Domain Controllers
        ■■   Account Operators
        ■■   Backup Operators
        ■■   Cryptographic Operators
        ■■   Network Configuration Operators
        ■■   Print Operators
        ■■   System Operators
        ■■   RAS Servers
        ■■   Power Users
        ■■   Pre-Windows 2000 Compatible Access

       Many of the groups listed are used only on domain-joined systems and don’t give users local ad-
     ministrative rights directly. Instead, they allow users to modify domain-wide settings.

        The privileges checked for are as follows:
        ■■   SeBackupPrivilege

        ■■   SeCreateTokenPrivilege

        ■■   SeDebugPrivilege

        ■■   SeImpersonatePrivilege

   ■■   SeLabelPrivilege

   ■■   SeLoadDriverPrivilege

   ■■   SeRestorePrivilege

   ■■   SeTakeOwnershipPrivilege

   ■■   SeTcbPrivilege

   These privileges are described in detail in the section “Privileges,” later in this chapter.

    If one or more of these groups or privileges are present, Lsass creates a restricted token for the user
(also called a filtered admin token) and creates a logon session for both. The standard user token is at-
tached to the initial process or processes that Winlogon starts (by default, Userinit.exe).

   Note If UAC has been disabled, administrators run with a token that includes their admin-
   istrator group memberships and privileges.

   Because child processes inherit a copy of the token of their creators by default, all processes in
the user’s session run under the same token. You can also generate a token by using the Windows
LogonUser function. You can then use this token to create a process that runs within the security
context of the user logged on through the LogonUser function by passing the token to the Windows
CreateProcessAsUser function. The CreateProcessWithLogonW function combines these into a
single call, which is how the Runas command launches processes under alternative tokens.

   Tokens vary in size because different user accounts have different sets of privileges and associated
group accounts. However, all tokens contain the same types of information. The most important con-
tents of a token are represented in Figure 7-7.

FIGURE 7-7 Access tokens.

        The security mechanisms in Windows use two components to determine what objects can be ac-
     cessed and what secure operations can be performed. One component comprises the token’s user
     account SID and group SID fields. The SRM uses SIDs to determine whether a process or thread can
     obtain requested access to a securable object, such as an NTFS file.

         The group SIDs in a token indicate which groups a user’s account is a member of. For example, a
     server application can disable specific groups to restrict a token’s credentials when the server applica-
     tion is performing actions requested by a client. Disabling a group produces nearly the same effect
     as if the group wasn’t present in the token. (It results in a deny-only group, described in the section
     “Restricted tokens.” Disabled SIDs are used as part of security access checks, described in the section
     “Determining access” later in the chapter.) Group SIDs can also include a special SID that contains the
     integrity level of the process or thread. The SRM uses another field in the token, which describes the
     mandatory integrity policy, to perform the mandatory integrity check described later in the chapter.

        The second component in a token that determines what the token’s thread or process can do is
     the privilege array. A token’s privilege array is a list of rights associated with the token. An example of
     a privilege is the right of the process or thread associated with the token to shut down the computer.
     Privileges are described in more detail later in this chapter.

         A token’s default primary group field and default discretionary access control list (DACL) field are
     security attributes that Windows applies to objects that a process or thread creates when it uses the
     token. By including security information in tokens, Windows makes it convenient for a process or
     thread to create objects with standard security attributes because the process or thread doesn’t need
     to request discrete security information for every object it creates.

         Each token’s type distinguishes a primary token (a token that identifies the security context of a pro-
     cess) from an impersonation token (a type of token that threads use to temporarily adopt a different
     security context, usually of another user). Impersonation tokens carry an impersonation level that signi-
     fies what type of impersonation is active in the token. (Impersonation is described later in this chapter.)

       A token also includes the mandatory policy for the process or thread, which defines how MIC will
     behave when processing this token. There are two policies:

        ■■   TOKEN_MANDATORY_NO_WRITE_UP Enabled by default, this sets the No-Write-Up policy on this
             token, specifying that the process or thread will not be able to access objects with a higher
             integrity level for write access.

        ■■   TOKEN_MANDATORY_NEW_PROCESS_MIN Also enabled by default, this specifies that the SRM
             should look at the integrity level of the executable image when launching a child process and
             compute the minimum integrity level of the parent process and the file object’s integrity level
             as the child’s integrity level.

        Token flags include parameters that determine the behavior of certain UAC and UIPI mechanisms,
     such as virtualization and user interface access. Those mechanisms will be described later in this chapter.

        Each token can also contain attributes that are assigned by the Application Identification service
     (part of AppLocker) when AppLocker rules have been defined. AppLocker and its use of attributes in
     the access token are described later in this chapter.

    A token for a UWP process includes information on the AppContainer hosting the process. First, it
stores a package SID, identifying the UWP package the process originated from. The significance of this
SID will be described in the “AppContainers” section later in this chapter. Second, UWP processes need
to request capabilities for operations that require the user’s consent. Examples of capabilities include
network access, using the phone capabilities of the device (if any), accessing the camera on the device,
and more. Each such capability is represented with a SID, stored as part of the token. (Capabilities will
be discussed further in the “AppContainers” section.)

   The remaining fields in a token serve informational purposes. The token source field contains a short
textual description of the entity that created the token. Programs that want to know where a token
originated use the token source to distinguish among sources such as the Windows Session Manager,
a network file server, or the remote procedure call (RPC) server. The token identifier is a locally unique
identifier (LUID) that the SRM assigns to the token when it creates the token. The Windows executive
maintains the executive LUID, a monotonically increasing counter it uses to assign a unique numeric
identifier to each token. A LUID is guaranteed to be unique only until the system is shut down.

    The token authentication ID is another kind of LUID. A token’s creator assigns the token’s authenti-
cation ID when calling the LsaLogonUser function. If the creator doesn’t specify a LUID, Lsass obtains
the LUID from the executive LUID. Lsass copies the authentication ID for all tokens descended from an
initial logon token. A program can obtain a token’s authentication ID to see whether the token belongs
to the same logon session as other tokens the program has examined.

  The executive LUID refreshes the modified ID every time a token’s characteristics are modified. An
application can test the modified ID to discover changes in a security context since the context’s last use.

   Tokens contain an expiration time field that can be used by applications performing their own se-
curity to reject a token after a specified amount of time. However, Windows itself does not enforce the
expiration time of tokens.

   Note To guarantee system security, the fields in a token are immutable (because they are
   located in kernel memory). Except for fields that can be modified through a specific system
   call designed to modify certain token attributes (assuming the caller has the appropriate
   access rights to the token object), data such as privileges and SIDs in a token can never be
   modified from user mode.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing access tokens
   The kernel debugger dt _TOKEN command displays the format of an internal token object.
   Although this structure differs from the user-mode token structure returned by Windows API
   security functions, the fields are similar. For further information on tokens, see the description in
   the Windows SDK documentation.

          Here’s a token structure on Windows 10:
       lkd> dt nt!_token
          +0x000 TokenSource      : _TOKEN_SOURCE
          +0x010 TokenId          : _LUID
          +0x018 AuthenticationId : _LUID
          +0x020 ParentTokenId    : _LUID
          +0x028 ExpirationTime   : _LARGE_INTEGER
          +0x030 TokenLock        : Ptr64 _ERESOURCE
          +0x038 ModifiedId       : _LUID
          +0x040 Privileges       : _SEP_TOKEN_PRIVILEGES
          +0x058 AuditPolicy      : _SEP_AUDIT_POLICY
          +0x078 SessionId        : Uint4B
          +0x07c UserAndGroupCount : Uint4B
          +0x080 RestrictedSidCount : Uint4B
          +0x084 VariableLength   : Uint4B
          +0x088 DynamicCharged   : Uint4B
          +0x08c DynamicAvailable : Uint4B
          +0x090 DefaultOwnerIndex : Uint4B
          +0x098 UserAndGroups    : Ptr64 _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES
          +0x0a0 RestrictedSids   : Ptr64 _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES
          +0x0a8 PrimaryGroup     : Ptr64 Void
          +0x0b0 DynamicPart      : Ptr64 Uint4B
          +0x0b8 DefaultDacl      : Ptr64 _ACL
          +0x0c0 TokenType        : _TOKEN_TYPE
          +0x0c4 ImpersonationLevel : _SECURITY_IMPERSONATION_LEVEL
          +0x0c8 TokenFlags       : Uint4B
          +0x0cc TokenInUse       : UChar
          +0x0d0 IntegrityLevelIndex : Uint4B
          +0x0d4 MandatoryPolicy : Uint4B
          +0x0d8 LogonSession     : Ptr64 _SEP_LOGON_SESSION_REFERENCES
          +0x0e0 OriginatingLogonSession : _LUID
          +0x0e8 SidHash          : _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES_HASH
          +0x1f8 RestrictedSidHash : _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES_HASH
          +0x308 pSecurityAttributes : Ptr64 _AUTHZBASEP_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTES_INFORMATION
          +0x310 Package          : Ptr64 Void
          +0x318 Capabilities     : Ptr64 _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES
          +0x320 CapabilityCount : Uint4B
          +0x328 CapabilitiesHash : _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES_HASH
          +0x438 LowboxNumberEntry : Ptr64 _SEP_LOWBOX_NUMBER_ENTRY
          +0x440 LowboxHandlesEntry : Ptr64 _SEP_LOWBOX_HANDLES_ENTRY
          +0x448 pClaimAttributes : Ptr64 _AUTHZBASEP_CLAIM_ATTRIBUTES_COLLECTION
          +0x450 TrustLevelSid    : Ptr64 Void
          +0x458 TrustLinkedToken : Ptr64 _TOKEN
          +0x460 IntegrityLevelSidValue : Ptr64 Void
          +0x468 TokenSidValues   : Ptr64 _SEP_SID_VALUES_BLOCK
          +0x470 IndexEntry       : Ptr64 _SEP_LUID_TO_INDEX_MAP_ENTRY
          +0x478 DiagnosticInfo   : Ptr64 _SEP_TOKEN_DIAG_TRACK_ENTRY
          +0x480 SessionObject    : Ptr64 Void
          +0x488 VariablePart     : Uint8B

   You can examine the token for a process with the !token command. You’ll find the address of
the token in the output of the !process command. Here’s an example for an explorer.exe process:
lkd> !process 0 1 explorer.exe
PROCESS ffffe18304dfd780
    SessionId: 1 Cid: 23e4      Peb: 00c2a000 ParentCid: 2264
    DirBase: 2aa0f6000 ObjectTable: ffffcd82c72fcd80 HandleCount: <Data Not
Accessible>
    Image: explorer.exe
    VadRoot ffffe18303655840 Vads 705 Clone 0 Private 12264. Modified 376410. Locked 18.
    DeviceMap ffffcd82c39bc0d0
    Token                               ffffcd82c72fc060
    ...

PROCESS ffffe1830670a080
    SessionId: 1 Cid: 27b8      Peb: 00950000 ParentCid: 035c
    DirBase: 2cba97000 ObjectTable: ffffcd82c7ccc500 HandleCount: <Data Not
Accessible>
    Image: explorer.exe
    VadRoot ffffe183064e9f60 Vads 1991 Clone 0 Private 19576. Modified 87095. Locked 0.
    DeviceMap ffffcd82c39bc0d0
    Token                              ffffcd82c7cd9060
    ...

lkd> !token ffffcd82c72fc060
_TOKEN 0xffffcd82c72fc060
TS Session ID: 0x1
User: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
User Groups:
 00 S-1-16-8192
    Attributes - GroupIntegrity GroupIntegrityEnabled
 01 S-1-1-0
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 02 S-1-5-114
    Attributes - DenyOnly
 03 S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1004
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 04 S-1-5-32-544
    Attributes - DenyOnly
 05 S-1-5-32-578
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 06 S-1-5-32-559
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 07 S-1-5-32-545
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 08 S-1-5-4
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 09 S-1-2-1
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 10 S-1-5-11
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled

        11 S-1-5-15
           Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
        12 S-1-11-96-3623454863-58364-18864-2661722203-1597581903-1225312835-2511459453-
       1556397606-2735945305-1404291241
           Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
        13 S-1-5-113
           Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
        14 S-1-5-5-0-1745560
           Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled LogonId
        15 S-1-2-0
           Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
        16 S-1-5-64-36
           Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
       Primary Group: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
       Privs:
        19 0x000000013 SeShutdownPrivilege                Attributes -
        23 0x000000017 SeChangeNotifyPrivilege            Attributes - Enabled Default
        25 0x000000019 SeUndockPrivilege                  Attributes -
        33 0x000000021 SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege      Attributes -
        34 0x000000022 SeTimeZonePrivilege                Attributes -
       Authentication ID:         (0,1aa448)
       Impersonation Level:       Anonymous
       TokenType:                 Primary
       Source: User32             TokenFlags: 0x2a00 ( Token in use )
       Token ID: 1be803           ParentToken ID: 1aa44b
       Modified ID:               (0, 43d9289)
       RestrictedSidCount: 0      RestrictedSids: 0x0000000000000000
       OriginatingLogonSession: 3e7
       PackageSid: (null)
       CapabilityCount: 0      Capabilities: 0x0000000000000000
       LowboxNumberEntry: 0x0000000000000000
       Security Attributes:
       Unable to get the offset of nt!_AUTHZBASEP_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE.ListLink
       Process Token TrustLevelSid: (null)

          Notice that there is no package SID for Explorer, since it’s not running inside an AppContainer.

           Run calc.exe under Windows 10, which spawns calculator.exe (now a UWP app), and examine
       its token:
       lkd> !process 0 1 calculator.exe
       PROCESS ffffe18309e874c0
           SessionId: 1 Cid: 3c18      Peb: cd0182c000 ParentCid: 035c
           DirBase: 7a15e4000 ObjectTable: ffffcd82ec9a37c0 HandleCount: <Data Not
       Accessible>
           Image: Calculator.exe
           VadRoot ffffe1831cf197c0 Vads 181 Clone 0 Private 3800. Modified 3746. Locked 503.
           DeviceMap ffffcd82c39bc0d0
           Token                              ffffcd82e26168f0
       ...

       lkd> !token ffffcd82e26168f0
       _TOKEN 0xffffcd82e26168f0

TS Session ID: 0x1
User: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
User Groups:
 00 S-1-16-4096
    Attributes - GroupIntegrity GroupIntegrityEnabled
 01 S-1-1-0
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 02 S-1-5-114
    Attributes - DenyOnly
 03 S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1004
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 04 S-1-5-32-544
    Attributes - DenyOnly
 05 S-1-5-32-578
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 06 S-1-5-32-559
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 07 S-1-5-32-545
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 08 S-1-5-4
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 09 S-1-2-1
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 10 S-1-5-11
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 11 S-1-5-15
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 12 S-1-11-96-3623454863-58364-18864-2661722203-1597581903-1225312835-2511459453-
1556397606-2735945305-1404291241
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 13 S-1-5-113
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 14 S-1-5-5-0-1745560
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled LogonId
 15 S-1-2-0
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
 16 S-1-5-64-36
    Attributes - Mandatory Default Enabled
Primary Group: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
Privs:
 19 0x000000013 SeShutdownPrivilege                Attributes -
 23 0x000000017 SeChangeNotifyPrivilege            Attributes - Enabled Default
 25 0x000000019 SeUndockPrivilege                  Attributes -
 33 0x000000021 SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege      Attributes -
 34 0x000000022 SeTimeZonePrivilege                Attributes -
Authentication ID:         (0,1aa448)
Impersonation Level:       Anonymous
TokenType:                 Primary
Source: User32             TokenFlags: 0x4a00 ( Token in use )
Token ID: 4ddb8c0          ParentToken ID: 1aa44b
Modified ID:               (0, 4ddb8b2)

       RestrictedSidCount: 0       RestrictedSids: 0x0000000000000000
       OriginatingLogonSession: 3e7
       PackageSid: S-1-15-2-466767348-3739614953-2700836392-1801644223-4227750657-
       1087833535-2488631167
       CapabilityCount: 1       Capabilities: 0xffffcd82e1bfccd0
       Capabilities:
        00 S-1-15-3-466767348-3739614953-2700836392-1801644223-4227750657-1087833535-
       2488631167
           Attributes - Enabled
       LowboxNumberEntry: 0xffffcd82fa2c1670
       LowboxNumber: 5
       Security Attributes:
       Unable to get the offset of nt!_AUTHZBASEP_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE.ListLink
       Process Token TrustLevelSid: (null)

           You can see there is one capability required by Calculator (which is in fact equal to its
       AppContainer SID RID, as described in the section “AppContainers” later in this chapter). Looking
       at the token of the Cortana process (searchui.exe) shows the following capabilities:
       lkd> !process 0 1 searchui.exe
       PROCESS ffffe1831307d080
           SessionId: 1 Cid: 29d8     Peb: fb407ec000 ParentCid: 035c
       DeepFreeze
           DirBase: 38b635000 ObjectTable: ffffcd830059e580 HandleCount: <Data Not
       Accessible>
           Image: SearchUI.exe
           VadRoot ffffe1831fe89130 Vads 420 Clone 0 Private 11029. Modified 2031. Locked 0.
           DeviceMap ffffcd82c39bc0d0
           Token                              ffffcd82d97d18f0
           ...

       lkd> !token ffffcd82d97d18f0
       _TOKEN 0xffffcd82d97d18f0
       TS Session ID: 0x1
       User: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
       User Groups:
        ...
       Primary Group: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
       Privs:
        19 0x000000013 SeShutdownPrivilege               Attributes -
        23 0x000000017 SeChangeNotifyPrivilege           Attributes - Enabled Default
        25 0x000000019 SeUndockPrivilege                 Attributes -
        33 0x000000021 SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege     Attributes -
        34 0x000000022 SeTimeZonePrivilege               Attributes -
       Authentication ID:         (0,1aa448)
       Impersonation Level:       Anonymous
       TokenType:                 Primary
       Source: User32             TokenFlags: 0x4a00 ( Token in use )
       Token ID: 4483430          ParentToken ID: 1aa44b
       Modified ID:               (0, 4481b11)
       RestrictedSidCount: 0      RestrictedSids: 0x0000000000000000
       OriginatingLogonSession: 3e7

PackageSid: S-1-15-2-1861897761-1695161497-2927542615-642690995-327840285-
2659745135-2630312742
CapabilityCount: 32      Capabilities: 0xffffcd82f78149b0
Capabilities:
 00 S-1-15-3-1024-1216833578-114521899-3977640588-1343180512-2505059295-473916851-
3379430393-3088591068
    Attributes - Enabled
 01 S-1-15-3-1024-3299255270-1847605585-2201808924-710406709-3613095291-873286183-
3101090833-2655911836
    Attributes - Enabled
 02 S-1-15-3-1024-34359262-2669769421-2130994847-3068338639-3284271446-2009814230-
2411358368-814686995
    Attributes - Enabled
 03 S-1-15-3-1
    Attributes - Enabled
...
 29 S-1-15-3-3633849274-1266774400-1199443125-2736873758
    Attributes - Enabled
 30 S-1-15-3-2569730672-1095266119-53537203-1209375796
    Attributes - Enabled
 31 S-1-15-3-2452736844-1257488215-2818397580-3305426111
    Attributes - Enabled
LowboxNumberEntry: 0xffffcd82c7539110
LowboxNumber: 2
Security Attributes:
Unable to get the offset of nt!_AUTHZBASEP_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE.ListLink
Process Token TrustLevelSid: (null)

   There are 32 capabilities required by Cortana. This simply indicates the process is richer in
features that need to be accepted by end users and validated by the system.

   You can indirectly view token contents with Process Explorer’s Security tab in the process
Properties dialog box. The dialog box shows the groups and privileges included in the token of
the process you examine.

EXPERIMENT: Launching a program at low integrity level
When you elevate a program, either by using the Run as Administrator option or because the
program is requesting it, the program is explicitly launched at high integrity level. However, it is
also possible to launch a program at low integrity level by using PsExec from Sysinternals:

    1.   Launch Notepad at low integrity level by using the following command:
         c:\psexec –l notepad.exe

    2.   Try opening a file (such as one of the XML files) in the %SystemRoot%\System32 direc-
         tory. Notice that you can browse the directory and open any file contained within it.

    3.   In Notepad, open the File menu and choose New.

            4.   Enter some text in the window and try saving it in the %SystemRoot%\System32 direc-
                 tory. Notepad displays a dialog box indicating a lack of permissions and suggests saving
                 the file in the Documents folder.

            5.   Accept Notepad’s suggestion. You will get the same message box again, and repeatedly
                 for each attempt.

            6.   Now try saving the file in the LocalLow directory of your user profile, shown in an
                 experiment earlier in the chapter.

           In the previous experiment, saving a file in the LocalLow directory worked because Notepad
        was running with low integrity level, and only the LocalLow directory also had low integrity
        level. All the other directories where you tried to save the file had an implicit medium integrity
        level. (You can verify this with AccessChk.) However, reading from the %SystemRoot%\System32
        directory, as well as opening files within it, did work, even though the directory and its file also
        have an implicit medium integrity level.

     Impersonation
     Impersonation is a powerful feature Windows uses frequently in its security model. Windows also uses
     impersonation in its client/server programming model. For example, a server application can provide
     access to resources such as files, printers, and databases. Clients wanting to access a resource send a re-
     quest to the server. When the server receives the request, it must ensure that the client has permission
     to perform the desired operations on the resource. For example, if a user on a remote machine tries
     to delete a file on an NTFS share, the server exporting the share must determine whether the user is
     allowed to delete the file. The obvious way to determine whether a user has permission is for the server
     to query the user’s account and group SIDs and scan the security attributes on the file. This approach is
     tedious to program, prone to errors, and wouldn’t permit new security features to be supported trans-
     parently. Thus, Windows provides impersonation services to simplify the server’s job.

         Impersonation lets a server notify the SRM that the server is temporarily adopting the security pro-
     file of a client making a resource request. The server can then access resources on behalf of the client,
     and the SRM carries out the access validation, but it does so based on the impersonated client security
     context. Usually, a server has access to more resources than a client does and loses some of its secu-
     rity credentials during impersonation. However, the reverse can be true: The server can gain security
     credentials during impersonation.

        A server impersonates a client only within the thread that makes the impersonation request.
     Thread-control data structures contain an optional entry for an impersonation token. However, a
thread’s primary token, which represents the thread’s real security credentials, is always accessible in
the process’s control structure.

   Windows makes impersonation available through several mechanisms. For example, if a server com-
municates with a client through a named pipe, the server can use the ImpersonateNamedPipeClient
Windows API function to tell the SRM that it wants to impersonate the user on the other end of the
pipe. If the server is communicating with the client through Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) or RPC, it
can make similar impersonation requests using DdeImpersonateClient and RpcImpersonateClient.
A thread can create an impersonation token that’s simply a copy of its process token with the
ImpersonateSelf function. The thread can then alter its impersonation token, perhaps to disable
SIDs or privileges. A Security Support Provider Interface (SSPI) package can impersonate its clients
with ImpersonateSecurityContext. SSPIs implement a network authentication protocol such as LAN
Manager version 2 or Kerberos. Other interfaces such as COM expose impersonation through APIs of
their own, such as CoImpersonateClient.

    After the server thread finishes its task, it reverts to its primary security context. These forms of imper-
sonation are convenient for carrying out specific actions at the request of a client and for ensuring that
object accesses are audited correctly. (For example, the audit that is generated gives the identity of the
impersonated client rather than that of the server process.) The disadvantage to these forms of imperson-
ation is that they can’t execute an entire program in the context of a client. In addition, an impersonation
token can’t access files or printers on network shares unless it is a delegation-level impersonation (de-
scribed shortly) and has sufficient credentials to authenticate to the remote machine, or the file or printer
share supports null sessions. (A null session is one that results from an anonymous logon.)

   If an entire application must execute in a client’s security context or must access network resources
without using impersonation, the client must be logged on to the system. The LogonUser Windows
API function enables this action. LogonUser takes an account name, a password, a domain or com-
puter name, a logon type (such as interactive, batch, or service), and a logon provider as input, and it
returns a primary token. A server thread can adopt the token as an impersonation token, or the server
can start a program that has the client’s credentials as its primary token. From a security standpoint,
a process created using the token returned from an interactive logon via LogonUser, such as with
the CreateProcessAsUser API, looks like a program a user starts by logging on to the machine
interactively. The disadvantage to this approach is that a server must obtain the user’s account name
and password. If the server transmits this information across the network, the server must encrypt it
securely so that a malicious user snooping network traffic can’t capture it.

   To prevent the misuse of impersonation, Windows doesn’t let servers perform impersonation
without a client’s consent. A client process can limit the level of impersonation that a server process can
perform by specifying a security quality of service (SQOS) when connecting to the server. For instance,
when opening a named pipe, a process can specify SECURITY_ANONYMOUS, SECURITY_IDENTIFICATION,
SECURITY_IMPERSONATION, or SECURITY_DELEGATION as flags for the Windows CreateFile function.
These same options apply to other impersonation-related functions listed earlier. Each level lets a server
perform different types of operations with respect to the client’s security context:

   ■■   SecurityAnonymous This is the most restrictive level of impersonation. The server can’t imper-
        sonate or identify the client.

        ■■   SecurityIdentification This lets the server obtain the identity (the SIDs) of the client and
             the client’s privileges, but the server can’t impersonate the client.

        ■■   SecurityImpersonation This lets the server identify and impersonate the client on the
             local system.

        ■■   SecurityDelegation This is the most permissive level of impersonation. It lets the server
             impersonate the client on local and remote systems.

        Other interfaces such as RPC use different constants with similar meanings (for example, RPC_C_
     IMP_LEVEL_IMPERSONATE).

        If the client doesn’t set an impersonation level, Windows chooses the SecurityImpersonation
     level by default. The CreateFile function also accepts SECURITY_EFFECTIVE_ONLY and SECURITY_
     CONTEXT_TRACKING as modifiers for the impersonation setting:

        ■■   SECURITY_EFFECTIVE_ONLY This prevents a server from enabling or disabling a client’s privi-
             leges or groups while the server is impersonating.

        ■■   SECURITY_CONTEXT_TRACKING This specifies that any changes a client makes to its security con-
             text are reflected in a server that is impersonating it. If this option isn’t specified, the server adopts
             the context of the client at the time of the impersonation and doesn’t receive any changes. This
             option is honored only when the client and server processes are on the same system.

         To prevent spoofing scenarios in which a low-integrity process could create a user interface that
     captured user credentials and then used LogonUser to obtain that user’s token, a special integrity pol-
     icy applies to impersonation scenarios: a thread cannot impersonate a token of higher integrity than
     its own. For example, a low-integrity application cannot spoof a dialog box that queries administrative
     credentials and then attempt to launch a process at a higher privilege level. The integrity-mechanism
     policy for impersonation access tokens is that the integrity level of the access token that is returned by
     LsaLogonUser must be no higher than the integrity level of the calling process.

     Restricted tokens
     A restricted token is created from a primary or impersonation token using the CreateRestrictedToken
     function. The restricted token is a copy of the token it’s derived from, with the following possible
     modifications:

        ■■   Privileges can be removed from the token’s privilege array.

        ■■   SIDs in the token can be marked as deny-only. These SIDs remove access to any resources for
             which the SID’s access is denied by using a matching access-denied ACE that would other-
             wise be overridden by an ACE granting access to a group containing the SID earlier in the
             security descriptor.

        ■■   SIDs in the token can be marked as restricted. These SIDs are subject to a second pass of the
             access-check algorithm, which will parse only the restricted SIDs in the token. The results of
             both the first pass and the second pass must grant access to the resource or no access is granted
             to the object.

   Restricted tokens are useful when an application wants to impersonate a client at a reduced security
level, primarily for safety reasons when running untrusted code. For example, the restricted token can
have the shutdown-system privilege removed from it to prevent code executed in the restricted token’s
security context from rebooting the system.

Filtered admin token
As you saw earlier, restricted tokens are also used by UAC to create the filtered admin token that all
user applications will inherit. A filtered admin token has the following characteristics:

   ■■   The integrity level is set to medium.

   ■■   The administrator and administrator-like SIDs mentioned previously are marked as deny-only
        to prevent a security hole if the group were to be removed altogether. For example, if a file
        had an access control list (ACL) that denied the Administrators group all access but granted
        some access to another group the user belongs to, the user would be granted access if the
        Administrators group was absent from the token, which would give the standard user version
        of the user’s identity more access than the user’s administrator identity.

   ■■   All privileges are stripped except Change Notify, Shutdown, Undock, Increase Working Set,
        and Time Zone.

   EXPERIMENT: Looking at filtered admin tokens
   You can make Explorer launch a process with either the standard user token or the administrator
   token by following these steps on a machine with UAC enabled:

        1.   Log on to an account that’s a member of the Administrators group.

        2.   Open the Start menu, type command, right-click the Command Prompt option that
             appears, and choose Run as Administrator to run an elevated command prompt.

        3.   Run a new instance of cmd.exe, but this time do it normally (that is, not elevated).

        4.   Run Process Explorer elevated, open the Properties dialog boxes for the two command
             prompt processes, and click the Security tabs. Note that the standard user token con-
             tains a deny-only SID and a medium mandatory label, and that it has only a couple of
             privileges. The properties on the right in the following screenshot are from a command
             prompt running with an administrator token, and the properties on the left are from
             one running with the filtered administrator token:

     Virtual service accounts
     Windows provides a specialized type of account known as a virtual service account (or simply virtual
     account) to improve the security isolation and access control of Windows services with minimal ad-
     ministrative effort. (See Chapter 9 in Part 2 for more information on Windows services.) Without this
     mechanism, Windows services must run under one of the accounts defined by Windows for its built-in
     services (such as Local Service or Network Service) or under a regular domain account. The accounts
     such as Local Service are shared by many existing services and so offer limited granularity for privilege
     and access control; furthermore, they cannot be managed across the domain. Domain accounts require
     periodic password changes for security, and the availability of services during a password-change cycle
     might be affected. Furthermore, for best isolation, each service should run under its own account, but
     with ordinary accounts this multiplies the management effort.

        With virtual service accounts, each service runs under its own account with its own security ID. The
     name of the account is always NT SERVICE\ followed by the internal name of the service. Virtual service
     accounts can appear in access control lists and can be associated with privileges via Group Policy like
     any other account name. They cannot, however, be created or deleted through the usual account-
     management tools, nor assigned to groups.

        Windows automatically sets and periodically changes the password of the virtual service account.
     Similar to the Local System and Other Service Accounts, there is a password, but the password is un-
     known to the system administrators.

EXPERIMENT: Using virtual service accounts
You can create a service that runs under a virtual service account by using the Service Control
(Sc.exe) tool. Follow these steps:

    1.   In an Administrator command prompt, type the create command in the Sc.exe command-
         line tool to create a service and a virtual account in which it will run. This example uses
         the srvany service from the Windows 2003 resource kit, which you can download here:
         https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=17657.
         C:\Windows\system32>sc create srvany obj= "NT SERVICE\srvany" binPath=
         "c:\temp\srvany.exe"
         [SC] CreateService SUCCESS

    2.   The previous command created the service (in the registry and in the service controller
         manager’s internal list) and created the virtual service account. Now run the Services
         MMC snap-in (services.msc), select the new service, and open its Properties dialog box.

    3.   Click the Log On tab.

           4.   You can use the service’s Properties dialog box to create a virtual service account for an
                existing service. To do so, change the account name to NT SERVICE\servicename in
                the This Account field and clear both password fields. Note, however, that existing ser-
                vices might not run correctly under a virtual service account because the account might
                not have access to files or other resources needed by the service.

           5.   If you run Process Explorer and view the Security tab in the Properties dialog box for
                a service that uses a virtual account, you can observe the virtual account name and its
                security ID (SID). To try this, in the Properties dialog box of the srvany service, enter the
                command-line arguments notepad.exe. (srvany can be used to turn normal executa-
                bles into services, so it must accept some executable on the command line.) Then click
                the Start button to start the service.

           6.   The virtual service account can appear in an access control entry for any object (such as
                a file) the service needs to access. If you click the Security tab in a file’s Properties dia-
                log box and create an ACL that references the virtual service account, you will find that
                the account name you typed (for example, NT SERVICE\srvany) is changed to simply the
                service name (srvany) by the Check Names function, and it appears in the access control
                list in this shortened form.

7.   The virtual service account can be granted permissions (or user rights) via Group Policy.
     In this example, the virtual account for the srvany service has been granted the right to
     create a pagefile (using the Local Security Policy editor, secpol.msc).

             8.   You won’t see the virtual service account in user-administration tools like lusrmgr.msc
                  because it is not stored in the SAM registry hive. However, if you examine the registry
                  within the context of the built-in System account (as described previously), you will see
                  evidence of the account in the HKLM\Security\Policy\Secrets key:
                  C:\>psexec –s –i –d regedit.exe

     Security descriptors and access control
     Tokens, which identify a user’s credentials, are only part of the object security equation. Another part of
     the equation is the security information associated with an object, which specifies who can perform what
     actions on the object. The data structure for this information is called a security descriptor. A security
     descriptor consists of the following attributes:

        ■■   Revision number      This is the version of the SRM security model used to create the descriptor.

        ■■   Flags These are optional modifiers that define the behavior or characteristics of the descriptor.
             These flags are listed in Table 7-5 (most are documented in the Windows SDK).

        ■■   Owner SID This is the owner’s SID.

        ■■   Group SID This is the SID of the primary group for the object (used only by the POSIX subsys-
             tem, now unused since POSIX is no longer supported).

        ■■   Discretionary access control list (DACL)      This specifies who has what access to the object.

        ■■   System access control list (SACL) This specifies which operations by which users should be
             logged in the security audit log and the explicit integrity level of an object.

TABLE 7-5   Security descriptor flags
Flag                                Meaning

SE_OWNER_DEFAULTED                  This indicates a security descriptor with a default owner security identifier
                                    (SID). Use this bit to find all the objects that have default owner permis-
                                    sions set.

SE_GROUP_DEFAULTED                  This indicates a security descriptor with a default group SID. Use this bit
                                    to find all the objects that have default group permissions set.

SE_DACL_PRESENT                     This indicates a security descriptor that has a DACL. If this flag is not set,
                                    or if this flag is set and the DACL is NULL, the security descriptor allows
                                    full access to everyone.

SE_DACL_DEFAULTED                   This indicates a security descriptor with a default DACL. For example, if
                                    an object creator does not specify a DACL, the object receives the default
                                    DACL from the access token of the creator. This flag can affect how the sys-
                                    tem treats the DACL with respect to access control entry (ACE) inheritance.
                                    The system ignores this flag if the SE_DACL_PRESENT flag is not set.

SE_SACL_PRESENT                     This indicates a security descriptor that has a system access control
                                    list (SACL).

SE_SACL_DEFAULTED                   This indicates a security descriptor with a default SACL. For example, if
                                    an object creator does not specify a SACL, the object receives the default
                                    SACL from the access token of the creator. This flag can affect how the
                                    system treats the SACL with respect to ACE inheritance. The system ignores
                                    this flag if the SE_SACL_PRESENT flag is not set.

SE_DACL_UNTRUSTED                   This indicates that the ACL pointed to by the DACL of the security descrip-
                                    tor was provided by an untrusted source. If this flag is set and a com-
                                    pound ACE is encountered, the system will substitute known valid SIDs
                                    for the server SIDs in the ACEs.

SE_SERVER_SECURITY                  This requests that the provider for the object protected by the security
                                    descriptor be a server ACL based on the input ACL, regardless of its
                                    source (explicit or defaulting). This is done by replacing all the GRANT
                                    ACEs with compound ACEs granting the current server access. This flag is
                                    meaningful only if the subject is impersonating.

SE_DACL_AUTO_INHERIT_REQ            This requests that the provider for the object protected by the security
                                    descriptor automatically propagate the DACL to existing child objects. If
                                    the provider supports automatic inheritance, the DACL is propagated to
                                    any existing child objects, and the SE_DACL_AUTO_INHERITED bit in the
                                    security descriptor of the parent and child objects is set.

SE_SACL_AUTO_INHERIT_REQ            This requests that the provider for the object protected by the security
                                    descriptor automatically propagate the SACL to existing child objects. If
                                    the provider supports automatic inheritance, the SACL is propagated to
                                    any existing child objects, and the SE_SACL_AUTO_INHERITED bit in the
                                    security descriptors of the parent object and child objects is set.

SE_DACL_AUTO_INHERITED              This indicates a security descriptor in which the DACL is set up to support
                                    automatic propagation of inheritable ACEs to existing child objects. The
                                    system sets this bit when it performs the automatic inheritance algorithm
                                    for the object and its existing child objects.

SE_SACL_AUTO_INHERITED              This indicates a security descriptor in which the SACL is set up to support
                                    automatic propagation of inheritable ACEs to existing child objects. The
                                    system sets this bit when it performs the automatic inheritance algorithm
                                    for the object and its existing child objects.

SE_DACL_PROTECTED                   This prevents the DACL of a security descriptor from being modified by
                                    inheritable ACEs.

SE_SACL_PROTECTED                   This prevents the SACL of a security descriptor from being modified by
                                    inheritable ACEs.

     TABLE 7-5   Security descriptor flags (continued)
     Flag                                 Meaning

     SE_RM_CONTROL_VALID                  This indicates that the resource control manager bits in the security
                                          descriptor are valid. The resource control manager bits are 8 bits in the
                                          security descriptor structure that contains information specific to the
                                          resource manager accessing the structure.

     SE_SELF_RELATIVE                     This indicates a security descriptor in self-relative format, with all the
                                          security information in a contiguous block of memory. If this flag is not
                                          set, the security descriptor is in absolute format.

         Security descriptors (SDs) can be retrieved programmatically by using various functions, such as
     GetSecurityInfo, GetKernelObjectSecurity, GetFileSecurity, GetNamedSecurityInfo, and
     other more esoteric functions. After retrieval, the SD can be manipulated and then the relevant Set
     function called to make the change. Furthermore, a security descriptor can be constructed using
     a string in a language called Security Descriptor Definition Language (SDDL), which is capable of
     representing a security descriptor using a compact string. This string can be converted to a true SD
     by calling ConvertStringSecurityDescriptorToSecurityDescriptor. As you might expect, the
     converse function exists as well (ConvertSecurityDescriptorToStringSecurityDescriptor). See
     the Windows SDK for a detailed description of the SDDL.

         An access control list (ACL) is made up of a header and zero or more access control entry (ACE)
     structures. There are two types of ACLs: DACLs and SACLs. In a DACL, each ACE contains a SID and
     an access mask (and a set of flags, explained shortly), which typically specifies the access rights (read,
     write, delete, and so forth) that are granted or denied to the holder of the SID. There are nine types of
     ACEs that can appear in a DACL: access allowed, access denied, allowed object, denied object, allowed
     callback, denied callback, allowed object callback, denied-object callback, and conditional claims. As
     you would expect, the access-allowed ACE grants access to a user, and the access-denied ACE denies
     the access rights specified in the access mask. The callback ACEs are used by applications that make use
     of the AuthZ API (described later) to register a callback that AuthZ will call when it performs an access
     check involving this ACE.

         The difference between allowed object and access allowed, and between denied object and ac-
     cess denied, is that the object types are used only within Active Directory. ACEs of these types have a
     globally unique identifier (GUID) field that indicates that the ACE applies only to particular objects or
     subobjects (those that have GUID identifiers). (A GUID is a 128-bit identifier guaranteed to be univer-
     sally unique.) In addition, another optional GUID indicates what type of child object will inherit the
     ACE when a child is created within an Active Directory container that has the ACE applied to it. The
     conditional claims ACE is stored in a *-callback type ACE structure and is described in the section on
     the AuthZ APIs.

        The accumulation of access rights granted by individual ACEs forms the set of access rights granted
     by an ACL. If no DACL is present (a null DACL) in a security descriptor, everyone has full access to the
     object. If the DACL is empty (that is, it has zero ACEs), no user has access to the object.

   The ACEs used in DACLs also have a set of flags that control and specify characteristics of the ACE re-
lated to inheritance. Some object namespaces have containers and objects. A container can hold other
container objects and leaf objects, which are its child objects. Examples of containers are directories in
the file system namespace and keys in the registry namespace. Certain flags in an ACE control how the
ACE propagates to child objects of the container associated with the ACE. Table 7-6, reproduced in part
from the Windows SDK, lists the inheritance rules for ACE flags.

TABLE 7-6    Inheritance rules for ACE flags
Flag                                     Inheritance Rule

CONTAINER_INHERIT_ACE                    Child objects that are containers, such as directories, inherit the ACE as an
                                         effective ACE. The inherited ACE is inheritable unless the NO_PROPAGATE_
                                         INHERIT_ACE bit flag is also set.

INHERIT_ONLY_ACE                         This flag indicates an inherit-only ACE that doesn’t control access to the object
                                         it’s attached to. If this flag is not set, the ACE controls access to the object to
                                         which it is attached.

INHERITED_ACE                            This flag indicates that the ACE was inherited. The system sets this bit when it
                                         propagates an inheritable ACE to a child object.

NO_PROPAGATE_INHERIT_ACE                 If the ACE is inherited by a child object, the system clears the OBJECT_INHERIT_
                                         ACE and CONTAINER_INHERIT_ACE flags in the inherited ACE. This action pre-
                                         vents the ACE from being inherited by subsequent generations of objects.

OBJECT_INHERIT_ACE                       Non-container child objects inherit the ACE as an effective ACE. For child ob-
                                         jects that are containers, the ACE is inherited as an inherit-only ACE unless the
                                         NO_PROPAGATE_INHERIT_ACE bit flag is also set.

   A SACL contains two types of ACEs: system audit ACEs and system audit-object ACEs. These ACEs
specify which operations performed on the object by specific users or groups should be audited. Audit
information is stored in the system audit log. Both successful and unsuccessful attempts can be au-
dited. Like their DACL object-specific ACE cousins, system audit-object ACEs specify a GUID indicating
the types of objects or sub-objects that the ACE applies to and an optional GUID that controls propa-
gation of the ACE to particular child object types. If a SACL is null, no auditing takes place on the object.
(Security auditing is described later in this chapter.) The inheritance flags that apply to DACL ACEs also
apply to system audit and system audit-object ACEs.

    Figure 7-8 is a simplified picture of a file object and its DACL. As shown, the first ACE allows USER1
to read the file. The second ACE denies members of the group TEAM1 write access to the file. The third
ACE grants all other users (Everyone) execute access.

FIGURE 7-8    Discretionary access control list (DACL).

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing a security descriptor
       Most executive subsystems rely on the object manager’s default security functionality to manage
       security descriptors for their objects. The object manager’s default security functions use the
       security descriptor pointer to store security descriptors for such objects. For example, the process
       manager uses default security, so the object manager stores process and thread security descrip-
       tors in the object headers of process and thread objects, respectively. The security descriptor
       pointer of events, mutexes, and semaphores also store their security descriptors. You can use live
       kernel debugging to view the security descriptors of these objects once you locate their object
       header, as outlined in the following steps. (Note that both Process Explorer and AccessChk can
       also show security descriptors for processes.)

           1.   Start local kernel debugging.

           2.   Type !process 0 0 explorer.exe to obtain process information about Explorer:
                lkd> !process 0 0 explorer.exe
                PROCESS ffffe18304dfd780
                    SessionId: 1 Cid: 23e4     Peb: 00c2a000 ParentCid: 2264
                    DirBase: 2aa0f6000 ObjectTable: ffffcd82c72fcd80 HandleCount:
                <Data Not Accessible>
                    Image: explorer.exe

                PROCESS ffffe1830670a080
                    SessionId: 1 Cid: 27b8    Peb: 00950000 ParentCid: 035c
                    DirBase: 2cba97000 ObjectTable: ffffcd82c7ccc500 HandleCount:
                <Data Not Accessible>
                    Image: explorer.exe

           3.   If more than one instance of explorer is listed, choose one. (It doesn’t matter which.)
                Type !object with the address of the EPROCESS in the output of the previous command
                as the argument to show the object data structure:
                lkd> !object ffffe18304dfd780
                Object: ffffe18304dfd780 Type: (ffffe182f7496690) Process
                    ObjectHeader: ffffe18304dfd750 (new version)
                    HandleCount: 15 PointerCount: 504639

           4.   Type dt _OBJECT_HEADER and the address of the object header field from the previ-
                ous command’s output to show the object header data structure, including the security
                descriptor pointer value:
                lkd> dt nt!_object_header ffffe18304dfd750
                   +0x000 PointerCount     : 0n504448
                   +0x008 HandleCount      : 0n15
                   +0x008 NextToFree       : 0x00000000'0000000f Void
                   +0x010 Lock             : _EX_PUSH_LOCK
                   +0x018 TypeIndex        : 0xe5 ''
                   +0x019 TraceFlags       : 0 ''
                   +0x019 DbgRefTrace      : 0y0
                   +0x019 DbgTracePermanent : 0y0

        +0x01a InfoMask         : 0x88 ''
        +0x01b Flags            : 0 ''
        +0x01b NewObject        : 0y0
        +0x01b KernelObject     : 0y0
        +0x01b KernelOnlyAccess : 0y0
        +0x01b ExclusiveObject : 0y0
        +0x01b PermanentObject : 0y0
        +0x01b DefaultSecurityQuota : 0y0
        +0x01b SingleHandleEntry : 0y0
        +0x01b DeletedInline    : 0y0
        +0x01c Reserved         : 0x30003100
        +0x020 ObjectCreateInfo : 0xffffe183'09e84ac0 _OBJECT_CREATE_INFORMATION
        +0x020 QuotaBlockCharged : 0xffffe183'09e84ac0 Void
        +0x028 SecurityDescriptor : 0xffffcd82'cd0e97ed Void
        +0x030 Body             : _QUAD

5.   Finally, use the debugger’s !sd command to dump the security descriptor. The security
     descriptor pointer in the object header uses some of the low-order bits as flags, and these
     must be zeroed before following the pointer. On 32-bit systems there are three flag bits,
     so use & –8 with the security descriptor address displayed in the object header structure,
     as follows. On 64-bit systems there are four flag bits, so you use & –10 instead.
     lkd> !sd 0xffffcd82'cd0e97ed & -10
     ->Revision: 0x1
     ->Sbz1    : 0x0
     ->Control : 0x8814
                 SE_DACL_PRESENT
                 SE_SACL_PRESENT
                 SE_SACL_AUTO_INHERITED
                 SE_SELF_RELATIVE
     ->Owner   : S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
     ->Group   : S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001
     ->Dacl    :
     ->Dacl    : ->AclRevision: 0x2
     ->Dacl    : ->Sbz1       : 0x0
     ->Dacl    : ->AclSize    : 0x5c
     ->Dacl    : ->AceCount   : 0x3
     ->Dacl    : ->Sbz2       : 0x0
     ->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
     ->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
     ->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->AceSize: 0x24
     ->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->Mask : 0x001fffff
     ->Dacl    : ->Ace[0]: ->SID: S-1-5-21-3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001

     ->Dacl     : ->Ace[1]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE
     ->Dacl     : ->Ace[1]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
     ->Dacl     : ->Ace[1]: ->AceSize: 0x14
     ->Dacl     : ->Ace[1]: ->Mask : 0x001fffff
     ->Dacl     : ->Ace[1]: ->SID: S-1-5-18

     ->Dacl     : ->Ace[2]: ->AceType: ACCESS_ALLOWED_ACE_TYPE

                 ->Dacl       : ->Ace[2]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
                 ->Dacl       : ->Ace[2]: ->AceSize: 0x1c
                 ->Dacl       : ->Ace[2]: ->Mask : 0x00121411
                 ->Dacl       : ->Ace[2]: ->SID: S-1-5-5-0-1745560

                 ->Sacl       :
                 ->Sacl       : ->AclRevision: 0x2
                 ->Sacl       : ->Sbz1       : 0x0
                 ->Sacl       : ->AclSize    : 0x1c
                 ->Sacl       : ->AceCount   : 0x1
                 ->Sacl       : ->Sbz2       : 0x0
                 ->Sacl       : ->Ace[0]: ->AceType: SYSTEM_MANDATORY_LABEL_ACE_TYPE
                 ->Sacl       : ->Ace[0]: ->AceFlags: 0x0
                 ->Sacl       : ->Ace[0]: ->AceSize: 0x14
                 ->Sacl       : ->Ace[0]: ->Mask : 0x00000003
                 ->Sacl       : ->Ace[0]: ->SID: S-1-16-8192

           The security descriptor contains three access-allowed ACEs: one for the current user (S-1-5-21-
        3537846094-3055369412-2967912182-1001), one for the System account (S-1-5-18), and the last
        for the Logon SID (S-1-5-5-0-1745560). The system access control list has one entry (S-1-16-8192)
        labeling the process as medium integrity level.

     ACL assignment
     To determine which DACL to assign to a new object, the security system uses the first applicable rule of
     the following four assignment rules:

        1.   If a caller explicitly provides a security descriptor when creating the object, the security system
             applies it to the object. If the object has a name and resides in a container object (for example, a
             named event object in the \BaseNamedObjects object manager namespace directory), the system
             merges any inheritable ACEs (ACEs that might propagate from the object’s container) into the DACL
             unless the security descriptor has the SE_DACL_PROTECTED flag set, which prevents inheritance.

        2.   If a caller doesn’t supply a security descriptor and the object has a name, the security system looks
             at the security descriptor in the container in which the new object name is stored. Some of the
             object directory’s ACEs might be marked as inheritable, meaning they should be applied to new
             objects created in the object directory. If any of these inheritable ACEs are present, the security
             system forms them into an ACL, which it attaches to the new object. (Separate flags indicate ACEs
             that should be inherited only by container objects rather than by objects that aren’t containers.)

        3.   If no security descriptor is specified and the object doesn’t inherit any ACEs, the security system
             retrieves the default DACL from the caller’s access token and applies it to the new object.
             Several subsystems on Windows have hard-coded DACLs that they assign on object creation
             (for example, services, LSA, and SAM objects).

        4.   If there is no specified descriptor, no inherited ACEs, and no default DACL, the system creates
             the object with no DACL, which allows everyone (all users and groups) full access to the object.
             This rule is the same as the third rule, in which a token contains a null default DACL.

   The rules the system uses when assigning a SACL to a new object are similar to those used for DACL
assignment, with some exceptions:

   ■■   Inherited system audit ACEs don’t propagate to objects with security descriptors marked with
        the SE_SACL_PROTECTED flag (similar to the SE_DACL_PROTECTED flag, which protects DACLs).

   ■■   If there are no specified security audit ACEs and there is no inherited SACL, no SACL is applied
        to the object. This behavior is different from that used to apply default DACLs because tokens
        don’t have a default SACL.

   When a new security descriptor containing inheritable ACEs is applied to a container, the system au-
tomatically propagates the inheritable ACEs to the security descriptors of child objects. (Note that a se-
curity descriptor’s DACL doesn’t accept inherited DACL ACEs if its SE_DACL_PROTECTED flag is enabled,
and its SACL doesn’t inherit SACL ACEs if the descriptor has the SE_SACL_PROTECTED flag set.) The order
in which inheritable ACEs are merged with an existing child object’s security descriptor is such that any
ACEs that were explicitly applied to the ACL are kept ahead of ACEs that the object inherits. The system
uses the following rules for propagating inheritable ACEs:

   ■■   If a child object with no DACL inherits an ACE, the result is a child object with a DACL containing
        only the inherited ACE.

   ■■   If a child object with an empty DACL inherits an ACE, the result is a child object with a DACL
        containing only the inherited ACE.

   ■■   For objects in Active Directory only, if an inheritable ACE is removed from a parent object, auto-
        matic inheritance removes any copies of the ACE inherited by child objects.

   ■■   For objects in Active Directory only, if automatic inheritance results in the removal of all ACEs
        from a child object’s DACL, the child object has an empty DACL rather than no DACL.

  As you’ll soon discover, the order of ACEs in an ACL is an important aspect of the Windows security
model.

   Note Inheritance is generally not directly supported by the object stores, such as file systems,
   the registry, or Active Directory. Windows APIs that support inheritance, including SetEntriesInAcl,
   do so by invoking appropriate functions within the security inheritance support DLL
   (%SystemRoot%\System32\Ntmarta.dll) that know how to traverse those object stores.

Trust ACEs
The advent of protected processes and Protected Processes Light (PPL, discussed in Chapter 3) created
a need for such a process to make objects as accessible by protected processes only. This is important
to protect certain resources such as the KnownDlls registry key from tampering, even by admin-level
code. Such ACEs are specified with well-known SIDs that provide the protection level and signer that is
required to obtain access. Table 7-7 shows the SIDs and their level and meaning.

     TABLE 7-7 Trust SIDs

     SID                                 Protection Level                    Protection Signer

     1-19-512-0                          Protected Light                     None

     1-19-512-4096                       Protected Light                     Windows

     1-19-512-8192                       Protected Light                     WinTcb

     1-19-1024-0                         Protected                           None

     1-19-1024-4096                      Protected                           Windows

     1-19-1024-8192                      Protected                           WinTcb

        A trust SID is part of a token object that exists for tokens attached to protected or PPL processes.
     The higher the SID number, the more powerful the token is. (remember that Protected is higher than
     Protected Light).

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing trust SIDs
        In this experiment, you’ll look at trust SIDs in tokens of protected processes.

           Start local kernel debugging.

           List Csrss.exe processes with basic information:
                   lkd> !process 0 1 csrss.exe
                   PROCESS ffff8188e50b5780
                       SessionId: 0 Cid: 0358     Peb: b3a9f5e000 ParentCid: 02ec
                       DirBase: 1273a3000 ObjectTable: ffffbe0d829e2040 HandleCount:
                   <Data Not Accessible>
                       Image: csrss.exe
                       VadRoot ffff8188e6ccc8e0 Vads 159 Clone 0 Private 324. Modified 4470.
                   Locked 0.
                       DeviceMap ffffbe0d70c15620
                       Token                             ffffbe0d829e7060
                       ...
                   PROCESS ffff8188e7a92080
                       SessionId: 1 Cid: 03d4     Peb: d5b0de4000 ParentCid: 03bc
                       DirBase: 162d93000 ObjectTable: ffffbe0d8362d7c0 HandleCount:
                   <Data Not Accessible>Modified 462372. Locked 0.
                       DeviceMap ffffbe0d70c15620
                       Token                             ffffbe0d8362d060
                       ...

           Select one of the tokens and show its details:
                   lkd> !token ffffbe0d829e7060
                   _TOKEN 0xffffbe0d829e7060
                   TS Session ID: 0
                   User: S-1-5-18
                   ...
                   Process Token TrustLevelSid: S-1-19-512-8192

           That’s a PPL with a WinTcb signer.

Determining access
Two methods are used for determining access to an object:

   ■■   The mandatory integrity check, which determines whether the integrity level of the caller is
        high enough to access the resource, based on the resource’s own integrity level and its manda-
        tory policy.

   ■■   The discretionary access check, which determines the access that a specific user account has to
        an object.

   When a process tries to open an object, the integrity check takes place before the standard
Windows DACL check in the kernel’s SeAccessCheck function because it is faster to execute and can
quickly eliminate the need to perform the full discretionary access check. Given the default integrity
policies in its access token (TOKEN_MANDATORY_NO_WRITE_UP and TOKEN_MANDATORY_NEW_PROCESS_
MIN, described previously), a process can open an object for write access if its integrity level is equal to
or higher than the object’s integrity level and the DACL also grants the process the accesses it desires.
For example, a low-integrity-level process cannot open a medium-integrity-level process for write ac-
cess, even if the DACL grants the process write access.

     With the default integrity policies, processes can open any object—with the exception of process,
thread, and token objects—for read access as long as the object’s DACL grants them read access. That
means a process running at low integrity level can open any files accessible to the user account in which
it’s running. Protected Mode Internet Explorer uses integrity levels to help prevent malware that infects it
from modifying user account settings, but it does not stop malware from reading the user’s documents.

   Recall that process, thread, and token objects are exceptions because their integrity policy also in-
cludes No-Read-Up. That means a process integrity level must be equal to or higher than the integrity
level of the process or thread it wants to open, and the DACL must grant it the access it wants for an
attempt to open it to succeed. Assuming the DACLs allow the desired access, Table 7-8 shows the types
of access that processes running at various integrity levels have to other processes and objects.

TABLE 7-8 Accessing objects and processes based on integrity level
Accessing Process        Access to Objects                                Access to Other Processes

High integrity level     Read/write to all objects with integrity level   Read/write access to all processes with High
                         of High or lower                                 or lower integrity level
                         Read access to objects with integrity level      No read/write access to processes with
                         of System                                        System integrity level

Medium integrity level   Read/write to all objects with integrity level   Read/write access to all processes with
                         of Medium or Low                                 Medium or Low integrity level
                         Read access to objects with integrity level of   No read/write access to processes with High
                         High or System                                   or System integrity level

Low integrity level      Read/write to all objects with integrity level   Read/write access to all processes with Low
                         of Low                                           integrity level
                         Read access to objects with integrity level of   No read/write access to processes with
                         Medium or higher                                 Medium or higher integrity level

       Note The read access to a process described in this section means full read access, such as
       reading the contents of the process address space. No-Read-Up does not prevent opening a
       higher-integrity-level process from a lower one for a more limited access, such as PROCESS_
       QUERY_LIMITED_INFORMATION, which provides only basic information about the process.

       User Interface Privilege Isolation
       The Windows messaging subsystem also honors integrity levels to implement User Interface
       Privilege Isolation (UIPI). The subsystem does this by preventing a process from sending window
       messages to the windows owned by a process having a higher integrity level, with the following
       informational messages being exceptions:

        ■■   WM_NULL                                               ■■   WM_GETICON

        ■■   WM_MOVE                                               ■■   WM_RENDERFORMAT

        ■■   WM_SIZE                                               ■■   WM_DRAWCLIPBOARD

        ■■   WM_GETTEXT                                            ■■   WM_CHANGECBCHAIN

        ■■   WM_GETTEXTLENGTH                                      ■■   WM_THEMECHANGED

        ■■   WM_GETHOTKEY

           This use of integrity levels prevents standard user processes from driving input into the windows
       of elevated processes or from performing a shatter attack (such as sending the process mal-
       formed messages that trigger internal buffer overflows, which can lead to the execution of code
       at the elevated process’s privilege level). UIPI also blocks window hooks (SetWindowsHookEx API)
       from affecting the windows of higher-integrity-level processes so that a standard user process
       can’t log the keystrokes the user types into an administrative application, for example. Journal
       hooks are also blocked in the same way to prevent lower-integrity-level processes from monitor-
       ing the behavior of higher-integrity-level processes.

           Processes (running with medium or higher integrity level only) can choose to allow additional
       messages to pass the guard by calling the ChangeWindowMessageFilterEx API. This function
       is typically used to add messages required by custom controls to communicate outside native
       common controls in Windows. An older API, ChangeWindowMessageFilter, performs a similar
       function, but it is per-process rather than per-window. With ChangeWindowMessageFilter, it is
       possible for two custom controls inside the same process to be using the same internal window
       messages, which could lead to one control’s potentially malicious window message to be allowed
       through, simply because it happens to be a query-only message for the other custom control.

          Because accessibility applications such as the On-Screen Keyboard (Osk.exe) are subject to
       UIPI’s restrictions (which would require the accessibility application to be executed for each kind
       of visible integrity-level process on the desktop), these processes can enable UI access. This flag

   can be present in the manifest file of the image and will run the process at a slightly higher integ-
   rity level than medium (between 0x2000 and 0x3000) if launched from a standard user account,
   or at high integrity level if launched from an Administrator account. Note that in the second case,
   an elevation request won’t actually be displayed. For a process to set this flag, its image must also
   be signed and in one of several secure locations, including %SystemRoot% and %ProgramFiles%.

   After the integrity check is complete, and assuming the mandatory policy allows access to the
object based on the caller’s integrity, one of two algorithms is used for the discretionary check to an
object, which will determine the outcome of the access check:

   ■■   Determine the maximum access allowed to the object, a form of which is exported to user
        mode using the AuthZ API (described in the section “The AuthZ API” later in this chapter) or
        the older GetEffectiveRightsFromAcl function. This is also used when a program specifies
        a desired access of MAXIMUM_ALLOWED, which is what the legacy APIs that don’t have a desired
        access parameter use.

   ■■   Determine whether a specific desired access is allowed, which can be done with the Windows
        AccessCheck function or the AccessCheckByType function.

   The first algorithm examines the entries in the DACL as follows:

   1.   If the object has no DACL (a null DACL), the object has no protection and the security sys-
        tem grants all access, unless the access is from an AppContainer process (discussed in the
        “AppContainers” section later in this chapter), which means access is denied.

   2.   If the caller has the take-ownership privilege, the security system grants write-owner access
        before examining the DACL. (Take-ownership privilege and write-owner access are explained
        in a moment.)

   3.   If the caller is the owner of the object, the system looks for an OWNER_RIGHTS SID and uses that SID
        as the SID for the next steps. Otherwise, read-control and write-DACL access rights are granted.

   4.   For each access-denied ACE that contains a SID that matches one in the caller’s access token,
        the ACE’s access mask is removed from the granted-access mask.

   5.   For each access-allowed ACE that contains a SID that matches one in the caller’s access token,
        the ACE’s access mask is added to the granted-access mask being computed, unless that access
        has already been denied.

   When all the entries in the DACL have been examined, the computed granted-access mask is re-
turned to the caller as the maximum allowed access to the object. This mask represents the total set of
access types that the caller will be able to successfully request when opening the object.

   The preceding description applies only to the kernel-mode form of the algorithm. The Windows
version implemented by GetEffectiveRightsFromAcl differs in that it doesn’t perform step 2, and it
considers a single user or group SID rather than an access token.

        Owner Rights
        Because owners of an object can normally override the security of an object by always being
        granted read-control and write-DACL rights, a specialized method of controlling this behavior is
        exposed by Windows: the Owner Rights SID.

             The Owner Rights SID exists for two main reasons:

         ■■    To improve service hardening in the operating system Whenever a service creates an
               object at run time, the Owner SID associated with that object is the account the service is
               running in (such as local system or local service) and not the actual service SID. This means
               that any other service in the same account would have access to the object by being an
               owner. The Owner Rights SID prevents that unwanted behavior.

         ■■    To allow more flexibility for specific usage scenarios For example, suppose an admin-
               istrator wants to allow users to create files and folders but not to modify the ACLs on those
               objects. (Users could inadvertently or maliciously grant access to those files or folders to
               unwanted accounts.) By using an inheritable Owner Rights SID, the users can be prevented
               from editing or even viewing the ACL on the objects they create. A second usage scenario
               relates to group changes. Suppose an employee has been part of some confidential or
               sensitive group, has created several files while a member of that group, and has now been
               removed from the group for business reasons. Because that employee is still a user, he
               could continue accessing the sensitive files.

        The second algorithm is used to determine whether a specific access request can be granted based
     on the caller’s access token. Each open function in the Windows API that deals with securable objects
     has a parameter that specifies the desired access mask, which is the last component of the security
     equation. To determine whether the caller has access, the following steps are performed:

        1.    If the object has no DACL (a null DACL), the object has no protection and the security system
              grants the desired access.

        2.    If the caller has the take-ownership privilege, the security system grants write-owner access
              if requested and then examines the DACL. However, if write-owner access was the only access
              requested by a caller with take-ownership privilege, the security system grants that access and
              never examines the DACL.

        3.    If the caller is the owner of the object, the system looks for an OWNER_RIGHTS SID and uses
              that SID as the SID for the next steps. Otherwise, read-control and write-DACL access rights are
              granted. If these rights were the only access rights that the caller requested, access is granted
              without examining the DACL

        4.    Each ACE in the DACL is examined from first to last. An ACE is processed if one of the following
              conditions is satisfied:

              • The ACE is an access-deny ACE, and the SID in the ACE matches an enabled SID (SIDs can be
                 enabled or disabled) or a deny-only SID in the caller’s access token.

        • The ACE is an access-allowed ACE, and the SID in the ACE matches an enabled SID in the
             caller’s token that isn’t of type deny-only.

        • It is the second pass through the descriptor for restricted-SID checks, and the SID in the ACE
             matches a restricted SID in the caller’s access token.

        • The ACE isn’t marked as inherit-only.
   5.   If it is an access-allowed ACE, the rights in the access mask in the ACE that were requested are
        granted. If all the requested access rights have been granted, the access check succeeds. If it is
        an access-denied ACE and any of the requested access rights are in the denied-access rights,
        access is denied to the object.

   6.   If the end of the DACL is reached and some of the requested access rights still haven’t been
        granted, access is denied.

   7.   If all accesses are granted but the caller’s access token has at least one restricted SID, the system
        rescans the DACL’s ACEs looking for ACEs with access-mask matches for the accesses the user
        is requesting and a match of the ACE’s SID with any of the caller’s restricted SIDs. Only if both
        scans of the DACL grant the requested access rights is the user granted access to the object.

   The behavior of both access-validation algorithms depends on the relative ordering of allow and
deny ACEs. Consider an object with only two ACEs: one that specifies that a certain user is allowed full
access to an object and one that denies the user access. If the allow ACE precedes the deny ACE, the
user can obtain full access to the object, but if the order is reversed, the user cannot gain any access to
the object.

    Several Windows functions, such as SetSecurityInfo and SetNamedSecurityInfo, apply ACEs
in the preferred order of explicit deny ACEs preceding explicit allow ACEs. For example, the security
editor dialog boxes with which you edit permissions on NTFS files and registry keys use these func-
tions. SetSecurityInfo and SetNamedSecurityInfo also apply ACE inheritance rules to the security
descriptor on which they are applied.

    Figure 7-9 shows an example of access validation demonstrating the importance of ACE ordering. In
the example, access is denied to a user wanting to open a file even though an ACE in the object’s DACL
grants the access. This is because the ACE denying the user access (by virtue of the user’s membership
in the Writers group) precedes the ACE granting access.

FIGURE 7-9    Access-validation example.

        As stated, because it wouldn’t be efficient for the security system to process the DACL every time a
     process uses a handle, the SRM makes this access check only when a handle is opened, not each time
     the handle is used. Thus, once a process successfully opens a handle, the security system can’t revoke
     the access rights that have been granted, even if the object’s DACL changes. Also keep in mind that
     because kernel-mode code uses pointers rather than handles to access objects, the access check isn’t
     performed when the operating system uses objects. In other words, the Windows executive trusts itself
     (and all loaded drivers) in a security sense.

        The fact that an object’s owner is always granted write-DACL access to an object means that users
     can never be prevented from accessing the objects they own. If, for some reason, an object had an
     empty DACL (no access), the owner would still be able to open the object with write-DACL access and
     then apply a new DACL with the desired access permissions.

        A warning regarding the GUI security editors
        When you use the GUI permissions editors to modify security settings on a file, a registry, or an
        Active Directory object, or on another securable object, the main security dialog box shows you a
        potentially misleading view of the security that’s applied to the object. If you allow Full Control to
        the Everyone group and deny the Administrator group Full Control, the list might lead you to be-
        lieve that the Everyone group access-allowed ACE precedes the Administrator deny ACE because
        that’s the order in which they appear. However, as we’ve said, the editors place deny ACEs before
        allow ACEs when they apply the ACL to the object.

            The Permissions tab of the Advanced Security Settings dialog box shows the order of ACEs
        in the DACL. However, even this dialog box can be confusing because a complex DACL can have
        deny ACEs for various accesses followed by allow ACEs for other access types.

   The only definitive way to know what access a particular user or group will have to an object
(other than having that user or a member of the group try to access the object) is to use the
Effective Access tab of the dialog box that is displayed when you click the Advanced button in
the Properties dialog box. Enter the name of the user or group you want to check and the dialog
box shows you what permissions they are allowed for the object.

     Dynamic Access Control
     The discretionary access control mechanism discussed in previous sections has existed since the first
     Windows NT version and is useful in many scenarios. There are scenarios, however, where this scheme
     is not flexible enough. For example, consider a requirement that users accessing a shared file should be
     allowed to do so if they are using a computer in the workplace, but should not be allowed if accessing
     the file from their computer at home. There is no way to specify such a condition using an ACE.

        Windows 8 and Server 2012 introduced Dynamic Access Control (DAC), a flexible mechanism that can
     be used to define rules based on custom attributes defined in Active Directory. DAC does not replace the
     existing mechanism, but adds to it. This means that for an operation to be allowed, both DAC and the
     classic DACL must grant the permission. Figure 7-10 shows the main aspects of Dynamic Access Control.

     FIGURE 7-10   Dynamic Access Control components.

        A claim is any piece of information about a user, device (computer in a domain), or resource (generic
     attribute) that has been published by a domain controller. Examples of valid claims are a user’s title and
     department classification of a file. Any combination of claims can be used in expressions for building
     rules. These rules collectively become the central access policy.

        DAC configuration is done in Active Directory and pushed through policy. The Kerberos tickets
     protocol has been enhanced to support authenticated transport of user and device claims (known as
     Kerberos armoring).

The AuthZ API
     The AuthZ Windows API provides authorization functions and implements the same security model
     as the security reference monitor (SRM), but it implements the model totally in user mode in the
     %SystemRoot%\System32\Authz.dll library. This gives applications that want to protect their own private
     objects, such as database tables, the ability to leverage the Windows security model without incurring the
     cost of user mode–to–kernel mode transitions that they would make if they relied on the SRM.

        The AuthZ API uses standard security descriptor data structures, SIDs, and privileges. Instead of
     using tokens to represent clients, AuthZ uses AUTHZ_CLIENT_CONTEXT. AuthZ includes user-mode
     equivalents of all access-check and Windows security functions—for example, AuthzAccessCheck is
     the AuthZ version of the AccessCheck Windows API that uses the SeAccessCheck SRM function.

    Another advantage available to applications that use AuthZ is that they can direct AuthZ to cache
the results of security checks to improve subsequent checks that use the same client context and secu-
rity descriptor. AuthZ is fully documented in the Windows SDK.

  This type of access checking, using a SID and security group membership in a static, controlled
environment, is known as Identity-Based Access Control (IBAC), and it requires that the security system
know the identity of every possible accessor when the DACL is placed in an object’s security descriptor.

    Windows includes support for Claims Based Access Control (CBAC), where access is granted not based
upon the accessor’s identity or group membership, but upon arbitrary attributes assigned to the acces-
sor and stored in the accessor’s access token. Attributes are supplied by an attribute provider, such as
AppLocker. The CBAC mechanism provides many benefits, including the ability to create a DACL for a
user whose identity is not yet known or dynamically calculated user attributes. The CBAC ACE (also known
as a conditional ACE) is stored in a *-callback ACE structure, which is essentially private to AuthZ and
is ignored by the system SeAccessCheck API. The kernel-mode routine SeSrpAccessCheck does not
understand conditional ACEs, so only applications calling the AuthZ APIs can make use of CBAC. The only
system component that makes use of CBAC is AppLocker, for setting attributes such as path or publisher.
Third-party applications can make use of CBAC by taking advantage of the CBAC AuthZ APIs.

   Using CBAC security checks allows powerful management policies, such as the following:

   ■■   Run only applications approved by the corporate IT department.

   ■■   Allow only approved applications to access your Microsoft Outlook contacts or calendar.

   ■■   Allow only people in a particular building on a specific floor to access printers on that floor.

   ■■   Allow access to an intranet website only to full-time employees (as opposed to contractors).

   Attributes can be referenced in what is known as a conditional ACE, where the presence, absence, or
value of one or more attributes is checked. An attribute name can contain any alphanumeric Unicode
characters, as well as the following characters: colon (:), forward slash (/), and underscore (_). The value
of an attribute can be one of the following: 64-bit integer, Unicode string, byte string, or array.

Conditional ACEs
The format of SDDL strings has been expanded to support ACEs with conditional expressions. The
new format of an SDDL string is this: AceType;AceFlags;Rights;ObjectGuid;InheritObjectGuid;
AccountSid;(ConditionalExpression).

   The AceType for a conditional ACE is either XA (for SDDL_CALLBACK_ACCESS_ALLOWED) or XD (for
SDDL_CALLBACK_ACCESS_DENIED). Note that ACEs with conditional expressions are used for claims-
type authorization (specifically, the AuthZ APIs and AppLocker) and are not recognized by the object
manager or file systems.

   A conditional expression can include any of the elements shown in Table 7-9.

     TABLE 7-9   Acceptable Elements for a Conditional Expression
     Expression Element                      Description

     AttributeName                           Tests whether the specified attribute has a non-zero value.

     exists AttributeName                    Tests whether the specified attribute exists in the client context.

     AttributeName Operator Value            Returns the result of the specified operation. The following operators are
                                             defined for use in conditional expressions to test the values of attributes. All
                                             these are binary operators (as opposed to unary) and are used in the form
                                             AttributeName Operator Value. The operators are Contains any_of ,
                                             ==, !=, <, <=, >, >=.

     ConditionalExpression ||                Tests whether either of the specified conditional expressions is true.
     ConditionalExpression

     ConditionalExpression &&                Tests whether both of the specified conditional expressions are true.
     ConditionalExpression

     !(ConditionalExpression)                The inverse of a conditional expression.

     Member_of {SidArray}                    Tests whether the SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES array of the client context con-
                                             tains all the security identifiers (SIDs) in the comma-separated list specified
                                             by SidArray.

        A conditional ACE can contain any number of conditions. It is ignored if the resultant evaluation of
     the condition is false or applied if the result is true. A conditional ACE can be added to an object using
     the AddConditionalAce API and checked using the AuthzAccessCheck API.

        A conditional ACE could specify that access to certain data records within a program should be
     granted only to a user who meets the following criteria (for example):

        ■■   Holds the Role attribute, with a value of Architect, Program Manager, or Development Lead,
             and the Division attribute with a value of Windows

        ■■   Whose ManagementChain attribute contains the value John Smith

        ■■   Whose CommissionType attribute is Officer and whose PayGrade attribute is greater than 6
             (that is, the rank of General Officer in the US military)

        Windows does not include tools to view or edit conditional ACEs.

Account rights and privileges
     Many operations performed by processes as they execute cannot be authorized through object access
     protection because they do not involve interaction with a particular object. For example, the ability to
     bypass security checks when opening files for backup is an attribute of an account, not of a particular
     object. Windows uses both privileges and account rights to allow a system administrator to control
     what accounts can perform security-related operations.

        A privilege is the right of an account to perform a particular system-related operation, such as shut-
     ting down the computer or changing the system time. An account right grants or denies the account to
     which it’s assigned the ability to perform a particular type of logon, such as a local logon or interactive
     logon, to a computer.

    A system administrator assigns privileges to groups and accounts using tools such as the Active
Directory Users and Groups MMC snap-in for domain accounts or the Local Security Policy editor
(%SystemRoot%\System32\secpol.msc). Figure 7-11 shows the User Rights Assignment configuration
in the Local Security Policy editor, which displays the complete list of privileges and account rights
available on Windows. Note that the tool makes no distinction between privileges and account rights.
However, you can differentiate between them: Any user right that does not contain the words log on is
an account privilege.

FIGURE 7-11   Local Security Policy editor user rights assignment.

Account rights
Account rights are not enforced by the SRM, nor are they stored in tokens. The function responsible for
logon is LsaLogonUser. Winlogon, for example, calls the LogonUser API when a user logs on interac-
tively to a computer, and LogonUser calls LsaLogonUser. LogonUser takes a parameter that indicates
the type of logon being performed, which includes interactive, network, batch, service, and Terminal
Server client.

        In response to logon requests, the Local Security Authority (LSA) retrieves account rights assigned
     to a user from the LSA policy database at the time that a user attempts to log on to the system. The LSA
     checks the logon type against the account rights assigned to the user account logging on and denies
     the logon if the account does not have the right that permits the logon type or it has the right that
     denies the logon type. Table 7-10 lists the user rights defined by Windows.

     TABLE 7-10   Account rights
     User Right                                                   Role

     Deny logon locally, allow logon locally                      Used for interactive logons that originate on the local
                                                                  machine

     Deny logon over the network, allow logon over the network    Used for logons that originate from a remote machine

     Deny logon through Terminal Services, allow logon            Used for logons through a Terminal Server client
     through Terminal Services

     Deny logon as a service, allow logon as a service            Used by the service control manager when starting a service
                                                                  in a particular user account

     Deny logon as a batch job, allow logon as a batch job        Used when performing a logon of type batch

        Windows applications can add and remove user rights from an account by using the LsaAdd-
     AccountRights and LsaRemoveAccountRights functions, and they can determine what rights are
     assigned to an account with LsaEnumerateAccountRights.

     Privileges
     The number of privileges defined by the operating system has grown over time. Unlike user rights,
     which are enforced in one place by the LSA, different privileges are defined by different components
     and enforced by those components. For example, the debug privilege, which allows a process to by-
     pass security checks when opening a handle to another process with the OpenProcess Windows API,
     is checked for by the process manager.

        Table 7-11 is a full list of privileges and describes how and when system components check for
     them. Each privilege has a macro defined in the SDK headers, in the form SE_privilege_NAME, where
     privilege is a privilege constant—for example, SE_DEBUG_NAME for the debug privilege. These macros
     are defined as strings that start with Se and end with Privilege, as in SeDebugPrivilege. This may
     seem to indicate that privileges are identified by strings, but in fact they are identified by LUIDs, which
     naturally are unique for the current boot. Every access to a privilege needs to lookup the correct LUID
     by calling the LookupPrivilegeValue function. Note, however, that Ntdll and kernel code can identify
     privileges with integer constants directly without going through a LUID.

     TABLE 7-11   Privileges
     Privilege                                      User Right           Privilege Usage

     SeAssignPrimaryTokenPrivilege                  Replace a process-   Checked for by various components, such as
                                                    level token          NtSetInformationJobObject, that set a process’s
                                                                         token.

     SeAuditPrivilege                               Generate security    Required to generate events for the Security event
                                                    audits               log with the ReportEvent API.

TABLE 7-11   Privileges (continued)
Privilege                             User Right           Privilege Usage

SeBackupPrivilege                     Back up files and    Causes NTFS to grant the following access to any file
                                      directories          or directory, regardless of the security descriptor
                                                           that’s present: READ_CONTROL, ACCESS_SYSTEM_
                                                           SECURITY, FILE_GENERIC_READ, and FILE_
                                                           TRAVERSE. Note that when opening a file for backup,
                                                           the caller must specify the FILE_FLAG_BACKUP_
                                                           SEMANTICS flag. Also allows corresponding access to
                                                           registry keys when using RegSaveKey.

SeChangeNotifyPrivilege               Bypass traverse      Used by NTFS to avoid checking permissions on
                                      checking             intermediate directories of a multilevel directory
                                                           lookup. Also used by file systems when applications
                                                           register for notification of changes to the file system
                                                           structure.

SeCreateGlobalPrivilege               Create global        Required for a process to create section and sym-
                                      objects              bolic link objects in the directories of the object
                                                           manager namespace that are assigned to a different
                                                           session than the caller.

SeCreatePagefilePrivilege             Create a pagefile    Checked for by NtCreatePagingFile, which is the
                                                           function used to create a new paging file.

SeCreatePermanentPrivilege            Create permanent     Checked for by the object manager when creating a
                                      shared objects       permanent object (one that doesn’t get deallocated
                                                           when there are no more references to it).

SeCreateSymbolicLinkPrivilege         Create symbolic      Checked for by NTFS when creating symbolic links
                                      links                on the file system with the CreateSymbolicLink
                                                           API.

SeCreateTokenPrivilege                Create a token       NtCreateToken, the function that creates a token
                                      object               object, checks for this privilege.

SeDebugPrivilege                      Debug programs       If the caller has this privilege enabled, the process
                                                           manager allows access to any process or thread
                                                           using NtOpenProcess or NtOpenThread, regardless
                                                           of the process’s or thread’s security descriptor (except
                                                           for protected processes).

SeEnableDelegationPrivilege           Enable computer      Used by Active Directory services to delegate
                                      and user accounts    authenticated credentials.
                                      to be trusted for
                                      delegation

SeImpersonatePrivilege                Impersonate a        The process manager checks for this when a thread
                                      client after         wants to use a token for impersonation and the
                                      authentication       token represents a different user than that of the
                                                           thread’s process token.

SeIncreaseBasePriorityPrivilege       Increase schedul-    Checked for by the process manager and is required
                                      ing priority         to raise the priority of a process.

SeIncreaseQuotaPrivilege              Adjust memory        Enforced when changing a process’s working set
                                      quotas for a         thresholds, a process’s paged and nonpaged pool
                                      process              quotas, and a process’s CPU rate quota.

SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege         Increase a process   Required to call SetProcessWorkingSetSize to
                                      working set          increase the minimum working set. This indirectly
                                                           allows the process to lock up to the minimum work-
                                                           ing set of memory using VirtualLock.

     TABLE 7-11   Privileges (continued)
     Privilege                             User Right           Privilege Usage

     SeLoadDriverPrivilege                 Load and unload      Checked for by the NtLoadDriver and
                                           device drivers       NtUnloadDriver driver functions.

     SeLockMemoryPrivilege                 Lock pages in        Checked for by NtLockVirtualMemory, the kernel
                                           memory               implementation of VirtualLock.

     SeMachineAccountPrivilege             Add workstations     Checked for by the Security Account Manager on a
                                           to the domain        domain controller when creating a machine account
                                                                in a domain.

     SeManageVolumePrivilege               Perform volume       Enforced by file system drivers during a volume open
                                           maintenance tasks    operation, which is required to perform disk-check-
                                                                ing and defragmenting activities.

     SeProfileSingleProcessPrivilege       Profile single       Checked by Superfetch and the prefetcher when
                                           process              requesting information for an individual process
                                                                through the NtQuerySystemInformation API.

     SeRelabelPrivilege                    Modify an object     Checked for by the SRM when raising the integrity
                                           label                level of an object owned by another user, or when
                                                                attempting to raise the integrity level of an object
                                                                higher than that of the caller’s token.

     SeRemoteShutdownPrivilege             Force shutdown       Winlogon checks that remote callers of the
                                           from a remote        InitiateSystemShutdown function have this privi-
                                           system               lege.

     SeRestorePrivilege                    Restore files and    This privilege causes NTFS to grant the following ac-
                                           directories          cess to any file or directory, regardless of the security
                                                                descriptor that’s present: WRITE_DAC, WRITE_OWNER,
                                                                ACCESS_SYSTEM_SECURITY, FILE_GENERIC_WRITE,
                                                                FILE_ADD_FILE, FILE_ADD_SUBDIRECTORY, and
                                                                DELETE. Note that when opening a file for restore,
                                                                the caller must specify the FILE_FLAG_BACKUP_
                                                                SEMANTICS flag. Allows corresponding access to
                                                                registry keys when using RegSaveKey.

     SeSecurityPrivilege                   Manage auditing      Required to access the SACL of a security descriptor
                                           and security log     and to read and clear the security event log.

     SeShutdownPrivilege                   Shut down the        Checked for by NtShutdownSystem and
                                           system               NtRaiseHardError, which presents a system error
                                                                dialog box on the interactive console.

     SeSyncAgentPrivilege                  Synchronize direc-   Required to use the LDAP directory synchronization
                                           tory service data    services. It allows the holder to read all objects and
                                                                properties in the directory, regardless of the protec-
                                                                tion on the objects and properties.

     SeSystemEnvironmentPrivilege          Modify firmware      Required by NtSetSystemEnvironmentValue and
                                           environment vari-    NtQuerySystemEnvironmentValue to modify and
                                           ables                read firmware environment variables using the hard-
                                                                ware abstraction layer (HAL).

     SeSystemProfilePrivilege              Profile system per- Checked for by NtCreateProfile, the function
                                           formance            used to perform profiling of the system. This is used
                                                               by the Kernprof tool, for example.

     SeSystemtimePrivilege                 Change the sys-      Required to change the time or date.
                                           tem time

TABLE 7-11   Privileges (continued)
Privilege                                User Right           Privilege Usage

SeTakeOwnershipPrivilege                 Take ownership       Required to take ownership of an object without
                                         of files and other   being granted discretionary access.
                                         objects

SeTcbPrivilege                           Act as part of the   Checked for by the SRM when the session ID is
                                         operating system     set in a token, by the Plug and Play manager for
                                                              Plug and Play event creation and management, by
                                                              BroadcastSystemMessageEx when called with
                                                              BSM_ALLDESKTOPS, by LsaRegisterLogonProcess,
                                                              and when specifying an application as a VDM with
                                                              NtSetInformationProcess.

SeTimeZonePrivilege                      Change the time      Required to change the time zone.
                                         zone

SeTrustedCredManAccessPrivilege          Access Credential    Checked by the Credential Manager to verify that it
                                         Manager as a         should trust the caller with credential information
                                         trusted caller       that can be queried in plaintext. It is granted only to
                                                              Winlogon by default.

SeUndockPrivilege                        Remove computer      Checked for by the user-mode Plug and Play man-
                                         from a docking       ager when either a computer undock is initiated or a
                                         station              device eject request is made.

SeUnsolicitedInputPrivilege              Receive unsolic-     This privilege isn’t currently used by Windows.
                                         ited data from a
                                         terminal device

   When a component wants to check a token to see whether a privilege is present, it uses the Privilege-
Check or LsaEnumerateAccountRights APIs if running in user mode and SeSinglePrivilegeCheck
or SePrivilegeCheck if running in kernel mode. The privilege-related APIs are not account-right
aware, but the account-right APIs are privilege-aware.

   Unlike account rights, privileges can be enabled and disabled. For a privilege check to succeed,
the privilege must be in the specified token and it must be enabled. The idea behind this scheme is
that privileges should be enabled only when their use is required so that a process cannot inadver-
tently perform a privileged security operation. Enabling or disabling privileges can be done with the
AdjustTokenPrivileges function.

   EXPERIMENT: Seeing a privilege get enabled
   By following these steps, you can see that the Date and Time Control Panel applet enables the
   SeTimeZonePrivilege privilege in response to you using its interface to change the time zone
   of the computer (Windows 10):

        1.    Run Process Explorer elevated.

        2.    Right-click the clock in the system tray in the taskbar and choose Adjust Date/Time.
              Alternatively, open the Settings app and search for time to open the Date and Time
              settings page.

           3.   Right-click the SystemSettings.exe process in Process Explorer and choose Properties.
                Then click the Security tab in the Properties dialog box. You should see that the
                SeTimeZonePrivilege privilege is disabled.

           4.   Change the time zone, close the Properties dialog box, and then open it again. On the
                Security tab, you should now see that the SeTimeZonePrivilege privilege is enabled:

   EXPERIMENT: The Bypass Traverse Checking privilege
   If you are a systems administrator, you must be aware of the Bypass Traverse Checking privilege
   (internally called SeNotifyPrivilege) and its implications. This experiment demonstrates that
   not understanding its behavior can lead to improperly applied security.

        1.   Create a folder and, within that folder, a new text file with some sample text.

        2.   Navigate in Explorer to the new file, open its Properties dialog box, and click the
             Security tab.

        3.   Click the Advanced button.

        4.   Deselect the Inheritance check box.

        5.   Select Copy when you are prompted as to whether you want to remove or copy
             inherited permissions.

        6.   Modify the security of the new folder so that your account does not have any access
             to the folder. To do so, select your account and check all the Deny boxes in the permis-
             sions list.

        7.   Run Notepad. Then open the File menu, choose Open, and browse to the new direc-
             tory in the dialog box that appears. You should be denied access to the directory.

        8.   In the File Name field of the Open dialog box, type the full path of the new file. The file
             should open.

      If your account does not have the Bypass Traverse Checking privilege, NTFS performs an ac-
   cess check on each directory of the path to a file when you try to open a file, which results in you
   being denied access to the file in this example.

Super privileges
Several privileges are so powerful that a user to which they are assigned is effectively a “super user”
who has full control over a computer. These privileges can be used in an infinite number of ways to
gain unauthorized access to otherwise off-limit resources and to perform unauthorized operations.
However, we’ll focus on using the privilege to execute code that grants the user privileges not assigned
to the user, with the knowledge that this capability can be leveraged to perform any operation on the
local machine that the user desires.

   This section lists the privileges and discusses some of the ways they can be exploited. Other privi-
leges, such as Lock Pages in Physical Memory (SeLockMemoryPrivilege), can be exploited for denial-
of-service attacks on a system, but these are not discussed. Note that on systems with UAC enabled,
these privileges will be granted only to applications running at high integrity level or higher, even if the
account possesses them:

        ■■   Debug programs (SeDebugPrivilege) A user with this privilege can open any process on the
             system (except for a protected process) without regard to the security descriptor present on the
             process. For example, the user could implement a program that opens the Lsass process, copy
             executable code into its address space, and then inject a thread with the CreateRemoteThread
             Windows API to execute the injected code in a more-privileged security context. The code
             could grant the user additional privileges and group memberships.

        ■■   Take ownership (SeTakeOwnershipPrivilege) This privilege allows a holder to take owner-
             ship of any securable object (even protected processes and threads) by writing his own SID into
             the owner field of the object’s security descriptor. Recall that an owner is always granted per-
             mission to read and modify the DACL of the security descriptor, so a process with this privilege
             could modify the DACL to grant itself full access to the object and then close and reopen the
             object with full access. This would allow the owner to see sensitive data and to even replace sys-
             tem files that execute as part of normal system operation, such as Lsass, with his own programs
             that grant a user elevated privileges.

        ■■   Restore files and directories (SeRestorePrivilege) A user assigned this privilege can re-
             place any file on the system with her own. She could exploit this power by replacing system files
             as described in the preceding paragraph.

        ■■   Load and unload device drivers (SeLoadDriverPrivilege) A malicious user could use this
             privilege to load a device driver into the system. Device drivers are considered trusted parts
             of the operating system that can execute within it with System account credentials, so a driver
             could launch privileged programs that assign the user other rights.

        ■■   Create a token object (SeCreateTokenPrivilege) This privilege can be used in the obvious
             way to generate tokens that represent arbitrary user accounts with arbitrary group membership
             and privilege assignment.

        ■■   Act as part of operating system (SeTcbPrivilege) LsaRegisterLogonProcess, the function
             a process calls to establish a trusted connection to Lsass, checks for this privilege. A malicious user
             with this privilege can establish a trusted-Lsass connection and then execute LsaLogonUser, a
             function used to create new logon sessions. LsaLogonUser requires a valid user name and pass-
             word and accepts an optional list of SIDs that it adds to the initial token created for a new logon
             session. The user could therefore use her own user name and password to create a new logon
             session that includes the SIDs of more privileged groups or users in the resulting token.

       Note The use of an elevated privilege does not extend past the machine boundary to the
       network because any interaction with another computer requires authentication with a do-
       main controller and validation of domain passwords. Domain passwords are not stored on a
       computer either in plaintext or encrypted form, so they are not accessible to malicious code.

Access tokens of processes and threads
   Figure 7-12 brings together the concepts covered so far in this chapter by illustrating the basic process
   and thread security structures. In the figure, notice that the process object and the thread objects have
   ACLs, as do the access token objects themselves. Also in this figure, thread 2 and thread 3 each have an
   impersonation token, whereas thread 1 uses the default process access token.

   FIGURE 7-12   Process and thread security structures.

Security auditing
   The object manager can generate audit events as a result of an access check, and Windows func-
   tions available to user applications can generate them directly. Kernel-mode code is always allowed
   to generate an audit event. Two privileges, SeSecurityPrivilege and SeAuditPrivilege, relate to
   auditing. A process must have the SeSecurityPrivilege privilege to manage the security event log
   and to view or set an object’s SACL. Processes that call audit system services, however, must have the
   SeAuditPrivilege privilege to successfully generate an audit record.

      The audit policy of the local system controls the decision to audit a particular type of security event.
   The audit policy, also called the Local Security Policy, is one part of the security policy Lsass maintains
   on the local system. It is configured with the Local Security Policy editor as shown in Figure 7-13. The
   audit policy configuration (both the basic settings under Local Policies and the Advanced Audit Policy
   Configuration) is stored in the registry as a bitmapped value in the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SECURITY\
   Policy\PolAdtEv key.

     FIGURE 7-13   Local Security Policy editor audit policy configuration.

        Lsass sends messages to the SRM to inform it of the auditing policy at system-initialization time and
     when the policy changes. Lsass is responsible for receiving audit records generated based on the audit
     events from the SRM, editing the records, and sending them to the event logger. Lsass (instead of the
     SRM) sends these records because it adds pertinent details, such as the information needed to more
     completely identify the process that is being audited.

       The SRM sends audit records via its ALPC connection to Lsass. The event logger then writes the
     audit record to the security event log. In addition to audit records the SRM passes, both Lsass and the
     SAM generate audit records that Lsass sends directly to the event logger, and the AuthZ APIs allow for
     applications to generate application-defined audits. Figure 7-14 depicts this overall flow.

     FIGURE 7-14   Flow of security audit records.

    Audit records are put on a queue to be sent to the LSA as they are received. They are not submitted
in batches. The audit records are moved from the SRM to the security subsystem in one of two ways. If
the audit record is small (less than the maximum ALPC message size), it is sent as an ALPC message. The
audit records are copied from the address space of the SRM to the address space of the Lsass process.
If the audit record is large, the SRM uses shared memory to make the message available to Lsass and
simply passes a pointer in an ALPC message.

Object access auditing
An important use of the auditing mechanism in many environments is to maintain a log of accesses
to secured objects—in particular, files. To do this, the Audit object access policy must be enabled, and
there must be audit ACEs in system access control lists that enable auditing for the objects in question.

    When an accessor attempts to open a handle to an object, the SRM first determines whether the
attempt is allowed or denied. If object access auditing is enabled, the SRM then scans the system ACL
of the object. There are two types of audit ACEs: access allowed and access denied. An audit ACE must
match any of the security IDs held by the accessor, it must match any of the access methods requested,
and its type (access allowed or access denied) must match the result of the access check to generate an
object access audit record.

   Object access audit records include not just the fact of access allowed or denied, but also the reason
for the success or failure. This “reason for access” reporting generally takes the form of an access con-
trol entry, specified in Security Descriptor Definition Language (SDDL), in the audit record. This allows
for a diagnosis of scenarios in which an object to which you believe access should be denied is being
permitted, or vice versa, by identifying the specific access control entry that caused the attempted
access to succeed or fail.

  As was shown in Figure 7-13, object access auditing is disabled by default (as are all other
auditing policies).

   EXPERIMENT: Object access auditing
   You can observe object access auditing by following these steps:

       1.   In Explorer, navigate to a file to which you would normally have access (such as a
            text file), open its Properties dialog box, click the Security tab, and then select the
            Advanced settings.

       2.   Click the Auditing tab and click through the administrative privileges warning. The
            resulting dialog box allows you to add auditing of access control entries to the file’s
            system access control list.

           3.   Click the Add button and choose Select a Principal.

           4.   In the resulting Select User or Group dialog box, enter your own user name or a group
                to which you belong, such as Everyone. Click Check Names and then click OK. This
                presents a dialog box for creating an Audit access control entry for this user or group
                for this file.

           5.   Click OK three times to close the file Properties dialog box.

           6.   In Explorer, double-click the file to open it with its associated program (for example,
                Notepad for a text file).

           7.   Click the Start menu, type event, and choose Event Viewer.

8.   Navigate to the Security log. Note that there is no entry for access to the file. This is
     because the audit policy for object access is not yet configured.

9.   In the Local Security Policy editor, navigate to Local Policies and choose Audit Policy.

10. Double-click Audit Object Access and click Success to enable auditing of successful
     access to files.

11. In Event Viewer, click Action (from the menu) and Refresh. Note that the changes to
     audit policy resulted in audit records.

12. In Explorer, double-click the file to open it again.

13. In Event Viewer, click Action and Refresh. Note that several file access audit records are
     now present.

14. Find one of the file access audit records for event ID 4656. This shows up as “a handle
     to an object was requested.” (You can use the Find option to search for the file name
     you opened.)

15. Scroll down in the text box to find the Access Reasons section. The following example
     shows that two access methods, READ_CONTROL, SYNCHRONIZE, and ReadAttributes,
     ReadEA (extended attributes), and ReadData were requested. READ_CONTROL was granted
     because the accessor was the owner of the file. The others were granted because of the
     indicated access control entry.

     Global audit policy
     In addition to object-access ACEs on individual objects, a global audit policy can be defined for the
     system that enables object-access auditing for all file-system objects, all registry keys, or for both. A
     security auditor can therefore be certain that the desired auditing will be performed, without having
     to set or examine SACLs on all the individual objects of interest.

        An administrator can set or query the global audit policy via the AuditPol command with the
     /resourceSACL option. This can also be done programmatically by calling the AuditSetGlobalSacl
     and AuditQueryGlobalSacl APIs. As with changes to objects’ SACLs, changing these global SACLs
     requires SeSecurityPrivilege.

        EXPERIMENT: Setting global audit policy
        You can use the AuditPol command to enable global audit policy.

             1.   If you didn’t already do so in the previous experiment, open the Local Security Policy
                  editor, navigate to the Audit Policy settings (refer to Figure 7-13), double-click Audit
                  Object Access, and enable auditing for both success and failure. On most systems,
                  SACLs specifying object access auditing are uncommon, so few if any object-access
                  audit records will be produced at this point.

             2.   In an elevated command prompt window, enter the following command. This will pro-
                  duce a summary of the commands for setting and querying global audit policy.
                  C:\> auditpol /resourceSACL

             3.   In the same elevated command prompt window, enter the following commands. On a
                  typical system, each of these commands will report that no global SACL exists for the
                  respective resource type. (Note that the File and Key keywords are case-sensitive.)
                  C:\> auditpol /resourceSACL /type:File /view
                  C:\> auditpol /resourceSACL /type:Key /view

             4.   In the same elevated command prompt window, enter the following command. This will
                  set a global audit policy such that all attempts to open files for write access (FW) by the
                  indicated user will result in audit records, whether the open attempts succeed or fail.
                  The user name can be a specific user name on the system, a group such as Everyone, a
                  domain-qualified user name such as domainname\username, or a SID.
                  C:\> auditpol /resourceSACL /set /type:File /user:yourusername /success
                  /failure /access:FW

             5.   While running under the user name indicated, use Explorer or other tools to open a file.
                  Then look at the security log in the system event log to find the audit records.

             6.   At the end of the experiment, use the auditpol command to remove the global SACL
                  you created in step 4, as follows:
                  C:\> auditpol /resourceSACL /remove /type:File /user:yourusername

   The global audit policy is stored in the registry as a pair of system access control lists in HKLM\
SECURITY\Policy\GlobalSaclNameFile and HKLM\SECURITY\Policy\GlobalSaclNameKey. You can
examine these keys by running Regedit.exe under the System account, as described in the “Security
system components” section earlier in this chapter. These keys will not exist until the corresponding
global SACLs have been set at least once.

   The global audit policy cannot be overridden by SACLs on objects, but object-specific SACLs can al-
low for additional auditing. For example, global audit policy could require auditing of read access by all
users to all files, but SACLs on individual files could add auditing of write access to those files by specific
users or by more specific user groups.

   Global audit policy can also be configured via the Local Security Policy editor in the Advanced Audit
Policy settings, described in the next section.

Advanced Audit Policy settings
In addition to the Audit Policy settings described previously, the Local Security Policy editor offers a
much more fine-grained set of audit controls under the Advanced Audit Policy Configuration heading,
shown in Figure 7-15.

FIGURE 7-15   The Local Security Policy editor's Advanced Audit Policy Configuration settings.

        Each of the nine audit policy settings under Local Policies (refer to Figure 7-13) maps to a group of
     settings here that provide more detailed control. For example, while the Audit Object Access settings
     under Local Policies allow access to all objects to be audited, the settings here allow auditing of access
     to various types of objects to be controlled individually. Enabling one of the audit policy settings under
     Local Policies implicitly enables all the corresponding advanced audit policy events, but if finer control
     over the contents of the audit log is desired, the advanced settings can be set individually. The stan-
     dard settings then become a product of the advanced settings. However, this is not visible in the Local
     Security Policy editor. Attempts to specify audit settings by using both the basic and the advanced
     options can cause unexpected results.

        You can use the Global Object Access Auditing option under Advanced Audit Policy Configuration
     to configure the global SACLs described in the previous section, using a graphical interface identical to
     that seen in Explorer or the Registry editor for security descriptors in the file system or the registry.

AppContainers
     Windows 8 introduced a new security sandbox called an AppContainer. Although it was created
     primarily to host UWP processes, AppContainers can actually be used for “normal” processes as well
     (although there is no built-in tool to do that). This section will mostly cover the attributes of packaged
     AppContainers, which is the term that refers to AppContainers associated with UWP processes and
     their resulting .Appx format. A complete treatment of UWP apps is beyond the scope of this chapter.
     You can find more information in Chapter 3 of this book, and in Chapters 8 and 9 in Part 2. Here we’ll
     concentrate on the security aspects of AppContainers and their typical usage as hosts of UWP apps.

        Note The term Universal Windows Platform (UWP) app is the latest used to describe pro-
        cesses that host the Windows Runtime. Older names include immersive app, modern app,
        metro app, and sometimes simply Windows app. The Universal part indicates the ability of
        such apps to be deployed and run on various Windows 10 editions and form factors, from
        IoT core, to mobile, to desktop, to Xbox, to HoloLens. However, they are essentially the
        same as the ones first introduced in Windows 8. Therefore, the concept of AppContainers
        discussed in this section is relevant to Windows 8 and later versions of Windows. Note that
        Universal Application Platform (UAP) is sometimes used instead of UWP; it’s the same thing.

        Note The original codename for AppContainer was LowBox. You may see this term come
        up in many of the API names and data structures throughout this section. They refer to the
        same concept.

Overview of UWP apps
The mobile device revolution established new ways of obtaining and running software. Mobile devices
normally get their applications from a central store, with automatic installation and updates, all with little
user intervention. Once a user selects an app from the store, she can see the permissions the app requires
to function correctly. These permissions are called capabilities and are declared as part of the package
when it’s submitted to the store. This way, the user can decide whether these capabilities are acceptable.

    Figure 7-16 shows an example of a capabilities list for a UWP game (Minecraft, Windows 10 beta edi-
tion). The game requires internet access as a client and as a server and access to the local home or work
network. Once the user downloads the game, she implicitly agrees the game may exercise these capa-
bilities. Conversely, the user can be confident that the game uses only those capabilities. That is, there is
no way the game could use other unapproved capabilities, such as accessing the camera on the device.

FIGURE 7-16   Part of an app’s page in the store, showing capabilities, among other things.

   To get a sense of the differences between UWP apps and desktop (classic) apps at a high level, consult
Table 7-12. From a developer’s perspective, the Windows platform can be seen as shown in Figure 7-17.

     TABLE 7-12     High-level comparison of UWP and desktop apps
                           UWP App                                           Desktop (Classic) App

     Device Support        Runs on all Windows device families               Runs on PCs only

     APIs                  Can access WinRT, subset of COM, and subset of    Can access COM, Win32, and subset of
                           Win32 APIs                                        WinRT APIs

     Identity              Strong app identity (static and dynamic)          Raw EXEs and processes

     Information           Declarative APPX manifest                         Opaque binaries

     Installation          Self-contained APPX package                       Loose files or MSI

     App Data              Isolated per-user/per-app storage (local and      Shared user profile
                           roaming)

     Lifecycle             Participates in app resource management and PLM   Process-level lifecycle

     Instancing            Single instance only                              Any number of instances

     FIGURE 7-17     The Windows platform landscape.

        A few items in Figure 7-17 are worth elaborating on:

        ■■   UWP apps can produce normal executables, just like desktop apps. Wwahost.exe (%SystemRoot%\
             System32\wwahost.exe) is used to host HTML/JavaScript-based UWP apps, as those produce a
             DLL, not an executable.

        ■■   The UWP is implemented by the Windows Runtime APIs, which are based on an enhanced version
             of COM. Language projections are provided for C++ (through proprietary language extensions
             known as C++/CX), .NET languages, and JavaScript. These projections make it relatively easy to
             access WinRT types, methods, properties, and events from developers’ familiar environments.

        ■■   Several bridging technologies are available, which can transform other types of applications
             into UWP. See the MSDN documentation for more information on utilizing these technologies.

        ■■   The Windows Runtime is layered on top of the Windows subsystem DLLs, just like the .NET
             Framework. It has no kernel components and is not part of a different subsystem because it still
             leverages the same Win32 APIs that the system offers. However, some policies are implemented
             in the kernel, as well as the general support for AppContainers.

   ■■   The Windows Runtime APIs are implemented in DLLs residing in the %SystemRoot%\System32
        directory, with names in the form Windows.Xxx.Yyy…Dll, where the file name usually indicates
        the Windows Runtime API namespace implemented. For example, Windows.Globalization.Dll
        implements the classes residing in the Windows.Globalization namespace. (See the MSDN
        documentation for the complete WinRT API reference.)

The AppContainer
We’ve seen the steps required to create processes back in Chapter 3; we’ve also seen some of the extra
steps required to create UWP processes. The initiation of creation is performed by the DCOMLaunch
service, because UWP packages support a set of protocols, one of which is the Launch protocol. The
resulting process gets to run inside an AppContainer. Here are several characteristics of packaged pro-
cesses running inside an AppContainer:

   ■■   The process token integrity level is set to Low, which automatically restricts access to many
        objects and limits access to certain APIs or functionality for the process, as discussed earlier
        in this chapter.

   ■■   UWP processes are always created inside a job (one job per UWP app). This job manages the
        UWP process and any background processes that execute on its behalf (through nested jobs).
        The jobs allow the Process State Manager (PSM) to suspend or resume the app or background
        processing in a single stroke.

   ■■   The token for UWP processes has an AppContainer SID, which represents a distinct identity
        based on the SHA-2 hash of the UWP package name. As you’ll see, this SID is used by the system
        and other applications to explicitly allow access to files and other kernel objects. This SID is part
        of the APPLICATION PACKAGE AUTHORITY instead of the NT AUTHORITY you’ve mostly seen so
        far in this chapter. Thus, it begins with S-1-15-2 in its string format, corresponding to SECURITY_
        APP_PACKAGE_BASE_RID (15) and SECURITY_APP_PACKAGE_BASE_RID (2). Because a SHA-2
        hash is 32 bytes, there are a total of eight RIDs (recall that a RID is the size of a 4-byte ULONG) in
        the remainder of the SID.

   ■■   The token may contain a set of capabilities, each represented with a SID. These capabilities are
        declared in the application manifest and shown on the app’s page in the store. Stored in the ca-
        pability section of the manifest, they are converted to SID format using rules we’ll see shortly, and
        belong to the same SID authority as in the previous bullet, but using the well-known SECURITY_
        CAPABILITY_BASE_RID (3) instead. Various components in the Windows Runtime, user-mode
        device-access classes, and kernel can look for capabilities to allow or deny certain operations.

   ■■   The token may only contain the following privileges: SeChangeNotifyPrivilege, SeIncrease-
        WorkingSetPrivilege, SeShutdownPrivilege, SeTimeZonePrivilege, and SeUndockPrivilege.
        These are the default set of privileges associated with standard user accounts. Additionally, the
        AppContainerPrivilegesEnabledExt function part of the ms-win-ntos-ksecurity API Set
        contract extension can be present on certain devices to further restrict which privileges are
        enabled by default.

        ■■    The token will contain up to four security attributes (see the section on attribute-based access
              control earlier in this chapter) that identify this token as being associated with a UWP packaged
              application. These attributes are added by the DcomLaunch service as indicated earlier, which is
              responsible for the activation of UWP applications. They are as follows:

              • WIN://PKG This identifies this token as belonging to a UWP packaged application. It con-
                  tains an integer value with the application’s origin as well as some flags. See Table 7-13 and
                  Table 7-14 for these values.

              • WIN://SYSAPPID This contains the application identifiers (called package monikers or string
                  names) as an array of Unicode string values.

              • WIN://PKGHOSTID This identifies the UWP package host ID for packages that have an ex-
                  plicit host through an integer value.

              • WIN://BGKD This is only used for background hosts (such as the generic background task
                  host BackgroundTaskHost.exe) that can store packaged UWP services running as COM pro-
                  viders. The attribute’s name stands for background and contains an integer value that stores
                  its explicit host ID.

        The TOKEN_LOWBOX (0x4000) flag will be set in the token’s Flags member, which can be queried
     with various Windows and kernel APIs (such as GetTokenInformation). This allows components to
     identity and operate differently under the presence of an AppContainer token.

        Note A second type of AppContainer exists: a child AppContainer. This is used when a UWP
        AppContainer (or parent AppContainer) wishes to create its own nested AppContainer to further
        lock down the security of the application. Instead of eight RIDs, a child AppContainer has four
        additional RIDs (the first eight match the parents’) to uniquely identify it.

     TABLE 7-13   Package origins
     Origin                             Meaning

     Unknown (0)                        The package origin is unknown.

     Unsigned (1)                       The package is unsigned.

     Inbox (2)                          The package is associated with a built-in (inbox) Windows application.

     Store (3)                          The package is associated with a UWP application downloaded from the store. This
                                        origin is validated by checking if the DACL of the file associated with the main UWP
                                        application’s executable contains a trust ACE.

     Developer Unsigned (4)             The package is associated with an unsigned developer key.

     Developer Signed (5)               The package is associated with a signed developer key.

     Line-of-Business (6)               The package is associated with a side-loaded line-of-business (LOB) application.

TABLE 7-14   Package flags
Flag                                                         Meaning

PSM_ACTIVATION_TOKEN_PACKAGED_APPLICATION (0x1)              This indicates that the AppContainer UWP ap-
                                                             plication is stored in AppX packaged format.
                                                             This is the default.

PSM_ACTIVATION_TOKEN_SHARED_ENTITY (0x2)                     This indicates that this token is being used for
                                                             multiple executables all part of the same AppX
                                                             packaged UWP application.

PSM_ACTIVATION_TOKEN_FULL_TRUST (0x4)                        This indicates that this AppContainer token
                                                             is being used to host a Project Centennial
                                                             (Windows Bridge for Desktop) converted
                                                             Win32 application.

PSM_ACTIVATION_TOKEN_NATIVE_SERVICE (0x8)                    This indicates that this AppContainer token
                                                             is being used to host a packaged service cre-
                                                             ated by the Service Control Manager (SCM)’s
                                                             Resource Manager. See Chapter 9 in Part 2 for
                                                             more information on services.

PSM_ACTIVATION_TOKEN_DEVELOPMENT_APP (0x10)                  This indicates that this is an internal develop-
                                                             ment application. Not used on retail systems.

BREAKAWAY_INHIBITED (0x20)                                   The package cannot create a process that is
                                                             not itself packaged as well. This is set by using
                                                             the PROC_THREAD_ATTRIBUTE_DESKTOP_
                                                             APP_POLICY process-creation attribute.
                                                             (See Chapter 3 for more information.)

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing UWP process information
   There are several ways to look at UWP processes, some more obvious than others. Process
   Explorer can highlight processes that use the Windows Runtime in color (cyan by default). To see
   this in action, open Process Explorer, open the Options menu, and choose Configure Colors.
   Then make sure the Immersive Processes check box is selected.

          Immersive process is the original term used to describe WinRT (now UWP) apps in Windows 8.
       (They were mostly full screen, and therefore “immersive.”) This distinction is available by calling
       the IsImmersiveProcess API.

           Run Calc.exe and switch to Process Explorer. You should see several processes highlighted
       in cyan, including Calculator.exe. Now minimize the Calculator app and notice that the cyan
       highlight has turned gray. This is because Calculator has been suspended. Restore Calculator’s
       window, and it’s back to cyan.

           You should have similar experiences with other apps—for example, Cortana (SearchUI.exe).
       Click or tap the Cortana icon on the taskbar and then close it. You should see the gray to cyan
       and back to gray transition. Or, click or tap the Start button. ShellExperienceHost.exe highlights
       in a similar fashion.

          The presence of some cyan-highlighted processes might surprise you, such as Explorer.exe,
       TaskMgr.Exe, and RuntimeBroker.exe. These are not really apps, but use Windows Runtime APIs,
       and so are classified as immersive. (The role of RuntimeBroker will be discussed shortly.)

          Finally, make sure the Integrity column is visible in Process Explorer and sort by that column.
       You’ll find processes such as Calculator.exe and SearchUI.exe with AppContainer integrity level.
       Notice that Explorer and TaskMgr are not there, clearly showing they are not UWP processes, and
       so live under different rules.

       EXPERIMENT: Viewing an AppContainer token
       You can look at the properties of an AppContainer hosted process with several tools. In Process
       Explorer, the Security tab shows the capabilities associated with the token. Here’s the Security tab
       for Calculator.exe:

   Notice two interesting pieces of information: the AppContainer SID, shown in the Flags
column as AppContainer, and a single capability, right underneath the AppContainer SID. Except
for the base RID (SECURITY_APP_PACKAGE_BASE_RID versus SECURITY_CAPABILITY_BASE_RID),
the remaining eight RIDs are identical, and both refer to the package name in SHA-2 format as
discussed. This shows you that there will always be one implicit capability, the capability of being
the package itself, which really means Calculator requires no capabilities at all. The upcoming
capabilities section covers a much more complex example.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing AppContainer token attributes
You can obtain similar information on the command line by using the AccessChk Sysinternals tool
while also adding a full list of all of the token’s attributes. For example, running AccessChk with the -p
-f switches followed by the process ID for SearchUI.exe, which hosts Cortana, shows the following:

C:\ >accesschk -p -f 3728

Accesschk v6.10 - Reports effective permissions for securable objects
Copyright (C) 2006-2016 Mark Russinovich
Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

[7416] SearchUI.exe

          RW DESKTOP-DD6KTPM\aione
          RW NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM
          RW Package
        \S-1-15-2-1861897761-1695161497-2927542615-642690995-327840285-2659745135-2630312742
          Token security:
          RW DESKTOP-DD6KTPM\aione
          RW NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM
          RW DESKTOP-DD6KTPM\aione-S-1-5-5-0-459087
          RW Package
        \S-1-15-2-1861897761-1695161497-2927542615-642690995-327840285-2659745135-2630312742
          R BUILTIN\Administrators
          Token contents:
            User:
              DESKTOP-DD6KTPM\aione
            AppContainer:
              Package
        \S-1-15-2-1861897761-1695161497-2927542615-642690995-327840285-2659745135-2630312742
            Groups:
              Mandatory Label\Low Mandatory Level               INTEGRITY
              Everyone                                          MANDATORY
              NT AUTHORITY\Local account and member of Administrators group DENY
              …
                Security Attributes:
              WIN://PKGHOSTID
                   TOKEN_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_TYPE_UINT64
                   [0] 1794402976530433
              WIN://SYSAPPID
                   TOKEN_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_TYPE_STRING
                   [0] Microsoft.Windows.Cortana_1.8.3.14986_neutral_neutral_cw5n1h2txyewy
                   [1] CortanaUI
                   [2] Microsoft.Windows.Cortana_cw5n1h2txyewy
              WIN://PKG
                   TOKEN_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_TYPE_UINT64
                   [0] 131073
              TSA://ProcUnique
                   [TOKEN_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_NON_INHERITABLE]
                   [TOKEN_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_COMPARE_IGNORE]
                   TOKEN_SECURITY_ATTRIBUTE_TYPE_UINT64
                   [0] 204
                   [1] 24566825

        First is the package host ID, converted to hex: 0x6600000000001. Because all package host IDs
     begin with 0x66, this means Cortana is using the first available host identifier: 1. Next are the system
     application IDs, which contain three strings: the strong package moniker, the friendly application name,
     and the simplified package name. Finally, you have the package claim, which is 0x20001 in hex. Based
     on the Table 7-13 and Table 7-14 fields you saw, this indicates an origin of Inbox (2) and flags set to
     PSM_ACTIVATION_TOKEN_PACKAGED_APPLICATION, confirming that Cortana is part of an AppX package.

AppContainer security environment
One of the biggest side-effects caused by the presence of an AppContainer SID and related flags is that
the access check algorithm you saw in the “Access checks” section earlier in this chapter is modified to
essentially ignore all regular user and group SIDs that the token may contain, essentially treating them
as deny-only SIDs. This means that even though Calculator may be launched by a user John Doe be-
longing to the Users and Everyone groups, it will fail any access checks that grant access to John Doe’s
SID, the Users group SID, or the Everyone group SID. In fact, the only SIDs that are checked during the
discretionary access check algorithm will be that of the AppContainer SID, followed by the capability
access check algorithm, which will look at any capability SIDs part of the token.

    Taking things even further than merely treating the discretionary SIDs as deny-only, AppContainer
tokens effect one further critical security change to the access check algorithm: a NULL DACL, typically
treated as an allow-anyone situation due to the lack of any information (recall that this is different from
an empty DACL, which is a deny-everyone situation due to explicit allow rules), is ignored and treated
as a deny situation. To make matters simple, the only types of securable objects that an AppContainer
can access are those that explicitly have an allow ACE for its AppContainer SID or for one of its capabili-
ties. Even unsecured (NULL DACL) objects are out of the game.

   This situation causes compatibility problems. Without access to even the most basic file system,
registry, and object manager resources, how can an application even function? Windows takes this
into account by preparing a custom execution environment, or “jail” if you will, specifically for each
AppContainer. These jails are as follows:

   Note So far we’ve implied that each UWP packaged application corresponds to one
   AppContainer token. However, this doesn’t necessarily imply that only a single executable
   file can be associated with an AppContainer. UWP packages can contain multiple executable
   files, which all belong to the same AppContainer. This allows them to share the same SID
   and capabilities and exchange data between each other, such as a micro-service back-end
   executable and a foreground front-end executable.

   ■■   The AppContainer SID’s string representation is used to create a subdirectory in the object
        manager’s namespace under \Sessions\x\AppContainerNamedObjects. This becomes the pri-
        vate directory of named kernel objects. This specific subdirectory object is then ACLed with the
        AppContainer SID associated with the AppContainer that has an allow-all access mask. This is in
        contrast to desktop apps, which all use the \Sessions\x\BaseNamedObjects subdirectory (within
        the same session x). We’ll discuss the implications of that shortly, as well as the requirement for
        the token to now store handles.

   ■■   The token will contain a LowBox number, which is a unique identifier into an array of LowBox
        Number Entry structures that the kernel stores in the g_SessionLowboxArray global variable.
        Each of these maps to a SEP_LOWBOX_NUMBER_ENTRY structure that, most importantly, contains
        an atom table unique to this AppContainer, because the Windows Subsystem Kernel Mode
        Driver (Win32k.sys) does not allow AppContainers access to the global atom table.

        ■■   The file system contains a directory in %LOCALAPPDATA% called Packages. Inside it are the
             package monikers (the string version of the AppContainer SID—that is, the package name) of
             all the installed UWP applications. Each of these application directories contains application-
             specific directories, such as TempState, RoamingState, Settings, LocalCache, and others, which
             are all ACLed with the specific AppContainer SID corresponding to the application, set to an
             allow-all access mask.

        ■■   Within the Settings directory is a Settings.dat file, which is a registry hive file that is loaded as
             an application hive. (You will learn more about application hives in Chapter 9 in Part 2.) The hive
             acts as the local registry for the application, where WinRT APIs store the various persistent state
             of the application. Once again, the ACL on the registry keys explicitly grants allow-all access to
             the associated AppContainer SID.

         These four jails allow AppContainers to securely, and locally, store their file system, registry, and
     atom table without requiring access to sensitive user and system areas on the system. That being said,
     what about the ability to access, at least in read-only mode, critical system files (such as Ntdll.dll and
     Kernel32.dll) or registry keys (such as the ones these libraries will need), or even named objects (such
     as the \RPC Control\DNSResolver ALPC port used for DNS lookups)? It would not make sense, on each
     UWP application or uninstallation, to re-ACL entire directories, registry keys, and object namespaces to
     add or remove various SIDs.

        To solve this problem, the security subsystem understands a specific group SID called ALL APPLICATION
     PACKAGES, which automatically binds itself to any AppContainer token. Many critical system locations,
     such as %SystemRoot%\System32 and HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion, will have
     this SID as part of their DACL, typically with a read or read-and-execute access mask. Certain objects
     in the object manager namespace will have this as well, such as the DNSResolver ALPC port in the
     \RPC Control object manager directory. Other examples include certain COM objects, which grant the
     execute right. Although not officially documented, third-party developers, as they create non-UWP
     applications, can also allow interactions with UWP applications by also applying this SID to their own
     resources.

        Unfortunately, because UWP applications can technically load almost any Win32 DLL as part of their
     WinRT needs (because WinRT is built on top of Win32, as you saw), and because it’s hard to predict
     what an individual UWP application might need, many system resources have the ALL APPLICATION
     PACKAGES SID associated with their DACL as a precaution. This now means there is no way for a UWP
     developer, for example, to prevent DNS lookups from their application. This greater-than-needed
     access is also helpful for exploit writers, which could leverage it to escape from the AppContainer
     sandbox. Newer versions of Windows 10, starting with version 1607 (Anniversary Update), contain an
     additional element of security to combat this risk: Restricted AppContainers.

        By using the PROC_THREAD_ATTRIBUTE_ALL_APPLICATION_PACKAGES_POLICY process attribute
     and setting it to PROCESS_CREATION_ALL_APPLICATION_PACKAGES_OPT_OUT during process creation
     (see Chapter 3 for more information on process attributes), the token will not be associated with any
     ACEs that specify the ALL APPLICATION PACKAGES SID, cutting off access to many system resources
     that would otherwise be accessible. Such tokens can be identified by the presence of a fourth token
     attribute named WIN://NOALLAPPPKG with an integer value set to 1.

    Of course, this takes us back to the same problem: How would such an application even be able
to load Ntdll.dll, which is key to any process initialization? Windows 10 version 1607 introduces a new
group, called ALL RESTRICTED APPLICATION PACKAGES, which takes care of this problem. For example,
the System32 directory now also contains this SID, also set to allow read and execute permissions,
because loading DLLs in this directory is key even to the most sandboxed process. However, the
DNSResolver ALPC port does not, so such an AppContainer would lose access to DNS.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing AppContainer security attributes
   In this experiment, we’ll look at the security attributes of some of the directories mentioned in
   the previous section.

       1.   Make sure Calculator is running.

       2.   Open WinObj elevated from Sysinternals and navigate to the object directory corre-
            sponding to Calculator’s AppContainer SID. (You saw it in a previous experiment.)

           3.   Right-click the directory, select Properties, and click the Security tab. You should see
                something like the following screenshot. Calculator’s AppContainer SID has permission
                to list, add object, and add subdirectory (among others scrolled out of view), which
                simply means Calculator can create kernel objects under this directory.

           4.   Open Calculator’s local folder by navigating to %LOCALAPPDATA%\Packages\
                Microsoft.WindowsCalculator_8wekyb3d8bbwe. Then right-click the Settings sub-
                directory, select Properties, and click the Security tab. You should see Calculator’s
                AppContainer SID having full permissions for the folder:

           5.   In Explorer, open the %SystemRoot% directory (for example, C:\Windows), right-click
                the System32 directory, select Properties, and click the Security tab. You should
                see the read and execute permissions for all application packages and all restricted
                application packages (if using Windows 10 version 1607 or later):

  As an alternative, you can use the AccessChk Sysinternals command-line tool to view the
same information.

EXPERIMENT: Viewing the AppContainer atom table
An atom table is a hash table of integers to strings that’s used by the windowing system for vari-
ous identification purposes, such as Window Class registration (RegisterClassEx) and custom
Windows messages. The AppContainer private atom table can be viewed with the kernel debugger:

    1.   Run Calculator, open WinDbg, and start local kernel debugging.

    2.   Find the Calculator process:
         lkd> !process 0 1 calculator.exe
         PROCESS ffff828cc9ed1080
             SessionId: 1 Cid: 4bd8     Peb: d040bbc000 ParentCid: 03a4
         DeepFreeze
             DirBase: 5fccaa000 ObjectTable: ffff950ad9fa2800 HandleCount:
         <Data Not Accessible>
             Image: Calculator.exe
             VadRoot ffff828cd2c9b6a0 Vads 168 Clone 0 Private 2938. Modified 3332.
         Locked 0.
             DeviceMap ffff950aad2cd2f0
             Token                             ffff950adb313060
            ...

    3.   Use the token value with the following expressions:
         lkd> r? @$t1 = @$t0->NumberOfBuckets
         lkd> r? @$t0 = (nt!_RTL_ATOM_TABLE*)((nt!_token*)0xffff950adb313060)-
         >LowboxNumberEntry->AtomTable
         lkd> .for (r @$t3 = 0; @$t3 < @$t1; r @$t3 = @$t3 + 1) { ?? (wchar_t*)@$t0-

               >Buckets[@$t3]->Name }
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac39b78a
                "Protocols"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac17b7aa
                "Topics"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b2fd282a
                "TaskbarDPI_Deskband"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b3e2b47a
                "Static"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b3c9458a
                "SysTreeView32"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac34143a
                "UxSubclassInfo"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac5520fa
                "StdShowItem"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'abc6762a
                "SysSetRedraw"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b4a5340a
                "UIA_WindowVisibilityOverridden"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ab2c536a
                "True"
               ...
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b492c3ea
                "tooltips_class"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac23f46a
                "Save"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac29568a
                "MSDraw"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac54f32a
                "StdNewDocument"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b546127a
                "{FB2E3E59-B442-4B5B-9128-2319BF8DE3B0}"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac2e6f4a
                "Status"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ad9426da
                "ThemePropScrollBarCtl"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b3edf5ba
                "Edit"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ab02e32a
                "System"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b3e6c53a
                "MDIClient"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac17a6ca
                "StdDocumentName"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac6cbeea
                "StdExit"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'b033c70a
                "{C56C5799-4BB3-7FAE-7FAD-4DB2F6A53EFF}"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ab0360fa
                "MicrosoftTabletPenServiceProperty"
               wchar_t * 0xffff950a'ac2f8fea
                "OLEsystem"

AppContainer capabilities
As you’ve just seen, UWP applications have very restricted access rights. So how, for example, is the
Microsoft Edge application able to parse the local file system and open PDF files in the user’s Documents
folder? Similarly, how can the Music application play MP3 files from the Music directory? Whether done
directly through kernel access checks or by brokers (which you’ll see in the next section), the key lies in
capability SIDs. Let’s see where these come from, how they are created, and when they are used.

    First, UWP developers begin by creating an application manifest that specifies many details of their
application, such as the package name, logo, resources, supported devices, and more. One of the key
elements for capability management is the list of capabilities in the manifest. For example, let’s take
a look at Cortana’s application manifest, located in %SystemRoot%\SystemApps\Microsoft.Windows.
Cortana_cw5n1h2txywey\AppxManifest.xml:

   <Capabilities>
            <wincap:Capability Name="packageContents"/>
            <!-- Needed for resolving MRT strings -->
            <wincap:Capability Name="cortanaSettings"/>
            <wincap:Capability Name="cloudStore"/>
            <wincap:Capability Name="visualElementsSystem"/>
            <wincap:Capability Name="perceptionSystem"/>
            <Capability Name="internetClient"/>
            <Capability Name="internetClientServer"/>
            <Capability Name="privateNetworkClientServer"/>
            <uap:Capability Name="enterpriseAuthentication"/>
            <uap:Capability Name="musicLibrary"/>
            <uap:Capability Name="phoneCall"/>
            <uap:Capability Name="picturesLibrary"/>
            <uap:Capability Name="sharedUserCertificates"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="locationHistory"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="userDataSystem"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="contactsSystem"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="phoneCallHistorySystem"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="appointmentsSystem"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="chatSystem"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="smsSend"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="emailSystem"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="packageQuery"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="slapiQueryLicenseValue"/>
            <rescap:Capability Name="secondaryAuthenticationFactor"/>
            <DeviceCapability Name="microphone"/>
            <DeviceCapability Name="location"/>
            <DeviceCapability Name="wiFiControl"/>
   </Capabilities>

   You’ll see many types of entries in this list. For example, the Capability entries contain the well-
known SIDs associated with the original capability set that was implemented in Windows 8. These
begin with SECURITY_CAPABILITY_―for example, SECURITY_CAPABILITY_INTERNET_CLIENT,
which is part of the capability RID under the APPLICATION PACKAGE AUTHORITY. This gives us a SID
of S-1-15-3-1 in string format.

         Other entries are prefixed with uap, rescap, and wincap. One of these (rescap) refers to restricted
     capabilities. These are capabilities that require special onboarding from Microsoft and custom approv-
     als before being allowed on the store. In Cortana’s case, these include capabilities such as accessing
     SMS text messages, emails, contacts, location, and user data. Windows capabilities, on the other hand,
     refer to capabilities that are reserved for Windows and system applications. No store application can
     use these. Finally, UAP capabilities refer to standard capabilities that anyone can request on the store.
     (Recall that UAP is the older name for UWP.)

        Unlike the first set of capabilities, which map to hard-coded RIDs, these capabilities are imple-
     mented in a different fashion. This ensures a list of well-known RIDs doesn’t have to be constantly
     maintained. Instead, with this mode, capabilities can be fully custom and updated on the fly. To do this,
     they simply take the capability string, convert it to full upper-case format, and take a SHA-2 hash of
     the resulting string, much like AppContainer package SIDs are the SHA-2 hash of the package moniker.
     Again, since SHA-2 hashes are 32 bytes, this results in 8 RIDs for each capability, following the well-
     known SECURITY_CAPABILITY_BASE_RID (3).

        Finally, you’ll notice a few DeviceCapability entries. These refer to device classes that the UWP appli-
     cation will need to access, and can be identified either through well-known strings such as the ones you
     see above or directly by a GUID that identifies the device class. Rather than using one of the two methods
     of SID creation already described, this one uses yet a third! For these types of capabilities, the GUID is
     converted into a binary format and then mapped out into four RIDs (because a GUID is 16 bytes). On the
     other hand, if a well-known name was specified instead, it must first be converted to a GUID. This is done
     by looking at the HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\DeviceAccess\CapabilityMappings
     registry key, which contains a list of registry keys associated with device capabilities and a list of GUIDs
     that map to these capabilities. The GUIDs are then converted to a SID as you’ve just seen.

        Note For an up-to-date list of supported capabilities, see https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
        us/windows/uwp/packaging/app-capability-declarations.

        As part of encoding all of these capabilities into the token, two additional rules are applied:

        ■■   As you may have seen in the earlier experiment, each AppContainer token contains its own
             package SID encoded as a capability. This can be used by the capability system to specifically
             lock down access to a particular app through a common security check instead of obtaining and
             validating the package SID separately.

        ■■   Each capability is re-encoded as a group SID through the use of the SECURITY_CAPABILITY_APP_
             RID (1024) RID as an additional sub-authority preceding the regular eight-capability hash RIDs.

        After the capabilities are encoded into the token, various components of the system will read them
     to determine whether an operation being performed by an AppContainer should be permitted. You’ll
     note most of the APIs are undocumented, as communication and interoperability with UWP applica-
     tions is not officially supported and best left to broker services, inbox drivers, or kernel components.
     For example, the kernel and drivers can use the RtlCapabilityCheck API to authenticate access to
     certain hardware interfaces or APIs.

   As an example, the Power Manager checks for the ID_CAP_SCREENOFF capability before allow-
ing a request to shut off the screen from an AppContainer. The Bluetooth port driver checks for the
bluetoothDiagnostics capability, while the application identity driver checks for Enterprise Data
Protection (EDP) support through the enterpriseDataPolicy capability. In user mode, the documented
CheckTokenCapability API can be used, although it must know the capability SID instead of providing
the name (the undocumented RtlDeriveCapabilitySidFromName can generate this, however).
Another option is the undocumented CapabilityCheck API, which does accept a string.

   Finally, many RPC services leverage the RpcClientCapabilityCheck API, which is a helper function
that takes care of retrieving the token and requires only the capability string. This function is very com-
monly used by many of the WinRT-enlightened services and brokers, which utilize RPC to communicate
with UWP client applications.

   EXPERIMENT: Viewing AppContainer capabilities
   To clearly demonstrate all these various capability combinations and their population in the
   token, let’s look at the capabilities for a complex app such as Cortana. You’ve already seen its
   manifest, so you can use that output to compare with the UI. First, looking at the Security tab for
   SearchUI.exe shows the following (sorted by the Flags column):

      Clearly, Cortana has obtained many capabilities—all the ones in its manifest. Some are those
   that were originally in Windows 8 and are known to functions like IsWellKnownSid, for which
   Process Explorer shows a friendly name. Other capabilities are just shown using their SID, as they
   represent either hashes or GUIDs, as discussed.

          To get the details of the package from which the UWP process was created, you can use the
       UWPList tool provided with the downloadable resources for this book. It can show all immersive
       processes on the system or a single process based on its ID:
       C:\WindowsInternals>UwpList.exe 3728
       List UWP Processes - version 1.1 (C)2016 by Pavel Yosifovich

       Building capabilities map... done.

       Process ID:   3728
       ------------------
       Image name: C:\Windows\SystemApps\Microsoft.Windows.Cortana_cw5n1h2txyewy\SearchUI.exe
       Package name: Microsoft.Windows.Cortana
       Publisher: CN=Microsoft Windows, O=Microsoft Corporation, L=Redmond, S=Washington, C=US
       Published ID: cw5n1h2txyewy
       Architecture: Neutral
       Version: 1.7.0.14393
       AppContainer SID: S-1-15-2-1861897761-1695161497-2927542615-642690995-327840285-
       2659745135-2630312742
       Lowbox Number: 3
       Capabilities: 32
       cortanaSettings (S-1-15-3-1024-1216833578-114521899-3977640588-1343180512-
       2505059295-473916851-3379430393-3088591068) (ENABLED)
       visualElementsSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-3299255270-1847605585-2201808924-710406709-
       3613095291-873286183-3101090833-2655911836) (ENABLED)
       perceptionSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-34359262-2669769421-2130994847-3068338639-
       3284271446-2009814230-2411358368-814686995) (ENABLED)
       internetClient (S-1-15-3-1) (ENABLED)
       internetClientServer (S-1-15-3-2) (ENABLED)
       privateNetworkClientServer (S-1-15-3-3) (ENABLED)
       enterpriseAuthentication (S-1-15-3-8) (ENABLED)
       musicLibrary (S-1-15-3-6) (ENABLED)
       phoneCall (S-1-15-3-1024-383293015-3350740429-1839969850-1819881064-1569454686-
       4198502490-78857879-1413643331) (ENABLED)
       picturesLibrary (S-1-15-3-4) (ENABLED)
       sharedUserCertificates (S-1-15-3-9) (ENABLED)
       locationHistory (S-1-15-3-1024-3029335854-3332959268-2610968494-1944663922-
       1108717379-267808753-1292335239-2860040626) (ENABLED)
       userDataSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-3324773698-3647103388-1207114580-2173246572-
       4287945184-2279574858-157813651-603457015) (ENABLED)
       contactsSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-2897291008-3029319760-3330334796-465641623-3782203132-
       742823505-3649274736-3650177846) (ENABLED)
       phoneCallHistorySystem (S-1-15-3-1024-2442212369-1516598453-2330995131-3469896071-
       605735848-2536580394-3691267241-2105387825) (ENABLED)
       appointmentsSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-2643354558-482754284-283940418-2629559125-
       2595130947-547758827-818480453-1102480765) (ENABLED)
       chatSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-2210865643-3515987149-1329579022-3761842879-3142652231-
       371911945-4180581417-4284864962) (ENABLED)
       smsSend (S-1-15-3-1024-128185722-850430189-1529384825-139260854-329499951-
       1660931883-3499805589-3019957964) (ENABLED)
       emailSystem (S-1-15-3-1024-2357373614-1717914693-1151184220-2820539834-3900626439-
       4045196508-2174624583-3459390060) (ENABLED)

   packageQuery (S-1-15-3-1024-1962849891-688487262-3571417821-3628679630-802580238-
   1922556387-206211640-3335523193) (ENABLED)
   slapiQueryLicenseValue (S-1-15-3-1024-3578703928-3742718786-7859573-1930844942-
   2949799617-2910175080-1780299064-4145191454) (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-1861897761-1695161497-2927542615-642690995-327840285-2659745135-2630312742
   (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-787448254-1207972858-3558633622-1059886964 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-3215430884-1339816292-89257616-1145831019 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-3071617654-1314403908-1117750160-3581451107 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-593192589-1214558892-284007604-3553228420 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-3870101518-1154309966-1696731070-4111764952 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-2105443330-1210154068-4021178019-2481794518 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-2345035983-1170044712-735049875-2883010875 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-3633849274-1266774400-1199443125-2736873758 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-2569730672-1095266119-53537203-1209375796 (ENABLED)
   S-1-15-3-2452736844-1257488215-2818397580-3305426111 (ENABLED)

      The output shows the package full name, executable directory, AppContainer SID, publisher
   information, version, and list of capabilities. Also shown is the LowBox number, which is just a
   local index of the app.

      Lastly, you can inspect these properties in the kernel debugger with the !token command.

   Some UWP apps are called trusted, and although they use the Windows Runtime platform like
other UWP apps, they do not run inside an AppContainer, and have an integrity level higher than
Low. The canonical example is the System Settings app (%SystemRoot%\ImmersiveControlPanel\
SystemSettings.exe); this seems reasonable, as the Settings app must be able to make changes to the
system that would be impossible to do from an AppContainer-hosted process. If you look at its token,
you will see the same three attributes— PKG, SYSAPPID, and PKGHOSTID—which confirm that it’s still a
packaged application, even without the AppContainer token present.

AppContainer and object namespace
Desktop applications can easily share kernel objects by name. For example, suppose process A cre-
ates an event object by calling CreateEvent(Ex) with the name MyEvent. It gets back a handle it can
later use to manipulate the event. Process B running in the same session can call CreateEvent(Ex) or
OpenEvent with the same name, MyEvent, and (assuming it has appropriate permissions, which is usu-
ally the case if running under the same session) get back another handle to the same underlying event
object. Now if process A calls SetEvent on the event object while process B was blocked in a call to
WaitForSingleObject on its event handle, process B’s waiting thread would be released because it’s
the same event object. This sharing works because named objects are created in the object manager
directory \Sessions\x\BaseNamedObjects, as shown in Figure 7-18 with the WinObj Sysinternals tool.

   Furthermore, desktop apps can share objects between sessions by using a name prefixed with
Global\. This creates the object in the session 0 object directory located in \BaseNamedObjects (refer
to Figure 7-18).

     FIGURE 7-18   Object manager directory for named objects.

         AppContainer-based processes have their root object namespace under \Sessions\x\AppContainer
     NamedObjects\<AppContainerSID>. Since every AppContainer has a different AppContainer SID, there
     is no way two UWP apps can share kernel objects. The ability to create a named kernel object in the
     session 0 object namespace is not allowed for AppContainer processes. Figure 7-19 shows the object
     manager’s directory for the Windows UWP Calculator app.

       UWP apps that want to share data can do so using well-defined contracts, managed by the
     Windows Runtime. (See the MSDN documentation for more information.)

         Sharing kernel objects between desktop apps and UWP apps is possible, and often done by broker
     services. For example, when requesting access to a file in the Documents folder (and getting the right
     capability validated) from the file picker broker, the UWP app will receive a file handle that it can use for
     reads and writes directly, without the cost of marshalling requests back and forth. This is achieved by
     having the broker duplicate the file handle it obtained directly in the handle table of the UWP applica-
     tion. (More information on handle duplication appears in Chapter 8 in Part 2.) To simplify things even
     further, the ALPC subsystem (also described in Chapter 8) allows the automatic transfer of handles in
     this way through ALPC handle attributes. and the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) services that use ALPC
     as their underlying protocol can use this functionality as part of their interfaces. Marshallable handles
     in the IDL file will automatically be transferred in this way through the ALPC subsystem.

FIGURE 7-19   Object manager directory for Calculator.

   Outside of official broker RPC services, a desktop app can create a named (or even unnamed) object
normally, and then use the DuplicateHandle function to inject a handle to the same object into the UWP
process manually. This works because desktop apps typically run with medium integrity level and there’s
nothing preventing them from duplicating handles into UWP processes—only the other way around.

   Note Communication between a desktop app and a UWP is not usually required because
   a store app cannot have a desktop app companion, and cannot rely on such an app to exist
   on the device. The capability to inject handles into a UWP app may be needed in specialized
   cases such as using the desktop bridge (Centennial) to convert a desktop app to a UWP app
   and communicate with another desktop app that is known to exist.

AppContainer handles
In a typical Win32 application, the presence of the session-local and global BaseNamedObjects directory
is guaranteed by the Windows subsystem, as it creates this on boot and session creation. Unfortunately,
the AppContainerBaseNamedObjects directory is actually created by the launch application itself. In the
case of UWP activation, this is the trusted DComLaunch service, but recall that not all AppContainers are
necessarily tied to UWP. They can also be manually created through the right process-creation attributes.
(See Chapter 3 for more information on which ones to use.) In this case, it’s possible for an untrusted ap-
plication to have created the object directory (and required symbolic links within it), which would result

     in the ability for this application to close the handles from underneath the AppContainer application.
     Even without malicious intent, the original launching application might exit, cleaning up its handles and
     destroying the AppContainer-specific object directory. To avoid this situation, AppContainer tokens have
     the ability to store an array of handles that are guaranteed to exist throughout the lifetime of any applica-
     tion using the token. These handles are initially passed in when the AppContainer token is being created
     (through NtCreateLowBoxToken) and are duplicated as kernel handles.

        Similar to the per-AppContainer atom table, a special SEP_CACHED_HANDLES_ENTRY structure is
     used, this time based on a hash table that’s stored in the logon session structure for this user. (See the
     “Logon” section later in this chapter for more information on logon sessions.) This structure contains an
     array of kernel handles that have been duplicated during the creation of the AppContainer token. They
     will be closed either when this token is destroyed (because the application is exiting) or when the user
     logs off (which will result in tearing down the logon session).

        EXPERIMENT: Viewing token stored handles
        To view token stored handles, follow these steps:

             1.   Run Calculator and launch local kernel debugging.

             2.   Search for the calculator process:
                  lkd> !process 0 1 calculator.exe
                  PROCESS ffff828cc9ed1080
                      SessionId: 1 Cid: 4bd8     Peb: d040bbc000 ParentCid: 03a4
                  DeepFreeze
                      DirBase: 5fccaa000 ObjectTable: ffff950ad9fa2800 HandleCount:
                  <Data Not Accessible>
                      Image: Calculator.exe
                      VadRoot ffff828cd2c9b6a0 Vads 168 Clone 0 Private 2938. Modified 3332.
                  Locked 0.
                      DeviceMap ffff950aad2cd2f0
                      Token                             ffff950adb313060
                      ElapsedTime                       1 Day 08:01:47.018
                      UserTime                          00:00:00.015
                      KernelTime                        00:00:00.031
                      QuotaPoolUsage[PagedPool]         465880
                      QuotaPoolUsage[NonPagedPool]      23288
                      Working Set Sizes (now,min,max) (7434, 50, 345) (29736KB, 200KB, 1380KB)
                      PeakWorkingSetSize                11097
                      VirtualSize                       303 Mb
                      PeakVirtualSize                   314 Mb
                      PageFaultCount                    21281
                      MemoryPriority                    BACKGROUND
                      BasePriority                      8
                      CommitCharge                      4925
                      Job                               ffff828cd4914060

3.   Dump the token using the dt command. (Remember to mask the lower 3 or 4 bits if
     they are not zero.)
     lkd> dt nt!_token ffff950adb313060
        +0x000 TokenSource      : _TOKEN_SOURCE
        +0x010 TokenId          : _LUID
        +0x018 AuthenticationId : _LUID
        +0x020 ParentTokenId    : _LUID
        ...
        +0x0c8 TokenFlags       : 0x4a00
        +0x0cc TokenInUse       : 0x1 ''
        +0x0d0 IntegrityLevelIndex : 1
        +0x0d4 MandatoryPolicy : 1
        +0x0d8 LogonSession    : 0xffff950a'b4bb35c0 _SEP_LOGON_SESSION_REFERENCES
        +0x0e0 OriginatingLogonSession : _LUID
        +0x0e8 SidHash          : _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES_HASH
        +0x1f8 RestrictedSidHash : _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES_HASH
        +0x308 pSecurityAttributes : 0xffff950a'e4ff57f0 _AUTHZBASEP_SECURITY_
     ATTRIBUTES_INFORMATION
        +0x310 Package          : 0xffff950a'e00ed6d0 Void
        +0x318 Capabilities     : 0xffff950a'e8e8fbc0 _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES
        +0x320 CapabilityCount : 1
        +0x328 CapabilitiesHash : _SID_AND_ATTRIBUTES_HASH
        +0x438 LowboxNumberEntry : 0xffff950a'b3fd55d0 _SEP_LOWBOX_NUMBER_ENTRY
        +0x440 LowboxHandlesEntry : 0xffff950a'e6ff91d0 _SEP_LOWBOX_HANDLES_ENTRY
        +0x448 pClaimAttributes : (null)
        ...

4.   Dump the LowboxHandlesEntry member:
     lkd> dt nt!_sep_lowbox_handles_entry 0xffff950a'e6ff91d0
        +0x000 HashEntry        : _RTL_DYNAMIC_HASH_TABLE_ENTRY
        +0x018 ReferenceCount   : 0n10
        +0x020 PackageSid       : 0xffff950a'e6ff9208 Void
        +0x028 HandleCount      : 6
        +0x030 Handles          : 0xffff950a'e91d8490 -> 0xffffffff'800023cc Void

5.   There are six handles. Let’s dump their values:
     lkd> dq 0xffff950ae91d8490 L6
     ffff950a'e91d8490 ffffffff'800023cc ffffffff'80001e80
     ffff950a'e91d84a0 ffffffff'80004214 ffffffff'8000425c
     ffff950a'e91d84b0 ffffffff'800028c8 ffffffff'80001834

6.   You can see that these handles are kernel handles—that is, handle values starting with
     0xffffffff (64 bit). Now you can use the !handle command to look at individual
     handles. Here are two examples from the six handles above:
     lkd> !handle ffffffff'80001e80

     PROCESS ffff828cd71b3600
         SessionId: 1 Cid: 27c4          Peb: 3fdfb2f000    ParentCid: 2324

                     DirBase: 80bb85000      ObjectTable: ffff950addabf7c0        HandleCount:
                 <Data Not Accessible>
                     Image: windbg.exe

                 Kernel handle Error reading handle count.

                 80001e80: Object: ffff950ada206ea0 GrantedAccess: 0000000f (Protected)
                 (Inherit) (Audit) Entry: ffff950ab5406a00
                 Object: ffff950ada206ea0 Type: (ffff828cb66b33b0) Directory
                     ObjectHeader: ffff950ada206e70 (new version)
                         HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 32770
                         Directory Object: ffff950ad9a62950 Name: RPC Control

                         Hash Address           Type                               Name
                         ---- -------           ----                               ----
                          23 ffff828cb6ce6950 ALPC Port
                 OLE376512B99BCCA5DE4208534E7732
                 lkd> !handle ffffffff'800028c8

                 PROCESS ffff828cd71b3600
                     SessionId: 1 Cid: 27c4    Peb: 3fdfb2f000 ParentCid: 2324
                     DirBase: 80bb85000 ObjectTable: ffff950addabf7c0 HandleCount: <Data
                 Not Accessible>
                     Image: windbg.exe

                 Kernel handle Error reading handle count.

                 800028c8: Object: ffff950ae7a8fa70 GrantedAccess: 000f0001 (Audit) Entry:
                 ffff950acc426320
                 Object: ffff950ae7a8fa70 Type: (ffff828cb66296f0) SymbolicLink
                     ObjectHeader: ffff950ae7a8fa40 (new version)
                         HandleCount: 1 PointerCount: 32769
                         Directory Object: ffff950ad9a62950 Name: Session
                         Flags: 00000000 ( Local )
                         Target String is '\Sessions\1\AppContainerNamedObjects
                 \S-1-15-2-466767348-3739614953-2700836392-1801644223-4227750657
                 -1087833535-2488631167'

         Finally, because the ability to restrict named objects to a particular object directory namespace
     is a valuable security tool for sandboxing named object access, the upcoming (at the time of this
     writing) Windows 10 Creators Update includes an additional token capability called BNO isolation
     (where BNO refers to BaseNamedObjects). Using the same SEP_CACHE_HANDLES_ENTRY structure,
     a new field, BnoIsolationHandlesEntry, is added to the TOKEN structure, with the type set to
     SepCachedHandlesEntryBnoIsolation instead of SepCachedHandlesEntryLowbox. To use this fea-
     ture, a special process attribute must be used (see Chapter 3 for more information), which contains an
     isolation prefix and a list of handles. At this point, the same LowBox mechanism is used, but instead of
     an AppContainer SID object directory, a directory with the prefix indicated in the attribute is used.

Brokers
Because AppContainer processes have almost no permissions except for those implicitly granted with
capabilities, some common operations cannot be performed directly by the AppContainer and require
help. (There are no capabilities for these, as these are too low level to be visible to users in the store,
and difficult to manage.) Some examples include selecting files using the common File Open dialog
box or printing with a Print dialog box. For these and other similar operations, Windows provides
helper processes, called brokers, managed by the system broker process, RuntimeBroker.exe.

   An AppContainer process that requires any of these services communicates with the Runtime Broker
through a secure ALPC channel and Runtime Broker initiates the creation of the requested broker process.
Examples are %SystemRoot%\PrintDialog\PrintDialog.exe and %SystemRoot%\System32\PickerHost.exe.

   EXPERIMENT: Brokers
   The following steps show how broker processes are launched and terminated:

       1.   Click the Start button, type Photos, and select the Photos option to run the built-in
            Windows 10 Photos application.

       2.   Open Process Explorer, switch the process list to a tree view, and locate the Microsoft.
            Photos.exe process. Place both windows side by side.

       3.   In the Photos app, select a picture file, and click Print in the top ellipsis menu or right-
            click the picture and choose Print from the menu that appears. The Print dialog box
            should open, and Process Explorer should show the newly created broker (PrintDialog.
            exe). Notice they are all children of the same Svchost process. (All UWP processes are
            launched by the DCOMLaunch service hosted inside that process.)

       4.   Close the Print dialog box. The PrintDialog.exe process should exit.

Logon
      Interactive logon (as opposed to network logon) occurs through the interaction of the following:

         ■■   The logon process (Winlogon.exe)

         ■■   The logon user interface process (LogonUI.exe) and its credential providers

         ■■   Lsass.exe

         ■■   One or more authentication packages

         ■■   SAM or Active Directory

         Authentication packages are DLLs that perform authentication checks. Kerberos is the Windows
      authentication package for interactive logon to a domain. MSV1_0 is the Windows authentication
      package for interactive logon to a local computer, for domain logons to trusted pre–Windows 2000
      domains, and for times when no domain controller is accessible.

         Winlogon is a trusted process responsible for managing security-related user interactions. It
      coordinates logon, starts the user’s first process at logon, and handles logoff. It also manages various
      other operations relevant to security, including launching LogonUI for entering passwords at logon,
      changing passwords, and locking and unlocking the workstation. The Winlogon process must ensure
      that operations relevant to security aren’t visible to any other active processes. For example, Winlogon
      guarantees that an untrusted process can’t get control of the desktop during one of these operations
      and thus gain access to the password.

          Winlogon relies on the credential providers installed on the system to obtain a user’s account name
      or password. Credential providers are COM objects located inside DLLs. The default providers are authui.
      dll, SmartcardCredentialProvider.dll, and FaceCredentialProvider.dll, which support password, smartcard
      PIN, and face-recognition authentication, respectively. Allowing other credential providers to be installed
      enables Windows to use different user-identification mechanisms. For example, a third party might sup-
      ply a credential provider that uses a thumbprint-recognition device to identify users and extract their
      passwords from an encrypted database. Credential providers are listed in HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\
      Windows\CurrentVersion\Authentication\Credential Providers, where each subkey identifies a credential
      provider class by its COM CLSID. (The CLSID itself must be registered at HKCR\CLSID like any other COM
      class.) You can use the CPlist.exe tool provided with the downloadable resources for this book to list the
      credential providers with their CLSID, friendly name, and implementation DLL.

          To protect Winlogon’s address space from bugs in credential providers that might cause the
      Winlogon process to crash (which, in turn, will result in a system crash, because Winlogon is considered
      a critical system process), a separate process, LogonUI.exe, is used to actually load the credential pro-
      viders and display the Windows logon interface to users. This process is started on demand whenever
      Winlogon needs to present a user interface to the user, and it exits after the action has finished. It also
      allows Winlogon to simply restart a new LogonUI process should it crash for any reason.

         Winlogon is the only process that intercepts logon requests from the keyboard. These are sent
      through an RPC message from Win32k.sys. Winlogon immediately launches the LogonUI application to

display the user interface for logon. After obtaining a user name and password from credential provid-
ers, Winlogon calls Lsass to authenticate the user attempting to log on. If the user is authenticated, the
logon process activates a logon shell on behalf of that user. The interaction between the components
involved in logon is illustrated in Figure 7-20.

FIGURE 7-20   Components involved in logon.

   In addition to supporting alternative credential providers, LogonUI can load additional network
provider DLLs that need to perform secondary authentication. This capability allows multiple network
providers to gather identification and authentication information all at one time during normal logon.
A user logging on to a Windows system might simultaneously be authenticated on a Linux server. That
user would then be able to access resources of the UNIX server from the Windows machine without
requiring additional authentication. Such a capability is known as one form of single sign-on.

Winlogon initialization
During system initialization, before any user applications are active, Winlogon performs the following
steps to ensure that it controls the workstation once the system is ready for user interaction:

   1.   It creates and opens an interactive window station (for example, \Sessions\1\Windows\
        WindowStations\WinSta0 in the object manager namespace) to represent the keyboard,
        mouse, and monitor. Winlogon creates a security descriptor for the station that has one and
        only one ACE containing only the system SID. This unique security descriptor ensures that no
        other process can access the workstation unless explicitly allowed by Winlogon.

   2.   It creates and opens two desktops: an application desktop (\Sessions\1\Windows\WinSta0\
        Default, also known as the interactive desktop) and a Winlogon desktop (\Sessions\1\Windows\
        WinSta0\Winlogon, also known as the Secure Desktop). The security on the Winlogon desk-
        top is created so that only Winlogon can access that desktop. The other desktop allows both

             Winlogon and users to access it. This arrangement means that any time the Winlogon desktop
             is active, no other process has access to any active code or data associated with the desktop.
             Windows uses this feature to protect the secure operations that involve passwords and locking
             and unlocking the desktop.

        3.   Before anyone logs on to a computer, the visible desktop is Winlogon’s. After a user logs on,
             pressing the SAS sequence (by default, Ctrl+Alt+Del) switches the desktop from Default to
             Winlogon and launches LogonUI. (This explains why all the windows on your interactive desktop
             seem to disappear when you press Ctrl+Alt+Del, and then return when you dismiss the Windows
             Security dialog box.) Thus, the SAS always brings up a Secure Desktop controlled by Winlogon.

        4.   It establishes an ALPC connection with Lsass. This connection will be used for exchang-
             ing information during logon, logoff, and password operations, and is made by calling
             LsaRegisterLogonProcess.

        5.   It registers the Winlogon RPC message server, which listens for SAS, logoff, and workstation
             lock notifications from Win32k. This measure prevents Trojan horse programs from gaining
             control of the screen when the SAS is entered.

                  Note The Wininit process performs steps similar to steps 1 and 2 to allow legacy
                  interactive services running on session 0 to display windows, but it does not per-
                  form any other steps because session 0 is not available for user logon.

        How SAS is implemented
        The SAS is secure because no application can intercept the Ctrl+Alt+Del keystroke combination
        or prevent Winlogon from receiving it. Win32k.sys reserves the Ctrl+Alt+Del key combination so
        that whenever the Windows input system (implemented in the raw input thread in Win32k) sees
        the combination, it sends an RPC message to Winlogon’s message server, which listens for such
        notifications. The keystrokes that map to a registered hot key are not sent to any process other
        than the one that registered it, and only the thread that registered a hot key can unregister it, so
        a Trojan horse application cannot deregister Winlogon’s ownership of the SAS.

           A Windows function, SetWindowsHookEx, enables an application to install a hook procedure
        that’s invoked every time a keystroke is pressed, even before hot keys are processed, and allows
        the hook to squash keystrokes. However, the Windows hot key processing code contains a special
        case for Ctrl+Alt+Del that disables hooks so that the keystroke sequence can’t be intercepted. In
        addition, if the interactive desktop is locked, only hot keys owned by Winlogon are processed.

           Once the Winlogon desktop is created during initialization, it becomes the active desktop.
        When the Winlogon desktop is active, it is always locked. Winlogon unlocks its desktop only to
        switch to the application desktop or the screen-saver desktop. (Only the Winlogon process can
        lock or unlock a desktop.)

User logon steps
Logon begins when a user presses the SAS (Ctrl+Alt+Del). After the SAS is pressed, Winlogon starts
LogonUI, which calls the credential providers to obtain a user name and password. Winlogon also creates
a unique local logon SID for this user, which it assigns to this instance of the desktop (keyboard, screen,
and mouse). Winlogon passes this SID to Lsass as part of the LsaLogonUser call. If the user is successfully
logged on, this SID will be included in the logon process token—a step that protects access to the desk-
top. For example, another logon to the same account but on a different system will be unable to write to
the first machine’s desktop because this second logon won’t be in the first logon’s desktop token.

    When the user name and password have been entered, Winlogon retrieves a handle to a package
by calling the Lsass function LsaLookupAuthenticationPackage. Authentication packages are listed
in the registry under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Lsa. Winlogon passes logon informa-
tion to the authentication package via LsaLogonUser. Once a package authenticates a user, Winlogon
continues the logon process for that user. If none of the authentication packages indicates a successful
logon, the logon process is aborted.

   Windows uses two standard authentication packages for interactive username/password-based logons:

   ■■   MSV1_0 The default authentication package on a stand-alone Windows system is MSV1_0
        (Msv1_0.dll), an authentication package that implements LAN Manager 2 protocol. Lsass also
        uses MSV1_0 on domain-member computers to authenticate to pre–Windows 2000 domains
        and computers that can’t locate a domain controller for authentication. (Computers that are
        disconnected from the network fall into this latter category.)

   ■■   Kerberos The Kerberos authentication package, Kerberos.dll, is used on computers that
        are members of Windows domains. The Windows Kerberos package, with the cooperation
        of Kerberos services running on a domain controller, supports the Kerberos protocol. This
        protocol is based on Internet RFC 1510. (Visit the Internet Engineering Task Force [IETF] website
        at http://www.ietf.org for detailed information on the Kerberos standard.)

MSV1_0
The MSV1_0 authentication package takes the user name and a hashed version of the password and
sends a request to the local SAM to retrieve the account information, which includes the hashed
password, the groups to which the user belongs, and any account restrictions. MSV1_0 first checks the
account restrictions, such as hours or type of accesses allowed. If the user can’t log on because of the
restrictions in the SAM database, the logon call fails and MSV1_0 returns a failure status to the LSA.

   MSV1_0 then compares the hashed password and user name to that obtained from the SAM. In the
case of a cached domain logon, MSV1_0 accesses the cached information by using Lsass functions that
store and retrieve “secrets” from the LSA database (the SECURITY hive of the registry). If the information
matches, MSV1_0 generates a LUID for the logon session and creates the logon session by calling Lsass,
associating this unique identifier with the session and passing the information needed to ultimately
create an access token for the user. (Recall that an access token includes the user’s SID, group SIDs, and
assigned privileges.)

         Note MSV1_0 does not cache a user’s entire password hash in the registry because that
         would enable someone with physical access to the system to easily compromise a user’s
         domain account and gain access to encrypted files and to network resources the user is
         authorized to access. Instead, it caches half of the hash. The cached half-hash is sufficient to
         verify that a user’s password is correct, but it isn’t sufficient to gain access to EFS keys and
         to authenticate as the user on a domain because these actions require the full hash.

         If MSV1_0 needs to authenticate using a remote system, as when a user logs on to a trusted pre–
      Windows 2000 domain, MSV1_0 uses the Netlogon service to communicate with an instance of Netlogon
      on the remote system. Netlogon on the remote system interacts with the MSV1_0 authentication
      package on that system, passing back authentication results to the system on which the logon is being
      performed.

      Kerberos
      The basic control flow for Kerberos authentication is the same as the flow for MSV1_0. However, in most
      cases, domain logons are performed from member workstations or servers rather than on a domain con-
      troller, so the authentication package must communicate across the network as part of the authentication
      process. The package does so by communicating via the Kerberos TCP/IP port (port 88) with the Kerberos
      service on a domain controller. The Kerberos Key Distribution Center service (Kdcsvc.dll), which imple-
      ments the Kerberos authentication protocol, runs in the Lsass process on domain controllers.

         After validating hashed user-name and password information with Active Directory’s user account
      objects (using the Active Directory server Ntdsa.dll), Kdcsvc returns domain credentials to Lsass, which
      returns the result of the authentication and the user’s domain logon credentials (if the logon was suc-
      cessful) across the network to the system where the logon is taking place.

         Note This description of Kerberos authentication is highly simplified, but it highlights the
         roles of the various components involved. Although the Kerberos authentication protocol
         plays a key role in distributed domain security in Windows, its details are outside the scope
         of this book.

         After a logon has been authenticated, Lsass looks in the local policy database for the user’s allowed
      access, including interactive, network, batch, or service process. If the requested logon doesn’t match
      the allowed access, the logon attempt will be terminated. Lsass deletes the newly created logon session
      by cleaning up any of its data structures and then returns failure to Winlogon, which in turn displays an
      appropriate message to the user. If the requested access is allowed, Lsass adds the appropriate addi-
      tional security IDs (such as Everyone, Interactive, and the like). It then checks its policy database for any
      granted privileges for all the SIDs for this user and adds these privileges to the user’s access token.

         When Lsass has accumulated all the necessary information, it calls the executive to create the access to-
      ken. The executive creates a primary access token for an interactive or service logon and an impersonation

token for a network logon. After the access token is successfully created, Lsass duplicates the token, creating
a handle that can be passed to Winlogon, and closes its own handle. If necessary, the logon operation is
audited. At this point, Lsass returns success to Winlogon along with a handle to the access token, the LUID
for the logon session, and the profile information, if any, that the authentication package returned.

   EXPERIMENT: Listing active logon sessions
   As long as at least one token exists with a given logon session LUID, Windows considers the
   logon session to be active. You can use the LogonSessions tool from Sysinternals, which uses
   the LsaEnumerateLogonSessions function (documented in the Windows SDK) to list the active
   logon sessions:
   C:\WINDOWS\system32>logonsessions

   LogonSessions v1.4 - Lists logon session information
   Copyright (C) 2004-2016 Mark Russinovich
   Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

   [0] Logon session 00000000:000003e7:
       User name:    WORKGROUP\ZODIAC$
       Auth package: NTLM
       Logon type:   (none)
       Session:      0
       Sid:          S-1-5-18
       Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:31
       Logon server:
       DNS Domain:
       UPN:

   [1] Logon session 00000000:0000cdce:
       User name:
       Auth package: NTLM
       Logon type:   (none)
       Session:      0
       Sid:          (none)
       Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:31
       Logon server:
       DNS Domain:
       UPN:

   [2] Logon session 00000000:000003e4:
       User name:    WORKGROUP\ZODIAC$
       Auth package: Negotiate
       Logon type:   Service
       Session:      0
       Sid:          S-1-5-20
       Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:31
       Logon server:
       DNS Domain:
       UPN:

        [3] Logon session 00000000:00016239:
            User name:    Window Manager\DWM-1
            Auth package: Negotiate
            Logon type:   Interactive
            Session:      1
            Sid:          S-1-5-90-0-1
            Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:32
            Logon server:
            DNS Domain:
            UPN:

        [4] Logon session 00000000:00016265:
            User name:    Window Manager\DWM-1
            Auth package: Negotiate
            Logon type:   Interactive
            Session:      1
            Sid:          S-1-5-90-0-1
            Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:32
            Logon server:
            DNS Domain:
            UPN:

        [5] Logon session 00000000:000003e5:
            User name:    NT AUTHORITY\LOCAL SERVICE
            Auth package: Negotiate
            Logon type:   Service
            Session:      0
            Sid:          S-1-5-19
            Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:32
            Logon server:
            DNS Domain:
            UPN:

        ...
        [8] Logon session 00000000:0005c203:
            User name:    NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D
            Auth package: Negotiate
            Logon type:   Service
            Session:      0
            Sid:          S-1-5-83-1-2895151542-1271406230-163986315-2103441620
            Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:35
            Logon server:
            DNS Domain:
            UPN:

        [9] Logon session 00000000:0005d524:
            User name:    NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\B37F4A3A-21EF-422D-8B37-AB6B0A016ED8
            Auth package: Negotiate
            Logon type:   Service
            Session:      0
            Sid:          S-1-5-83-1-3011463738-1110254063-1806382987-3631087882
            Logon time:   09-Dec-16 15:22:35

    Logon server:
    DNS Domain:
    UPN:

...
[12] Logon session 00000000:0429ab2c:
    User name:    IIS APPPOOL\DefaultAppPool
    Auth package: Negotiate
    Logon type:   Service
    Session:      0
    Sid:          S-1-5-82-3006700770-424185619-1745488364-794895919-4004696415
    Logon time:   09-Dec-16 22:33:03
    Logon server:
    DNS Domain:
    UPN:

    Information reported for a session includes the SID and name of the user associated with the ses-
sion, as well as the session’s authentication package and logon time. Note that the Negotiate authen-
tication package, seen in logon sessions 2 and 9 in the preceding output, will attempt to authenticate
via Kerberos or NTLM, depending on which is most appropriate for the authentication request.

   The LUID for a session is displayed on the Logon Session line of each session block. Using
the Handle.exe utility (also from Sysinternals), you can find the tokens that represent a particular
logon session. For example, to find the tokens for logon session 8 in the output just shown, you
could enter this command:
C:\WINDOWS\system32>handle -a 5c203

Nthandle v4.1 - Handle viewer
Copyright (C) 1997-2016 Mark Russinovich
Sysinternals - www.sysinternals.com

System             pid: 4      type: Directory     1274: \Sessions\0\
DosDevices\00000000-0005c203
lsass.exe          pid: 496    type: Token          D7C: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
lsass.exe          pid: 496    type: Token         2350: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
lsass.exe          pid: 496    type: Token         2390: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
svchost.exe        pid: 900    type: Token          804: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
svchost.exe        pid: 1468   type: Token         10EC: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
vmms.exe           pid: 4380   type: Token          A34: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
vmcompute.exe      pid: 6592   type: Token          200: NT VIRTUAL MACHINE\
AC9081B6-1E96-4BC8-8B3B-C609D4F85F7D:5c203
vmwp.exe           pid: 7136   type: WindowStation 168: \Windows\WindowStations\
Service-0x0-5c203$
vmwp.exe           pid: 7136   type: WindowStation 170: \Windows\WindowStations\
Service-0x0-5c203$

           Winlogon then looks in the registry at the value HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\Current
      Version\Winlogon\Userinit and creates a process to run whatever the value of that string is. (This value
      can be several EXEs separated by commas.) The default value is Userinit.exe, which loads the user
      profile and then creates a process to run whatever the value of HKCU\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows
      NT\Current Version\Winlogon\Shell is, if that value exists. That value does not exist by default, however.
      If it doesn’t exist, Userinit.exe does the same for HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\Current
      Version\Winlogon\Shell, which defaults to Explorer.exe. Userinit then exits (which is why Explorer.exe
      shows up as having no parent when examined in Process Explorer). For more information on the steps
      followed during the user logon process, see Chapter 11 in Part 2.

      Assured authentication
      A fundamental problem with password-based authentication is that passwords can be revealed or sto-
      len and used by malicious third parties. Windows includes a mechanism that tracks the authentication
      strength of how a user authenticated with the system, which allows objects to be protected from access
      if a user did not authenticate securely. (Smartcard authentication is considered to be a stronger form of
      authentication than password authentication.)

          On systems that are joined to a domain, the domain administrator can specify a mapping between
      an object identifier (OID) (a unique numeric string representing a specific object type) on a certificate
      used for authenticating a user (such as on a smartcard or hardware security token) and a SID that is
      placed into the user’s access token when the user successfully authenticates with the system. An ACE
      in a DACL on an object can specify such a SID be part of a user’s token in order for the user to gain
      access to the object. Technically, this is known as a group claim. In other words, the user is claiming
      membership in a particular group, which is allowed certain access rights on specific objects, with the
      claim based upon the authentication mechanism. This feature is not enabled by default, and it must be
      configured by the domain administrator in a domain with certificate-based authentication.

          Assured authentication builds on existing Windows security features in a way that provides a great
      deal of flexibility to IT administrators and anyone concerned with enterprise IT security. The enterprise
      decides which OIDs to embed in the certificates it uses for authenticating users and the mapping of
      particular OIDs to Active Directory universal groups (SIDs). A user’s group membership can be used
      to identify whether a certificate was used during the logon operation. Different certificates can have
      different issuance policies and, thus, different levels of security, which can be used to protect highly
      sensitive objects (such as files or anything else that might have a security descriptor).

        Authentication protocols (APs) retrieve OIDs from certificates during certificate-based authentication.
      These OIDs must be mapped to SIDs, which are in turn processed during group membership expansion,
      and placed in the access token. The mapping of OID to universal group is specified in Active Directory.

          As an example, an organization might have several certificate-issuance policies named Contractor,
      Full Time Employee, and Senior Management, which map to the universal groups Contractor-Users,
      FTE-Users, and SM-Users, respectively. A user named Abby has a smartcard with a certificate issued
      using the Senior Management issuance policy. When she logs in using her smartcard, she receives an
      additional group membership (which is represented by a SID in her access token) indicating that she
      is a member of the SM-Users group. Permissions can be set on objects (using an ACL) such that only
members of the FTE-Users or SM-Users group (identified by their SIDs within an ACE) are granted
access. If Abby logs in using her smartcard, she can access those objects, but if she logs in with just her
user name and password (without the smartcard), she cannot access those objects because she will not
have either the FTE-Users or SM-Users group in her access token. A user named Toby who logs in with a
smartcard that has a certificate issued using the Contractor issuance policy would not be able to access
an object that has an ACE requiring FTE-Users or SM-Users group membership.

Windows Biometric Framework
Windows provides a standardized mechanism for supporting certain types of biometric devices, such as
fingerprint scanners, used to enable user identification via a fingerprint swipe: the Windows Biometric
Framework (WBF). Like many other such frameworks, the WBF was developed to isolate the various func-
tions involved in supporting such devices, so as to minimize the code required to implement a new device.

    The primary components of the WBF are shown in Figure 7-21. Except as noted in the following list,
all of these components are supplied by Windows:

   ■■   The Windows Biometric Service (%SystemRoot%\System32\Wbiosrvc.dll This provides
        the process-execution environment in which one or more biometric service providers can execute.

   ■■   The Windows Biometric Driver Interface (WBDI) This is a set of interface definitions (IRP
        major function codes, DeviceIoControl codes, and so forth) to which any driver for a biomet-
        ric scanner device must conform if it is to be compatible with the Windows Biometric Service.
        WBDI drivers can be developed using any of the standard driver frameworks (UMDF, KMDF and
        WDM). However, UMDF is recommended to reduce code size and increase reliability. WBDI is
        described in the Windows Driver Kit documentation.

   ■■   The Windows Biometric API This allows existing Windows components such as Winlogon
        and LogonUI to access the biometric service. Third-party applications have access to the
        Windows Biometric API and can use the biometric scanner for functions other than logging
        in to Windows. An example of a function in this API is WinBioEnumServiceProviders. The
        Biometric API is exposed by %SystemRoot%\System32\Winbio.dll.

   ■■   The fingerprint biometric service provider This wraps the functions of biometric-type-
        specific adapters to present a common interface, independent of the type of biometric, to the
        Windows Biometric Service. In the future, additional types of biometrics, such as retinal scans
        or voiceprint analyzers, might be supported by additional biometric service providers. The bio-
        metric service provider in turn uses three adapters, which are user-mode DLLs:

        • The sensor adapter This exposes the data-capture functionality of the scanner. The sensor
           adapter usually uses Windows I/O calls to access the scanner hardware. Windows provides
           a sensor adapter that can be used with simple sensors, those for which a WBDI driver exists.
           For more complex sensors, the sensor adapter is written by the sensor vendor.

        • The engine adapter This exposes processing and comparison functionality specific to the
           scanner’s raw data format and other features. The actual processing and comparison might
           be performed within the engine adapter DLL, or the DLL might communicate with some
           other module. The engine adapter is always provided by the sensor vendor.
             • The storage adapter This exposes a set of secure storage functions. These are used to
                store and retrieve templates against which scanned biometric data is matched by the engine
                adapter. Windows provides a storage adapter using Windows cryptography services and
                standard disk file storage. A sensor vendor might provide a different storage adapter.

        ■■   The functional device driver for the actual biometric scanner device This exposes the
             WBDI at its upper edge. It usually uses the services of a lower-level bus driver, such as the USB
             bus driver, to access the scanner device. This driver is always provided by the sensor vendor.

             FIGURE 7-21   Windows Biometric Framework components and architecture.

       A typical sequence of operations to support logging in via a fingerprint scan might be as follows:

       1.    After initialization, the sensor adapter receives from the service provider a request for cap-
             ture data. The sensor adapter in turn sends a DeviceIoControl request with the IOCTL_
             BIOMETRIC_CAPTURE_DATA control code to the WBDI driver for the fingerprint scanner device.

       2.    The WBDI driver puts the scanner into capture mode and queues the IOCTL_BIOMETRIC_
             CAPTURE_DATA request until a fingerprint scan occurs.

       3.    A prospective user swipes a finger across the scanner. The WBDI driver receives notification of
             this, obtains the raw scan data from the sensor, and returns this data to the sensor driver in a
             buffer associated with the IOCTL_BIOMETRIC_CAPTURE_DATA request.

       4.    The sensor adapter provides the data to the fingerprint biometric service provider, which in
             turn passes the data to the engine adapter.

       5.    The engine adapter processes the raw data into a form compatible with its template storage.

       6.    The fingerprint biometric service provider uses the storage adapter to obtain templates and
             corresponding security IDs from secure storage. It invokes the engine adapter to compare each
             template to the processed scan data. The engine adapter returns a status indicating whether it’s
             a match or not a match.

   7.   If a match is found, the Windows Biometric Service notifies Winlogon, via a credential provider
        DLL, of a successful login and passes it the security ID of the identified user. This notification is
        sent via an ALPC message, providing a path that cannot be spoofed.

Windows Hello
Windows Hello, introduced in Windows 10, provides new ways to authenticate users based on biomet-
ric information. With this technology, users can log in effortlessly just by showing themselves to the
device’s camera or swiping their finger.

At the time of this writing, Windows Hello supports three types of biometric identification:

   ■■   Fingerprint

   ■■   Face

   ■■   Iris

   The security aspect of biometrics needs to be considered first. What is the likelihood of someone
being identified as you? What is the likelihood of you not being identified as you? These questions are
parameterized by two factors:

   ■■   False accept rate (uniqueness) This is the probability of another user having the same bio-
        metric data as you. Microsoft’s algorithms make sure the likelihood is 1 in 100,000.

   ■■   False reject rate (reliability) This is the probability of you not being correctly recognized as
        you (for example, in abnormal lighting conditions for face or iris recognition). Microsoft’s imple-
        mentation makes sure there is less than 1 percent chance of this happening. If it does happen,
        the user can try again or use a PIN code instead.

   Using a PIN code may seem less secure than using a full-blown password (the PIN can be as simple
as a four-digit number). However, a PIN is more secure than a password for two main reasons:

   ■■   The PIN code is local to the device and is never transmitted across the network. This means that
        even if someone gets a hold of the PIN, they cannot use it to log in as the user from any other
        device. Passwords, on the other hand, travel to the domain controller. If someone gets hold of
        the password, they can log in from another machine into the domain.

   ■■   The PIN code is stored in the Trusted Platform Module (TPM)—a piece of hardware that also
        plays a part in Secure Boot (discussed in detail in Chapter 11 in Part 2)—so is difficult to access.
        In any case, it requires physical access to the device, raising the bar considerably for a potential
        security compromise.

   Windows Hello is built upon the Windows Biometric Framework (WBF) (described in the previous
section). Current laptop devices support fingerprint and face biometrics, while iris is only supported
on the Microsoft Lumia 950 and 950 XL phones. (This will likely change and expand in future devices.)
Note that face recognition requires an infrared (IR) camera as well as a normal (RGB) one, and is sup-
ported on devices such as the Microsoft Surface Pro 4 and the Surface Book.

User Account Control and virtualization
     User Account Control (UAC) is meant to enable users to run with standard user rights as opposed to ad-
     ministrative rights. Without administrative rights, users cannot accidentally (or deliberately) modify sys-
     tem settings, malware can’t normally alter system security settings or disable antivirus software, and users
     can’t compromise the sensitive information of other users on shared computers. Running with standard
     user rights can thus mitigate the impact of malware and protect sensitive data on shared computers.

        UAC had to address a couple of problems to make it practical for a user to run with a standard user ac-
     count. First, because the Windows usage model has been one of assumed administrative rights, software
     developers assumed their programs would run with those rights and could therefore access and modify
     any file, registry key, or operating system setting. Second, users sometimes need administrative rights to
     perform such operations as installing software, changing the system time, and opening ports in the firewall.

        The UAC solution to these problems is to run most applications with standard user rights, even
     though the user is logged in to an account with administrative rights. At the same time, UAC makes it
     possible for standard users to access administrative rights when they need them—whether for legacy
     applications that require them or for changing certain system settings. As described, UAC accomplishes
     this by creating a filtered admin token as well as the normal admin token when a user logs in to an
     administrative account. All processes created under the user’s session will normally have the filtered ad-
     min token in effect so that applications that can run with standard user rights will do so. However, the
     administrative user can run a program or perform other functions that require full Administrator rights
     through UAC elevation.

        Windows also allows certain tasks that were previously reserved for administrators to be performed
     by standard users, enhancing the usability of the standard user environment. For example, Group
     Policy settings exist that can enable standard users to install printers and other device drivers approved
     by IT administrators and to install ActiveX controls from administrator-approved sites.

        Finally, when software developers test in the UAC environment, they are encouraged to develop
     applications that can run without administrative rights. Fundamentally, non-administrative programs
     should not need to run with administrator privileges; programs that often require administrator privi-
     leges are typically legacy programs using old APIs or techniques, and they should be updated.

        Together, these changes obviate the need for users to run with administrative rights all the time.

     File system and registry virtualization
     Although some software legitimately requires administrative rights, many programs needlessly store
     user data in system-global locations. When an application executes, it can be running in different user
     accounts, and it should therefore store user-specific data in the per-user %AppData% directory and
     save per-user settings in the user’s registry profile under HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software. Standard
     user accounts don’t have write access to the %ProgramFiles% directory or HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\
     Software, but because most Windows systems are single-user and most users have been administrators
     until UAC was implemented, applications that incorrectly saved user data and settings to these loca-
     tions worked anyway.

   Windows enables these legacy applications to run in standard user accounts through the help of file
system and registry namespace virtualization. When an application modifies a system-global location in
the file system or registry and that operation fails because access is denied, Windows redirects the opera-
tion to a per-user area. When the application reads from a system-global location, Windows first checks
for data in the per-user area and, if none is found, permits the read attempt from the global location.

   Windows will always enable this type of virtualization unless:

   ■■   The application is 64-bit Because virtualization is purely an application-compatibility tech-
        nology meant to help legacy applications, it is enabled only for 32-bit applications. The world of
        64-bit applications is relatively new and developers should follow the development guidelines
        for creating standard user-compatible applications.

   ■■   The application is already running with administrative rights           In this case, there is no
        need for any virtualization.

   ■■   The operation came from a kernel-mode caller

   ■■   The operation is being performed while the caller is impersonating For example, any
        operations not originating from a process classified as legacy according to this definition,
        including network file-sharing accesses, are not virtualized.

   ■■   The executable image for the process has a UAC-compatible manifest Specifying a
        requestedExecutionLevel setting, described in the next section.

   ■■   The administrator does not have write access to the file or registry key This exception
        exists to enforce backward compatibility because the legacy application would have failed
        before UAC was implemented even if the application was run with administrative rights.

   ■■   Services are never virtualized

   You can see the virtualization status (the process virtualization status is stored as a flag in its token)
of a process by adding the UAC Virtualization column to Task Manager’s Details page, as shown in
Figure 7-22. Most Windows components—including the Desktop Window Manager (Dwm.exe), the
Client Server Run-Time Subsystem (Csrss.exe), and Explorer—have virtualization disabled because they
have a UAC-compatible manifest or are running with administrative rights and so do not allow virtual-
ization. However, 32-bit Internet Explorer (iexplore.exe) has virtualization enabled because it can host
multiple ActiveX controls and scripts and must assume that they were not written to operate correctly
with standard user rights. Note that, if required, virtualization can be completely disabled for a system
using a Local Security Policy setting.

   In addition to file system and registry virtualization, some applications require additional help to run
correctly with standard user rights. For example, an application that tests the account in which it’s run-
ning for membership in the Administrators group might otherwise work, but it won’t run if it’s not in
that group. Windows defines a number of application-compatibility shims to enable such applications
to work anyway. The shims most commonly applied to legacy applications for operation with standard
user rights are shown in Table 7-15.

     FIGURE 7-22    Using Task Manager to view virtualization status.

     TABLE 7-15    UAC virtualization shims
     Flag                                  Meaning

     ElevateCreateProcess                  This changes CreateProcess to handle ERROR_ELEVATION_REQUIRED errors by
                                           calling the application information service to prompt for elevation.

     ForceAdminAccess                      This spoofs queries of Administrator group membership.

     VirtualizeDeleteFile                  This spoofs successful deletion of global files and directories.

     LocalMappedObject                     This forces global section objects into the user’s namespace.

     VirtualizeHKCRLite                    This redirects global registration of COM objects to a per-user location.

     VirtualizeRegisterTypeLib             This converts per-machine typelib registrations to per-user registrations.

File virtualization
The file system locations that are virtualized for legacy processes are %ProgramFiles%, %ProgramData%,
and %SystemRoot%, excluding some specific subdirectories. However, any file with an executable
extension—including .exe, .bat, .scr, .vbs, and others—is excluded from virtualization. This means that
programs that update themselves from a standard user account fail instead of creating private versions
of their executables that aren’t visible to an administrator running a global updater.

   Note To add extensions to the exception list, enter them in the HKLM\System\Current-
   ControlSet\Services\Luafv\Parameters\ExcludedExtensionsAdd registry key and reboot.
   Use a multistring type to delimit multiple extensions, and do not include a leading dot in the
   extension name.

    Modifications to virtualized directories by legacy processes are redirected to the user’s virtual root
directory, %LocalAppData%\VirtualStore. The Local component of the path highlights the fact that
virtualized files don’t roam with the rest of the profile when the account has a roaming profile.

    The UAC File Virtualization filter driver (%SystemRoot%\System32\Drivers\Luafv.sys) implements file
system virtualization. Because this is a file system filter driver, it sees all local file system operations, but
it implements functionality only for operations from legacy processes. As shown in Figure 7-23, the filter
driver changes the target file path for a legacy process that creates a file in a system-global location but
does not for a non-virtualized process with standard user rights. Default permissions on the \Windows
directory deny access to the application written with UAC support, but the legacy process acts as though
the operation succeeds when it really created the file in a location fully accessible by the user.

FIGURE 7-23   UAC File Virtualization filter driver operation.

       EXPERIMENT: File virtualization behavior
       In this experiment, you will enable and disable virtualization on the command prompt and see
       several behaviors to demonstrate UAC file virtualization:

           1.   Open a non-elevated command prompt (you must have UAC enabled for this to work)
                and enable virtualization for it. You can change the virtualization status of a pro-
                cess by right-clicking the process in the Task Manager Details tab and selecting UAC
                Virtualization from the shortcut menu that appears.

           2.   Navigate to the C:\Windows directory and use the following command to write a file:
                echo hello-1 > test.txt

           3.   List the contents of the directory. You’ll see that the file appears.
                dir test.txt

           4.   Disable virtualization by right-clicking the process in the Task Manager Details tab and
                deselecting UAC Virtualization. Then list the directory as in step 3. Notice that the file
                is gone. However, a directory listing of the VirtualStore directory will reveal the file:
                dir %LOCALAPPDATA%\VirtualStore\Windows\test.txt

           5.   Enable virtualization again for this process.

           6.   To look at a more complex scenario, create a new command prompt window, but
                elevated this time. Then repeat steps 2 and 3 using the string hello-2.

           7.   Examine the text inside these files by using the following command in both command
                prompts. The screenshots that follow show the expected output.
                type test.txt

        8.   From your elevated command prompt, delete the test.txt file:
             del test.txt

        9.   Repeat step 3 of the experiment in both windows. Notice that the elevated command
             prompt cannot find the file anymore, while the standard user command prompt shows
             the old contents of the file again. This demonstrates the failover mechanism described
             earlier: Read operations look in the per-user virtual store location first, but if the file
             doesn’t exist, read access to the system location will be granted.

Registry virtualization
Registry virtualization is implemented slightly differently from file system virtualization. Virtualized
registry keys include most of the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software branch, but there are numerous
exceptions, such as the following:

   ■■   HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows

   ■■   HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows NT

   ■■   HKLM\Software\Classes

    Only keys that are commonly modified by legacy applications, but that don’t introduce compat-
ibility or interoperability problems, are virtualized. Windows redirects modifications of virtualized
keys by a legacy application to a user’s registry virtual root at HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Classes\
VirtualStore. The key is located in the user’s Classes hive, %LocalAppData%\Microsoft\Windows\
UsrClass.dat, which, like any other virtualized file data, does not roam with a roaming user profile.
Instead of maintaining a fixed list of virtualized locations as Windows does for the file system, the virtu-
alization status of a key is stored as a combination of flags, shown in Table 7-16.

    You can use the Reg.exe utility included in Windows, with the flags option, to display the current
virtualization state for a key or to set it. In Figure 7-24, note that the HKLM\Software key is fully virtual-
ized, but the Windows subkey (and all its children) have only silent failure enabled.

     TABLE 7-16    Registry virtualization flags
     Flag                                   Meaning

     REG_KEY_DONT_VIRTUALIZE                This specifies whether virtualization is enabled for this key. If the flag is set, virtu-
                                            alization is disabled.

     REG_KEY_DONT_SILENT_FAIL               If the REG_KEY_DONT_VIRTUALIZE flag is set (virtualization is disabled), this key
                                            specifies that a legacy application that would be denied access performing an
                                            operation on the key is instead granted MAXIMUM_ALLOWED rights to the key (any
                                            access the account is granted) instead of the rights the application requested. If
                                            this flag is set, it implicitly disables virtualization as well.

     REG_KEY_RECURSE_FLAG                   This determines whether the virtualization flags will propagate to the child keys
                                            (subkeys) of this key.

     FIGURE 7-24    UAC registry virtualization flags on the Software and Windows keys.

        Unlike file virtualization, which uses a filter driver, registry virtualization is implemented in the con-
     figuration manager. (See Chapter 9 in Part 2 for more information on the registry and the configuration
     manager.) As with file system virtualization, a legacy process creating a subkey of a virtualized key is
     redirected to the user’s registry virtual root, but a UAC-compatible process is denied access by default
     permissions. This is shown in Figure 7-25.

     FIGURE 7-25    UAC registry virtualization operation.

Elevation
Even if users run only programs that are compatible with standard user rights, some operations still
require administrative rights. For example, the vast majority of software installations require adminis-
trative rights to create directories and registry keys in system-global locations or to install services or
device drivers. Modifying system-global Windows and application settings also requires administrative
rights, as does the parental controls feature. It would be possible to perform most of these operations
by switching to a dedicated administrator account, but the inconvenience of doing so would likely
result in most users remaining in the administrator account to perform their daily tasks, most of which
do not require administrative rights.

   It’s important to be aware that UAC elevations are conveniences and not security boundaries. A
security boundary requires that security policy dictate what can pass through the boundary. User
accounts are an example of a security boundary in Windows because one user can’t access the data
belonging to another user without having that user’s permission.

   Because elevations aren’t security boundaries, there’s no guarantee that malware running on a
system with standard user rights can’t compromise an elevated process to gain administrative rights.
For example, elevation dialog boxes only identify the executable that will be elevated; they say nothing
about what it will do when it executes.

Running with administrative rights
Windows includes enhanced “run as” functionality so that standard users can conveniently launch
processes with administrative rights. This functionality requires giving applications a way to identify
operations for which the system can obtain administrative rights on behalf of the application, as neces-
sary (we’ll say more on this topic shortly).

   To enable users acting as system administrators to run with standard user rights but not have to
enter user names and passwords every time they want to access administrative rights, Windows makes
use of a mechanism called Admin Approval Mode (AAM). This feature creates two identities for the
user at logon: one with standard user rights and another with administrative rights. Since every user
on a Windows system is either a standard user or acting for the most part as a standard user in AAM,
developers must assume that all Windows users are standard users, which will result in more programs
working with standard user rights without virtualization or shims.

    Granting administrative rights to a process is called elevation. When elevation is performed by
a standard user account (or by a user who is part of an administrative group but not the actual
Administrators group), it’s referred to as an over-the-shoulder (OTS) elevation because it requires the
entry of credentials for an account that’s a member of the Administrators group, something that’s
usually completed by a privileged user typing over the shoulder of a standard user. An elevation
performed by an AAM user is called a consent elevation because the user simply has to approve the
assignment of his administrative rights.

    Stand-alone systems, which are typically home computers, and domain-joined systems treat AAM
access by remote users differently because domain-connected computers can use domain administra-
tive groups in their resource permissions. When a user accesses a stand-alone computer’s file share,

     Windows requests the remote user’s standard user identity. But on domain-joined systems, Windows
     honors all the user’s domain group memberships by requesting the user’s administrative identity.
     Executing an image that requests administrative rights causes the application information service (AIS,
     contained in %SystemRoot%\System32\Appinfo.dll), which runs inside a standard service host process
     (SvcHost.exe), to launch %SystemRoot%\System32\Consent.exe. Consent captures a bitmap of the
     screen, applies a fade effect to it, switches to a desktop that’s accessible only to the local system ac-
     count (the Secure Desktop), paints the bitmap as the background, and displays an elevation dialog box
     that contains information about the executable. Displaying this dialog box on a separate desktop pre-
     vents any application present in the user’s account from modifying the appearance of the dialog box.

        If an image is a Windows component digitally signed (by Microsoft or another entity), the dialog
     box displays a light blue stripe across the top, as shown at the left of Figure 7-26 (the distinction be-
     tween Microsoft signed images and other signers has been removed in Windows 10). If the image is
     unsigned, the stripe becomes yellow, and the prompt stresses the unknown origin of the image (see the
     right of Figure 7-26). The elevation dialog box shows the image’s icon, description, and publisher for
     digitally signed images, but it shows only the file name and “Publisher: Unknown” for unsigned images.
     This difference makes it harder for malware to mimic the appearance of legitimate software. The Show
     More Details link at the bottom of the dialog box expands it to show the command line that will be
     passed to the executable if it launches.

     FIGURE 7-26   AAC UAC elevation dialog boxes based on image signature.

         The OTS consent dialog box, shown in Figure 7-27, is similar, but prompts for administrator creden-
     tials. It will list any accounts with administrator rights.

     FIGURE 7-27 OTS consent dialog box.

   If a user declines an elevation, Windows returns an access-denied error to the process that initiated
the launch. When a user agrees to an elevation by either entering administrator credentials or click-
ing Yes, AIS calls CreateProcessAsUser to launch the process with the appropriate administrative
identity. Although AIS is technically the parent of the elevated process, AIS uses new support in the
CreateProcessAsUser API that sets the process’s parent process ID to that of the process that origi-
nally launched it. That’s why elevated processes don’t appear as children of the AIS service-hosting
process in tools such as Process Explorer that show process trees. Figure 7-28 shows the operations
involved in launching an elevated process from a standard user account.

FIGURE 7-28   Launching an administrative application as a standard user.

Requesting administrative rights
There are a number of ways the system and applications identify a need for administrative rights. One
that shows up in the Explorer user interface is the Run as Administrator context menu command and
shortcut option. These items also include a blue and gold shield icon that should be placed next to any
button or menu item that will result in an elevation of rights when it is selected. Choosing the Run as
Administrator command causes Explorer to call the ShellExecute API with the runas verb.

    The vast majority of installation programs require administrative rights, so the image loader, which
initiates the launch of an executable, includes installer-detection code to identify likely legacy installers.
Some of the heuristics it uses are as simple as detecting internal version information or whether the
image has the words setup, install, or update in its file name. More sophisticated means of detection
involve scanning for byte sequences in the executable that are common to third-party installation
wrapper utilities. The image loader also calls the application-compatibility library to see if the target
executable requires administrator rights. The library looks in the application-compatibility database
to see whether the executable has the RequireAdministrator or RunAsInvoker compatibility flag
associated with it.

   The most common way for an executable to request administrative rights is for it to include a
requestedExecutionLevel tag in its application manifest file. The element’s level attribute can have
one of the three values shown in Table 7-17.

     TABLE 7-17 Requested elevation levels

     Elevation Level         Meaning                                            Usage

     As invoker              No need for administrative rights; never ask       Typical user applications that don’t need
                             for elevation.                                     administrative privileges—for example,
                                                                                Notepad.

     Highest available       Request approval for highest rights available.     Applications that can function without full
                             If the user is logged on as a standard user, the   administrative rights but expect users to want
                             process will be launched as invoker; other-        full access if it’s easily accessible. For example,
                             wise, an AAM elevation prompt will appear,         the Registry Editor, Microsoft Management
                             and the process will run with full administra-     Console, and the Event Viewer use this level.
                             tive rights.

     Require administrator   Always request administrative rights. An OTS       Applications that require administrative
                             elevation dialog box prompt will be shown          rights to work, such as the Firewall Settings
                             for standard users; otherwise, AAM.                Editor, which affects system-wide security.

       The presence of the trustInfo element in a manifest (which you can see in the manifest
     dump of eventvwr.exe) denotes an executable that was written with support for UAC and the
     requestedExecutionLevel element nests within it. The uiAccess attribute is where accessibility
     applications can use the UIPI bypass functionality mentioned earlier.

     C:\>sigcheck -m c:\Windows\System32\eventvwr.exe
     ...
     <trustInfo xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v3">
          <security>
              <requestedPrivileges>
                  <requestedExecutionLevel
                      level="highestAvailable"
                      uiAccess="false"
                  />
              </requestedPrivileges>
          </security>
     </trustInfo>
     <asmv3:application>
         <asmv3:windowsSettings xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/SMI/2005/WindowsSettings">
              <autoElevate>true</autoElevate>
         </asmv3:windowsSettings>
     </asmv3:application>
     ...

     Auto-elevation
     In the default configuration (see the next section for information on changing this), most Windows
     executables and control panel applets do not result in elevation prompts for administrative users, even
     if they need administrative rights to run. This is because of a mechanism called auto-elevation. Auto-
     elevation is intended to preclude administrative users from seeing elevation prompts for most of their
     work; the programs will automatically run under the user’s full administrative token.

        Auto-elevation has several requirements. One is that the executable in question must be con-
     sidered as a Windows executable. This means it must be signed by the Windows publisher (not just
     by Microsoft; oddly, they are not the same—Windows-signed is considered more privileged than
     Microsoft-signed). It must also be in one of several directories considered secure: %SystemRoot%\
System32 and most of its subdirectories, %Systemroot%\Ehome, and a small number of directories
under %ProgramFiles% (for example, those containing Windows Defender and Windows Journal).

   There are additional requirements, depending on the type of executable. EXE files other than Mmc.
exe auto-elevate if they are requested via an autoElevate element in their manifest. The manifest
shown earlier of eventvwr.exe in the previous section illustrates this.

   Mmc.exe is treated as a special case because whether it should auto-elevate or not depends on
which system management snap-ins it is to load. Mmc.exe is normally invoked with a command line
specifying an MSC file, which in turn specifies which snap-ins are to be loaded. When Mmc.exe is run
from a protected administrator account (one running with the limited administrator token), it asks
Windows for administrative rights. Windows validates that Mmc.exe is a Windows executable and then
checks the MSC. The MSC must also pass the tests for a Windows executable, and furthermore must be
on an internal list of auto-elevate MSCs. This list includes nearly all MSC files in Windows.

   Finally, COM (out-of-process server) classes can request administrative rights within their registry
key. To do so requires a subkey named Elevation with a DWORD value named Enabled, having a
value of 1. Both the COM class and its instantiating executable must meet the Windows executable
requirements, although the executable need not have requested auto-elevation.

Controlling UAC behavior
UAC can be modified via the dialog box shown in Figure 7-29. This dialog box is available under Change
User Account Control Settings. Figure 7-29 shows the control in its default position.

FIGURE 7-29   User Account Control Settings dialog box.

   The four possible settings have the effects described in Table 7-18.

   The third position is not recommended because the UAC elevation prompt appears not on the Secure
Desktop but on the normal user’s desktop. This could allow a malicious program running in the same
session to change the appearance of the prompt. It is intended for use only in systems where the video
subsystem takes a long time to dim the desktop or is otherwise unsuitable for the usual UAC display.

     TABLE 7-18   UAC options
     Slider Position      When administrative user not running with administrative rights…              Remarks

                                                                 …attempts to install software or
                          …attempts to change Windows
                                                                 run a program whose manifest
                          settings (for example, use cer-
                                                                 calls for elevation, or uses Run
                          tain Control Panel applets)
                                                                 as Administrator

     Highest position     A UAC elevation prompt appears on      A UAC elevation prompt appears         This was the Windows
     (Always Notify)      the Secure Desktop.                    on the Secure Desktop.                 Vista behavior.

     Second position      UAC elevation occurs automatically     A UAC elevation prompt appears         Windows default
                          with no prompt or notification.        on the Secure Desktop.                 setting.

     Third position       UAC elevation occurs automatically     A UAC elevation prompt appears         Not recommended.
                          with no prompt or notification.        on the user’s normal desktop.

     Lowest position      UAC is turned off for administrative   UAC is turned off for administrative   Not recommended.
     (Never Notify)       users.                                 users.

         The lowest position is strongly discouraged because it turns UAC off completely as far as administra-
     tive accounts are concerned. All processes run by a user with an administrative account will be run with
     the user’s full administrative rights in effect; there is no filtered admin token. Registry and file system
     virtualization are disabled as well for these accounts, and the Protected mode of Internet Explorer is
     disabled. However, virtualization is still in effect for non-administrative accounts, and non-administrative
     accounts will still see an OTS elevation prompt when they attempt to change Windows settings, run a
     program that requires elevation, or use the Run as Administrator context menu option in Explorer.

        The UAC setting is stored in four values in the registry under HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\
     Windows\CurrentVersion\Policies\System, as shown in Table 7-19. ConsentPromptBehaviorAdmin
     controls the UAC elevation prompt for administrators running with a filtered admin token, and
     ConsentPromptBehaviorUser controls the UAC prompt for users other than administrators.

     TABLE 7-19   UAC registry values
                          ConsentPrompt          ConsentPrompt
     Slider Position                                                   EnableLUA              PromptOnSecureDesktop
                          BehaviorAdmin          BehaviorUser

     Highest position     2 (display AAC UAC     3 (display OTS UAC    1 (enabled)            1 (enabled)
     (Always Notify)      elevation prompt)      elevation prompt)

     Second position      5 (display AAC UAC     3                     1                      1
                          elevation prompt,
                          except for changes
                          to Windows settings)

     Third position       5                      3                     1                      0 (disabled; UAC prompt
                                                                                              appears on user’s normal
                                                                                              desktop)

     Lowest position      0                      3                     0 (disabled; logins    0
     (Never Notify)                                                    to administrative
                                                                       accounts do not
                                                                       create a restricted
                                                                       admin access token)

Exploit mitigations
   Throughout this chapter, we’ve seen a number of technologies that help protect the user, guarantee
   the code-signing properties of executable code, and lock down access to resources through sand-
   boxing. At the end of the day, however, all secure systems have failure points, all code has bugs, and
   attackers leverage increasingly complex attacks to exploit them. A security model in which all code is
   assumed to be bug-free, or in which a software developer assumes all bugs will eventually be found
   and fixed, is destined to fail. Additionally, many security features that provide code-execution “guaran-
   tees” do so at a cost of performance or compatibility, which may be unacceptable in such scenarios.

       A much more successful approach is to identify the most common techniques used by attackers, as
   well as employ an internal “red team” (that is, an internal team attacking its own software) to discover
   new techniques before attackers do and to implement mitigations against such techniques. (These
   mitigations can be as simple as moving some data around or as complex as employing Control Flow
   Integrity [CFI] techniques.) Because vulnerabilities can number in the thousands in a complex code base
   such as Windows, but exploit techniques are limited, the idea is to make large classes of bugs very dif-
   ficult (or in some cases, impossible) to exploit, without worrying about finding all the bugs.

   Process-mitigation policies
   While individual applications can implement various exploit mitigations on their own (such as Microsoft
   Edge, which leverages a mitigation called MemGC to avoid many classes of memory-corruption attacks),
   this section will cover mitigations that are provided by the operating system to all applications or to the
   system itself to reduce exploitable bug classes. Table 7-20 describes all mitigations in the latest version
   of Windows 10 Creators Update, the type of bug class they mitigate against, and mechanisms to activate
   them.

   TABLE 7-20   Process mitigation options
    Mitigation Name                     Use Case                                   Enabling Mechanism

    ASLR Bottom Up Randomization        This makes calls to VirtualAlloc           This is set with the PROCESS_
                                        subject to ASLR with 8-bit entropy,        CREATION_MITIGATION_POLICY_
                                        including stack-base randomization.        BOTTOM_UP_ASLR_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                   process-creation attribute flag.

    ASLR Force Relocate Images          This forces ASLR even on binaries          This is set with
                                        that do not have the /DYNAMICBASE          SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                        linker flag.                               or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                                                                   MITIGATION_POLICY_FORCE_
                                                                                   RELOCATE_IMAGES_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                   process-creation flag.

    High Entropy ASLR (HEASLR)          This significantly increases entropy       Must be set through
                                        of ASLR on 64-bit images, increasing       /HIGHENTROPYVA at link time or the
                                        bottom-up randomization to up to 1         PROCESS_CREATION_MITIGATION_
                                        TB of variance (that is, bottom-up allo-   POLICY_HIGH_ENTROPY_ASLR_
                                        cations may start anywhere between         ALWAYS_ON process-creation attribute
                                        64 KB and 1 TB into the address space,     flag.
                                        giving 24 bits of entropy).

     TABLE 7-20   Process mitigation options (continued)
     Mitigation Name                       Use Case                                  Enabling Mechanism

     ASLR Disallow Stripped Images         This blocks the load of any library       This is set with
                                           without relocations (linked with the /    SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           FIXED flag) when combined with ASLR       or with the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           Force Relocate Images.                    MITIGATION_POLICY_FORCE_
                                                                                     RELOCATE_IMAGES_ALWAYS_ON_REQ_
                                                                                     RELOCS process-creation flag.

     DEP: Permanent                        This prevents the process from dis-       This is set with the
                                           abling DEP on itself. Only relevant on    SetProcessMitigationPolicy,
                                           x86. Only relevant on 32-bit applica-     process-creation attribute or with
                                           tions (and/or under WoW64)                SetProcessDEPPolicy.

     DEP: Disable ATL Thunk Emulation      This prevents legacy ATL library code     This is set with the
                                           from executing ATL thunks in the          SetProcessMitigationPolicy,
                                           heap, even if a known compatibility       process-creation attribute or with
                                           issue. Only relevant on 32-bit applica-   SetProcessDEPPolicy.
                                           tions (and/or under WoW64)

     SEH Overwrite Protection (SEHOP)      This prevents structure exception         This can be set with
                                           handlers from being overwritten with      SetProcessDEPPolicy or with the
                                           incorrect ones, even if the image was     PROCESS_CREATION_MITIGATION_
                                           not linked with Safe SEH ( /SAFESEH).     POLICY_SEHOP_ENABLE process-
                                           Only relevant on 32-bit applications      creation flag.
                                           (and/or under WoW64).

     Raise Exception on Invalid Handle     This helps catch handle reuse (use-       This is set with
                                           after-handle-close) attacks in which a    SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           process uses a handle that is no longer   or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           the handle it expected (for example:      MITIGATION_POLICY_STRICT_
                                           SetEvent on a mutex) by crashing the      HANDLE_CHECKS_ALWAYS_ON
                                           process instead of returning a failure    process-creation attribute flag.
                                           that the process might ignore.

     Raise Exception on Invalid            This helps catch handle reuse (double-    Undocumented, and can only be set
     Handle Close                          handle-close) attacks in which a pro-     through an undocumented API.
                                           cess is attempting to close a handle
                                           that has already been closed, sug-
                                           gesting that a different handle may
                                           potentially be used in other scenarios,
                                           in which an exploit would be success-
                                           ful, ultimately limiting its universal
                                           effectiveness.

     Disallow Win32k System Calls          This disables all access to the Win32     This is set with
                                           kernel-mode subsystem driver, which       SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           implements the Window Manager             or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           (GUI) and Graphics Device Interface       MITIGATION_POLICY_WIN32K_
                                           (GDI) and DirectX. No system calls to     SYSTEM_CALL_DISABLE_ALWAYS_ON
                                           this component will be possible.          process-creation attribute flag.

     Filter Win32k System Calls            This filters access to the Win32k         This is set through an internal process-
                                           kernel-mode subsystem driver only         creation attribute flag, which can
                                           to certain APIs allowing simple GUI       define one out of three possible sets
                                           and Direct X access, mitigating many      of Win32k filters that are enabled.
                                           of the possible attacks, without com-     However, because the filter sets are
                                           pletely disabling availability of the     hard-coded, this mitigation is re-
                                           GUI/GDI services.                         served for Microsoft internal usage.

TABLE 7-20   Process mitigation options (continued)
Mitigation Name                     Use Case                                    Enabling Mechanism

Disable Extension Points            This prevents a process from loading        This is set with
                                    an input method editor (IME),a Windows      SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                    hook DLL (SetWindowsHookEx), an app-        or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                    initialization DLL (AppInitDlls value       MITIGATION_POLICY_EXTENSION_
                                    in the registry), or a Winsock layered      POINT_DISABLE_ALWAYS_ON
                                    service provider (LSP).                     process-creation attribute flag.

Arbitrary Code Guard (CFG)          This prevents a process from allocating     This is set with
                                    executable code or from changing the        SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                    permission of existing executable code      or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                    to make it writeable. It can be config-     MITIGATION_POLICY_PROHIBIT_
                                    ured to allow a particular thread inside    DYNAMIC_CODE_ALWAYS_ON and
                                    the process to request this capability or   PROCESS_CREATION_MITIGATION_
                                    to allow a remote process from disabling    POLICY_PROHIBIT_DYNAMIC_
                                    this mitigation, which are not supported    CODE_ALWAYS_ON_ALLOW_OPT_OUT
                                    from a security point of view.              process-creation attribute flags.

Control Flow Guard (CFG)            This helps prevent memory corruption        The image must be compiled
                                    vulnerabilities from being used to hijack   with the /guard:cf option, and
                                    control flow by validating the target       linked with the /guard:cf option.
                                    of any indirect CALL or JMP instruction     It can be set with the PROCESS_
                                    against a list of valid expected target     CREATION_MITIGATION_POLICY_
                                    functions. Part of Control Flow Integrity   CONTROL_FLOW_GUARD_ALWAYS_ON
                                    (CFI) mechanisms described in the next      process-creation attribute flag in case
                                    section.                                    the image does not support it, but
                                                                                CFG enforcement is still desirable for
                                                                                other images loading in the process.

CFG Export Suppression              This strengthens CFG by suppressing         The image must be compiled with
                                    indirect calls to the exported API table    /guard: exportsuppress, and
                                    of the image.                               can also be configured through
                                                                                SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                                                                or with the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                                                                MITIGATION_POLICY_CONTROL_
                                                                                FLOW_GUARD_EXPORT_SUPPRESSION
                                                                                process-creation attribute flag.

CFG Strict Mode                     This prevents the loading of any image      This is set through
                                    library within the current process that     SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                    was not linked with the /guard:cf           or with the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                    option.                                     MITIGATION_POLICY2_STRICT_
                                                                                CONTROL_FLOW_GUARD_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                process-creation attribute flag.

Disable Non System Fonts            This prevents the loading of any font       This is set through
                                    files that have not been registered by      SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                    Winlogon at user logon time, after          or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                    being installed in the C:\windows\fonts     MITIGATION_POLICY_
                                    directory.                                  FONT_DISABLE_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                process-creation attribute flag.

Microsoft-Signed Binaries Only      This prevents the loading of any image      This is set through the
                                    library within the current process that     PROCESS_CREATION_
                                    has not been signed by a Microsoft          MITIGATION_POLICY_BLOCK_NON_
                                    CA—issued certificate.                      MICROSOFT_BINARIES_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                process-attribute flag at startup time.

     TABLE 7-20   Process mitigation options (continued)
     Mitigation Name                       Use Case                                   Enabling Mechanism

     Store-Signed Binaries Only            This prevents the loading of any image     This is set through the
                                           library within the current process that    PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           has not been signed by the Microsoft       MITIGATION_POLICY_BLOCK_NON_
                                           Store CA.                                  MICROSOFT_BINARIES_ALLOW_STORE
                                                                                      process attribute flag at startup time.

     No Remote Images                      This prevents the loading of any im-       This is set through
                                           age library within the current process     SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           that is present on a non-local (UNC or     or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           WebDAV) path.                              MITIGATION_POLICY_IMAGE_
                                                                                      LOAD_NO_REMOTE_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                      process-creation attribute flag.

     No Low IL Images                      This prevents the loading of any image     This is set through
                                           library within the current process that    SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           has a mandatory label below medium         or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           (0x2000).                                  MITIGATION_POLICY_IMAGE_
                                                                                      LOAD_NO_LOW_LABEL_ALWAYS_ON
                                                                                      process-creation flag. It can also be
                                                                                      set through a resource claim ACE
                                                                                      called IMAGELOAD on the file of the
                                                                                      process being loaded.

     Prefer System32 Images                This modifies the loader’s search path     This is set through
                                           to always look for the given image         SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           library being loaded (through a rela-      or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           tive name) in the %SystemRoot%\            MITIGATION_POLICY_IMAGE_LOAD_
                                           System32 directory, regardless of the      PREFER_SYSTEM32_ALWAYS_ON
                                           current search path.                       process-creation attribute flag.

     Return Flow Guard (RFG)               This helps prevent additional classes      Currently still being implemented in
                                           of memory-corruption vulnerabilities       a robust and performant way, this
                                           that affect control flow by validating,    mitigation is not yet available, but is
                                           before the execution of a RET instruc-     included here for completeness.
                                           tion, that the function was not called
                                           through a return-oriented program-
                                           ming (ROP) exploit by not having
                                           begun its execution correctly or by
                                           executing on an invalid stack. This is
                                           part of the Control Flow Integrity (CFI)
                                           mechanisms.

     Restrict Set Thread Context           This restricts the modification of the     Currently disabled pending the
                                           current thread’s context.                  availability of RFG, which makes the
                                                                                      mitigation more robust, this mitiga-
                                                                                      tion may appear in a future version
                                                                                      of Windows. It is included here for
                                                                                      completeness.

     Loader Continuity                     This prohibits the process from dy-     This is set through
                                           namically loading any DLLs that do      SetProcessMitigationPolicy
                                           not have the same integrity level as    or the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                           the process, in cases where a signature MITIGATION_POLICY2_LOADER_
                                           policy mitigation above could not be    INTEGRITY_CONTINUITY_ALWAYS_ON
                                           enabled at startup time due to com-     process-creation attribute flag.
                                           patibility concerns. This specifically
                                           targets cases of DLL planting attacks.

TABLE 7-20   Process mitigation options (continued)
Mitigation Name                       Use Case                                       Enabling Mechanism

Heap Terminate On Corruption          This disables the Fault Tolerant Heap          This is set through
                                      (FTH) and the raising of a continuable         HeapSetInformation or by using the
                                      exception in the case of heap cor-             PROCESS_CREATION_MITIGATION_
                                      ruption by terminating the process             POLICY_HEAP_TERMINATE_ALWAYS_
                                      instead. This prevents the use of              ON process-creation attribute flag.
                                      heap corruption as a way to force an
                                      attacker-controlled exception handler
                                      from executing, or in cases where the
                                      program ignores the heap exception,
                                      or cases where the exploit only some-
                                      times causes heap corruption (limiting
                                      its universal effectiveness or reliability).

Disable Child Process Creation        This prohibits the creation of child           This is set through the PROCESS_
                                      processes by marking the token with a          CREATION_CHILD_PROCESS_
                                      special restriction, which should stop         RESTRICTED process-creation
                                      any other component from creating a            attribute flag. It can be overridden
                                      process while impersonating the to-            to allow packaged (UWP) applica-
                                      ken of this process (for example, WMI          tions with the PROCESS_CREATION_
                                      process creation, or a kernel compo-           DESKTOP_APPX_OVERRIDE flag.
                                      nent creating the process).

All Application Packages Policy       This makes an application running              This is set through the PROC_THREAD_
                                      under an AppContainer unable to                ATTRIBUTE_ALL_APPLICATION_
                                      access resources that have an ALL              PACKAGES_POLICY process-creation
                                      APPLICATION PACKAGES SID pres-                 attribute.
                                      ent, as was explained earlier in the
                                      “AppContainers” section. The presence
                                      of an ALL RESTRICTED APPLICATION
                                      PACKAGES SID will be required in-
                                      stead. Sometimes referred to as Less
                                      Privileged App Container (LPAC).

    Note that it is also possible to some of these mitigations on a per-application or per-system basis
without the cooperation of the application developer. To do so, open the Local Group Policy Editor.
Then expand Computer Configuration, then Administrative Templates, then System, and finally
Mitigation Options (see Figure 7-30). In the Process Mitigation Options dialog box, enter the ap-
propriate bit-number value that corresponds to the mitigations being enabled, using 1 to enable a miti-
gation, 0 to disable it, or ? to leave it to its default or process-requested value (again, see Figure 7-30).
The bit numbers are taken from the PROCESS_MITIGATION_POLICY enumeration found in the Winnt.h
header file. This will result in the appropriate registry value being written in the Image File Execution
Options (IFEO) key for the entered image name. Unfortunately the current version of Windows 10
Creators Update and earlier will strip out many of the newer mitigations. You can avoid this by manu-
ally setting the REG_DWORD MitigationOptions registry value.

     FIGURE 7-30   Customizing process-mitigation options.

     Control Flow Integrity
     Data Execution Prevention (DEP) and Arbitrary Code Guard (ACG) make it hard for exploits to place
     executable code on the heap or stack, to allocate new executable code, or to change existing executable
     code. As a result, memory/data-only attacks have become more interesting. Such attacks allow the
     modification of portions of memory to redirect control flow, such as modifying return addresses on the
     stack or indirect function pointers stored in memory. Techniques such as return-oriented-programming
     (ROP) and jump-oriented-programming (JOP) are often used to violate the regular code flow of the
     program and redirect it to known locations of interesting code snippets (“gadgets”).

        Because such snippets are often present in the middle or end of various functions, when control
     flow is redirected in this way, it must be redirected into the middle or end of a legitimate function. By
     employing Control Flow Integrity (CFI) technologies—which can, for example, validate that the target
     of an indirect JMP or CALL instruction is the beginning of a real function, or that a RET instruction is
     pointing to an expected location, or that a RET instruction is issued after the function was entered
     through its beginning—the operating system and compiler can detect and prevent most classes of
     such exploits.

Control Flow Guard
Control Flow Guard (CFG) is an exploit-mitigation mechanism first introduced in Windows 8.1 Update
3 that exists in enhanced version in Windows 10 and Server 2016, with further improvements released
on various updates (up to and including the latest Creators Update). Originally implemented only for
user-mode code, CFG now also exists as Kernel CFG (KCFG) on the Creators Update. CFG addresses the
indirect CALL/JMP part of CFI by verifying that the target of an indirect call is at the start of a known
function (more on that momentarily). If the target is not at the start of a known function, the process is
simply terminated. Figure 7-31 shows the conceptual operation of CFG.

FIGURE 7-31   Conceptual view of Control Flow Guard.

   CFG requires the cooperation of a supported compiler that will add the call to the validation code
before indirect changes in control flow. The Visual C++ compiler has an option, /guard:cf, that must
be set for images (or even on a C/C++ source file level) to be built with CFG support (this option is
also available in Visual Studio’s GUI in the C/C++/Code Generation/Control Flow Guard setting in the
project’s properties). This setting should also be set in the linker settings, as both components of Visual
Studio are required to collaborate to support CFG.

    Once those settings are present, images (EXEs and DLLs) that are compiled with CFG-enabled
indicate this in their PE header. In addition, they contain a list of functions that are the valid indirect
control flow targets in a .gfids PE section (by default merged by the linker with the .rdata section). This
list is built by the linker and contains the relative virtual address (RVA) of all functions in the image. This
includes those that might not be called by an indirect call by the code present in the image because
there’s no way of knowing if outside code does not somehow legitimately know the address of a func-
tion and is attempting to call it. This can be especially true of exported functions, which can be called
after obtaining their pointer through GetProcAddress.

   That being said, programmers can use a technique called CFG suppression, which is supported
through the DECLSPEC_GUARD_SUPRESS annotation, and which marks the function in the table of valid
functions with a special flag indicating that the programmer never expects such a function to be the
target of any indirect call or jump.

        Now that a table of valid function targets exists, all that a simple validation function would need
     to do is to compare the target of the CALL or JMP instruction with one of the functions in the table.
     Algorithmically, this would result in an O(n) algorithm, where the number of functions needed to check
     would be equivalent, in the worst case, to the number of functions in the table. Clearly, linearly scan-
     ning an entire array during every single indirect change in control flow would bring a program to its
     knees, so operating system support is needed to perform CFG checks efficiently. We’ll see in the next
     section how Windows can achieve this.

        EXPERIMENT: Control Flow Guard information
        The DumpBin Visual Studio tool can show some basic CFG information. The following dumps
        header and loader configuration information for Smss:
        c:\> dumpbin /headers /loadconfig c:\windows\system32\smss.exe
        Microsoft (R) COFF/PE Dumper Version 14.00.24215.1
        Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
        Dump of file c:\windows\system32\smss.exe
        PE signature found
        File Type: EXECUTABLE IMAGE
        FILE HEADER VALUES
                    8664 machine (x64)
                       6 number of sections
                57899A7D time date stamp Sat Jul 16 05:22:53 2016
                       0 file pointer to symbol table
                       0 number of symbols
                      F0 size of optional header
                      22 characteristics
                           Executable
                           Application can handle large (>2GB) addresses

        OPTIONAL HEADER VALUES
                     20B magic # (PE32+)
                   14.00 linker version
                   12800 size of code
                    EC00 size of initialized data
                       0 size of uninitialized data
                    1080 entry point (0000000140001080) NtProcessStartupW
                    1000 base of code
               140000000 image base (0000000140000000 to 0000000140024FFF)
                    1000 section alignment
                     200 file alignment
                   10.00 operating system version
                   10.00 image version
                   10.00 subsystem version
                       0 Win32 version
                   25000 size of image
                     400 size of headers
                   270FD checksum
                       1 subsystem (Native)
                    4160 DLL characteristics

                  High Entropy Virtual Addresses
                  Dynamic base
                  NX compatible
                  Control Flow Guard
...
Section contains the following load config:

           000000D0 size
                  0 time date stamp
               0.00 Version
                  0 GlobalFlags Clear
                  0 GlobalFlags Set
                  0 Critical Section Default Timeout
                  0 Decommit Free Block Threshold
                  0 Decommit Total Free Threshold
   0000000000000000 Lock Prefix Table
                  0 Maximum Allocation Size
                  0 Virtual Memory Threshold
                  0 Process Heap Flags
                  0 Process Affinity Mask
                  0 CSD Version
               0800 Dependent Load Flag
   0000000000000000 Edit List
   0000000140020660 Security Cookie
   00000001400151C0 Guard CF address of check-function pointer
   00000001400151C8 Guard CF address of dispatch-function pointer
   00000001400151D0 Guard CF function table
                 2A Guard CF function count
           00010500 Guard Flags
                      CF Instrumented
                      FID table present
                      Long jump target table present
               0000 Code Integrity Flags
               0000 Code Integrity Catalog
           00000000 Code Integrity Catalog Offset
           00000000 Code Integrity Reserved
   0000000000000000 Guard CF address taken IAT entry table
                  0 Guard CF address taken IAT entry count
   0000000000000000 Guard CF long jump target table
                  0 Guard CF long jump target count
   0000000000000000 Dynamic value relocation table

   Guard CF Function Table

         Address
         --------
         0000000140001010    _TlgEnableCallback
         0000000140001070    SmpSessionComplete
         0000000140001080    NtProcessStartupW
         0000000140001B30    SmscpLoadSubSystemsForMuSession
         0000000140001D10    SmscpExecuteInitialCommand
         0000000140002FB0    SmpExecPgm

                    0000000140003620     SmpStartCsr
                    00000001400039F0     SmpApiCallback
                    0000000140004E90     SmpStopCsr
        ...

           The CFG-related information is marked in bold in the preceding output. We will discuss that
        shortly. For now, open Process Explorer, right-click the process column header, choose Select
        Columns. Then, in the Process Image tab, select the Control Flow Guard check box. Also select
        Virtual Size in the Process Memory tab. You should see something like this:

           You should see most Microsoft-provided processes were built with CFG (including Smss, Csrss,
        Audiodg, Notepad, and many others). The virtual size for CFG-built processes is surprisingly
        high. Recall that the virtual size indicates the total address space used in the process, whether
        that memory is committed or reserved. In contrast, the Private Bytes column shows the private
        committed memory and is not even remotely close to the virtual size (although the virtual size
        includes non-private memory as well). For 64-bit processes, the virtual size is at least 2 TB, which
        we will shortly be able to rationalize.

     The CFG bitmap
     As you saw earlier, forcing the program to iterate through a list of function calls every few instructions
     would not be practical. Therefore, instead of an algorithm that requires linear time O(n), performance
     requirements dictate that an O(1) algorithm be used instead—one where a constant lookup time is
     used, regardless of how many functions are present in the table. This constant lookup time should be
     as small as possible. A clear winner of such a requirement would be an array that is indexable by the tar-
     get function’s address, which is an indication if this address is valid or not (such as a simple BOOL). With
     a 128 TB of possible addresses, though, such an array would itself have to be 128 TB * sizeof(BOOL),
     which is an unacceptable storage size—bigger than the address space itself. Can we do better?

    First, we can leverage the fact that compilers ought to generate x64 function code on 16-byte
boundaries. This reduces the size to the required array to only 8 TB * sizeof(BOOL). But using an
entire BOOL (which is 4 bytes in the worst case or 1 byte in the best) is extremely wasteful. We only need
one state, valid or invalid, which only needs to use 1 bit. This makes the calculation 8 TB / 8, or simply
1 TB. Unfortunately, however, there’s a snag. There’s no guarantee that the compiler will generate all
functions on a 16-byte binary. Hand-crafted assembly code and certain optimizations might violate
this rule. As such, we’ll have to figure out a solution. One possible option is to simply use another bit
to indicate if the function begins somewhere on the next 15 bytes instead of on the 16-byte boundary
itself. Thus, we have the following possibilities:

   ■■   {0, 0}   No valid function begins inside this 16-byte boundary.

   ■■   {1, 0}   A valid function begins exactly on this aligned 16-byte address.

   ■■   {1, 1}   A valid function begins somewhere inside of this 16-byte address.

    Thanks to this setup, if the attacker attempts to call inside a function that was marked as 16-byte
aligned by the linker, the 2-bit state will be {1, 0}, while the required bits (that is, bits 3 and 4) in the
address will be {1, 1} as the address won’t be 16-byte aligned. Therefore, an attacker will only be able to
call an arbitrary instruction in the first 16 bytes of the function if the linker did not generate the func-
tion aligned in the first place (bits would then be {1, 1}, as shown above). Even then, this instruction must
somehow be useful to the attacker without crashing the function (typically some sort of stack pivot or
gadget that ends in a ret instruction).

  With this understanding in mind, we can apply the following formulas to compute the size of the
CFG bitmap:

   ■■   32-bit application on x86 or x64         2 GB / 16 * 2 = 32 MB

   ■■   32-bit application with /LARGEADDRESSAWARE, booted in 3 GB mode on x86 3 GB / 16 *
        2 = 48 MB

   ■■   64-bit application      128 TB / 16 * 2 = 2 TB

   ■■   32-bit application with /LARGEADDRESSAWARE, on x64 4 GB / 16 * 2 = 64 MB, plus the size
        of the 64-bit bitmap, which is needed to protect 64-bit Ntdll.dll and WoW64 components, so
        2 TB + 64MB

   Allocating and filling out 2 TB of bits on every single process execution is still a tough performance
overhead to swallow. Even though we have fixed the execution cost of the indirect call itself, process
startup cannot be allowed to take so long, and 2 TB of committed memory would exhaust the commit
limit instantly. Therefore, two memory-saving and performance-helping tricks are used.

   First, the memory manager will only reserve the bitmap, basing itself on the assumption that the
CFG validation function will treat an exception during CFG bitmap access as an indication that the bit
state is {0,0}. As such, as long as the region contains 4 KB of bit states that are all {0, 0}, it can be left as
reserved, and only pages with at least one bit set {1, X} need to be committed.

   Next, as described in the ASLR section of Chapter 5, “Memory management,” the system performs the
randomization/relocation of libraries typically only once at boot, as a performance-saving measure to avoid

     repeated relocations. As such, after a library that supports ASLR has been loaded once at a given address,
     it will always be loaded at that same address. This also therefore means that once the relevant bitmap states
     have been calculated for the functions in that library, they will be identical in all other processes that also
     load the same binary. As such, the memory manager treats the CFG bitmap as a region of pagefile-backed
     shareable memory, and the physical pages that correspond to the shared bits only exist in RAM once.

        This reduces the cost of the committed pages in RAM and means that only the bits corresponding
     to private memory need to be calculated. In regular applications, private memory is not executable ex-
     cept in the copy-on-write case where someone has patched a library (but this will not happen at image
     load), so the cost of loading an application, if it shares the same libraries as other previously launched
     applications, is almost nil. The next experiment demonstrates this.

        EXPERIMENT: Control Flow Guard bitmap
        Open the VMMap tool and select a Notepad process. You should see a large reserved block in
        the Sharable section like so:

           You can sort the lower pane by size and quickly locate the large chunk used for the
        CFGBitmap, as shown. Additionally, if you attach to the process and use the !address command
        on the process, you will see WinDBG identifying the CFG bitmap for you:
        +     7df5'ff530000 7df6'0118a000 0'01c5a000   MEM_MAPPED MEM_RESERVE
        Other [CFG Bitmap]
              7df6'0118a000 7df6'011fb000 0'00071000   MEM_MAPPED MEM_COMMIT PAGE_NOACCESS
        Other [CFG Bitmap]
              7df6'011fb000 7ff5'df530000 1ff'de335000 MEM_MAPPED MEM_RESERVE
        Other [CFG Bitmap]

           7ff5'df530000 7ff5'df532000 0'00002000             MEM_MAPPED MEM_COMMIT PAGE_READONLY
   Other    [CFG Bitmap]

      Note how large regions are marked as MEM_RESERVE, in between regions that are MEM_COMMIT,
   representing that at least one valid bit state {1, X} is set. Also, all (or almost all) the regions will be
   MEM_MAPPED, since they belong to the shared bitmap.

CFG bitmap construction
Upon system initialization, the MiInitializeCfg function is called to initialize support for CFG. The
function creates one or two section objects (MmCreateSection) as reserved memory with size appro-
priate for the platform, as shown earlier. For 32-bit platforms, one bitmap is enough. For x64 platforms,
two bitmaps are required—one for 64-bit processes and the other for Wow64 processes (32-bit appli-
cations). The section objects’ pointers are stored in a substructure within the MiState global variable.

   After a process is created, the appropriate section is securely mapped into the process’s address
space. Securely here means that the section cannot be unmapped by code running within the process
or have its protection changed. (Otherwise, malicious code could just unmap the memory, reallocate,
and fill everything with 1 bits, effectively disabling CFG, or simply modify any bits by marking the
region read/write.)

   The user mode CFG bitmap(s) are populated in the following scenarios:

   ■■   During image mapping, images that have been dynamically relocated due to ASLR (see Chapter
        5, for more on ASLR) will have their indirect call target metadata extracted. If an image does
        not have indirect call target metadata, meaning it was not compiled with CFG, it is assumed
        that every address within the image can be called indirectly. As explained, because dynamically
        relocated images are expected to load at the same address in every process, their metadata is
        used to populate the shared section that is used for the CFG bitmap.

   ■■   During image mapping, special care is needed for non-dynamically relocated images and imag-
        es not being mapped at their preferred base. For these image mappings, the relevant pages of
        the CFG bitmap are made private and are populated using the CFG metadata from the image.
        For images whose CFG bits are present in the shared CFG bitmap, a check is made to ensure that
        all the relevant CFG bitmap pages are still shared. If this is not the case, the bits of the private
        CFG bitmap pages are populated using the CFG metadata from the image.

   ■■   When virtual memory is allocated or re-protected as executable, the relevant pages of the CFG bit-
        map are made private and initialized to all 1s by default. This is needed for cases such as just-in-time
        (JIT) compilation, where code is generated on the fly and then executed (for example, .NET or Java).

Strengthening CFG protection
Although CFG does an adequate job to prevent types of exploits that leverage indirect calls or jumps, it
could be bypassed through the following ways:

        ■■   If the process can be tricked or an existing JIT engine abused to allocate executable memory, all the
             corresponding bits will be set to {1, 1}, meaning that all memory is considered a valid call target.

        ■■   For 32-bit applications, if the expected call target is __stdcall (standard calling convention),
             but an attacker is able to change the indirect call target to __cdecl (C calling convention), the
             stack will become corrupt, as the C call function will not perform cleanup of the caller’s argu-
             ments, unlike a standard call function. Because CFG cannot differentiate between the different
             calling conventions, this results in a corrupt stack, potentially with an attacker-controlled return
             address, bypassing the CFG mitigation.

        ■■   Similarly, compiler-generated setjmp/longjmp targets behave differently from true indirect
             calls. CFG cannot differentiate between the two.

        ■■   Certain indirect calls are harder to protect, such as the Import Address Table (IAT) or Delay-
             Load Address Table, which is typically in a read-only section of the executable.

        ■■   Exported functions may not be desirable indirect function calls.

         Windows 10 introduces advancements to CFG that address all these issues. The first is to introduce
     a new flag to the VirtualAlloc function called PAGE_TARGETS_INVALID and one to VirtualProtect
     called PAGE_TARGETS_NO_UPDATE. With these flags set, JIT engines that allocate executable memory
     will not see all their allocations’ bits set to the {1, 1} state. Instead, they must manually call the SetProcess-
     ValidCallTargets function (which calls the native NtSetInformationVirtualMemory function), which
     will allow them to specify the actual function start addresses of their JITed code. Additionally, this func-
     tion is marked as a suppressed call with DECLSPEC_GUARD_SUPPRESS, making sure that attackers cannot
     use an indirect CALL or JMP to redirect into it, even at its function start. (Because it’s an inherently
     dangerous function, calling it with a controlled stack or registers could result in the bypassing of CFG.)

         Next, improved CFG changes the default flow you saw in the beginning of this section with a more
     refined flow. In this flow, the loader does not implement a simple “verify target, return” function, but
     rather a “verify target, call target, check stack, return” function, which is used in a subset of places on
     32-bit applications (and/or running under WoW64). This improved execution flow is shown in Figure 7-32.

        Next, improved CFG adds additional tables inside of the executable, such as the Address Taken IAT
     table and the Long Jump Address table. When longjmp and IAT CFG protection are enabled in the
     compiler, these tables are used to store destination addresses for these specific types of indirect calls,
     and the relevant functions are not placed in the regular function table, therefore not figuring in the
     bitmap. This means that if code is attempting to indirect jump/call to one of these functions, it will be
     treated as an illegal transition. Instead, the C Runtime and linker will validate the targets of, say, the
     longjmp function, by manually checking this table. Although it’s more inefficient than a bitmap, there
     should be little to no functions in these tables, making the cost bearable.

        Finally, improved CFG implements a feature called export suppression, which must be supported by
     the compiler and enabled by process-mitigation policy. (See the section “Process-mitigation policies”
     for more on process level mitigations.) With this feature enabled, a new bit state is implemented (recall
     that bulleted list had {0, 1} as an undefined state). This state indicates that the function is valid but
     export-suppressed, and it will be treated differently by the loader.

FIGURE 7-32    Improved CFG.

   You can determine which features are present in a given binary by looking at the guard flags in
the Image Load Configuration Directory, which the DumpBin application used earlier can decode. For
reference, they are listed in Table 7-21.

TABLE 7-21    Control Flow Guard flags
Flag Symbol                                               Value      Description

IMAGE_GUARD_CF_INSTRUMENTED                               0x100      This indicates CFG support is present
                                                                     for this module.

IMAGE_GUARD_CFW_INSTRUMENTED                              0x200      This module performs CFG and write
                                                                     integrity checks.

IMAGE_GUARD_CF_FUNCTION_TABLE_PRESENT                     0x400      This module contains CFG-aware
                                                                     function lists.

IMAGE_GUARD_SEURITY_COOKIE_UNUSED                         0x800      This module does not make use of
                                                                     the security cookie emitted with the
                                                                     compiler /GS flag.

IMAGE_GUARD_PROTECT_DELAYLOAD_IAT                         0x1000     This module supports read-
                                                                     only delay-load Import Address
                                                                     Tables (IATs).

IMAGE_GUARD_DELAYLOAD_IAT_IN_ITS_OWN_SECTION              0x2000     Delay-load IAT is its own section, so
                                                                     it can be re-protected if desired.

IMAGE_GUARD_CF_EXPORT_SUPPRESSION_INFO_PRESENT            0x4000     This module contains suppressed
                                                                     export information.

IMAGE_GUARD_CF_ENABLE_EXPORT_SUPPRESSION                  0x8000     This module enables suppression of
                                                                     exports.

IMAGE_GUARD_CF_LONGJUMP_TABLE_PRESENT                     0x10000    This module contains longjmp
                                                                     target information.

     Loader interaction with CFG
     Although it is the memory manager that builds the CFG bitmap, the user-mode loader (see Chapter 3
     for more information) serves two purposes. The first is to dynamically enable CFG support only if the
     feature is enabled (for example, the caller may have requested no CFG for the child process, or the
     process itself might not have CFG support). This is done by the LdrpCfgProcessLoadConfig loader
     function, which is called to initialize CFG for each loaded module. If the module DllCharacteristics
     flags in the optional header of the PE does not have the CFG flag set (IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_
     GUARD_CF), the GuardFlags member of IMAGE_LOAD_CONFIG_DIRECTORY structure does not have the
     IMAGE_GUARD_CF_INSTRUMENTED flag set, or the kernel has forcibly turned off CFG for this module,
     then there is nothing to do.

        Second, if the module is indeed using CFG, LdrpCfgProcessLoadConfig gets the indirect check-
     ing function pointer retrieved from the image (the GuardCFCheckFunctionPointer member of
     IMAGE_LOAD_CONFIG_DIRECTORY structure) and sets it to either LdrpValidateUserCallTarget or
     LdrpValidateUserCallTargetES in Ntdll, depending on whether export suppression is enabled.
     Additionally, the function first makes sure the indirect pointer has not been somehow modified to
     point outside the module itself.

        Furthermore, if improved CFG was used to compile this binary, a second indirect routine is avail-
     able, called the dispatch CFG routine. It is used to implement the enhanced execution flow described
     earlier. If the image includes such a function pointer (in the GuardCFDispatchFunctionPointer
     member of the abovementioned structure), it is initialized to LdrpDispatchUserCallTarget, or
     LdrpDispatchUserCallTargetES if export suppression is enabled.

        Note In some cases, the kernel itself can emulate or perform indirect jumps or calls on
        behalf of user mode. In situations where this is a possibility, the kernel implements its own
        MmValidateUserCallTarget routine, which performs the same work as LdrpValidate-
        UserCallTarget.

        The code generated by the compiler when CFG is enabled issues an indirect call that lands in the
     LdrpValidateCallTarget(ES) or LdrpDispatchUserCallTarget(ES) functions in Ntdll. This func-
     tion uses the target branch address and checks the bit state value for the function:

        ■■   If the bit state is {0, 0}, the dispatch is potentially invalid.

        ■■   If the bit state is {1, 0}, and the address is 16-byte aligned, the dispatch is valid. Otherwise, it is
             potentially invalid.

        ■■   If the bit state is {1, 1}, and the address is not 16-byte aligned, the dispatch is valid. Otherwise,
             it is potentially invalid.

        ■■   If the bit state is {0, 1}, the dispatch is potentially invalid.

        If the dispatch is potentially invalid, the RtlpHandleInvalidUserCallTarget function will execute
     to determine the appropriate action. First, it checks if suppressed calls are allowed in the process, which

is an unusual application-compatibility option that might be set if Application Verifier is enabled, or
through the registry. If so, it will check if the address is suppressed, which is why it was not inserted
into the bitmap (recall that a special flag in the guard function table entry indicates this). If this is the
case, the call is allowed through. If the function is not valid at all (meaning it’s not in the table), then the
dispatch is aborted and the process terminated.

    Second, a check is made to see if export suppression is enabled. If it is, the target address is checked
against the list of export-suppressed addresses, which is once again indicated with another flag that is
added in the guard function table entry. If this is the case, the loader validates that the target address is
a forwarder reference to the export table of another DLL, which is the only allowed case of an indirect
call toward an image with suppressed exports. This is done by a complex check that makes sure the
target address is in a different image, that its image load directory has enabled export suppression,
and that this address is in the import directory of that image. If these checks match, the kernel is called
through the NtSetInformationVirtualMemory call described earlier, to change the bit state to {1, 0}.
If any of these checks fail, or export suppression is not enabled, then the process is terminated.

    For 32-bit applications, an additional check is performed if DEP is enabled for the process. (See Chapter 5
for more on DEP.) Otherwise, because there are no execution guarantees to begin with, the incorrect call is
allowed, as it may be an older application calling into the heap or stack for legitimate reasons.

   Finally, because large sets of {0, 0} bit states are not committed to save space, if checking the CFG
bitmap lands on a reserved page, an access violation exception occurs. On x86, where exception han-
dling setup is expensive, instead of being handled as part of the verification code, it is left to propagate
normally. (See Chapter 8 in Part 2 for more on exception dispatching.) The user-mode dispatcher han-
dler, KiUserExceptionDispatcher, has specific checks for recognizing CFG bitmap access violation
exceptions within the validation function and will automatically resume execution if the exception
code was STATUS_IN_PAGE_ERROR. This simplifies the code in LdrpValidateUserCallTarget(ES) and
LdrpDispatchUserCallTarget(ES), which don’t have to include exception handling code. On x64,
where exception handlers are simply registered in tables, the LdrpICallHandler handler runs instead,
with the same logic as above.

Kernel CFG
Although drivers compiled with Visual Studio and /guard:cf also ended up with the same binary
properties as user-mode images, the first versions of Windows 10 did not do anything with this data.
Unlike the user-mode CFG bitmap, which is protected by a higher, more trusted entity (the kernel),
there is nothing that can truly “protect” the kernel CFG bitmap if one were to be created. A malicious
exploit could simply edit the PTE that corresponded to the page containing the desired bits to modify,
mark it as read/write, and proceed with the indirect call or jump. Therefore, the overhead of setting up
such a trivially bypassable mitigation was simply not worth it.

   With a greater number of users enabling VBS features, once again, the higher security boundary
that VTL 1 provides can be leveraged. The SLAT page table entries come to the rescue by providing a
second boundary against PTE page protection changes. While the bitmap is readable to VTL 0 because
the SLAT entries are marked as read only, if a kernel attacker attempts to change the PTEs to mark them
read/write, they cannot do the same to the SLAT entries. As such, this will be detected as an invalid

     KCFG bitmap access which HyperGuard can act on (for telemetry reasons alone—since the bits can’t be
     changed anyway).

        KCFG is implemented almost identically to regular CFG, except that export suppression is not en-
     abled, nor is longjmp support, nor is the ability to dynamically request additional bits for JIT purposes.
     Kernel drivers should not be doing any of these things. Instead, the bits are set in the bitmap based on
     the “address taken IAT table” entries, if any are set; by the usual function entries in the guard table each
     time a driver image is loaded; and for the HAL and kernel during boot by MiInitializeKernelCfg. If
     the hypervisor is not enabled, and SLAT support is not present, then none of this will be initialized, and
     Kernel CFG will be kept disabled.

       Just like in the user-mode case, a dynamic pointer in the load configuration data directory is
     updated, which in the enabled case will point to __guard_check_icall for the check function and
     __guard_dispatch_icall for the dispatch function in enhanced CFG mode. Additionally, a variable
     named guard_icall_bitmap will hold the virtual address of the bitmap.

        One last detail on Kernel CFG is that unfortunately, dynamic Driver Verifier settings will not be con-
     figurable (for more information on Driver Verifier, see Chapter 6, “I/O system”), as this would require
     adding dynamic kernel hooks and redirecting execution to functions that may not be in the bitmap. In
     this case, STATUS_VRF_CFG_ENABLED (0xC000049F) will be returned, and a reboot is required (at which
     time the bitmap can be built with the Verifier Driver hooks in place).

     Security assertions
     Earlier, we described how Control Flow Guard will terminate the process. We also explained how certain
     other mitigations or security features will raise an exception to kill the process. It is important to be ac-
     curate with what exactly happens during these security violations because both these descriptions hide
     important details about the mechanism.

        In fact, when a security-related breach occurs, such as when CFG detects an incorrect indirect call or
     jump, terminating the process through the standard TerminateProcess mechanism would not be an
     adequate path. There would be no crash generated, and no telemetry sent to Microsoft. These are both
     important tools for the administrator to understand that a potential exploit has executed or that an
     application compatibility issue exists, as well as for Microsoft to track zero-day exploitation in the wild.
     On the flip side, while raising an exception would achieve the desired result, exceptions are callbacks,
     which can be:

        ■■   Potentially hooked by attackers if /SAFESEH and SEHOP mitigations are not enabled, causing the
             security check to be the one that gives control to an attacker in the first place—or an attacker
             can simply “swallow” the exception.

        ■■   Potentially hooked by legitimate parts of the software through an unhandled exception filter or
             vectored exception handler, both of which might accidentally swallow the exception.

        ■■   Same as above, but intercepted by a third-party product that has injected its own library into
             the process. Common to many security tools, this can also lead in the exception not being cor-
             rectly delivered to Windows Error Reporting (WER).

   ■■   A process might have an application recovery callback registered with WER. This might then
        display a less clear UI to the user, and might restart the process in its current exploited state,
        leading anywhere from a recursive crash/start loop to the exception being swallowed whole.

   ■■   Likely in a C++-based product, caught by an outer exception handler as if “thrown” by the
        program itself, which, once again, might swallow the exception or continue execution in an
        unsafe manner.

   Solving these issues requires a mechanism that can raise an exception that cannot be intercepted by
any of the process’s components outside of the WER service, which must itself be guaranteed to receive
the exception. This is where security assertions come into play.

Compiler and OS support
When Microsoft libraries, programs, or kernel components encounter unusual security situations,
or when mitigations recognize dangerous violations of security state, they now use a special com-
piler intrinsic supported by Visual Studio, called __fastfail, which takes one parameter as input.
Alternatively, they can call a runtime library (Rtl) function in Ntdll called RtlFailFast2, which itself
contains a __fastfail intrinsic. In some cases, the WDK or SDK contain inline functions that call this
intrinsic, such as when using the LIST_ENTRY functions InsertTailList and RemoveEntryList. In
other situations, it is the Universal CRT (uCRT) itself that has this intrinsic in its functions. In yet others,
APIs will do certain checks when called by applications and may use this intrinsic as well.

   Regardless of the situation, when the compiler sees this intrinsic, it generates assembly code that
takes the input parameter, moves it into the RCX (x64) or ECX (x86) register, and then issues a software
interrupt with the number 0x29. (For more information on interrupts, see Chapter 8 in Part 2.)

   In Windows 8 and later, this software interrupt is registered in the Interrupt Dispatch Table (IDT) with
the handler KiRaiseSecurityCheckFailure, which you can verify on your own by using the !idt 29
command in the debugger. This will result (for compatibility reasons) in KiFastFailDispatch being
called with the STATUS_STACK_BUFFER_OVERRUN status code (0xC0000409). This will then do regular
exception dispatching through KiDispatchException, but treat this as a second-chance exception,
which means that the debugger and process won’t be notified.

    This condition will be specifically recognized and an error message will be sent to the WER error
ALPC port as usual. WER will claim the exception as non-continuable, which will then cause the kernel
to terminate the process with the usual ZwTerminateProcess system call. This, therefore, guarantees
that once the interrupt is used, no return to user mode will ever be performed within this process again,
that WER will be notified, and that the process will be terminated (additionally, the error code will be
the exception code). When the exception record is generated, the first exception argument will be the
input parameter to __fastfail.

   Kernel-mode code can also raise exceptions, but in this case KiBugCheckDispatch will be called in-
stead, which will result in a special kernel mode crash (bugcheck) with code 0x139 (KERNEL_SECURITY_
CHECK_FAILURE), where the first argument will be the input parameter to __fastfail.

     Fast fail/security assertion codes
     Because the __fastfail intrinsic contains an input argument that is bubbled up to the exception
     record or crash screen, it allows the failing check to identify what part of the system or process is not
     working correctly or has encountered a security violation. Table 7-22 shows the various failure condi-
     tions and their meaning or significance.

     TABLE 7-22   __fastfail failure codes

     Code                                Meaning

     Legacy OS Violation (0x0)           An older buffer security check present in a legacy binary has failed, and has
                                         been converted to a security assertion instead.

     V-Table Guard Failure (0x1)         The Virtual Table Guard Mitigation in Internet Explorer 10 and higher has en-
                                         countered a corrupted virtual function table pointer.

     Stack Cookie Check Failure (0x2)    The stack cookie generated with the /GS compiler option (also called a stack
                                         canary) has been corrupted.

     Corrupt List Entry (0x3)            One of the macros for manipulating LIST_ENTRY structures has detected an
                                         inconsistent linked list, where the grandparent or grandchild entry does not
                                         point to the parent or child entry of the item being manipulated.

     Incorrect Stack (0x4)               A user-mode or kernel-mode API that is often potentially called from ROP-
                                         based exploits while operating on an attacker-controlled stack has been called,
                                         and the stack is therefore not the expected one.

     Invalid Argument (0x5)              A user-mode CRT API (typically) or other sensitive function has been called with
                                         an invalid argument, suggesting potential ROP-based use or an otherwise cor-
                                         rupted stack.

     Stack Cookie Init Failure (0x6)     The initialization of the stack cookie has failed, suggesting image patching
                                         or corruption.

     Fatal App Exit (0x7)                The application has used the FatalAppExit user-mode API, which has been
                                         converted into a security assertion to grant it the advantages this has.

     Range Check Failure (0x8)           Additional validation checks in certain fixed array buffers to check if the array
                                         element index is within expected bounds.

     Unsafe Registry Access (0x9)        A kernel-mode driver is attempting to access registry data from a user-control-
                                         lable hive (such as an application hive or user profile hive) and is not using the
                                         RTL_QUERY_REGISTRY_TYPECHECK flag to protect itself.

     CFG Indirect Call Failure (0xA)     Control Flow Guard has detected an indirect CALL or JMP instruction to a tar-
                                         get address that is not a valid dispatch per the CFG bitmap.

     CFG Write Check Failure (0xB)       Control Flow Guard with write protection has detected an invalid write to pro-
                                         tected data. This feature ( /guard:cfw) is not supported outside of testing at
                                         Microsoft.

     Invalid Fiber Switch (0xC)          The SwitchToFiber API was used on an invalid fiber or from a thread which
                                         has not been converted to a fiber.

     Invalid Set of Context (0xD)        An invalid context record structure was detected while attempting to restore it
                                         (due to an exception or SetThreadContext API), in which the stack pointer is
                                         not valid. Checked only when CFG is active on the process.

     Invalid Reference Count (0xE)       A reference countered object (such as the OBJECT_HEADER in kernel-mode or
                                         a Win32k.sys GDI object) has underflowed its reference count below 0 or over-
                                         flowed beyond its maximum capacity back to 0.

     Invalid Jump Buffer (0x12)          A longjmp attempt is being made with a jump buffer that contains an invalid
                                         stack address or invalid instruction pointer. Checked only when CFG is active on
                                         the process.

TABLE 7-22    __fastfail failure codes (continued)

Code                                   Meaning

MRDATA Modified (0x13)                 The mutable read-only data heap/section of the loader has been modified.
                                       Checked only when CFG is active on the process.

Certification Failure (0x14)           One or more Cryptographic Services APIs has encountered an issue parsing a
                                       certificate or an invalid ASN.1 stream.

Invalid Exception Chain (0x15)         An image linked with /SAFESEH, or with the SEHOP mitigation, has encountered
                                       an invalid exception handler dispatch.

Crypto Library (0x16)                  CNG.SYS, KSECDD.SYS, or their equivalent APIs in user mode have encountered
                                       some critical failure.

Invalid Call in DLL Callout (0x17)     An attempt to call dangerous functions while in the user-mode loader’s notifi-
                                       cation callback has occurred.

Invalid Image Base (0x18)              An invalid value for __ImageBase (IMAGE_DOS_HEADER structure) was detected
                                       by the user-mode image loader.

Delay Load Protection Failure (0x19)   The delay-loaded IAT has been found to be corrupted while delay-loading an
                                       imported function. Checked only when CFG is active on the process, and delay-
                                       load IAT protection is enabled.

Unsafe Extension Call (0x1A)           Checked when certain kernel-mode extension APIs are called, and the caller
                                       state is incorrect.

Deprecated Service Called (0x1B)       Checked when certain no-longer supported, and undocumented system calls,
                                       are called.

Invalid Buffer Access (0x1C)           Checked by the runtime library functions in Ntdll and the kernel when a generic
                                       buffer structure is corrupt in some way.

Invalid Balanced Tree (0x1D)           Checked by the runtime library functions in Ntdll and the kernel when an
                                       RTL_RB_TREE or RTL_AVL_TABLE structure has invalid nodes (where siblings
                                       and/or parent nodes do not match up with the grandparent’s, similar to the
                                       LIST_ENTRY checks).

Invalid Next Thread (0x1E)             Checked by the kernel scheduler when the next thread to schedule in the
                                       KPRCB is invalid in some way.

CFG Call Suppressed (0x1F)             Checked when CFG is allowing a suppressed call due to compatibility concerns.
                                       In this situation, WER will mark the error as handled, and the kernel will not
                                       terminate the process, but telemetry will still be sent to Microsoft.

APCs Disabled (0x20)                   Checked by the kernel when returning to user-mode and kernel APCs are still
                                       disabled.

Invalid Idle State (0x21)              Checked by the kernel power manager when the CPU is attempting to enter an
                                       invalid C-state.

MRDATA Protection Failure (0x22)       Checked by the user-mode loader when the Mutable Read-Only Heap Section
                                       has already been unprotected outside of the expected code path.

Unexpected Heap Exception (0x23)       Checked by the heap manager whenever the heap is corrupted in ways that
                                       indicate potential exploitation attempts.

Invalid Lock State (0x24)              Checked by the kernel when certain locks are not in their expected state, such
                                       as if an acquired lock is already in a released state.

Invalid Longjmp (0x25)                 Checked by longjmp when called, and CFG is active on the process with
                                       Longjmp Protection enabled, but the Longjmp Table is corrupt or missing in
                                       some way.

Invalid Longjmp Target (0x26)          Same conditions as above, but the Longjmp Table indicates that this is not a
                                       valid Longjmp target function.

     TABLE 7-22   __fastfail failure codes (continued)

     Code                                    Meaning

     Invalid Dispatch Context (0x27)         Checked by the exception handler in kernel-mode when an exception is at-
                                             tempted to be dispatched with an incorrect CONTEXT record.

     Invalid Thread (0x28)                   Checked by the scheduler in kernel-mode when the KTHREAD structure is cor-
                                             rupt during certain scheduling operations.

     Invalid System Call Number (0x29)       Similar to Deprecated Service Called, but WER will mark the exception as han-
                                             dled, resulting in the process continuing and therefore only used for telemetry.

     Invalid File Operation (0x2A)           Used by the I/O Manager and certain file systems, as another telemetry-type
                                             failure as above.

     LPAC Access Denied (0x2B)               Used by the SRM’s access check function when a lower-privilege AppContainer
                                             attempts to access an object that does not have the ALL RESTRICTED
                                             APPLICATION PACKAGES SID and tracing of such failures is enabled. Once
                                             more, results only in telemetry data, not a process crash.

     RFG Stack Failure (0x2C)                Used by Return Flow Guard (RFG), although this feature is currently disabled.

     Loader Continuity Failure (0x2D)        Used by the process-mitigation policy of the same name, shown earlier, to in-
                                             dicate that an unexpected image with a different signature or no signature has
                                             been loaded.

     CFG Export Suppression Failure (0x2D)   Used by CFG when enabled with export suppression to indicate that a sup-
                                             pressed export has been the target of an indirect branch.

     Invalid Control Stack (0x2E)            Used by RFG, although this feature is currently disabled.

     Set Context Denied (0x2F)               Used by the process-mitigation policy of the same name, shown earlier, al-
                                             though this feature is currently disabled.

Application Identification
     Historically, security decisions in Windows have been based on a user’s identity (in the form of the
     user’s SID and group membership), but a growing number of security components (AppLocker, firewall,
     antivirus, anti-malware, Rights Management Services, and others) need to make security decisions
     based on what code is to be run. In the past, each of these security components used their own pro-
     prietary method for identifying applications, which led to inconsistent and overly complicated policy
     authoring. The purpose of Application Identification (AppID) is to bring consistency to how the security
     components recognize applications by providing a single set of APIs and data structures.

        Note This is not the same as the AppID used by DCOM/COM+ applications, where a GUID
        represents a process that is shared by multiple CLSIDs, nor is it related to UWP application ID.

         Just as a user is identified when she logs in, an application is identified just before it is started by
     generating the main program’s AppID. An AppID can be generated from any of the following attributes
     of the application:

        ■■   Fields Fields within a code-signing certificate embedded within the file allow for different
             combinations of publisher name, product name, file name, and version. APPID://FQBN is a
          fully qualified binary name, and it is a string in the following form: {Publisher\Product\
          Filename,Version}. Publisher is the Subject field of the x.509 certificate used to sign the
          code, using the following fields:

          • O Organization
          • L Locality
          • S State or province
          • C Country
     ■■   File hash there are several methods that can be used for hashing. The default is APPID://
          SHA256HASH. However, for backward compatibility with SRP and most x.509 certificates, SHA-1
          (APPID://SHA1HASH) is still supported. APPID://SHA256HASH specifies the SHA-256 hash of the file.

     ■■   The partial or complete path to the file      APPID://Path specifies a path with optional wild-
          card characters (*).

     Note An AppID does not serve as a means for certifying the quality or security of an
     application. An AppID is simply a way of identifying an application so that administrators
     can reference the application in security policy decisions.

      The AppID is stored in the process access token, allowing any security component to make autho-
  rization decisions based on a single consistent identification. AppLocker uses conditional ACEs (de-
  scribed earlier) for specifying whether a particular program is allowed to be run by the user.

     When an AppID is created for a signed file, the certificate from the file is cached and verified to a
  trusted root certificate. The certificate path is reverified daily to ensure the certificate path remains
  valid. Certificate caching and verification are recorded in the system event log at Application and
  Services Logs\Microsoft\Windows\AppID\Operational.

AppLocker
  Windows 8.1 and Windows 10 (Enterprise editions) and Windows Server 2012/R2/2016 support a feature
  known as AppLocker, which allows an administrator to lock down a system to prevent unauthorized
  programs from being run. Windows XP introduced Software Restriction Policies (SRP), which was the
  first step toward this capability, but SRP was difficult to manage, and it couldn’t be applied to specific
  users or groups. (All users were affected by SRP rules.) AppLocker is a replacement for SRP, and yet co-
  exists alongside SRP, with AppLocker’s rules being stored separately from SRP’s rules. If both AppLocker
  and SRP rules are in the same Group Policy object (GPO), only the AppLocker rules will be applied.

     Another feature that makes AppLocker superior to SRP is AppLocker’s auditing mode, which allows
  an administrator to create an AppLocker policy and examine the results (stored in the system event
  log) to determine whether the policy will perform as expected—without actually performing the

     restrictions. AppLocker auditing mode can be used to monitor which applications are being used by
     one or more users on a system.

        AppLocker allows an administrator to restrict the following types of files from being run:

        ■■   Executable images (EXE and COM)

        ■■   Dynamic-link libraries (DLL and OCX)

        ■■   Microsoft Software Installer (MSI and MSP) for both install and uninstall

        ■■   Scripts

        ■■   Windows PowerShell (PS1)

        ■■   Batch (BAT and CMD)

        ■■   VisualBasic Script (VBS)

        ■■   Java Script (JS)

        AppLocker provides a simple GUI rule-based mechanism, which is very similar to network firewall
     rules, for determining which applications or scripts are allowed to be run by specific users and groups,
     using conditional ACEs and AppID attributes. There are two types of rules in AppLocker:

        ■■   Allow the specified files to run, denying everything else.

        ■■   Deny the specified files from being run, allowing everything else. Deny rules take precedence
             over allow rules.

        Each rule can also have a list of exceptions to exclude files from the rule. Using an exception, you
     could create a rule to, for example, allow everything in the C:\Windows or C:\Program Files directories
     to be run except RegEdit.exe.

        AppLocker rules can be associated with a specific user or group. This allows an administrator to sup-
     port compliance requirements by validating and enforcing which users can run specific applications.
     For example, you can create a rule to allow users in the Finance security group to run the finance line-
     of-business applications. This blocks everyone who is not in the Finance security group from running
     finance applications (including administrators) but still provides access for those who have a business
     need to run the applications. Another useful rule would be to prevent users in the Receptionists group
     from installing or running unapproved software.

        AppLocker rules depend upon conditional ACEs and attributes defined by AppID. Rules can be
     created using the following criteria:

        ■■   Fields within a code-signing certificate embedded within the file, allowing for different
             combinations of publisher name, product name, file name, and version For example,
             a rule could be created to allow all versions greater than 9.0 of Contoso Reader to run or allow
             anyone in the Graphics group to run the installer or application from Contoso for GraphicsShop
             as long as the version is 14.*. For example, the following SDDL string denies execute access to

        any signed programs published by Contoso for the RestrictedUser user account (identified by
        the user’s SID):

        D:(XD;;FX;;;S-1-5-21-3392373855-1129761602-2459801163-1028;((Exists APPID://FQBN)
        && ((APPID://FQBN) >= ({"O=CONTOSO, INCORPORATED, L=REDMOND,
        S=CWASHINGTON, C=US\*\*",0}))))

   ■■   Directory path, allowing only files within a particular directory tree to run This can also be
        used to identify specific files. For example, the following SDDL string denies execute access to the
        programs in the directory C:\Tools for the RestrictedUser user account (identified by the user’s SID):

        D:(XD;;FX;;;S-1-5-21-3392373855-1129761602-2459801163-1028;(APPID://PATH
        Contains "%OSDRIVE%\TOOLS\*"))

   ■■   File hash Using a hash will also detect if a file has been modified and prevent it from running.
        This can also be a weakness if files are changed frequently because the hash rule will need to
        be updated frequently. File hashes are often used for scripts because few scripts are signed.
        For example, this SDDL string denies execute access to programs with the specified hash values
        for the RestrictedUser user account (identified by the user’s SID):

        D:(XD;;FX;;;S-1-5-21-3392373855-1129761602-2459801163-1028;(APPID://SHA256HASH
        Any_of {#7a334d2b99d48448eedd308dfca63b8a3b7b44044496ee2f8e236f5997f1b647,
        #2a782f76cb94ece307dc52c338f02edbbfdca83906674e35c682724a8a92a76b}))

  AppLocker rules can be defined on the local machine using the Security Policy MMC snap-in (secpol.
msc, see Figure 7-33) or a Windows PowerShell script, or they can be pushed to machines within a
domain using Group Policy. AppLocker rules are stored in multiple locations within the registry:

   ■■   HKLM\Software\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\SrpV2 This key is also mirrored to
        HKLM\SOFTWARE\Wow6432Node\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\SrpV2. The rules are stored
        in XML format.

   ■■   HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Srp\Gp\Exe                   The rules are stored as SDDL
        and a binary ACE.

   ■■   HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Group Policy
        Objects\{GUID}Machine\Software\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\SrpV2 AppLocker policy
        pushed down from a domain as part of a GPO are stored here in XML format.

  Certificates for files that have been run are cached in the registry under the key HKLM\SYSTEM\
CurrentControlSet\Control\AppID\CertStore. AppLocker also builds a certificate chain (stored in
HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\AppID\CertChainStore) from the certificate found in a file
back to a trusted root certificate.

   There are also AppLocker-specific PowerShell commands (cmdlets) to enable deployment and test-
ing via scripting. After using the Import-Module AppLocker to get AppLocker cmdlets into PowerShell,
several cmdlets are available. These include Get-AppLockerFileInformation, Get-AppLockerPolicy,
New-AppLockerPolicy, Set-AppLockerPolicy, and Test-AppLockerPolicy.

     FIGURE 7-33   AppLocker configuration page in Local Security Policy.

         The AppID and SRP services coexist in the same binary (AppIdSvc.dll), which runs within an SvcHost
     process. The service requests a registry change notification to monitor any changes under that key,
     which is written by either a GPO or the AppLocker UI in the Local Security Policy MMC snap-in. When
     a change is detected, the AppID service triggers a user-mode task (AppIdPolicyConverter.exe), which
     reads the new rules (described with XML) and translates them into binary format ACEs and SDDL
     strings, which are understandable by both the user-mode and kernel-mode AppID and AppLocker
     components. The task stores the translated rules under HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Srp\
     Gp. This key is writable only by System and Administrators, and it is marked read-only for authenticated
     users. Both user-mode and kernel-mode AppID components read the translated rules from the registry
     directly. The service also monitors the local machine trusted root certificate store, and it invokes a user-
     mode task (AppIdCertStoreCheck.exe) to reverify the certificates at least once per day and whenever
     there is a change to the certificate store. The AppID kernel-mode driver (%SystemRoot%\System32\
     drivers\AppId.sys) is notified about rule changes by the AppID service through an APPID_POLICY_
     CHANGED DeviceIoControl request.

        An administrator can track which applications are being allowed or denied by looking at the
     system event log using Event Viewer (once AppLocker has been configured and the service started).
     See Figure 7-34.

FIGURE 7-34 Event Viewer showing AppLocker allowing and denying access to various applications. Event ID 8004
is denied; 8002 is allowed.

   The implementations of AppID, AppLocker, and SRP are somewhat blurred and violate strict layer-
ing, with various logical components coexisting within the same executables, and the naming is not as
consistent as one would like.

   The AppID service runs as LocalService so that it has access to the Trusted Root Certificate Store
on the system. This also enables it to perform certificate verification. The AppID service is responsible
for the following:

   ■■   Verification of publisher certificates

   ■■   Adding new certificates to the cache

   ■■   Detecting AppLocker rule updates and notifying the AppID driver

   The AppID driver performs the majority of the AppLocker functionality and relies on communica-
tion (via DeviceIoControl requests) from the AppID service, so its device object is protected by an
ACL, granting access only to the NT SERVICE\AppIDSvc, LOCAL SERVICE and BUILTIN\Administrators
groups. Thus, the driver cannot be spoofed by malware.

   When the AppID driver is first loaded, it requests a process-creation callback by calling
PsSetCreateProcessNotifyRoutineEx. When the notification routine is called, it is passed a PPS_
CREATE_NOTIFY_INFO structure (describing the process being created). It then gathers the AppID attri-
butes that identify the executable image and writes them to the process’s access token. Then it calls the
undocumented routine SeSrpAccessCheck, which examines the process token and the conditional ACE
AppLocker rules, and determines whether the process should be allowed to run. If the process should

     not be allowed to run, the driver writes STATUS_ACCESS_DISABLED_BY_POLICY_OTHER to the Status
     field of the PPS_CREATE_NOTIFY_INFO structure, which causes the process creation to be canceled (and
     sets the process’s final completion status).

        To perform DLL restriction, the image loader sends a DeviceIoControl request to the AppID driver
     whenever it loads a DLL into a process. The driver then checks the DLL’s identity against the AppLocker
     conditional ACEs, just like it would for an executable.

        Note Performing these checks for every DLL load is time-consuming and might be notice-
        able to end users. For this reason, DLL rules are normally disabled, and they must be specifi-
        cally enabled via the Advanced tab in the AppLocker properties page in the Local Security
        Policy snap-in.

        The scripting engines and the MSI installer have been modified to call the user-mode SRP APIs
     whenever they open a file, to check whether a file is allowed to be opened. The user-mode SRP APIs
     call the AuthZ APIs to perform the conditional ACE access check.

Software Restriction Policies
     Windows contains a user-mode mechanism called Software Restriction Policies (SRP) that enables
     administrators to control what images and scripts execute on their systems. The Software Restriction
     Policies node of the Local Security Policy editor, shown in Figure 7-35, serves as the management inter-
     face for a machine’s code execution policies, although per-user policies are also possible using domain
     group policies.

     FIGURE 7-35   Software Restriction Policy configuration.

   Several global policy settings appear beneath the Software Restriction Policies node:

   ■■   Enforcement This policy configures whether restriction policies apply to libraries, such as
        DLLs, and whether policies apply to users only or to administrators as well.

   ■■   Designated File Types      This policy records the extensions for files that are considered
        executable code.

   ■■   Trusted Publishers     This policy controls who can select which certificate publishers
        are trusted.

    When configuring a policy for a particular script or image, an administrator can direct the
system to recognize it using its path, its hash, its Internet zone (as defined by Internet Explorer),
or its cryptographic certificate, and can specify whether it is associated with the Disallowed or
Unrestricted security policy.

   Enforcement of SRPs takes place within various components where files are treated as containing
executable code. Some of these components are listed here:

   ■■   The user-mode Windows CreateProcess function in Kernel32.dll enforces it for
        executable images.

   ■■   The DLL loading code in Ntdll enforces it for DLLs.

   ■■   The Windows command prompt (Cmd.exe) enforces it for batch file execution.

   ■■   Windows Scripting Host components that start scripts—Cscript.exe (for command-line scripts),
        Wscript.exe (for UI scripts), and Scrobj.dll (for script objects)—enforce it for script execution.

   ■■   The PowerShell host (PowerShell.exe) enforces it for PowerShell script execution.

    Each of these components determines whether the restriction policies are enabled by reading
the TransparentEnabled registry value in the HKLM\Software\Policies\Microsoft \Windows\Safer\
CodeIdentifiers key, which if set to 1 indicates that policies are in effect. Then it determines whether the
code it’s about to execute matches one of the rules specified in a subkey of the CodeIdentifiers key and,
if so, whether the execution should be allowed. If there is no match, the default policy, as specified in
the DefaultLevel value of the CodeIdentifiers key, determines whether the execution is allowed.

    Software Restriction Policies are a powerful tool for preventing the unauthorized access of code and
scripts, but only if properly applied. Unless the default policy is set to disallow execution, a user can
make minor changes to an image that’s been marked as disallowed so that he can bypass the rule and
execute it. For example, a user can change an innocuous byte of a process image so that a hash rule
fails to recognize it, or copy a file to a different location to avoid a path-based rule.

        EXPERIMENT: Watching Software Restriction Policy enforcement
        You can indirectly see SRPs being enforced by watching accesses to the registry when you
        attempt to execute an image that you’ve disallowed.

             1.   Run secpol.msc to open the Local Security Policy editor and navigate to the Software
                  Restriction Policies node.

             2.   Choose Create New Policies from the context menu if no policies are defined.

             3.   Create a path-based disallow restriction policy (under the Additional Rules node) for
                  %SystemRoot%\System32\Notepad.exe.

             4.   Run Process Monitor and set an include a Path filter for Safer.

             5.   Open a command prompt and run Notepad from the prompt.

           Your attempt to run Notepad should result in a message telling you that you cannot execute
        the specified program, and Process Monitor should show the command prompt (cmd.exe) query-
        ing the local machine restriction policies.

Kernel Patch Protection
     Some device drivers modify the behavior of Windows in unsupported ways. For example, they patch
     the system call table to intercept system calls or patch the kernel image in memory to add functional-
     ity to specific internal functions. Such modifications are inherently dangerous and can reduce system
     stability and security. Additionally, it is also possible for such modifications to be made with malicious
     intent, either by rogue drivers or through exploits due to vulnerabilities in Windows drivers.

     Without the presence of a more privileged entity than the kernel itself, detecting and protecting
     against kernel-based exploits or drivers from within the kernel itself is a tricky game. Because both the
     detection/protection mechanism and the unwanted behavior operate in ring 0, it is not possible to de-
     fine a security boundary in the true sense of the word, as the unwanted behavior could itself be used to
     disable, patch, or fool the detection/prevention mechanism. That being said, even in such conditions, a
     mechanism to react to such unwanted operations can still be useful in the following ways:

        ■■   By crashing the machine with a clearly identifiable kernel-mode crash dump, both users and ad-
             ministrators can easily see that an unwanted behavior has been operating inside of their kernel
             and they can take action. Additionally, it means that legitimate software vendors will not want
             to take the risk of crashing their customers’ systems and will find supported ways of extending
             kernel functionality (such as by using the filter manager for file system filters or other callback-
             based mechanisms).

   ■■   Obfuscation (which is not a security boundary) can make it costly—either in time or in complex-
        ity—for the unwanted behavior to disable the detection mechanism. This added cost means
        that the unwanted behavior is more clearly identified as potentially malicious, and that its com-
        plexity results in additional costs to a potential attacker. By shifting the obfuscation techniques,
        it means that legitimate vendors will be better off taking the time to move away from their
        legacy extension mechanisms and implement supported techniques instead, without the risk of
        looking like malware.

   ■■   Randomization and non-documentation of which specific checks the detection/prevention
        mechanism makes to monitor kernel integrity, and non-determinism of when such checks are
        executed, cripple the ability of attackers to ensure their exploits are reliable. It forces them to
        account for every possible non-deterministic variable and state transition that the mechanism
        has through static analysis, which obfuscation makes nearly impossible within the timeframe
        required before another obfuscation shift or feature change is implemented in the mechanism.

   ■■   Because kernel mode crash dumps are automatically submitted to Microsoft, it allows the
        company to receive telemetry of in-the-wild unwanted code, and to either identify software
        vendors whose code is unsupported and is crashing systems, or to track the progress of mali-
        cious drivers in the wild, or even zero-day kernel-mode exploitations, and fix bugs that may not
        have been reported, but are actively exploited.

PatchGuard
Shortly after the release of 64-bit Windows for x64 and before a rich third-party ecosystem had
developed, Microsoft saw an opportunity to preserve the stability of 64-bit Windows, and to add te-
lemetry and exploit-crippling patch detection to the system, through a technology called Kernel Patch
Protection (KPP), also referred to as PatchGuard. When Windows Mobile was released, which operates
on a 32-bit ARM processor core, the feature was ported to such systems, too, and it will be present in
64-bit ARM (AArch64) systems as well. Due to the existence of too many legacy 32-bit drivers that still
use unsupported and dangerous hooking techniques, however, this mechanism is not enabled on such
systems, even on Windows 10 operating systems. Fortunately, usage of 32-bit systems is almost coming
to an end, and server versions of Windows no longer support this architecture at all.

    Although both Guard and Protection imply that this mechanism will protect the system, it is important
to realize that the only guard/protection offered is the crashing of the machine, which prevents further
execution of the unwanted code. The mechanism does not prevent the attack in the first place, nor miti-
gate against it, nor undo it. Think of KPP as an Internet-connected video security system, or CCTV, with a
loud alarm (the crash) inside the vault (the kernel), not as an impenetrable lock on the vault.

   KPP has a variety of checks that it makes on protected systems, and documenting them all would
both be impractical (due to the difficulty of static analysis) and valuable to potential attackers (reducing
their research time). However, Microsoft does document certain checks, which we generalize in Table
7-23. When, where, and how KPP makes these checks, and which specific functions or data structures
are affected, is outside of the scope of this analysis.

     TABLE 7-23      Generalized description of elements protected by KPP
     Component                                 Legitimate Usage                           Potential Unwanted Usage

     Executable code in the kernel, its        Standard Windows components key to Patching code in these components
     dependencies, and core drivers, as        operation of kernel-mode usage.    can modify their behavior and in-
     well as the Import Address Table (IAT)                                       troduce unwanted back doors to the
     of these components                                                          system, hide data or unwanted com-
                                                                                  munications from the system, as well
                                                                                  as reduce the stability of the system,
                                                                                  or even add additional vulnerabilities
                                                                                  through buggy third-party code.

     Global Descriptor Table (GDT)             CPU hardware protection for the im-        Modification of expected permissions
                                               plementation of ring privilege levels      and mappings between code and
                                               (ring 0 versus ring 3).                    ring levels, allowing ring 3 code ring
                                                                                          0 access.

     Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT) or       Table read by the CPU to deliver inter-    Hooking of keystrokes, network pack-
     Interrupt Vector Table                    rupt vectors to the correct handling       ets, paging mechanism, system calls,
                                               routine.                                   hypervisor communication, and more,
                                                                                          which can be used for back-dooring,
                                                                                          hiding malicious data or communica-
                                                                                          tions, or accidentally adding vulner-
                                                                                          abilities through buggy third-party
                                                                                          code.

     System Service Descriptor Table           Table containing the array of pointers     Hooking of all user-mode communi-
     (SSDT)                                    for each system call handler.              cations with the kernel. Same issues
                                                                                          as above.

     Critical CPU registers such as Control    Used for system calls, virtualization,     Same as above, plus disabling of key
     Registers, Vector Base Address            enabling CPU security features such as     CPU security features or hypervisor
     Register, and Model Specific Registers    SMEP, and more.                            protection.

     Various function pointers in the kernel   Used as indirect calls to various inter-   Can be used to hook certain internal
                                               nal functionality.                         kernel operations, leading to back
                                                                                          doors and/or instability.

     Various global variables in the kernel    Used to configure various parts of         Malicious code would disable these
                                               the kernel, including certain security     security features, such as through an
                                               features.                                  exploit from user mode allowing arbi-
                                                                                          trary memory overwrites.

     Process and module list                   Used to show the user, in tools such       Malicious code can hide the existence
                                               as Task Manager, Process Explorer,         of certain processes or drivers on the
                                               and the Windows Debugger, which            machine, making them invisible to the
                                               processes are active, and which drivers    user and most applications such as
                                               are loaded.                                security software.

     Kernel stacks                             Store function arguments, the call         Operating on a non-standard kernel
                                               stack (where a function should return),    stack is often the sign of a return-
                                               and variables.                             oriented programming (ROP) exploit
                                                                                          operating on a pivoted stack as part of
                                                                                          the attack.

     Window Manager, graphical system          Provides the GUI, GDI, and DirectX         Same hooking abilities as described
     calls, callbacks, and more                services.                                  earlier, but specifically targeting the
                                                                                          graphics and window-management
                                                                                          stack. Same issues as other types of
                                                                                          hooks.

     Object types                              Definitions for the various objects        Can be used as another hooking tech-
                                               (such as processes and files) that the     nique, which does not target indirect
                                               system supports through the object         function pointers in binaries’ data
                                               manager.                                   sections, nor patching code directly.
                                                                                          Same issues.

TABLE 7-23   Generalized description of elements protected by KPP (continued)
Component                             Legitimate Usage                           Potential Unwanted Usage

Local APIC                            Used to receive hardware interrupts        Can be used to hook timer execu-
                                      on the processor, receive timer inter-     tion, IPIs, or interrupts, or as a way for
                                      rupts, and inter-processor interrupts      persistent code to covertly maintain
                                      (IPI).                                     liveness on the machine, executing on
                                                                                 a periodic basis.

Filter and third-party notification   Used by legitimate third-party secu-       Could be used by malicious code to
callbacks                             rity software (and Windows Defender)       hook all the filterable operations, as
                                      to receive notifications about system      well as maintain liveness on a ma-
                                      actions, and in some cases even block/     chine, executing on a periodic basis.
                                      defend against certain actions. Exists
                                      as the supported way to achieve much
                                      of what KPP prevents.

Specialized configuration and flags   Various data structures, flags, and ele-   Could be used by malicious code to
                                      ments of legitimate components that        bypass certain mitigations or violate
                                      provide security and/or mitigation         certain guarantees or expectations
                                      guarantees to them.                        that user-mode processes might have,
                                                                                 such as unprotecting a protected
                                                                                 process.

KPP engine itself                     Code related to bug-checking the           By modifying certain parts of the sys-
                                      system during a KPP violation, execut-     tem used by KPP, unwanted compo-
                                      ing the callbacks associated with KPP,     nents could attempt to silence, ignore,
                                      and more.                                  or otherwise cripple KPP.

   As mentioned, when KPP detects unwanted code on the system, it crashes the system with an easily
identifiable code. This corresponds to bugcheck code 0x109, which stands for CRITICAL_STRUCTURE_
CORRUPTION, and the Windows Debugger can be used to analyze this crash dump. (See Chapter 15,
“Crash dump analysis,” in Part 2 for more information.) The dump information will contain some infor-
mation about the corrupted or scrumptiously modified part of the kernel, but any additional data must
be analyzed by Microsoft’s Online Crash Analysis (OCA) and/or Windows Error Reporting (WER) teams
and is not exposed to users.

   For third-party developers who use techniques that KPP deters, the following supported techniques
can be used:

   ■■   File system (mini) filters Use these to hook all file operations, including loading image
        files and DLLs, that can be intercepted to purge malicious code on-the-fly or block reading of
        known bad executables or DLLs. (See Chapter 13, “File systems,” in Part 2 for more information
        on these.)

   ■■   Registry filter notifications Use these to hook all registry operations. (See Chapter 9 in Part
        2 for more information on these notifications.) Security software can block modification of criti-
        cal parts of the registry, as well as heuristically determine malicious software by registry access
        patterns or known bad registry keys.

   ■■   Process notifications Security software can monitor the execution and termination of
        all processes and threads on the system, as well as DLLs being loaded or unloaded. With the
        enhanced notifications added for antivirus and other security vendors, they also can block
        process launch. (See Chapter 3 for more information on these notifications.)

        ■■   Object manager filtering Security software can remove certain access rights being granted
             to processes and/or threads to defend their own utilities against certain operations. (These are
             discussed in Chapter 8 in Part 2.)

        ■■   NDIS Lightweight Filters (LWF) and Windows Filtering Platform (WFP) filters Security
             software can intercept all socket operations (accept, listen, connect, close, and so on) and even
             the packets themselves. With LWF, security vendors have access to the raw Ethernet frame data
             that is going from the network card (NIC) to the wire.

        ■■   Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) Through ETW, many types of operations that have
             interesting security properties can be consumed by a user-mode component, which can then
             react to data in near real-time. In certain cases, special secure ETW notifications are available to
             anti-malware-protected processes under NDA with Microsoft and participation in various secu-
             rity programs, which give access to a greater set of tracing data. (ETW is discussed in Chapter 8
             in Part 2.)

     HyperGuard
     On systems that run with virtualization-based security (described earlier in this chapter in the section
     “Virtualization-based security”), it is no longer true that attackers with kernel-mode privileges are es-
     sentially running at the same security boundary as a detection/prevention mechanism. In fact, such at-
     tackers would operate at VTL 0, while a mechanism could be implemented in VTL 1. In the Anniversary
     Update of Windows 10 (version 1607), such a mechanism does indeed exist, which is appropriately
     named HyperGuard. HyperGuard has a few interesting properties that set it apart from PatchGuard:

        ■■   It does not need to rely on obfuscation. The symbol files and function names that implement
             HyperGuard are available for anyone to see, and the code is not obfuscated. Complete static
             analysis is possible. This is because HyperGuard is a true security boundary.

        ■■   It does not need to operate non-deterministically because this would provide no advantage
             due to the preceding property. In fact, by operating deterministically, HyperGuard can crash
             the system at the precise time unwanted behavior is detected. This means crash data will con-
             tain clear and actionable data for the administrator (and Microsoft’s analysis teams), such as the
             kernel stack, which will show the code that performed the undesirable behavior.

        ■■   Due to the preceding property, it can detect a wider variety of attacks, because the malicious
             code does not have the chance to restore a value back to its correct value during a precise time
             window, which is an unfortunate side-effect of PatchGuard’s non-determinism.

         HyperGuard is also used to extend PatchGuard’s capabilities in certain ways, and to strengthen its
     ability to run undetected by attackers trying to disable it. When HyperGuard detects an inconsistency,
     it too will crash the system, albeit with a different code: 0x18C (HYPERGUARD_VIOLATION). As before, it
     might be valuable to understand, at a generic level, what kind of things HyperGuard will detect, which
     you can see in Table 7-24.

TABLE 7-24   Generalized description of elements protected by HyperGuard
Component                             Legitimate Usage                       Potential Unwanted Usage

Executable code in the kernel, its    Refer to Table 7-23.                   Refer to Table 7-23.
dependencies, and core drivers,
as well as the Import Address
Table (IAT) of these components

Global Descriptor Table (GDT)         Refer to Table 7-23.                   Refer to Table 7-23.

Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT) or   Refer to Table 7-23.                   Refer to Table 7-23.
Interrupt Vector Table

Critical CPU registers such as        Refer to Table 7-23.                   Refer to Table 7-23.
Control Registers, GDTR, IDTR,
Vector Base Address Register, and
Model Specific Registers

Executable code, callbacks, and       Standard Windows components            Patching code in these components implies the
data regions in the Secure Kernel     key to operation of VTL 1 and          attacker has access to some sort of vulnerability
and its dependencies, including       secure kernel-mode usage.              in VTL 1, either through hardware or the hyper-
HyperGuard itself                                                            visor. Could be used to subvert Device Guard,
                                                                             HyperGuard, and Credential Guard.

Structures and features used by       Sharing data between one               Implies that some vulnerability might exist in
Trustlets                             Trustlet to another, or Trustlets      one or more Trustlets, which could be used to
                                      and the kernel, or Trustlets and       hamper features such as Credential Guard or
                                      VTL 0.                                 Shielded Fabric/vTPM.

Hypervisor structures and regions     Used by the hypervisor to              Implies a potential vulnerability in a VTL 1 com-
                                      communicate with VTL 1.                ponent or the hypervisor itself, which may be
                                                                             accessible from ring 0 in VTL 0.

Kernel CFG bitmap                     Used to identify valid kernel          Implies that an attacker has been able to per-
                                      functions that are the subject of      form a modification to the VTL 1-protected
                                      indirect function calls or jumps, as   KCFG bitmap through some sort of hardware or
                                      described earlier.                     hypervisor exploit.

Page verification                     Used to implement HVCI-related         Implies that an attacker has somehow attacked
                                      work for Device Guard.                 SKCI, which could result in Device Guard com-
                                                                             promise or non-authorized IUM Trustlets.

NULL page                             None.                                  Implies that an attacker has somehow coerced
                                                                             the kernel and/or secure kernel to allocate vir-
                                                                             tual page 0, which can be used to exploit NULL-
                                                                             page vulnerabilities in either VTL 0 or VTL 1.

   On systems with VBS enabled, there is another security-related feature that is worth describing,
which is implemented in the hypervisor itself: Non-Privileged Instruction Execution Prevention (NPIEP).
This mitigation targets specific x64 instructions that can be used to leak the kernel-mode addresses of
the GDT, IDT, and LDT, which are SGDT, SIDT, and SLDT. With NPIEP, these instructions are still allowed
to execute (due to compatibility concerns), but will return a per-processor unique number that is not
actually the kernel address of these structures. This serves as a mitigation against Kernel ASLR (KASLR)
information leaks from local attackers.

   Finally, note that there is no way to disable PatchGuard or HyperGuard once they are enabled.
However, because device-driver developers might need to make changes to a running system as part
of debugging, PatchGuard is not enabled when the system boots in debugging mode with an active
remote kernel-debugging connection. Similarly, HyperGuard is disabled if the hypervisor boots in
debugging mode with a remote debugger attached.

Conclusion
     Windows provides an extensive array of security functions that meet the key requirements of both
     government agencies and commercial installations. In this chapter, we’ve taken a brief tour of the
     internal components that are the basis of these security features. In Chapter 8 of Part 2, we’ll look at
     various mechanisms that are spread out throughout the Windows system.

