# Lab 5: Optimization

                        15-411 Compiler Design, Fall 2020
                                     Lab 5


                    Compilers Due: 11:59pm, Thursday, December 3, 2020
                      Report due 11:59pm, Tuesday, December 8, 2020


1    Introduction
The goal of this lab is to implement optimizations for the language L4, which remains unchanged
from Lab 4. Your goal is to minimize both the running time and code size of the executable
generated by your compiler on a set of benchmarks. This includes an unsafe mode in which your
compiler may assume that no exception will be raised during the execution of the program (except
due to assert). This affects operations such as integer division, arithmetic shift, array access, and
pointer dereference.


2    Preview of Deliverables
In this lab, you are not required to hand in any test programs, since there is no change in language
specification. Instead, we will be testing your compiler’s optimizations on a suite of benchmark
tests created by the course staff. We offer a choice of many optimizations you can implement, and
the benchmarks are designed to resemble realistic programs. As in real life, some may respond
better to particular optimizations than others. In addition to the benchmarks, we will be testing
the correctness of your compiler by running it on the test suites from Labs 1–4, so you must be
careful to maintain the semantics of the L4 language when optimizing.
    You are required to turn in a complete working compiler that translates L4 source program into
correct target programs in x86-64. In addition, you have to submit a PDF file which describes and
evaluates the optimizations that you implemented.


3    Compilation to Unsafe Code
The --unsafe flag to your compiler allows it to ignore any exceptions that might be raised during
the execution of the program except ones due to assert. This means you can eliminate some
checks from the code that you generate. You are not required to eliminate all (or, indeed, any)
checks, but it will make your compiled code slower if you do not take advantage of this opportunity
at least to some extent.
    Note that unsafe means that you do not have to perform any runtime checks, not that you can
generate an incorrect executable. :) By eliminating the runtime checks you will be more able to
compare the efficiency of your generated code against gcc and others in the class.

                                                 1
    In addition to the --unsafe flag, your compiler must take a new option, -On, where -O0 means
no optimizations, and -O1 performs the most aggressive optimizations. One way to think about
this is that -O0 should minimize the compiler’s running time, and -O1 should prioritize the emitted
code’s running time and code size. We suggest using some thresholds to decide between the two as
the default behavior, if no flag is passed. We will pass the -O1 flag when timing your compiler on
the benchmarks. The -O0 flag is mainly for your own debugging purposes.


4     Optimizations
In the following sections, we will provide you with list of suggested analysis and optimization passes
you can add to your compiler. This is a long list and we obviously do NOT expect you to complete
all of the optimizations. We suggest that you pick the optimizations that you are most interested in,
and do enough optimizations so that your compiler is competitive with the cc0 reference compiler
and gcc -O1. We list the course staff recommended difficulty and usefulness rating (your experience
may vary) of optimizations to help you decide which passes to implement first.
    If you have already implemented any of the optimizations, you may revisit and describe them,
empirically evaluate their impact, and improve them further. In this case, your report should
contain a description of any improvements you made.
    Feel free to add other optimizations and analyses outside of this list as you see fit, although
we strongly recommend first completing basic ones before you go for more advanced ones. That
said, it is a good idea to consult the course staff first to ensure that your planned optimizations are
feasible to complete within three weeks.
    There is abundant literature on all the following optimizations, and we have listed some good
resources that might be helpful for this lab. We specifically recommend the Dragon Book (Com-
pilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, 2nd Edition), the Cooper Book (Engineering a Compiler,
2nd Edition), and the SSA Book (SSA-Based Compiler Design), all of which have great sections on
compiler optimizations. Additionally, the recitations, lecture slides, and lecture notes are great re-
sources. We also encourage you to read relevant papers and adapt their algorithm for your compiler,
as long as you cite the source.

4.1   Analysis Passes
Analysis passes provide the infrastructure upon which you can do optimizations. For example
purity/loop/alias analysis computes information that optimization passes can use. The quality of
your analysis passes can affect the effectiveness of your optimizations.

    1. Control flow graph (CFG)
       Difficulty: ☀☆☆☆☆        Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
      Almost all global optimizations (intraprocedural optimizations) will use the CFG and ba-
      sic blocks. We recommend implementing CFG as a standalone module/class with helper
      functions such as reverse postorder traversal and splitting critical edges.
    2. Dataflow Framework
       Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆               Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☆
      The Dataflow Framework we made you do in the l2 checkpoint is not only useful for liveness
      analysis, but also for passes such as alias analysis, partial redundancy elimination (which

                                                  2
   uses 4 separate Dataflow passes, see section below), among others. You probably want your
   Dataflow framework to work with general facts (a fact could be a temp/expression/instruction,
   etc.).

3. Dominator Tree
   Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆              Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
   Resources: SSA Recitation Notes
   You can build a Dominator Tree on top of your CFG. The Dominator Tree will be useful for
   constructing SSA, loop analysis, and many other optimizations.

4. Single Static Assignment (SSA)
   Difficulty: ☀☀☀☀☆               Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
   Resources: SSA Recitation Notes
   A program in SSA form has the nice guarantee that each variable/temp is only defined
   once. This means we no longer need to worry about a temp being redefined, which makes
   a lot of optimizations straightforward to implement on SSA form, such as SCCP, ADCE,
   Redundant Safety Check Elimination, among others. In fact, modern compilers such as
   LLVM uses SSA form for all scalar values and optimizations before register allocation. Your
   SSA representation will need to track which predecessor block is associated with each phi
   argument.

5. Purity Analysis
   Difficulty: ☀☆☆☆☆                Usefulness: ☀☀☀☆☆
   Purity analysis identifies functions that are pure (pure can mean side-effect free, store-free,
   etc.), and can enhance the quality of numerous optimization passes. This is one of the simplest
   interprocedural analysis you can perform.

6. Loop Analysis
   Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆              Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☆
   Resources: LLVM Loop Terminology
   A Loop Analysis Framework is the foundation of loop optimizations, and is also useful for
   other heuristics-based optimizations such as inlining and register allocation. Generally, you
   will do loop analysis based on the CFG, and identify for each loop its header block, exit
   blocks, nested depth, and other loop features. You might also consider adding preheader
   blocks during this pass.

7. Value Range Analysis
   Difficulty: ☀☀☀☆☆               Usefulness: ☀☀☆☆☆
   Resources: Compiler Analysis of the Value Ranges for Variables (Harrison 77)
   Value Range Analysis identifies the range of values a temp can take on at each point of your
   program. You can use an SSA-based or dataflow-based approach. Value Range Analysis can
   make other optimizations more effective, such as SCCP, Strength Reduction, and Redundant
   Safety Check Elimination.




                                              3
4.2   Optimization Passes
Below is a list of suggested optimization passes. All these optimizations are doable - they have
been successfully performed by students in past iterations of this course.

  1. Cleaning Up Lab3 & Lab4
     Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆       Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
      Before performing global optimization passes, we suggest inspecting the x86 assembly code
      output of your compiler as you did for l5 checkpoint, and finding opportunities for improve-
      ment. For example, you would want to optimize for calling conventions in lab3 (try not to
      push/pop every caller/callee register), and you would want to make use of the x86 disp(base,
      index, scale) memory addressing scheme to reduce the number of instructions needed for
      each memory operation in lab4. Another common mistake is a poor choice of instructions in
      instruction selection (try comparing your assembly to gcc/clang output), or fixing too many
      registers in codegen and not making full use of your register allocator.

  2. Strength Reduction
     Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆              Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☆
     Resources: Division by Invariant Integers using Multiplication (Granlund 91)
                 Hacker’s Delight 2nd Edition Chapter 10
     Strength reduction modifies expressions to equivalent, cheaper ones. This includes unneces-
     sary divisions, modulus, multiplications, other algebraic simplifications, and memory loads.
     Though simple to implement, this optimization can bring a huge performance improvement
     (a division/modulus takes dozens of cycles on a modern CPU). Getting the magic number
     forumlas for division and modulus is tricky, and we recommend you read the above resources,
     or look at how GCC/LLVM implements strength reductions.

  3. Peephole & Local Optimizations
     Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆              Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☆
     Peephole and local optimizations are performed in a small window of several instructions or
     within a basic block. Similar to strength reductions, these are easy to implement but can
     bring a large performance improvement. We recommend comparing your assembly code to
     gcc/clang assembly code to find various peephole opportunities and efficient x86 instructions.

  4. Improved Register Allocation
     Difficulty: varies       Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
     Resources: Pre-spilling - Register Allocation via Coloring of Chordal Graphs (Pereira 05)
                  Live Range Splitting - Lecture notes on Register Allocation
                  SSA-based Register Allocation - SSA Book Chapter 17
     A good register allocator is essentially for code optimization, and below we provide a list of
     possible extensions (ordered roughly in increasing difficulty) to the register allocator we had
     you build for the L1 checkpoint, which is far from perfect. We highly recommend at least
     implementing coalescing, and the rest is up to you.

      (a) Coalescing We recommend optimistic coalescing, which integrates seamlessly into the
          graph coloring approach taught in lecture. However, there is abundant literature in this
          area so feel free to explore other coalescing approaches.


                                                4
   (b) Heuristics for MCS and Coalescing Using some heuristics to break ties in Maximum
       Cardinality Search and decide the order of coalescing might enhance the quality of your
       register allocator.
   (c) Pre-spilling Pre-spilling identifies maximum cliques in the graph and attempts to pick
       the best temps to spill before coloring the interference graph. You can also integrate
       this with your current post-spilling approach.
   (d) Live Range Splitting The naive graph coloring approach assigns each temp to the
       same register or memory location throughout its whole lifetime, but if the temp has
       “lifetime holes” between its uses, one can split its live range to reduce register pressure,
       especially at the beginning and ending of loops. This optimization is more naturally
       integrated with a linear scan register allocator, but is still possible with a graph coloring
       allocator. See the lecture notes on register allocation for details.
   (e) Register Allocation on CSSA Doing register allocation and spilling on SSA might be
       faster and more effective, and with SSA you get a chordal interference graph. However,
       it turns out that getting out of SSA is a bit difficult after doing register allocation on
       SSA. You should probably spend your time doing some of the other (more interesting and
       fun) optimizations if you haven’t already decided to do this. If you’re still interested, the
       paper SSA Elimination after Register Allocation might be useful. Warning: this could
       be challenging to get right.

5. Code Layout
   Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆               Usefulness: ☀☀☆☆☆
   As we saw in the guest lecture, optimizations for code layout include deciding the order
   of basic blocks in your code, minimizing jump instructions and utilizing fall throughs, and
   techniques such as loop inversion.

6. Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation (SCCP)
   Difficulty: ☀☀☀☆☆                Usefulness: ☀☀☀☆☆
   Resources: Constant Propagation with conditional branches (Wegman and Zadeck)
   It is possible to do local constant propagation within basic blocks, but we recommend this
   SSA-based global constant propagation approach. Additionally, SCCP can also trim dead
   conditional branches that will never be visited. SCCP might not bring a large improvement
   in code performance, but would significantly reduce code size and improve readability.

   (a) Copy Propagation One related optimization is copy propagation, which is straight-
       forward to implement on SSA, and can also serve to eliminate redundant phi functions.
       Note that much of copy propagation’s functionality is covered by register coalescing, and
       aggressively doing copy propagation might increase register pressure. However, copy
       propagation can serve to reduce the number of instructions which speeds up subsequent
       passes and makes your code easier to debug.

7. Aggressive Deadcode Elimination (ADCE)
   Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆             Usefulness: ☀☀☀☆☆
   Similar to SCCP, deadcode elimination is made easier by SSA, and can bring improvement
   to both code size and performance. ADCE can be made more effective by purity analysis.



                                               5
 8. Partial Redundancy Elimination (PRE)
    Difficulty: ☀☀☀☀☆               Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
    Resources: Dragon Book Section 9.5, or Cooper Book Section 10.3
    PRE eliminates partially redundant computations, and provides the additional benefits of
    Common Subexpression Elimination (CSE) and Loop Invariant Code Motion (LICM). The
    latter is especially important to reduce loop execution overhead. You can implement the
    SSAPRE algorithm, but we recommend the simpler alternative using 4 dataflow passes which
    you read about in the Dragon Book or Cooper Book. Your dataflow framework from L2
    checkpoint will come in handy here. An alternative to implementing PRE is to implement
    CSE and LICM as 2 separate passes.

     (a) Global value numbering (GVN) GVN can identify equivalent computations in the
         code, and can either be a standalone pass or be incorporated into PRE to eliminate
         more redundant computation. Note that GVN might eliminate some expressions that
         CSE cannot.

 9. Function Inlining
    Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆                Usefulness: ☀☀☀☆☆
    Inlining a function can reduce the overhead of a call and potentially open up opportunities for
    more optimizations. However, it can bring problems such as increased code size and register
    pressure. Choosing which functions calls to inline is often a tradeoff between code size and
    performance, and you will need some good heuristics. For example, common heuristics include
    size of the functions, and loop depth of the function call.

10. Tail Call Optimization (TCO)
    Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆              Usefulness: ☀☀☆☆☆
    Resources: LLVM TailRecursionElimination pass
    TCO turns recursive calls at the end of functions into jumps to reduce the overhead of
    function calls. You can also perform accumulation transformations on tail-call expressions
    when required. You might also find other benefits of turning recursive calls into jumps.

11. Redundant Safety Check Elimination
    Difficulty: ☀☀☆☆☆                Usefulness: ☀☀☆☆☆
    You can implement an SSA-based or dataflow-based approach to eliminate redundant null-
    checks and array bounds-checks when dereferencing pointers or accessing arrays at runtime.
    This optimization is specifically tailored towards speedup in safe mode, as these checks can
    be removed entirely when running with --unsafe.

12. Loop Optimizations
    Difficulty: varies, hard in general      Usefulness: useful for programs abundant with loops

     (a) Loop unrolling/tiling/fusion/interchange/... You need good heuristics to perform
         these optimizations, and their effectiveness is target specific (dependent on the hard-
         ware). Your loop analysis framework will come in handy here.
     (b) Induction Variable Elimination (IVE) You need to first perform Induction Variable
         Detection which detects induction variables in a loop, and dependence analysis. Then
         you could perform strength reduction, scalar replacement, and deadcode elimination


                                               6
            based on the induction variables. We recommend doing SSA-based IVE. See the lecture
            slides for more details.

4.3    Advanced Analysis and Optimization Passes
Below we list some optimizations that might be beyond the scope of this project - they are either
too hard, or might not affect your score enough to justify the time investment. We only recommend
you to implement these once you have most of the optimizations in the above section working.

    1. Alias Analysis
       Difficulty: ☀☀☀☀☀                 Usefulness: ☀☀☀☀☀
       Resources: Andersen’s or Steensgaard’s Points-To Analysis
       Making context-sensitive points-to analysis practical for the real world (Lattner 07)
       We recommend Andersen’s or Steensgaard’s approach as it is simpler to implement, though
       you could also refer to Lattner’s paper and LLVM’s cheaper alias analysis approach. Note that
       you are allowed to assume the strict aliasing rule of C, that the function pointer arguments
       in a function are assumed not to alias if they point to fundamentally different types. Alias
       analysis will enhance the quality of many of your optimizations, including ADCE, PRE,
       redundant store elimination, instruction scheduling, among others.

    2. Interprocedural Optimizations
       Difficulty: varies, hard in general      Usefulness: depends
       Most optimizations in the above section are intraprocedural, but some passes such as register
       allocation and alias analysis, can be made more effective when applied across functions.
       Interprocedural Optimizations generally involve traversing the call graph.

    3. Vectorization using Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE)
       Difficulty: ☀☀☀☀☀              Usefulness: useful for programs with a lot of parallelism
       You can take advantage of the X86 SSE, SSE2, or AVX-512 extensions to vectorize loops, like
       gcc -O3 does. This can also be an interesting project for lab6.

    4. Instruction Scheduling (Software Pipelining / Hyperblock or Trace Scheduling)
       Difficulty: ☀☀☀☀☀☀                 Usefulness: depends on the program and the processor
       Code scheduling involves moving instructions around to increase instruction level parallelism
       and reduce pipeline stalls. You might also perform if-conversions to form larger blocks. These
       optimizations are very tricky to get right and are target-specific.


5     Testing
As you are implementing optimizations, it is extremely important to carry out regression testing
to make sure your compiler remains correct. We heavily recommend that your optimizations
be modular, and that correctness does not depend on a particular previous optimization. We
will call your compiler with and without the --unsafe flags at various levels of optimization to
ascertain its continued correctness, though your performance will be evaluated primarily through
our benchmarks.




                                                  7
    To enable you to perform more compiler optimizations, we increased COMPILER TIMEOUT
of the autograding harness to 6 seconds. We also increased the RUN TIMEOUT of the executable
produced by your compiler to 120 seconds.
    To help you test your performance, you’ll see some new files in the dist repository:

    • tests/bench/, which contain the benchmark programs.

    • timecompiler, a script which counts the cycles of your compiler on these benchmarks.

    • score_table.py, a script which you can use to generate Notolab-like score tables. You can
      also see the times and code sizes of the executables produced by cc0 and gcc, and the formula
      we use to compute your multiplier on Notolab. Read the comments within score_table.py
      on how to use this script.

    To use the timecompiler script, you should follow these steps:

    1. Ensure your compiler supports --unsafe and -O1.

    2. If you wish, add additional benchmarks to the benchmark folder.

    3. Run ../timecompiler from your compiler’s directory. timecompiler accepts the same flags
       that gradecompiler does – however, we don’t recommend running the benchmarks in parallel.

Here is a cheatsheet of useful commands:
timecompiler bench:
this will time your compiler on the benchmarks in the ../tests/bench folder, and print out the
cycles and code sizes for each benchmark
timecompiler -q --autograde:
the -q flag suppresses unhelpful output, and --autograde will print a json array of the cycles and
code sizes at the end, which you can pass to score_table.py
bin/c0c -ex86-64 -O1 --unsafe ../tests/bench/daisy.l4:
this generates a .s file from your compiler
gcc -m64 -no-pie ../runtime/run411.o ../tests/bench/daisy.l4.s:
using the .s file, you can link to our runtime file to generate an executable
gcc -m64 -no-pie ../runtime/bench.o ../tests/bench/daisy.l4.s:
alternatively, you could link to bench.o to generate an executable that will run the benchmark
numerous times, and print out the average of the k best times
gcc -O1 -fno-asynchronous-unwind-tables -S ../tests/bench/unsafe/daisy.c:
this uses gcc to generate a .s file in the current directory, which you can use to compare your own
assembly against
gcc -O1 ../runtime/run411.o ../tests/bench/unsafe/daisy.c:
alternatively, you can let gcc directly generate an executable


6     Deliverables and Deadlines
For this project, you are required to hand in a complete working compiler for L4 that produces
correct target programs written in Intel x86-64 assembly language, and a description and assessment
of your optimizations. The compiler must accept the flags --unsafe and -On with n = 0, 1. When

                                                 8
we grade your work, we will use the gcc compiler to assemble and link the code you generate into
executables using the provided runtime environment on the lab machines.
    Note that this time we will not just call the _c0_main function in the assembly file you generate,
but also four other internal functions in order to obtain cycle counts that are as precise as possible.
These are _c0_init, _c0_prepare, _c0_run, and _c0_checksum, each corresponding to their un-
prefixed counterparts in the benchmark source. Given this, it is critical that your code follow the
standard calling conventions and function naming conventions from Labs 1–4 for these functions.

Compiler
The sources for your compiler should be handed in via Github as usual, and must contain docu-
mentation that is up to date. Particularly, your compiler should document each of your performed
optimizations in both a README file and the source itself. The course staff will be reading your code
as part of the submission for this lab. You may use up to five late days for the compiler.
    Compilers are due 11:59pm on Thursday, Dec 3rd, 2020.

Project Report
The project report should be a PDF file of approximately 4–5 pages (possibly more, particularly
with figures), and should be handed in on Gradescope. Your report should describe the effect of
--unsafe as well as your optimizations and other improvements,and assess how well they worked
in improving the code, over individual tests and the benchmark suite.
    At the absolute minimum, your project should present a description and quantitative evaluation
of the optimizations you performed at the -O0, -O1, and default levels. A good report must also
discuss the way your individual optimizations interact, backed up by quantitative evidence. (Tables
are a good idea. Graphs are an even better idea.) Make sure to carefully document how your got
your numbers; someone with access to your code should, if they’re willing to buy whatever hardware
and operating system you were using, be able to replicate your results. A good report should also
spend some time describing the effect of individual optimizations on the code you produce.
    Your report should contain a specific commit hash for the course staff to review1 , and a com-
prehensive descriptions of where in your source files each optimization you have described is imple-
mented. If you use algorithms that have not been covered in class, cite any relevant sources, and
briefly describe how they work. If the algorithms have been covered in class, cite the appropriate
lecture notes or paper, and focus on any implementation choices you made that are not described
in those resources.
    Other (optional) discussions that might be included in a high-quality report include:

       • Effects of the ordering of different optimization passes.

       • Time versus space tradeoffs in emitted code.

       • Effects of various optimizations on the running time of your compiler.

       • Examples of programs that your optimizations would interact particularly well with.

       • Examples of programs that your optimizations would interact particularly poorly with.
   1
    It is not necessary that this be the same commit hash that you submit to Notolab. In fact, we encourage you to
perform any code-cleanup that may be required.


                                                        9
    Project reports are due on 11:59pm on Thursday, Dec 8th, 2020.
    Late days: The late day rules for written assignments apply. You can only use late days if
both team members have late days left. If you use late days, then both team members will lose
late days.

Grading
This assignment is worth 150 points. Lab5 checkpoint is worth 20 points. The written report is
worth 30 points. The remaining 100 points will be based on the correctness of your compiler and
on the performance of your emitted code relative to our benchmarks, as reflected by your Notolab
score.
    Your performance will be measured as a factor of how far between -O0 and -O1 you are, and of
course, scaled accordingly. Achieving true parity with -O1 in the course of a single semester is a
tremendous feat, and we offer the comparison primarily to give you a sense of the bigger picture.
You will be scored not only based on how fast the code generated by your compiler is, but also by
the code size. Note that the running time is weighed much more heavily than code size in your
score.
    We will run your compiler numerous times in all of the optimization modes, and take the k-
best times of all of these. We will also use linux size command to determine the code size of the
executable generated by your compiler, and compare to the code size of the cc0 reference compiler
and gcc. We will use the benchmark score as a multiplier for your correctness score, and we derive
your multiplier by averaging your score over all of the benchmark tests. The scheme is designed
so that you do not have to exceed -O0 on all tests, and may benefit from a score greater than 1 if
your optimizations provide excellent speedup in certain cases. However, you will incur a penalty
of −10% for every benchmark which failed to executely correctly or within the time limit on any of
the optimization modes.
    The exact formula for each test is as follows: tc is the average of the k-best times from your
compiler, t0 and t1 denote the times of the cc0 reference compiler using -O0 and -O1 respectively.
Similarly, sc is code size of the executable produced by your compiler, and s0 and s1 denote the
code sizes of the cc0 reference compiler using -O0 and -O1 respectively. The u variables denote the
same times or code sizes, but with --unsafe and using gcc as reference. Both Ps and Pu are
clamped between 0 and 2.5. T is our benchmark suite, and M is your multiplier for the lab.
For running time of a benchmark:
                              tc − t1              uc − u1              Ps + Pu
                   Ps = 1 −             Pu = 1 −              Ptime =
                              t0 − t1              u0 − u1                 2
For code size of a benchmark:
                              sc − s1              uc − u1              Ps + Pu
                   Ps = 1 −             Pu = 1 −              Psize =
                              s0 − s1              u0 − u1                 2
Overall score:
                                                                  Σbench∈T Pbench
                     Pbench = 0.8 ∗ Ptime + 0.2 ∗ Psize      M=
                                                                        ∣T ∣
    Your final score is then M C, where C is your correctness score from running the suites from Labs
1–4 on Notolab. We will be running your compiler both with and without the --unsafe flag. We
will run --unsafe on tests with directives //test return i, //test typecheck, //test abort,

                                                   10
//test error, and //test compile. We will run --safe on tests with directives //test div-by-zero
and //test memerror.
   You will be able to get extra credit on this assignment! If your final score is above 100 points,
you will receive min(20, M C−100
                            2    ) extra credit points for building an excellent optimizing compiler.


7     Tips and Hints
    1. You have less than three weeks to work on this lab, and implementing optimizations and SSA
       is a lot of work, so start early!

    2. The Godbolt Compiler Explorer (godbolt.org) is a really helpful tool for comparing your
       compiler against gcc/clang.

    3. As in the Lab 5 checkpoint, you should make a habit of closely inspecting the assembly
       outputted by your compiler, comparing it to gcc/clang’s output, identifying inefficiencies in
       your code, and thinking about the possible optimizations to address those inefficiencies.

    4. That being said, optimizing for a specific line in a specific function in a specific benchmark
       might not be a good strategy, as it is unlikely to affect your score by much. Global opti-
       mizations that eliminates efficiencies across the board are likely a better investment of your
       time.

    5. Since you will likely perform most optimizations on SSA form or some other IR form, compiler
       utilities and flags to print out code in that IR can be really helpful for debugging, as is using
       dot to generate visual representations of control flow graphs (you can download graphviz here:
       https://graphviz.org/)

    6. The ordering of optimizations and analysis passes can be extremely important, and you should
       explore how different optimizations interact. It is often worth it to perform a certain pass
       multiple times (before and after related passes).

    7. If testing locally on a Mac outside of a docker container, you may get a slightly worse code size
       score than you would on autolab or in a docker container. This is because native MacOS uses
       the Mach-O executable format which rounds the size of the code segment up to a multiple
       of 4096 whereas the Linux ELF format does not round up at all. We strongly recommend
       testing for code size inside of a docker container on MacOS – otherwise, you will not be able
       to measure code size changes less than 4096 bytes.

    8. Don’t name any local folders bench. Our autograder defaults to searching for benchmarks




                                                   11
