# A Comb for Decompiled C Code

**Cited in:** Decompilation Wiki - Overview

Andrea Gussoni, Alessandro Di Federico, Pietro Fezzardi, and Giovanni Agosta. "A Comb for Decompiled C Code." In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ASIA CCS '20), pp. 637-651. Taipei, Taiwan, October 5-9, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1145/3320269.3384766

**Access:** Open access

**Read it:** https://rev.ng/downloads/asiaccs-2020-paper.pdf

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Full text

A Comb for Decompiled C Code
Andrea Gussoni

Alessandro Di Federico

Politecnico di Milano
andrea1.gussoni@polimi.it

rev.ng Srls
ale@rev.ng

Pietro Fezzardi

Giovanni Agosta

rev.ng Srls
pietro@rev.ng

Politecnico di Milano
agosta@acm.org

ABSTRACT
Decompilers are fundamental tools to perform security assessments
of third-party software. The quality of decompiled code can be a
game changer in order to reduce the time and effort required for
analysis. This paper proposes a novel approach to restructure the
control flow graph recovered from binary programs in a semanticspreserving fashion. The algorithm is designed from the ground up
with the goal of producing C code that is both goto-free and drastically reducing the mental load required for an analyst to understand it. As a result, the code generated with this technique is wellstructured, idiomatic, readable, easy to understand and fully exploits
the expressiveness of C language. The algorithm has been implemented on top of the rev.ng [12] static binary analysis framework.
The resulting decompiler, revng-c, is compared on real-world binaries with state-of-the-art commercial and open source tools. The
results show that our decompilation process introduces between
40% and 50% less extra cyclomatic complexity.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Software security engineering; Software reverse engineering; Security requirements.

KEYWORDS
decompilation, reverse engineering, goto, control flow restructuring
ACM Reference Format:
Andrea Gussoni, Alessandro Di Federico, Pietro Fezzardi, and Giovanni
Agosta. 2020. A Comb for Decompiled C Code. In 15th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ASIA CCS’20), October 5–9, 2020, Taipei, Taiwan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3320269.3384766

1

INTRODUCTION

In the last decades, software has steadily become increasingly ubiquitous, and programmable electronic devices are nowadays part of
every aspect of everyone’s life. Most often, users have little control
on the software that runs on these devices and on the life cycle of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASIA CCS ’20, October 5–9, 2020, Taipei, Taiwan
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6750-9/20/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3320269.3384766

release upgrades to fix outstanding bugs. Companies tend to be very
secretive about their implementations and rarely provide access to
the source code of their applications, either to protect patents and
trade secrets, or in the hope to provide security by obscurity. In
some fields, it is also common to find legacy code that runs parts
of critical infrastructures, for which gaining access to the source
is not even an option, since the company that originally provided
it ran out of business.
In all these scenarios, it is challenging for external analysts to
conduct independent security assessments of the implementations,
let alone to provide fixes for bugs and vulnerabilities.
In this context, performing an in-depth analysis of a piece of
software without access to its source code is significantly more difficult. To this end, decompilers are powerful tools that, starting from
a binary executable program, can reconstruct a representation of
its behavior using a high-level programming language, typically C.
These tools save the analyst from the need of looking directly the assembly code, leading to a dramatic reduction of the effort necessary
to perform a security assessment, making it viable in new scenarios.
The compilation process is not perfectly reversible, which complicates the task of evaluating the quality of the results of a decompiler.
Due to aggressive compiler optimizations and hand-written assembly, it is often impossible to recover the exact original source from
which a binary executable was produced. A decompiler could even
be used to recover C code from a Fortran program. In principle the
process should work, but the recovered C code would not be the
original source nor very idiomatic C.
Therefore, in practice, the goal of a decompiler is not really to
produce the exact same source code that originated the program,
which might be plainly unfeasible, but to produce some high-level
representation easy for analysts to reason about. For this reason, it
is of very important for a decompiler to produce high-quality code.
The quality of decompiled code can be measured in different
ways. Informally, it can be described as the readability of the code,
i.e., the ease with which a snippet of decompiled code can be understood by an analyst. This qualitative measure is strongly related
to the mental load necessary to understand the behavior of the
code, which in turns depends on the amount of information that
the analyst has to track during the analysis. This information can
be ascribed mainly to the complexity of the control flow and depends on all the possible entangled execution paths that can lead
to a certain portion of the code. All these factors contribute to the
mental load of an analyst.
To minimize such load, and to produce high-quality output code,
decompilers adopt various techniques to restructure the control
flow of decompiled programs, to make them easier to read and to

reduce the burden of understanding their functioning. As an example, control flow restructuring can be used to reduce the number of
goto statements [23], cutting the number of unstructured jumps
across the program, hence reducing the mental load necessary to
track all the possible paths. As another example, control flow restructuring can be used to produce if-then-else or loops that
naturally match high-level programming constructs, or to collapse
multiple ifs in a single one if they check the same condition. All
these modifications on the control flow contribute to make the code
easier to understand.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• we present a novel algorithm for control flow restructuring that
1) produces well-structured programs that can always be emitted in C, without resorting to goto statements, 2) significantly
reduces the cyclomatic complexity [19] of the generated C code
compared to the state of the art, a measure of the complexity of
the control flow strictly related to the mental load required to
understand the observed code, 3) fully exploits the expressiveness of the C language (such as short-circuit of if conditions
and switch statements);
• we implement the proposed approach employing the rev.ng
binary analysis framework as a basis;
• we compare the resulting decompiler, revng-c, with state-ofthe-art commercial and academic decompilers, on a set of real
world programs, measuring the size of the decompiled code and
its cyclomatic complexity.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the fundamental concepts necessary to understand the
rest of the work. Section 3 discusses related works while Section 4
presents the design of the control flow restructuring algorithm.
Section 5 shows the experimental results obtained on a set of realworld programs, the GNU coreutils, comparing the approach proposed in this work with other commercial, open-source and academic decompilers: the Hex-Rays Decompiler[1, 14], Ghidra[3], and
DREAM[22, 23]. Finally, Appendix B discusses more idiomatic case
studies and corner cases before the concluding remarks in Section 6.

2

BACKGROUND

This section briefly outlines the main concepts that are necessary
for the understanding of the paper.
Graph basics. In this paper we give for granted a number of fundamental concepts revolving around Directed Graphs. For the interested reader, these concepts are discussed in more detail in Appendix A, and a more distinguished reference can be found in [15].
Most of this concepts should be familiar, since they are widely
used in program analysis for representing the control flow of a
program by means of Control Flow Graphs (CFG). In particular, we
will make wide use of the following concepts.
• control flow graph representation of a program.
• directed acyclic graphs (DAG).
• search and visits over CFGs. In particular, we will make extensive use of the Depth First Search algorithm, and of the
orderings it induces on a CFG, as the preorder, postorder and
reverse postorder.
• dominance and post-dominance, and the data structures they
induce, the dominator- and post-dominator-tree.

Short-circuit evaluation. In this paper, short-circuit evaluation
refers to the semantics of boolean expressions in C.
If a boolean expression has more than one argument, each argument is evaluated only if the evaluation of the previous arguments
is not sufficient to establish the value of the expression containing
the boolean operator. This is particularly important when the evaluation of some operand of the boolean expression have side-effects,
because only the side-effects of the arguments that are actually
evaluated will be triggered.
Cyclomatic Complexity The cyclomatic complexity is a well-known
software metric used to capture the complexity of a program. It
was originally conceived by T. J. McCabe in 1976 [19].
It represents a quantitative measure of the number of linearly
independent paths in a program source code. The cyclomatic complexity is computed on the control flow graph of a program.
In general, the formula to compute the cyclomatic complexity
of a program is given by 𝑀 = 𝐸 − 𝑁 + 2𝑃, where 𝑀 is the cyclomatic complexity itself, 𝐸 is the number of edges in the CFG, 𝑁 is
the number of nodes in the CFG and 𝑃 represents the number of
connected components in the graph.
In the case of a single subroutine 𝑃 is always 1 hence the formula
can be simplified to 𝑀 = 𝐸 −𝑁 +2. If we consider a program as the
union of all the CFGs of its subroutines the cyclomatic complexity
of the program can be computed as the sum of all the cyclomatic
complexities of the single subroutines.

3

RELATED WORK

This section describes the related work in two main fields: recovery
of Control Flow Graphs, and decompilation.
CFG Recovery. In this work we focus on control flow restructuring, and we use as a starting point the Control Flow Graph of the
function we want to analyze and decompile.
The problem of correctly recovering such graphs from binary
code is well-known and lot of research work has been done in
this field. The CMU Binary Analysis Platform (BAP) [5] is a binary analysis framework which disassembles and lifts binary code
into a RISC like intermediate language, called BAP Intermediate
Language (BIL). BAP also integrates all the techniques developed
previously for BitBlaze [20]. The rev.ng [9, 10] project, which is
an architecture independent binary analysis framework based on
qemu [4] and llvm [17], is able to lift a binary into an equivalent
llvm ir representation. Other research groups have also dedicated
efforts to tackle the problem of disassembling obfuscated code [16].
The approach presented in this paper does not rely on any specific technique for extracting CFGs from binary code, hence it is
general enough to be used with any of these approaches.
Decompilation. The academic foundational work in the field of
decompilers is probably Cifuentes’ PhD thesis [8]. The techniques
presented there have been implemented in the dcc decompiler,
which is a C decompiler for Intel 80286.
In the field of commercial decompilers, Hex-Rays[1] is the defacto leader, and its decompiler is provided as a plug-in for the
Interactive Disassembler Pro (IDA) [14] tool. No specific information on the internal structure of the decompiler is publicly available,
apart from the fact that it uses some kind of structural analysis [13].

Phoenix [6], a decompiler tool built on top of the CMU Binary Analysis Platform (BAP) [5], uses iterative refinement and
semantics-preserving transformations. The iterative part is implemented through the emission of a goto instruction when the decompilation algorithm cannot make progress.
A very recent entry in the field of decompilers is Ghidra, which
is included in the Ghidra reverse engineering tool [3], initially developed by US National Security Agency (NSA) for internal use.
The tool has been open sourced very recently (April 2019) but, as of
today, no extensive documentation on the design of the components
has been released.
The decompiled code generated from Ghidra bears some similarities with the Hex-Rays Decompiler, and this suggests that it
also uses an approach based on structural analysis. In particular,
both tools, the Hex-Rays Decompiler and Ghidra, emit C code with
many goto statements, which is not idiomatic and results in very
convoluted control flow. This fact makes it hard to keep track of all
the entangled overlapping control flow paths in the code, making
it hard to understand. This characteristic is also somehow shared
by the Phoenix decompiler, which emits goto statements when it
cannot make further progress.
The DREAM [23] decompiler takes a drastically different direction. The authors present various semantic-preserving transformations for the CFG, and a decompilation technique that emits no goto
statements by design. However, to avoid gotos, DREAM handles
“pathological” loops by means of what can be seen as predicated
execution. If a CFG has a loop and a branch that jumps straight
in the middle of the loop from a point outside the loop, DREAM
wraps parts of the body of the loop inside a conditional statement
guarded by a state variable. This design choice prevents gotos but
generates code where multiple execution paths are entangled and
partially overlap. An example can be seen in an open dataset of
code snippets released by the authors [21], in Section 1.5, page 7, at
lines 12–16 of code generated by DREAM. In larger functions, this
can significantly increase the mental load of an analyst, especially if
a loop contains more than one of these conditional blocks, possibly
nested or with multiple conditions.

4

CONTROL FLOW COMBING

In this paper we make a novel choice for the generation of decompiled code that is free from goto statements: we accept to duplicate
code in order to emit more idiomatic C code that reduces the mental
load of an analyst, being more readable and easier to understand.
This section focuses on the details of this technique, called Control
Flow Combing.
The algorithm is composed of 3 stages: a Preprocessing, which
prepares the input CFG to the manipulation, transforming it into
a hierarchy of nested Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG); the actual
Combing stage, which disentangles complex portions of the control
flow by duplicating code portions or introducing dummy nodes; a
final Matching stage, which matches idiomatic C constructs, while
trying to reduce unnecessary duplication.
Informally, the idea is to “comb” the Control Flow Graph, duplicating code to disentangle convoluted overlapping paths, so that the
properties necessary to emit idiomatic C code naturally emerge. We
pay this potential duplication as a cost necessary to handle generic

binary programs. To gracefully handle common cases, the Matching
step is performed as post-processing to reduce duplication when
possible, leaving freedom and generality to the Combing without
sacrificing the capability to emit high-quality code.
The remainder of this section is structured as follows. Section 4.1
provides an overview the high-level design goals. Section 4.2 introduces the CFG properties that are later enforced by the Preprocessing and Combing stages. Section 4.3 provides a general overview
before digging into the details of the three stages: Preprocessing
(Section 4.4), Combing (Section 4.5), and Matching (Section 4.6).

4.1

Design Goals

The fundamental goal of the algorithm presented here is to increase
the quality of the produced decompiled code. As mentioned in Section 1, this means reducing the informative load on the shoulders
of analysts. To achieve this, the algorithm is designed with some
fundamental goals.
Generality. It must be able to work on any CFG, independently
of its complexity. This is important since, in decompilation, input
CFGs might be originate from hand-written or compiler-optimized
machine code. To build a decompiler that consistently generates
high-quality output very few assumptions can be made on the
input CFGs.
Structured. It needs to transform any CFG so that it can be expressed in terms of C constructs, excluding gotos. gotos, and
unstructured programming in general, can considerably increase
the complexity of the control flow[11].
Expressive. Starting from such structured CFGs, it must be able
to emit a wide range of idiomatic C constructs, such as while and
do-while loops, switch statements, and if statements with or
without else and short-circuited conditions.

4.2

CFG Properties

The Preprocessing and the Combing stages of the algorithm enforce
some properties on the input CFGs. Such properties are inspired to
fundamental characteristics of structured C programs and designed
to mimic them. The fundamental idea of the algorithm is to enforce
each of these properties one at a time. Once a property has been
enforced it becomes an invariant, so that it is preserved from all
the subsequent steps. In this way, the final result of applying the
transformations on the original CFG will feature all the properties.
Being these properties tailored to describe structured C programs,
the resulting CFG at the end of the algorithm is straightforward to
translate in C without gotos.
In the following we list the properties we aim to enforce.
Two Successors. The first important property of structured C programs is that each basic block has at most two successors. The
only case that does not respect this condition is the switch statement, but every switch can always be transformed in a sequence
of if-else statements and vice versa. The Preprocessing phase will
always enforce this property on CFGs, deferring to the Matching
stage the decision of whether to emit ifs or switches.
Two Predecessors. This property holds whenever a basic block in
CFG has at most two predecessors.

1

a graph cannot be emitted in well-structured C programs without
using gotos. Hence the Combing stage enforces this property.

3

As previously anticipated, the Control Flow Combing algorithm is
designed in three incremental stages: Preprocessing, Combing, and
Matching.

2

4.3

4
Figure 1: A CFG without Diamond Shape property. Node 3 is
reachable from 2 but does not dominate it. To emit this code in C,
a goto statement would be required (either ⟨1,3⟩ or ⟨2,3⟩).

Loop Properties. In a well-structured C program each loop has
the following three characteristics.
Single Entry. In C, the only way to enter a loop, without passing
from the entry node, is using the goto statement.
Single Successor. In C, the only way to abandon a loop without
gotos is using the break statement, and all the break statements
in a loop jump to the same point in the program: the single successor of the loop. The case of a natural exit from the loop is just
an implicit break
Single Retreating Target. In C, all the retreating edges in a structured loop jump to the same target since, given that we have no
gotos, they must be continue statements. Just like breaks, all
continues in a loop jump to the same point: the single retreating
target, which is also the entry node.
The fact that break and continue statements always target a single
node is only true under two assumptions. The first is that there are
no switch statements. The second assumption is that there are no
nested loops since, e.g., break statements of a nested loop do not
jump at the same target as breaks of its parent loop. These two
assumptions might sound strong, but the Preprocessing phase is
designed to ensure that these properties are enforced in strict order,
so that when the Loop Properties are enforced all their prerequisite
are guaranteed to hold. All the loop properties described above will
be enforced on the input CFG from the Preprocessing stage.
Diamond Shape Property. The Diamond Shape property holds
for a DAG whenever each node with two successors dominates all
the nodes between itself and its immediate post-dominator. This
property is enforced by the Combing stage, on the DAGs generated
by the Preprocessing stage.
This mimics the fact that in well structured C programs all the
scopes are either nested or non-overlapping. In other words, enforcing this property means forcing a DAG in the form of a diamond
where each node with more than a single successor induces a region
of nodes with a single entry and a single exit.
To grasp the implications of this property, it might be useful to
think about a scenario where this property does not hold. An example is portrayed in Figure 1. In this setting, it exists a conditional
node, node 2 in Figure 1, and another node, node 3, reachable from
the conditional node, which is not dominated by the conditional
node. There exist another node, node 1, from which it is possible
to reach node 3 without passing from node 2. But node 2 is a conditional node (an if statement in C), and since node 3 is reachable
from node 2, if the program is well-structured node 3 should be
either in the then or in the else, or after the if-else altogether.
At the same time, there is a path from node 1 to node 3 that does not
pass from node 2. The main problem with this scenario, is that such

Overview of the Algorithm

Preprocessing. The goal of this stage is to massage the input CFG
in a shape that can be digested by the Combing. To do this, the
Preprocessing incrementally enforces all the properties described
in Section 4.2, except for the Diamond Shape property. It does so
by working on a tree-like hierarchy of nested Regions of the CFG,
called Region Tree. At the end of Preprocessing all the Regions in the
tree are transformed into DAGs.
Combing. This stage works on the Region Tree generated by Preprocessing, which is now constituted only by DAGs. The Combing
enforces the Diamond Shape property on all the DAGs in the tree.
After this transformation the tree is ready to be transformed into
an C Abstract Syntax Tree.
Matching. This stage uses the combed Region Tree to generate a C
AST representation. The AST is subsequently manipulated with a
set of rules to match idiomatic C constructs. The rules presented in
this paper cover short-circuited ifs, switch statements, and loops
in the form do {...} while(...) and while(...) {...}, but others
can be added. After matching idiomatic C constructs, the final C
code is emitted in textual form.

4.4

Preprocessing

This section describes the Preprocessing stage in detail.
The first part of the Preprocessing, described in Section 4.4.1, is
designed to divide the CFG on a hierarchy of nested Regions, each
roughly representing a loop. The goal is to superimpose on the CFG
a Region Tree, that represents the hierarchy of loops in the CFG
itself. Each Region in the tree is then handled independently of the
others by the next steps of Preprocessing and Combing, reducing
the complexity of algorithm.
The second part of the Preprocessing, described in Section 4.4.2,
works on the Region Tree, transforming each Region into a DAG, so
that it can subsequently be handled by the Combing stage.
4.4.1 Building the Region Tree. This process is composed by three
steps. The first adds a sink node as a successor of all the exit nodes,
which is necessary to compute post-dominance. The second starts
to enforce some of the properties discusses in Section 4.2. The third
identifies nested Regions and builds the Region Tree.
Adding the sink Node. In general, CFGs obtained from binary
programs do not have a single exit, which is a requirement to compute the post-dominator tree, which in turn is a requirement to
reason about the Diamond Shape property that is enforced later.
Hence, every CFG needs to be brought into a shape with a single
exit. This is done by adding an artificial sink node, and attaching
an artificial edge from each original exit basic block to the sink.
This makes the sink the single exit node, allowing to compute the
post-dominator tree.
This operation does not alter the semantic of the program, and
is preserved by all the following steps.

0
1

2

3

1

2

4

Figure 2: Merging partially-overlapping SCS. There are two SCS
( ⟨1,2,3⟩ and ⟨2,3,4⟩) induced by the retreating edges 3 → 1 and 4 → 2
(dashed). They overlap but they have no inclusion relationship,
therefore they are merged into a new SCS ⟨1,2,3,4⟩.

Enforcing Two Predecessors and Two Successors. First, the
Two Successors property is enforced by transforming all the switch
statements into cascaded conditional branches, with two targets
each. Similarly, the Two Predecessors property is enforced by taking
each basic block with more than one predecessor and transforming
it into a tree of empty basic blocks (dummies) that only jump to
their single successor.
These operations do not alter in any way the semantic of the
program. Moreover, the Two Predecessors and Two Successors are
preserved in all the following steps.
Identifying Nested Regions. The core idea of this step is to merge
sets of the partially overlapping loops in the CFG into an individual
Region that we can then reason about as a single loop.
To define these Regions, the algorithm starts from all the Strongly
Connected Subgraphs (SCS), i.e., subgraphs of the original CFG
whose nodes are all reachable from each other. There might be
several overlapping and non-overlapping SCS in a graph. Note that
a SCS is a difference concept from a Strongly Connected Component
(SCC), typically used in loop analysis. In fact, SCCs are always nonoverlapping by definition, and their union represent the entire CFG.
In particular, we are interested in SCSs induced by retreating edges.
Given a retreating edge 𝑒 = ⟨𝑠,𝑡⟩ the SCS induced by 𝑒 is constituted
by all the nodes that are on at least one path starting from 𝑡 and
ending in 𝑠 that does not crosses 𝑡 nor 𝑠.
First, the algorithm identifies all the SCS induced by all the
retreating edges in the CFG, simply applying the definition above.
Note that at this stage the resulting SCSs can still overlap, whereas
to build a hierarchy between SCS it is necessary for the set of SCSs to
form a partially ordered set with the strict subset relation (⊂). Hence,
for each pair of SCS 𝐴 and 𝐵, if 𝐴∩𝐵 ≠ ∅, 𝐴 ⊄ 𝐵, and 𝐵 ⊄𝐴, then 𝐴∪𝐵
is added to the set of SCS, removing 𝐴 and 𝐵 from the set of SCSs.
When this happens, the algorithm restarts from the beginning, until
a fixed point is reached. Notice that the union of two SCS is always
an SCS, hence the process can proceed. An example of partially
overlapping SCS that trigger this condition is shown in Figure 2.
This process converges since the ∪ operator is monotonic and
the CFG has a finite number of nodes. At the end only a set of SCS
that is partially ordered with the ⊂ relationship is left. Each of this
remaining SCS is a Region roughly representing a loop, or a set of
loops tightly entangled together. Considering the whole CFG as a
Region itself, the ⊂ relationship naturally induces a tree on all the
regions. The whole CFG is the root of the tree, and moving towards
leaves we encounter more and more deeply nested loops. This tree
structure is called the Region Tree.
Notice that the grouping of nodes in Regions does not alter the
CFG, hence it does not alter the program semantic. The same holds
if a node is moved inside or outside of an existing Region. From this

Figure 3: Electing a Region’s head. The retreating edges are dashed.
Node 1 has one incoming retreating edge, while node 0 has 2. For
this reason, node 0 is elected head of the Region.

point, all the steps of the algorithm only work on Regions and the
Region Tree.
4.4.2 Turning Regions into DAGs. The goal of this phase is to turn
each Region into a DAG that can be then be reasoned about in
simpler terms. This process is composed of various incremental
steps. The combination of all these steps enforces on the Regions
all the remaining properties introduced in Section 4.2 except for
the Diamond Shape property, i.e., the Two Successors property, and
the Loop Properties. Where noted, some of steps are optional and
dedicated to gracefully handle common cases.
The following steps work on a single Region at a time, moving
from the leaves to the root of the Region Tree. At the beginning of
this process all Regions but the root are still SCS. At the end of this
process the Regions are transformed in DAGs, so that they can be
treated by the next phase, Combing.
Electing Regions’ Heads. The Loop Properties require every Region to have a Single Entry and a Single Retreating Target. However,
at this stage, each of them may contain multiple retreating edges,
possibly targeting different nodes. This step elects the entry node:
the node that is target of the highest number of retreating edges.
This node, the head node, represents the beginning of the loop body,
and will be the target of all the retreating edges in the loop.
Retreating Edges Normalization. After the election of the head,
all the retreating edges that do not point to it are considered abnormal, since they do not respect the Single Retreating Target property
and, therefore, need to be handled.
Consider the graph in Figure 3: the head is node 0 and there is
a single abnormal edge from node 2 to 1. In C parlance, this edge is
not a continue, since it jumps to the middle of a loop. Informally,
to handle this situation, we can introduce a state variable in the program so that the abnormal edge can be represented with a continue.
In practice, this edge will target a virtual head node that will check
the value of the state variable and dispatch execution at the correct
location (Node 1). To discriminate between retreating edges, the
state variable is set before every retreating edge and checked at the
beginning of the loop with a dedicated construct.
This is exactly what the normalization step does for abnormal
edges. For each Region, a state variable 𝑣 is created. Then, a distinct
identifier is assigned to each node with incoming abnormal edges,
as well as to the head elected at the previous step. Then, a new set
of nodes is created before the head, containing only conditional
jumps that check the state variable to dispatch the execution at the
correct target (either a target of an abnormal edge or the head). This
set of nodes is called the head dispatcher, and its first node is called
ℎ. Finally, each abnormal edge 𝑒 = ⟨𝑠,𝑡⟩ is replaced with a new pair
of edges. The former edge of this pair is 𝑒ℎ = ⟨𝑠,ℎ⟩. This edge points
to the entry point of the head dispatcher, and sets the state variable
to the value associated to 𝑡, say 𝑣𝑡 . The latter edge is added from the
node in the head dispatcher that checks for the condition 𝑣 ==𝑣𝑡 to

𝑣 := 1

0

0

1

1

𝑣 := 0
𝑣 := 0

head dispatcher

3

3
𝑣 == 0

𝑣 == 1

2
0

1

2

2

Figure 4: Normalizing retreating edges on the CFG from Figure 3. All
the retreating edges (dashed) now point to the new head dispatcher
and set the state variable (values are reported on the edge labels).
The head dispatcher then jumps to the original target node.

𝑡. Finally, the single entry point of the head dispatcher is promoted
to new head of the Region.
Figure 4 shows the result for the normalization of abnormal edges
applied to the CFG originally depicted in Figure 3.
The idea is to enforce the Single Retreating Target property, editing the control flow without altering the semantics of the original
program, except for the introduction of the state variable 𝑣. This process also preserves the Two Successors property. All these properties
are from now on invariant and preserved in the next steps.
Notice that redirecting the abnormal edges to the entry dispatcher
may momentarily break the Two Predecessors property. But this does
not represent a problem since the normalized abnormal edges are
later removed and substituted with continue statements.
Loop Successors Absorption. This is an optional step that starts
moving in the direction of the Single Successor loop property. It is
designed to handle gracefully a scenario observed frequently in
real-world example, depicted on the left in Figure 5. The Region
⟨0,1,2⟩ in the figure has two successors, 3 and 4. Informally it is easy
to see that the Region, along with node 3, is substantially a loop
that executes the code in node 3 on break. Given that one of the
goals is to emit idiomatic C, this would be better represented with
a loop, containing an if statement that executes the code in 3 and
breaks. In order to reach this form, the node 3 must be absorbed
into the Region, as shown in Figure 5.b.
More formally, this step starts with the creation of new empty
dummy frontier nodes on each edge whose source is in the Region
and whose target is not (see the empty dashed node in Figure 5.b).
Then, it computes the dominator tree of the entire CFG (not only the
current Region) and adds to the Region all the nodes that are dominated both by the head of the Region and by at least one dummy
frontier node.
This embodies the idea that given a node, if it is only reachable
passing through the head of Region and from a dummy frontier it is
in fact part of the Region itself, and it must be handled accordingly
by the remaining steps.
This step does not alter the semantic of the program as it only
adds empty dummy frontiers, and it also does not break any of the
previously enforced invariants.
First Iteration Outlining. This step enforces the Single Entry
property on Regions, removing potential multiple entry points that
at this stage are still possible by means of abnormal entries. An
abnormal entry is an edge 𝑒 = ⟨𝑠,𝑡⟩ such that 𝑠 is not in the Region,
𝑡 is in the Region, and 𝑡 is not the head.

4

4

Figure 5: Absorbing Successors. Left – The Region with the nodes
with dashed border has two successors: 3 and 4. Right – Node 3 has
been absorbed in the Region, which now has a single successor.

0

1

before outlining

2

0

1

2

1

2

after outlining

Figure 6: First iteration outlining. Dashed nodes are the outlined.

Abnormal entries are removed based on the observation that
each of them generates a set of paths that: enter the Region, execute
some parts of the loop and at some point reach the proper head of
the loop and proceed with regular iterations.
Thanks to this observation, the nodes and edges that compose
the first iteration can be duplicated and moved out of the Region,
since once they are outlined they have no retreating edges and bear
no signs of being loops.
Note that it would be possible to leave the first iteration inside the
loop, but it requires guarding each statement with conditional constructs, an approach adopted by previous works [22, 23]. However,
we deem that choice to be suboptimal since it generates decompiled
code where paths are entangled together and artificially guarded
by conditional constructs. Moving the first iteration outside the
Region makes it easier to reason about, since it can be analyzed in
isolation, while also leading to more idiomatic C code.
Exit Dispatcher Creation. Symmetrically to the creation of entry
dispatchers, this step normalizes the Regions to completely enforce
the Single Successor loop property. The successors absorption step
was an optional step to get the low-hanging fruit in this direction,
while gracefully handling common cases, but not all scenarios.
If the Single Successor loop property does not hold after the successors absorption step, this step injects an exit dispatcher, that is
built and acts similarly to the entry dispatcher, changing the control
flow without altering the semantic of the program thanks to a state
variable. Again, each of the edges 𝑒 = ⟨𝑠,𝑡⟩ with 𝑠 in the Region
and 𝑡 outside is substituted with two edges. The first starts from 𝑠,
sets the state variable, and jumps to the exit dispatcher. The second
starts from the exit dispatcher and goes to the 𝑡. In this way, the
first node of the exit dispatcher becomes the single successor of the
Region. Notice that this means that the exit dispatcher itself is not
part of the Region but is part of its parent Region in the Region Tree.
Figure 7 shows a case where the creation of the exit dispatcher
is necessary.

0
𝑣 == 2

𝑣 := 2

0

2
0

2

1
exit
...

5
3

1

3
𝑣 == 3

𝑣 := 3

4

Figure 7: Creating exit dispatcher. Left – The Region composed by
nodes 0 and 1 has two successors (2 and 3). Right – Creation of the
exit dispatcher, making it the target of the outgoing edges. The
edges also carry the values assigned to the state variable, later used
dispatch the execution to the real successors.
continue

1

2

3

1

2

3
break

before

3

2

1

after

Figure 8: Creation of break and continue nodes.

Note that this step does not alter the program semantics and does
not break any of the previously enforced invariants, since the exit
dispatcher is built of conditional statements. The Single Successor
loop property is enforced for all Regions and will be preserved by
all the following transformations.
Again, this does not alter the program semantics and does not
break any of the previously enforced invariants, since the exit dispatcher is built of conditional statements. The Single Successor loop
property is enforced for all Regions and will be preserved by all
following transformations.
break and continue Emission. This step transforms each Region
in a DAG that is then ready to be fed into the Combing stage.
After the previous steps, the execution of a program in a given
Region can either take an exit edge and jump to the single successor,
or take a retreating edge and jump to the head to execute another
iteration. At this point, all the properties introduced in Section 4.2
have been enforced, with two exceptions: Diamond Shape, that will
be enforced later by Combing and Two Predecessors, that was enforced at the beginning of Section 4.4.1, but that might have been
broken during Retreating Edges Normalization, to enforce the Single
Retreating Target and Single Exit. As a matter of fact, if all the retreating edges in a Region point to the head, head might have more
than two predecessors. This step re-enforces the Two Predecessors
while transforming the Region in a DAG.
It starts by removing all the retreating edges, and substituting
them with jumps to a newly created continue node. This naturally
conveys the same semantic, that a retreating edge jumps to the
head to start another iteration of the loop.
Then, all the edges jumping out of the region to the single successor are substituted them with jumps to a newly created break
node. This also conveys the same semantic, that an exit edge jumps
straight out of the loop to its single successor.
Figure 8 shows an example of these transformations.
Collapsing Regions. At this point, a Region that has been transformed by all the previous steps of Preprocessing is finally a DAG.
As mentioned at the beginning of Section 4.4.2, only one Region

6

continue

break

Figure 9: Collapsing nested DAG Region. The Region with red
nodes on the left (composed of 1,2,3,4,break, and continue) can be
collapsed in a virtual node from the point of view of its parent.

at a time is turned into a DAG, working on the Region Tree from
the leaves to the root. After a Region has been transformed into a
DAG, this step collapses it into a single virtual node in its parent’s
representation.
This is possible since each DAG Region has a Single Entry (part
of the DAG) and a Single Successor (not part of the DAG). Retreating edges have been removed from the DAG, and substituted by
continue nodes, that represent jumps to the Single Entry. Paths
that exit from the DAG have been substituted with break nodes
jumping to the Single Successor.
Hence in the parent’s representation, a DAG Region is collapsed
into a single virtual node 𝑉 as follows. Given a Region 𝑃 and a nested
DAG Region 𝐶 with Single Entry 𝐸 ∈𝐶 and Single Successor 𝑆 ∈ 𝑃 \𝐶.
First, all the nodes in 𝐶 are moved into the virtual node 𝑉𝐶 .
Then, each edge 𝑒 = ⟨𝑋,𝐸⟩ jumping from 𝑃 \𝐶 to 𝐸 is substituted
with an edge 𝑒𝑉𝐶 = ⟨𝑋,𝑉𝐶 ⟩. These represent all the entry paths
to 𝑉𝐶 (hence to the collapsed Region 𝑅), since the Diamond Shape
property guarantees that there are no edges in the form ⟨𝑋,𝑌 ⟩ with
𝑋 ∈ 𝑃 \𝐶, 𝑌 ∈𝐶 and 𝑌 ≠ 𝐸. From a semantic standpoint, every new
edge 𝑒 𝑣 jumps from 𝑋 to the head of the Region 𝐶 collapsed into 𝑉𝐶 .
Finally, a new edge 𝑒𝑆 = ⟨𝑉𝐶 ,𝑆⟩ is added to represent the fact that
break nodes inside Region 𝐶 collapsed into 𝑉𝐶 can jump straight
to the successor 𝑆.
This step concludes the collapsing of a single Region. An example
can be seen in Figure 9.
Once all the children of a Region have been collapsed, the Region
can be processed, until all the Regions in the tree become DAGs.
These DAGs contain, among others, virtual nodes that represent
nested collapsed DAG Regions. The Region Tree is now ready to be
processed by the Combing stage.

4.5

Combing

This is the core of the Control Flow Combing algorithm. It enforces
the Diamond Shape property, on all the DAGs in the Region Tree.
Enforcing this property reshapes the DAG so that it is only composed by nested diamond-shaped regions. These regions have only
a single entry and a single exit node. They have no branches that
jump directly in the middle of the region or jumping out from the
middle of the region. All the paths incoming into a diamond-shaped
region pass by the entry, and all the paths outgoing from the region
pass by the exit. A simple example is visible in Figure 10.a. Diamondshaped regions are easily convertible to C if-else constructs, with
then and else branches, and with a single common successor that
is the code emitted in C after both then and else.

1

1
𝐴

𝐴
true

false

𝐴

2
2

𝐵

𝐴

𝐵

𝐵

3

4

4

𝐵
3

4
D

(a)

5

5

(b)

(c)

Figure 10: (a) A diamond shaped region. (b) A region which is not
diamond-shaped. The arc between 1 and 4 breaks the assumption
of not having edges incoming from outside the region. (c) The same
region after the Combing has two nested diamond-shaped regions.
D is a dummy node, i.e., an empty node useful only to highlight
the diamond-shape.

Informally, the key idea of the Combing step, is to take all the
regions that are not diamond-shaped (as the one in Figure 10.b) and
restructure them to be diamond-shaped (as the one in Figure 10.c).
In order to achieve this goal, it is necessary to duplicate some nodes
in the graph. Node duplication can increase the size of the final
generated C code. However, we deem that this increases clarity
since it disentangles complex overlapping paths in the control flow,
linearizing them and making them easier to reason about for an
analyst, that can consider them one at a time. Moreover, in most
cases the duplicated nodes introduced by the Combing can be deduplicated by the Matching stage, that uses them to emit idiomatic C
code such as short-circuited ifs as explained in Section 4.6.2.
The Combing Algorithm. As all previous steps, Combing is done
on a single Region at a time. Thanks to the previous steps, Regions
at this point are DAGs. These two properties greatly reduce the
complexity, thanks to the shift of the problem from a global to a
local perspective, and since DAGs are acyclic.
For each Region DAG the comb works as follows. First, it collects
all the conditional nodes on the DAG. The Diamond Shape property
states that every conditional node must dominate all the nodes
between itself and its immediate post-dominator. Hence, for each
of these nodes, it identifies the immediate post-dominator. This is
always possible since the DAG has a single exit, thanks to the sink
node injected at the beginning of Preprocessing. In this way, for
each conditional node 𝐶, the algorithm identifies as set of nodes
D(𝐶) between 𝐶 and its immediate post-dominator.
Second, for each node 𝑁 in D(𝐶) that is not dominated by 𝐶 there
is some incoming edge 𝑒 = ⟨𝑋,𝑁 ⟩ such that source node 𝑋 is not
dominated by 𝐶. To enforce the Diamond Shape property, 𝑁 should
be dominated by 𝐶. Hence the node 𝑁 is duplicated, creating a basic
block node 𝑁 ′ that contains the same instructions as 𝑁 . Initially
𝑁 ′ has no incoming nor outgoing edges. Then, for every outgoing
edge 𝑒𝑆 = ⟨𝑁 ,𝑆⟩ from 𝑁 , an outgoing edge 𝑒𝑆′ = ⟨𝑁 ′,𝑆⟩ is created
from 𝑁 ′ . This ensures that 𝑁 ′ jumps in the same places where 𝑁
jumped, preserving the semantic of the program after 𝑁 . Then,
each incoming edge 𝑒𝑃 = ⟨𝑃,𝑁 ⟩ into 𝑁 such that 𝐶 dominates 𝑃 is
substituted with an edge 𝑒𝑃′ = ⟨𝑃,𝑁 ′ ⟩ incoming into 𝑁 ′ . This means
that after this transformation the node 𝑁 ′ is dominated by 𝐶, and
the node 𝑁 is not reachable from 𝐶 anymore. See Figure 10.b and
Figure 10.c for an example of this transformation.

Basically, the underlying idea is to group the incoming edges
in node 𝑁 in two sets: one composed by the edges dominated by
conditional node 𝐶, that will be moved to node 𝑁 ′ , and the other
one composed by the edges not dominated by 𝐶, that will remain
attached to node 𝑁 .
This is sufficient to enforce the Diamond Shape property for 𝐶
and 𝑁 , but there might be other nodes in D(𝐶). Repeating this on
each 𝑁 ∈ D(𝐶) fully enforces the Diamond Shape property for the
conditional node 𝐶. In turn, repeating the process in post-order on
all conditional nodes in the DAG enforces the property on the whole
Region. Notice that the process either never touches a node 𝑁 (since
it already fulfills the Diamond Shape property for all the conditional
nodes from which it is reachable) or it splits the incoming edges
of 𝑁 into two sets.
At the end of the procedure, the Region DAG fulfills the Diamond
Shape property and is said to be combed.
Note that, as shown in Figure 10, the Combing can insert dummy
nodes (i.e., empty nodes) to reinstate the two predecessor property,
and highlight the diamond-shape.
Improved Combing Algorithm: Untangling Return Paths. The
Combing Algorithm as described above still has a drawback in some
common cases: it duplicates code very aggressively which can lead
to a big increase in code size if not controlled.
Consider Figure 11. The source code in the figure is very simple, and represents a pretty common case where some checks are
performed on the arguments (A and B), a complex computation
composes the body of the function (C), and some final error check
is performed going on.
As we can see in Figure 11(a), one of the typical optimizations
performed by compilers even at lower optimization levels is to
coalesce all the returns in a single node (R). This is intended to
reduce code size in the binaries, but from an analysis standpoint it
“entangles” different execution paths that were originally separate
(the two return statements at lines 4 and 10).
If the vanilla Combing Algorithm is applied on the graph in Figure 11(a), both nodes C and R would be duplicated, like shown in
Figure 11(b). This would be very detrimental, because it would end
up duplicating the whole bulk of the computation (C), unnecessarily
inflating the size of the decompiled source code.
In order to cope with this cases we devised an improved combing
algorithm: the Untangling Algorithm. The improved version of the
algorithm, the Untangling is focused on handling these cases, and
is performed just before the vanilla Combing Algorithm. After the
Untangling, the Combing is executed on the untangled graphs, so
that it can iron out all the situations left behind from the Untangling
because they were not beneficial to untangle.
The Untangling is applied on each conditional node in a Region
DAG, and only if beneficial. Its benefits are evaluated with an heuristic that determines, for each conditional node, if the duplication
induced by untangling the return path is significantly lower than
the duplication that the Combing pass would introduce if the Untangling is not performed. To do this, the heuristic assigns a weight
to each node in the graph, to evaluate the consequences of applying
the Untangling compared to the vanilla Combing. The weight of
each node is proportional to the number of instructions each node

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

if ( arg0 ) {
//
fun_call () ; //
if ( arg1 )
//
return ;
//
}
// complex // C
// code
// C
// here
// C
if ( err () ) // C
return ; // R

A
B
B
R

A

A

B

C

C

A

B

C

B

C

R

R
R

(a)

R

(b)

R

(c)

Figure 11: Situation in which the baseline Combing would be very
costly in terms of duplicated code size. The graph in (a) is the CFG
of the snippet of code on the left. The red dashed node (C) represent
a big and messy portion of the CFG that would greatly increase
code size if duplicated. With the baseline Combing both C and R
would be duplicated, like shown in (b). With the Untangling, only
R is duplicated instead, like shown in (c).

contains, and for collapsed Regions this number if computed cumulatively on all the nodes they contain. If, according to these weights,
Untangling would duplicate more code than vanilla Combing, the
graph is not untangled and only combed.
Whenever triggered on a conditional node 𝑁 (B in Figure 11),
the Untangling duplicates all the blocks from the post-dominator
of 𝑁 to the exit of the graph (only R in Figure 11, but potentially
any other node after R). This transformation allows the Combing
step to keep duplication under control.
Going back to Figure 11, we can see in Figure 11(c) how the
Untangling would transform the graph. Only R is duplicated, saving
a huge amount of unnecessary duplication if C is big. This is also an
example where, after the Untangling, the plain Combing Algorithm
does not have anything to do, because all nodes in Figure 11(c) are
dominated by all the conditional nodes from which they are reachable. This means that the Diamond Shape property already holds
after Untangling, saving the work that would have been necessary
to comb the graph.
Finally, notice how the graph in Figure 11(c) is much more structurally close to the original source code than what plain Combing
would obtain, i.e. Figure 11(b).

4.6

Matching C Constructs

This phase builds the initial Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) representation of each of the combed Regions, and then manipulates it to
emit idiomatic C code.
4.6.1 Building the AST. Thanks to the Preprocessing and Combing
stages and all the enforced properties, building an AST is straightforward. The Two Successors rule ensures that each conditional node
can be emitted as an if, and since all the DAGs are diamond-shaped
regions, the DAG naturally represents a program with perfectly
nested scopes (each diamond-shaped part represents a scope). Moreover, all retreating edges have already been removed and converted
to break and continue nodes.
All these properties imply that the dominator tree of each DAG
Region is a tree where each node can have at most three children.
Exploiting this property, the algorithm works on the dominator tree
(from root to leaves) to emit the AST. If a node 𝐴 in the dominator
tree has only a single child 𝐵, 𝐴 and 𝐵 are emitted as subsequent
statements in a single scope in C. If a node 𝐴 in the dominator tree
has two or three children, then 𝐴 is an if statement. Depending

on how 𝐴 is connected to its children, they can represent the then
branch of 𝐴, the else branch of 𝐴, and the code that is emitted in
the AST after both the then and the else. This allows to represent
all the conditional nodes as well-structured if constructs.
A special treatment is reserved to nodes in a DAG Region that
represent another nested DAG Region, that was collapsed by the
Collapsing Regions step. Whenever one of such nodes is encountered, it is emitted in the AST as a while(1) {...} construct. The
AST representing the body of the loop is then generated iteratively
from the DAG of the collapsed Region. In general, this representation is not optimal for any loop, but it’s only preliminary AST form
that will be made more idiomatic as described in the next section.
4.6.2 Matching Idiomatic C Constructs. The preliminary AST is
now post-processed to match idiomatic C constructs, striving to
emit even more readable code, while, at the same time, reducing the
duplication introduced by Combing, when this is possible without
sacrificing readability.
This post-processing is modular and extensible. We only report
some basic matching steps leading to significant improvements
with a reduced effort. Additional matching criteria can be devised
and added to the pipeline, to emit even better code.
Each matching criterion listed in the following is basically structured as a top-down visit’ on the AST, which recognizes certain
patterns and transforms the AST to more idiomatic, but semantically equivalent, C constructs.
Short-Circuit Reduction. This criterion recognizes and reconstructs short-circuited if statements in C. In fact, the Combing step
breaks these constructs as shown in Figure 10.c. This matching
criterion reverts that choice when possible, allowing the Combing
to handle general situations, while also emitting idiomatic shortcircuited ifs whenever possible.
Figure 10.c shows two nested if statements that have the same
duplicated node in their else branches. This criterion matches that
pattern. Whenever two nested if nodes on the AST have the same
code on one of their branches, they are transformed into a single if node, short-circuiting their conditions with the appropriate
combination of &&, ||, and ! operators.
Note that the previous works [23] did not perform short-circuited
if matching, often leading to suboptimal results.
Switch Reconstruction. This criterion recognizes and builds switch
statements. As mentioned in Section 4.4.1, to enforce the Two Successors property, switches are decomposed in nested ifs in the
preprocessing phase of the Restructuring.
This criterion looks in the AST for nested ifs whose conditions
compare a variable for equality with different constants. Matched
sequences of ifs are transformed into switches.
Loop Promotion. Similarly to what is done in Yakdan et al.[23],
this criterion manipulates loops, initially emitted as while(1) {...},
to transform them into more idiomatic loops, with complex exit
conditions and various shapes such as while(...) {...} and do {...}
while(...).
To match while loops, the AST is scanned looking for loops
whose body starts with a statement in the form of if(𝑋 ) break;.
Any such cycle can be converted into a while(!𝑋 ) {...}, leaving
the rest of the loop body untouched. To match do-while loops,

instead, the AST is scanned looking for loops whose body’s final
statement is in the form if(𝑋 ) continue; else break;. These
loops are transformed into do {...} while(𝑋 ). The same is done
for loops where the continue and break statements are inverted,
simply negating the condition.

5

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

This section evaluates the proposed approach. Section 5.1 describes
the experimental setup, while Section 5.2 compares our implementation with state-of-the-art commercial and open-source decompilers.

5.1

Experimental Setup

To evaluate the performance of the Control Flow Combing described
in the previous section, the algorithm has been implemented on top
of the rev.ng static binary analysis framework [9, 10], based on
qemu [4] and llvm [17]. rev.ng is capable of generating CFGs from
binary programs for various CPU architectures. The Preprocessing
and Combing stages of the algorithm has been implemented on top
of the LLVM IR. After these phases, the Matching stage has been
implemented on a simple custom AST for C, that is then translated
into the AST employed by clang (LLVM’s C/C++ compiler) and
finally serialized to C in textual form.
The resulting decompiler is called revng-c. The quality of the
code generated by revng-c is compared with two other well-known
decompilers: IDA Pro’s Hex-Rays Decompiler, the leading commercial decompiler developed by Hex-Rays [14], and Ghidra, developed
by the National Security Agency (NSA) of the USA for internal use
and recently open-sourced [3].
For a more thorough comparison, we tried to reach the authors
of two other recent academic contributions in the control flow restructuring research area, namely [7] and [23]. Unfortunately, the
authors of Brumley et al. [7] were not able to retrieve the artifacts
to reproduce the results, while the main authors of DREAM [23]
have left academia to focus on different topics, and therefore were
not able to answer our inquiry. Given that DREAM [23] is the only
other approach to generate goto-free C code, it would have been
the perfect candidate to compare our approach with. This comparison would have enabled an evaluation of the main novelty of our
approach: allowing duplication of code in order to reduce the cyclomatic complexity of the decompiled code, which is a measure of
the mental load required to an analyst to understand the program.
DREAM tries not to resort to duplication, while we accept small to
moderate duplication because it reduces the cyclomatic complexity
of the generated code. Lacking reproducible results to compare
directly with DREAM, we decided to focus on a restricted number of case-studies, that show how the code generated by revng-c
compares with their results. Given the limited reach this manual
comparison with DREAM, we have left it in Appendix B.
The remainder of this section provides comparisons between
revng-c, Ghidra, and Hex-Rays Decompiler. For these decompilers, the quality of the decompiled code was evaluated on the GNU
Coreutils. These are the basic file, shell and text manipulation command line utilities of the GNU operating system. These benchmarks
have been used in the past in related works on control flow restructuring [7, 23], since they implement a large set of utilities, hence
producing a wide range of real-world different CFGs that do not

emerge in toy examples. For the benchmarks, the GNU Coreutils
9.29 have been compiled with GCC 4.9.3 targeting the x86-64 architecture, without debug symbols and dynamic linking. We evaluated
the performances of 4 optimizations levels, O0, O1, O2 and O3.
At this point, all the generated binaries have been decompiled
with all the decompilers, to generate C code. It is worth nothing that,
on the basis of the data collected during our evaluation, revng-c
is the only decompiler that produces valid C code as output. The
decompiled code generated by Hex-rays Decompiler and Ghidra
cannot be parsed as-is by a standard-conforming C parser. In order
to do this, which was a requirement to collect our evaluation metrics
on the decompiled code, we had to perform ad-hoc changes on the
decompiled sources, such as declaring missing variables and types,
correcting the number of parameters in function calls, and others.
To ensure a fair comparison, with the help of IDAPython for
the Hex-Rays Decompiler and Java scripts for Ghidra, we extracted
some information on the decompiled functions, such as their entry
point and their size. We then proceeded to compare only the functions for which the three tools gave identical information about
entry point and size. Later, in Table 1, we report the percentage of
functions which matched in dimension, and that we used in our
evaluation.
There is another aspect to keep in mind about using Coreutils as
benchmarks. All these programs share a core library, called gnulib,
whose code is statically linked with all binaries. This means that the
functions in gnulib are duplicated many times. This problem has
already been pointed out in the past, by the authors of DREAM [23],
who also designed a strategy to overcome it. The idea is simple:
all the decompiled functions across all Coreutils need to be deduplicated before the final comparison, to avoid overrepresenting
duplicated functions. We adopted the same strategy for the comparison of our results.

5.2

Evaluation of the Results

The quality of the generated code has been measured according to
the two following metrics.
gotos. The number of the emitted goto statements. goto statements are very detrimental to the readability of the decompiled
code since they can arbitrarily divert the control flow, and keeping
track of the execution becomes significantly more difficult [11].
Cyclomatic Complexity. The increment in cyclomatic complexity [19] of the decompiled code, using the one of the original code
as baseline. This measures the mental effort required to understand
the decompiled code.
We evaluate the code generated by the three decompilers from binaries with different optimization levels according to these metrics.
The evaluation is limited to the functions that all the decompilers
were able to correctly identify. The results are reported in Table 1.
By construction, revng-c zeros out the gotos metric, generating
0 gotos, over the entire GNU Coreutils suite. We can also see how
revng-c generates decompiled code with a reduced cyclomatic
complexity with respect to the Hex-Ray Decompiler and Ghidra.
Note that the cyclomatic complexity of decompiled code of the
tools is expressed with respect to this baseline. In fact, we assume
that this complexity is intrinsic in the code, and the objective of
the decompilation is to introduce as little additional complexity as

-O0

Cyclomatic Complexity
Gotos
Matched functions

-O1

-O2

-O3

revng-c

IDA

Ghidra

revng-c

IDA

Ghidra

revng-c

IDA

Ghidra

revng-c

IDA

Ghidra

+11%

+12%

+16%

+13%

+17%

+20%

+36%

+60%

+72%

+78%

+86%

+94%

0

1010

1370

0

2370

2622

0

2082

2062

0

2119

2282

93%

91%

89%

81%

Table 1: Comparison between revng-c, IDA, and Ghidra. Results are aggregated for the optimization level that was used to obtain the binaries
that were then decompiled (-O0, -O1, -O2, -O3). For each optimization level, the first row shows percentage of functions that were matched
by all the decompilers (percentage of the binary code size). The second and third row show respectively the number of gotos produced by
each decompiler, and the additional cyclomatic complexity introduce by the decompilation process with respect to the baseline cyclomatic
complexity of the original source code.

possible. If we observe the -O2 optimization level, the one typically
adopted in release builds, we can notice that revng-c is able to
reduce the additional cyclomatic complexity by 40% with respect
to IDA, and by almost 50% with respect to Ghidra.
For what concerns the metrics for the Hex-Rays Decompiler and
Ghidra, we can see that Ghidra performs slightly better in terms
of goto statements emitted, emitting less gotos when compared to
the Hex-Rays Decompiler. Overall, as previously stated, we think
that these metrics shows that the two decompilers adopt a similar
approach to decompilation.
In Table 2 we provide an overview of the increase in terms of
size of the decompiled code due to the duplication introduce by our
approach. In Figure 12 we also show an estimate of the probability
distribution function (using the KDE method) of the increase in size
for all the optimizations levels. This metric, has not been computed
for the other tools, since they do not introduce duplication.
Note also that the effects of duplication could be significantly mitigated by performing regular optimizations on the generated code,
such as dead code elimination. In fact, the optimizer might be able
to prove that, for instance, part of the code duplicated outside of a
loop due to the outlining of the first iteration will never be executed
and can therefore be dropped. However, due to timing constraints,
we have not been able to assess the impact of such optimizations.
We also produced a pair of heat maps Figure 13 that helps visualizing how the relationship between duplication and decrement
in cyclomatic complexity evolves. We plotted the values for the
-O2 optimization level, comparing with both Hex-Rays and Ghidra.
In particular, apart from the bright spots in correspondence of a
low duplication level which are positive, we can see some reddish
clouds towards the center of the heat maps, which represents a
class of functions for which the duplication is significant, but for
which the cyclomatic complexity is reduced with respect to IDA
and Ghidra. This represent the fact that even when a cost in terms
of duplication is payed, we have a gain in terms of reduction of
cyclomatic complexity.

6

CONCLUSION

In this work we presented a novel approach to control flow restructuring and to decompilation, by introducing new techniques for
transforming any given CFG into a DAG form, which we called Preprocessing, to which we later apply our Combing algorithm. Thanks
to Combing, we are able to build a C AST from the input code,
which is then transformed by the Matching phase to emit idiomatic
C. We implemented our solution on top of the rev.ng framework,

-O0

-O1

-O2

-O3

Goto

1.07×

1.10×

1.15×

1.32×

No-Goto

1.04×

1.08×

1.12×

1.25×

Table 2: Size increment metrics (over the original size) for the
functions over different optimization levels. For each optimization
level, we also provide the duplication factor metric computed
only on functions which do not have goto statements in the
original source code. While our algorithm is able to completely
eliminate gotos in the decompiled code, we can see that in case we
approach decompilation of code with gotos our duplication factor
is penalized. Indeed, our algorithm makes the assumption that we
are trying to decompile well-structured code, therefore gotos in
the original source code make this assumption to fail.
O0
O1
O2
O3

4

3

2

1

0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

Figure 12: Plot showing the Probability distribution functions of
the duplication introduced by revng-c. On the x axis, we have the
amount of duplication introduced (measured in terms of code size
increase over the original value). We can notice that as the optimization level increases, revng-c introduces a little bit more duplication
in order to be able to be able to emit goto-free decompiled code.

building a decompiler tool called revng-c. In the evaluation, we
performed compared our results against both academic and commercial state-of-the-art decompilers.
The experimental results show that our solution is able to avoid
the emission of goto statements, which is an improvement over
the Hex-Rays Decompiler and Ghidra, but at the same time does
not resorts to predicated execution, which on the other hand affects DREAM. In future work, we will to improve the quality of the
decompiled code by focusing on the recovery of more idiomatic
C constructs. This type of work will be greatly simplified by the
already modular nature of the Matching phase of our algorithm.

Duplication

1.8 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.0 0.9

Duplication

1.8 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.0 0.9
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2

1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2

(a) Cyclomatic complexity improvement w.r.t. IDA

(b) Cyclomatic complexity improvement w.r.t. Ghidra

Cyclomatic improvement

Cyclomatic improvement

Figure 13: Cyclomatic Complexity improvements of revng-c at O2. This heat maps helps us visualizing where the cyclomatic complexity
improvement gain obtained by revng-c is introduced. The cyclomatic improvement is represented on the x axis, while the duplication
factor introduced by revng-c is represented on the y axis (higher means less duplication). To color of a cell of the heat map is computed by
performing a sum of bivariate distributions for each data point in our dataset (every function). This means that a cell will assume a brighter
color as more data points showing values of duplication and decrease in cyclomatic complexity in its surrounding are present.

More in general, in the future we aim to further improve the quality of the decompiled code in other areas, such as arguments and
return values detection and advanced type recognition techniques.
In addition, we are also considering the possibility for our decompiler to support the emission of some goto statements in a very
limited and controlled setting, i.e., where they may be considered
idiomatic and legitimate, e.g., in the goto cleanup pattern. The goal of
this would be to trade the introduction of a goto in order to further
reduce the duplication introduced by our combing algorithm.
We also want to address the verification of the semantics preservation of the control flow restructuring transformation we introduce. We deem this goal achievable thanks to the very nature of the
rev.ng framework. The idea is to enforce back the modifications
done by the control flow restructuring algorithm at the level of the
LLVM IR lifted by rev.ng, and to use the recompilation features
of the framework to prove the behavioural equivalence between
the original binary and the one generated after the restructuring.

REFERENCES
[1] Hex-rays decompiler. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/decompiler/.
[2] International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, ICCST 2018, Montréal,
Canada, October 22-25, 2018. IEEE, 2018.
[3] National Security Agency. Ghidra. https://ghidra-sre.org/.
[4] Fabrice Bellard. QEMU, a fast and portable dynamic translator. In Proceedings
of the FREENIX Track: 2005 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, April 10-15,
2005, Anaheim, CA, USA, 2005.
[5] David Brumley, Ivan Jager, Thanassis Avgerinos, and Edward J Schwartz. Bap:
A binary analysis platform. In International Conference on Computer Aided
Verification. Springer, 2011.
[6] David Brumley, JongHyup Lee, Edward J Schwartz, and Maverick Woo. Native
x86 decompilation using semantics-preserving structural analysis and iterative
control-flow structuring. In Presented as part of the 22nd USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 13), 2013.
[7] David Brumley, JongHyup Lee, Edward J. Schwartz, and Maverick Woo. Native
x86 decompilation using semantics-preserving structural analysis and iterative
control-flow structuring. In Proceedings of the 22th USENIX Security Symposium,
Washington, DC, USA, August 14-16, 2013, 2013.

[8] Cristina Cifuentes. Reverse compilation techniques. Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, 1994.
[9] Alessandro Di Federico and Giovanni Agosta. A jump-target identification
method for multi-architecture static binary translation. In Compliers, Architectures, and Sythesis of Embedded Systems (CASES), 2016 International Conference
on, 2016.
[10] Alessandro Di Federico, Mathias Payer, and Giovanni Agosta. rev. ng: a
unified binary analysis framework to recover cfgs and function boundaries. In
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Compiler Construction, 2017.
[11] Edsger W Dijkstra. Go to statement considered harmful. Communications of
the ACM, 11(3), 1968.
[12] Alessandro Di Federico, Pietro Fezzardi, and Giovanni Agosta. rev.ng: A
multi-architecture framework for reverse engineering and vulnerability
discovery. In International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, ICCST
2018, Montréal, Canada, October 22-25, 2018 [2].
[13] Ilfak Guilfanov. Decompilers and beyond. Black Hat USA, 2008.
[14] Hex-Rays. Ida pro. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/.
[15] Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1 (3rd Ed.):
Fundamental Algorithms. Addison Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.,
Redwood City, CA, USA, 1997.
[16] Christopher Kruegel, William Robertson, Fredrik Valeur, and Giovanni Vigna.
Static disassembly of obfuscated binaries. In USENIX security Symposium,
volume 13, 2004.
[17] Chris Lattner and Vikram Adve. LLVM: A Compilation Framework for Lifelong
Program Analysis & Transformation. In CGO 2004.
[18] Thomas Lengauer and Robert Endre Tarjan. A fast algorithm for finding
dominators in a flowgraph. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and
Systems (TOPLAS), 1979.
[19] T. J. McCabe. A complexity measure. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
SE-2(4), Dec 1976.
[20] Dawn Song, David Brumley, Heng Yin, Juan Caballero, Ivan Jager, Min Gyung
Kang, Zhenkai Liang, James Newsome, Pongsin Poosankam, and Prateek
Saxena. Bitblaze: A new approach to computer security via binary analysis. In
International Conference on Information Systems Security. Springer, 2008.
[21] Khaled Yakdan. Dream code snippets. https://net.cs.uni-bonn.de/fileadmin/ag/
martini/Staff/yakdan/code_snippets_ndss_2015.pdf.
[22] Khaled Yakdan, Sergej Dechand, Elmar Gerhards-Padilla, and Matthew Smith.
Helping johnny to analyze malware: A usability-optimized decompiler and
malware analysis user study. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP). IEEE, 2016.
[23] Khaled Yakdan, Sebastian Eschweiler, Elmar Gerhards-Padilla, and Matthew
Smith. No more gotos: Decompilation using pattern-independent control-flow
structuring and semantic-preserving transformations. In NDSS, 2015.

A

GRAPHS BASICS

1

This section introduces the fundamental concepts to understand
the design of the Control Flow Combing algorithm, described in
Section 4.

1
6

6

2
Graphs. A directed graph is a pair 𝐺 = ⟨𝑉 ,𝐸⟩, where 𝑉 is a set, and
𝐸 ⊂𝑉 ×𝑉 is a set of pairs of element of 𝑉 . Each 𝑣 ∈𝑉 is called a node,
and each 𝑒 = ⟨𝑣 1,𝑣 2 ⟩ is called an edge. Given 𝑒 as defined above, 𝑣 1
is said to be a predecessor of 𝑣 2 , while 𝑣 2 is said to be a successor of
𝑣 1 . 𝑒 is said to be outgoing from 𝑣 1 and 𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑔 in 𝑣 2 . 𝑣 1 is called
the source of 𝑒 and 𝑣 2 is called the target of 𝑣 1 . A sequence of edges
𝑒 1 = ⟨𝑣 1,1,𝑣 1,2 ⟩,...,𝑒𝑛 = ⟨𝑣𝑛,1,𝑣𝑛,2 ⟩, is called a path if ∀𝑘 = 1,...,𝑛 − 1
holds 𝑣𝑘,2 =𝑣𝑘+1,1 .
Control Flow Graphs. A directed graph used to represent the
control flow of a function in a program.
Each node of a CFG is called a basic block and represents a sequence of instructions in the program that are executed sequentially,
without any branch with the exception of the last instruction in
the basic block.
Each edge in a CFG is called a branch. A branch 𝑏 = ⟨𝐵𝐵 1,𝐵𝐵 2 ⟩ in a
CFG, represents the notion that the execution of the program at the
end of 𝐵𝐵 1 might jump to the beginning of 𝐵𝐵 2 . Branches can be conditional or unconditional. A branch 𝑏 is unconditional if it is always
taken, independently of the specific values of conditions in the program at runtime. The source 𝑠 of an unconditional branch 𝑏 has no
other outgoing edges. Conversely, a branch 𝑏 is called conditional if
it might be taken by the execution at runtime, depending on the runtime value of specific conditions in the program. The source of a conditional branch always has multiple outgoing edges and the conditions associated to each outgoing edge are always strictly exclusive.
Finally, a CFG representing a function has a special basic block,
called entry node, entry basic block, or simply entry, that represents
the point in the CFG where the execution of the function starts.
In the remainder of this work, where not specified otherwise,
we will refer to CFGs.
Depth First Search. The concept of Depth First Search (DFS) [15]
is very important for the rest of this work. Briefly, DFS is a search
algorithm over a graph, which starts from a root node, and explores
as far as possible following a branch (going deep in the graph, hence
the name), before backtracking and following the other branches.
When the algorithm explores a new node it is pushed on a stack,
and, when the visit of the subtree starting in that node is completed,
it is popped from the exploration stack. Such traversal can be used
both for inducing an ordering on the nodes of a graph, and to calculate the set of retreating edges (informally, edges that jump back
in the control flow). Directed graphs without retreating edges are
called Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG). A Depth First Search induces
the following orderings of the nodes of a graph:
Preorder. Ordering of the nodes according to when they were first
visited by the DFS and, therefore, pushed on the exploration stack.
Postorder. Ordering of the nodes according to when their subtree has been visited completely and, therefore, popped from the
exploration stack.
Reverse Postorder. The reverse of postorder.
Dominance and Post-Dominance. Other two fundamental concepts in program analysis are dominance and post-dominance.

3

6

2
4

5

1

3

2
4

5

3

4
5

Figure 14: Left – An example graph. Node 1 is the entry and 5 is the
exit. Middle – Dominator tree of the graph on the left. Edges in this
tree go from immediate dominator to the dominated node. Right –
Post-dominator tree of the graph on the left. Edges in this tree go
from immediate post-dominator to post-dominated node.

Informally, dominance describes, given a node, which nodes have
to be traversed on all paths from the entry, which must be present
and unique, to that node. Given a graph and two nodes 𝐴 and 𝐵, 𝐴
dominates 𝐵 iff every path from the entry to 𝐵 contains 𝐴. 𝐴 properly
dominates 𝐵 if 𝐴 dominates 𝐵 and 𝐴 ≠ 𝐵. 𝐴 immediately dominates
𝐵 if 𝐴 properly dominates 𝐵 and 𝐴 ≠ 𝐵 and it does not exist a node
𝐶 such that 𝐴 properly dominates 𝐶 and 𝐶 properly dominates 𝐵.
Conversely, post-dominance is related to which nodes must be
traversed on paths from a given node to the exit, if this is present
and unique. In cases where there is not a single exit node postdominance is not defined. The node 𝐴 post-dominates 𝐵 if every path
from 𝐵 to the exit contains 𝐴. 𝐴 properly post-dominates 𝐵 if 𝐴 postdominates 𝐵 and 𝐴 ≠ 𝐵. 𝐴 immediately post-dominates 𝐵 if 𝐴 properly post-dominates 𝐵 and 𝐴 ≠ 𝐵 and it does not exist a node 𝐶 such
that 𝐴 properly post-dominates 𝐶 and 𝐶 properly post-dominates 𝐵.
Dominator and Post-Dominator Tree. The dominator tree (and
the post-dominator tree) are a compact representation of the dominance (and post-dominance) relationship withing a graph. The
dominator tree (DT) contains a node for each node of the input
graph, and an edge from node 𝐴 to node 𝐵 iff 𝐴 is the immediate
dominator of 𝐵. The resulting graph is guaranteed to be a tree since
each node except the entry node has a unique immediate dominator.
As a consequence, the entry node is the root of the dominator tree.
Whenever the exit of a graph is unique, it is possible to build an analogous data structure for the post-dominance relationship, called
post-dominator tree (PDT). A well known and widely used algorithm
for calculating a dominator tree is the Lengauer-Tarjan’s algorithm,
that has the peculiarity of having an almost linear complexity [18].
Examples of dominator and post-dominator tree for a CFG are
represented in Figure 14.

void sub43E100 ( void * a1 , int a2 ) {
...
v4 = *( result + 0 xc ) ;
if ( a2 >= v4 )
v5 = *( result + 8) + v4 ;
if ( a2 < v5 && a2 >= v4 )
break ;
i ++;
result += 0 x28 ;
...
}

DREAM

revng-c

Cridex4

9

5

ZeusP2P

9

5

SpyEye

19

15

OverlappingLoop

4

3

Table 3: This table presents the cyclomatic complexity of the code
produced by DREAM and revng-c. As we can see, DREAM consistently presents higher figures compared to revng-c due to the high
number situations in which conditions are reused multiple times.

Figure 15: Snippets which shows the reuse of the condition a2 >= 4
on the same execution path

B

CASE STUDIES

This section is devoted to a comparison of our solution with DREAM.
We need a special section for this since the only artifacts of decompilation available from DREAM are the ones included in a whitepaper [21] cited in [23]. In this document, for every sample of code
decompile by DREAM is present the corresponding code decompiled by Hex-Rays. Unfortunately, we were not able to recover the
original functions (in terms of binary code) used for the evaluation
of DREAM. This is due to the fact that the presented snippets belongs to malware samples for which a lot of different variants are
available.
We observe that the provided Hex-Rays Decompiler decompiled
source resembles very closely the original assembly representation
(e.g., due to the abundance of goto statements). Therefore, in order
to be able to compare our results with DREAM’s, we decided to use
the Hex-Rays Decompiler decompiled sources as a starting point
for obtaining the CFG of the functions. Then, in turn, apply our
algorithm, and obtain the revng-c decompiled sources.
To assess on a large scale how revng-c performed compared to
DREAM, we collected the mentioned metrics on both the DREAM
decompiled sources provided in the whitepaper, and on the sources
produced by revng-c.
Table 3 presents the results we obtained. The higher cyclomatic
complexity in code produced by DREAM is due to the predicated
execution-like code. In fact, in this cases, the same condition will be
employed multiple times as a state variable that enables or disables
certain portions of the code. This approach forces the analyst to
keep track of the state of the variables, increasing its mental load
in a non-negligible way. As we can see, both DREAM and revng-c
provide decompiled sources without goto statements, but DREAM
presents reuse of the conditions as expected and informally explained throughout the paper. As a concrete example of conditional
reuse, consider the snippet in Figure 15 (lines from 11 to 17 extracted
from the snippet 1.5 in DREAM whitepaper [21]), we can see how
the condition a2 >= v4 is reused twice on the same execution path.
As an additional example, Figure 16 compares how a situation
that DREAM (on the left of the listing) handles through predicated
execution is handled with duplication in revng-c (on the right of
the listing). The revng-c listing has been manually modified to reflect the same variable names used by DREAM. Also some optimizations in terms of code readability have been performed, but these
changes do not concern the control flow, but are simple aesthetic

improvements. We can see that, while DREAM uses a predicated
execution approach, guarding the statement at line 11 with a complicated condition. On the other hand, revng-c duplicates some code,
in this case the assignment, directly where the conditions to evaluate if the assignment needs to be performed are available, specifically at line 5. The idea is to inline the portion of code, paying a cost
in terms of duplication, instead of deferring it, but paying a cost
in terms of mental load necessary to understand when this assignment is actually executed. In the example, the cost is visible in the
DREAM snippet as the convoluted condition of the if statement at
lines 9 and 10. In this case, duplication also highlights immediately
what value is assigned to v2, that is the return value of the function.
In this section we illustrated why we think that predicated execution is suboptimal in terms of mental load for the analyst that
reads the decompiled code. The point is that in presence of predicated execution, different parts of the code in different conditional
constructs are executed on the basis of the state of the conditional
variable. This causes a mix of control flow and information on the
state of the conditional variable, which causes the heavy mental
load. Of course this is something that can be present in C code in
principle, but the predicated execution introduced by DREAM push
this to the limit where it becomes an impediment for the analyst.
We have done this by highlighting in a couple of examples where
this happens and how we approach instead the decompilation of the
same snippet of code, and by showing that the predicated execution
approach increases the cyclomatic complexity of the code.
During the design of the validation of our work, we also evaluated the possibility of conducting an user study to evaluate the
performance of different decompilers, as done in [22]. However, we
deemed that such kind of user study is really helpful to evaluate
the overall performance of a decompiler tool only once aspects
orthogonal to what presented in this paper are developed, such
as the identification of library functions and type identification
techniques. In this paper instead, we focused on the control flow
recovery portion of the decompilation task, and this led us to set
up the experimental evaluation in the way we did. Anyway, we do
not exclude to conduct an user study, once the other mentioned
aspects of the decompiler have matured.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

if (! cond1 && ! cond2 ) {
v4 = sub4634E2 ( a1 + a2 *4 , a7 , 0 , ...) ;
v2 = v4 ;
if ( v4 ) {
cond3 = v4 == -4;
...
}
}
if (( cond1 || v4 ) && ( cond1 || ! cond2 )
&& ( cond3 || ! v3 ) && (! cond1 || ! v3 ) )
v2 = -3;
if (! HeapValidate ( GetProcessHeap () , 0 , lpMem ) )
return v2 ;
HeapFree ( GetProcessHeap () , 0 , lpMem ) ;
return v2 ;

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

if ( var_4 ) {
v4 = sub4634E2 ( a1 + a2 *4 , a7 , 0 , ...) ;
if ( v4 ) {
if ( v4 == -4) {
v2 = -3;
} else {
v2 = v4
}
if (! HeapValidate ( GetProcessHeap () , 0 , lpMem ))
return v2 ;
HeapFree ( GetProcessHeap () , 0 , lpMem ) ;
}
...
}
return v2 ;

Figure 16: Side by side SpyeEye listings of the decompiled source by DREAM (on the left) and revng-c (on the right).
