# Paper: Colwell 1985

Instruction Sets and Beyond:

Computers, Complexity,
and Controversy
Robert P. Colwell, Charles Y. Hitchcock m,
E. Douglas Jensen, H. M. Brinkley Sprunt,
and Charles P. Kollar

Carnegie-Mellon University

t

JOCUS on rne assignment
of system functionality to
implementation levels
within an architecture,
and not be guided by
whether it is a RISC
or CISC design.

8

alanc

set design is important, but
lt1Mthi tyreceived Instruction
it should not be driven solely by adher-

o

ence to convictions about design style,
ica' ch m e n RISC or CISC. The focus ofdiscussion
,,tl
o09 Fy ipt issues. RISC should be on the more general question
of the assignment of system functionhave guided ality to implementation levels within
years. A study of an architecture. This point of view end yield a deeper un- compasses the instruction set-CISCs
f hardware/software tend to install functionality at lower
mputer performance, the system levels than RISCs-but also
iluence of VLSI on processor design, takes into account other design feaand many other topics. Articles on tures such as register sets, coprocesRISC research, however, often fail to sors, and caches.
While the implications of RISC reexplore these topics properly and can
be misleading. Further, the few papers search extend beyond the instruction
that present comparisons with com- set, even within the instruction set doplex instruction set computer design main, there are limitations that have
often do not address the same issues. not been identified. Typical RISC
As a result, even careful study of the papers give few clues about where the
literature is likely to give a distorted RISC approach might break down.
view of this area of research. This arti- Claims are made for faster machines
cle offers a useful perspective of that are cheaper and easier to design
RISC/Complex Instruction Set Com- and that "map" particularly well onto
puter research, one that is supported VLSI technology. It has been said,
by recent work at Carnegie-Mellon however, that "Every complex probUniversity.
lem has a simple solution. . . and it is
Much RISC literature is devoted to wrong." RISC ideas are not "wrong,"
discussions of the size and complexity but a simple-minded view of them
of computer instruction sets. These would be. RISC theory has many imdiscussions are extremely misleading. plications that are not obvious. Re0018-9162/85/0900-0008$01.00

1985 IEEE

COMPUTER

search in this area has helped focus attention on some important issues in
computer architecture whose resolutions have too often been determined
by defaults; yet RISC proponents
often fail to discuss the application, architecture, and implementation contexts in which their assertions seem
justified.
While RISC advocates have been
vocal concerning their design methods
and theories, CISC advocates have
been disturbingly mute. This is not a
healthy state of affairs. Without
substantive, reported CISC research,
many RISC arguments are left uncountered and, hence, out of perspective. The lack of such reports is
due partially to the proprietary nature
of most commercial CISC designs and
partially to the fact that industry designers do not generally publish as
much as academics. Also, the CISC
design style has no coherent statement
of design principles, and CISC designers do not appear to be actively working on one. This lack of a manifesto
differentiates the CISC and RISC design styles and is the result of their different historical developments.

Towards defining a RISC
Since the earliest digital electronic
computers, instruction sets have tended
to grow larger and more complex. The
1948 MARK-1 had only seven instructions of minimal complexity, such as
adds and simple jumps, but a contemporary machine like the VAX has hundreds of instructions. Furthermore, its
instructions can be rather complicated, like atomically inserting an element into a doubly linked list or
evaluating a floating point polynomial
of arbitrary degree. Any high performance implementation of the VAX, as
a result, has to rely on complex implementation techniques such as pipelining, prefetching, and multi-cycle instruction execution.
September 1985

This progression from small and
simple to large and complex instruction sets is striking in the development
of single-chip processors within the
past decade. Motorola's 68020, for example, carries 11 more addressing
modes than the 6800, more than twice
as many instructions, and support for
an instruction cache and coprocessors.
Again, not only has the number of addressing modes and instructions increased, but so has their complexity.
This general trend toward CISC machines was fueled by many things, including the following:
* New models are often required to
be upward-compatible with existing models in the same computer
family, resulting in the supersetting and proliferation of features.
* Many computer designers tried to
reduce the "semantic gap" between programs and computer instruction sets. By adding instructions semantically closer to those
used by programmers, these designers hoped to reduce software
costs by creating a more easily
programmed machine. Such instructions tend to be more complex because of their higher semantic level. (It is often the case,
however, that instructions with
high semantic content do not exactly match those required for the
language at hand.)
* In striving to develop faster machines, designers constantly moved
functions from software to microcode and from microcode to hardware, often without concern for
the adverse effects that an added
architectural feature can have on
an implementation. For example,
addition of an instruction requiring an extra level of decoding logic
can slow a machine's entire instruction set. (This is called the
"n + 1 " phenomenon.1 )
* Tools and methodologies aid designers in handling the inherent

complexity of large architectures.
Current CAD tools and microcoding support programs are examples.
Microcode is an interesting example
of a technique that encourages complex designs in two ways. First, it provides a structured means of effectively
creating and altering the algorithms
that control execution of numerous
operations and complex instructions in
a computer. Second, the proliferation
of CISC features is encouraged by the
quantum nature of microcode memories; it is relatively easy to add another
addressing mode or obscure instruction to a machine which has not yet
used all of its microcode space.
Instruction traces from CISC machines consistently show that few of
the available instructions are used in
most computing environments. This
situation led IBM's John Cocke, in the
early 70's, to contemplate a departure
from traditional computer styles. The
result was a research project based on
an ECL rnachine that used a very advanced compiler, creatively named
"801" for the research group's building number. Little has been published
about that project, but what has been
released speaks for a principled and
coherent research effort.
The 801's instruction set was based
on three design principles. According
to Radin, 2 the instruction set was to be
that set of run-time operations that
* could not be moved to compile
time,
* could not be more efficiently executed by object code produced by
a compiler that understood the
high-level intent of the program,
and
* could be implemented in random
logic more effectively than the
equivalent sequence of software
instructions.
The machine relied on a compiler that
used many optimization strategies for
much of its effectiveness, including a
9

powerful scheme of register allocation. The hardware implementation
was guided by a desire for leanness and
featured hardwired control and singlecycle instruction execution. The architecture was a 32-bit load/store machine (only load and store instructions
accessed memory) with 32 registers
and single-cycle instructions. It had
separate instruction and data caches to
allow simultaneous access to code and
operands.
Some of the basic ideas from the 801
research reached the West Coast in the
mid 70's. At the University of California at Berkeley, these ideas grew into a
series of graduate courses that produced the RISC I * (followed later by the
RISC II) and the numerous CAD tools
that facilitated its design. These
courses laid the foundation for related
research efforts in performance evaluation, computer-aided design, and
computer implementation.
The RISC I processor, 3 like the 801,
is a load/store machine that executes
most of its instructions in a single cycle. It has only 31 instructions, each of
which fits in a single 32-bit word and
uses practically the same encoding format. A special feature of the RISC I is
its large number of registers, well over
a hundred, which are used to form a
series of overlapping register sets. This
feature makes procedure calls on the
RISC I less expensive in terms of processor-memory bus traffic.
Soon after the first RISC I project at
Berkeley, a processor named MIPS
(Microprocessor without Interlocked
Pipe Stages) took shape at Stanford.
MIPS I is a pipelined, single-chip processor that relies on innovative software
to ensure that its pipeline resources are
properly managed. (In machines such
as the IBM System/360 Model 91,
pipeline interstage interlocking is perPlease note that the term "RISC" is used throughout

this article to refer to all research efforts conceming Reduced Instruction Set Computers, while the term "RISC
I" refers specificallv to the Berkeley research project.
10

formed at run-time by special hardware). By trading hardware for compile-time software, the Stanford
researchers were able to expose and use
the inherent internal parallelism of
their fast computing engine.
These three machines, the 801,
RISCI, and MIPS, form the core of
RISC research machines, and share a
set of common features. We propose
the following elements as a working
definition of a RISC:

Pyramid's machine is not a load/store
computer, however, and both Ridge
and Pyramid machines have variable
length instructions and use multiplecycle interpretation and microcoded
control engines. Further, while their
instruction counts might seem reduced
when compared to a VAX, the Pyramid has almost 90 instructions and the
Ridge has over 100. The use of microcoding in these machines is for price
and performance reasons. The Pyramid machine also has a system of multiple register sets derived from the
Berkeley RISC I, but this feature is orthogonal to RISC theory. These may
be successful machines, from both
technological and marketing standpoints, but they are not RISCs.
The six RISC features enumerated
above can be used to weed out misleading claims and provide a springboard for points of debate. Although
some aspects of this list may be arguable, it is useful as a working definition.

(1) Single-cycle operation facilitates
the rapid execution of simple
functions that dominate a computer's instruction stream and
promotes a low interpretive
overhead.
(2) Loadlstore design follows from
a desire for single-cycle operation.
(3) Hardwired control provides for
the fastest possible single-cycle
operation. Microcode leads to
slower control paths and adds to
interpretive overhead.
(4) Relatively few instructions and
addressing modes facilitate a Points of attention and
fast, simple interpretation by the contention
control engine.
There are two prevalent misconcep(5) Fixed instruction format with
consistent use, eases the hard- tions about RISC and CISC. The first
wired decoding of instructions, is due to the RISC and CISC acrowhich again speeds control nyms, which seem to imply that the
domain for discussion should be repaths.
(6) More compile-time effort offers stricted to selecting candidates for a
an opportunity to explicitly machine's instruction set. Although
move static run-time complexity specification format and number of
into the compiler. A good ex- instructions are the primary issues in
ample of this is the software most RISC literature, the best generpipeline reorganizer used by alization of RISC theory goes well
beyond them. It connotes a willingness
MIPS. I
to make design tradeoffs freely and
A consideration of the two com- consciously across architecture/implepanies that claim to have created the mentation, hardware/software, and
first commercial "RISC" computer, compile-time/run-time boundaries in
Ridge Computers and Pyramid Tech- order to maximize performance as
nology, illustrates why a definition is measured in some specific context.
needed. Machines of each firm have
The RISC and CISC acronyms also
restricted instruction formats, a fea- seem to imply that any machine can be
ture they share with RISC machines. classified as one or the other and that
COM PUTER

m

the primary task confronting an architect is to choose the most appropriate
design style for a particular application. But the classification is not a
dichotomy. RISCs and CISCs are at
different corners of a continous multidimensional design space. The need is
not for an algorithm by which one can
be chosen: rather, the goal should be
the formulation of a set of techniques,
drawn from CISC experiences and
RISC tenets, which can be used by a
designer in creating new systems. 46
One consequence of the us-or-them
attitude evinced by most RISC publications is that the reported performance of a particular machine (e.g.,
RISC I) can be hard to interpret if the
contributions made by the various design decisions are not presented individually. A designer faced with a large
array of choices needs guidance more
specific than a monolithic, all-ornothing performance measurement.
An example of how the issue of
scope can be confused is found in a recent article.7 By creating a machine
with only one instruction, its authors
claim to have delimited the RISC design space to their machine at one end
of the space and the RISC I (with 31
instructions) at the other end. This
model is far too simplistic to be useful;
an absolute number of instructions
cannot be the sole criterion for categorizing an architecture as to RISC or
CISC. It ignores aspects of addressing
modes and their associated complexity, fails to deal with compiler/architecture coupling, and provides no way
to evaluate the implementation of
other non-instruction set design decisions such as register files, caches,
memory management, floating point
operations, and co-processors.
Another fallacy is that the total system is composed of hardware, software, and application code. This
leaves out the operating system, and
the overhead and the needs of the operating system cannot be ignored in
most systems. This area has received
September 1985

far too little attention from RISC research efforts, in contrast to the CISC
efforts focused on this area. 8,9
An early argument in favor of RISC
design was that simpler designs could
be realized more quickly, giving them a
performance advantage over complex
machines. In addition to the economic
advantages of getting to market first,
the simple design was supposed to

The insinuation that the MicroVAX-32 follows in a RISC
tradition is unreasonable. It
does not follow our definition
of a RISC; it violates all
six RISC criteria.
avoid the performance disadvantages
of introducing a new machine based
on relatively old implementation
technology. In light of these arguments, DEC's MicroVAX-3210 is
especially interesting.
The VAX easily qualifies as a CISC.
According to published reports, the
MicroVAX-32, a VLSI implementation of the preponderance of the VAX
instruction set, was designed, realized,
and tested in a period of several
months. One might speculate that this
very short gestation period was made
possible in large part by DEC's considerable expertise in implementing the
VAX architecture (existing products
included the 11/780, 11/750, 11/730,
and VLSI-VAX). This shortened
design time would not have been possible had DEC had not first created a
standard instruction set. Standardization at this level, however, is precisely
what RISC theory argues against.
Such standards constrain the unconventional RISC hardware/software tradeoffs. From a commercial
standpoint, it is significant that the
MicroVAX-32 was born into a world
where compatible assemblers, compilers, and operating systems abound,
something that would certainly not be
the case for a RISC design.

Such problems with RISC system
designs may encourage commercial
RISC designers to define a new level of
standardization in order to achieve
some of the advantages of multiple implementations supporting one standard interface. A possible choice for
such an interface would be to define an
intermediate language as the target for
all compilation. The intermediate language would then be translated into
optimal machine code for each implementation. This translation process
would simply be performing resource
scheduling at a very low level (e.g.,
pipeline management and register
allocation).
It should be noted that the MicroVAX-32 does not directly implement
all VAX architecture. The suggestion
has been made that this implementation somehow supports the RISC inclination toward emulating complex
functions in software. In a recent publication, David Patterson observed:

Although I doubt DEC is calling
them RISCs, I certainly found it interesting that DEC's single chip
VAXs do not implement the whole
VAX instruction set. A MicroVAX
traps when it tries to execute some
infrequent but complicated operations, and invokes transparent
software routines that simulate
those complicated instructions. I I
The insinuation that the MicroVAX-32 follows in a RISC tradition is
unreasonable. It does not come close
to fitting our definition of a RISC; it
violates all six RISC criteria. To begin
with, any VAX by definition has a
variable-length instruction format and
is not a load/store machine. Further,
the MicroVAX-32 has multicycle instruction execution, relies on a microcoded control engine, and interprets
the whole array of VAX addressing
modes. Finally, the MicroVAX-32 executes 175 instructions on-chip, hardly
a reduced number.
11

A better perspective in the Micro
VAX-32 shows that there are indeed
cost/performance ranges where microcoded implementation of certain
functions is inappropriate and software emulation is better. The importance of carefully making this assignment of function to implementation
level-software, microcode, or hardware-has been amply demonstrated
in many RISC papers. Yet this basic
concern is also evidenced in many
CISC machines. In the case of the
MicroVAX-32, floating point instructions are migrated either to a coprocessor chip or to software emulation
routines. The numerous floating-point
chips currently available attest to the
market reception for this partitioning.
Also migrated to emulation are the
console, decimal, and string instructions. Since many of these instructions
are infrequent, not time-critical, or are
not generated by many compilers, it

12

would be difficult to fault this approach to the design of an inexpensive
VAX. The MicroVAX-32 also shows
that it is still possible for intelligent,
competent computer designers who
understand the notion of correct function-to-level mapping to find microcoding a valuable technique. Published RISC work, however, does not
accommodate this possibility.
The application environment is also
of crucial importance in system design.
The RISC I instruction set was designed specifically to run the C language efficiently, and it appears
reasonably successful. The RISC I
researchers have also investigated
the Smalltalk-80 computing environment. 12 Rather than evaluate RISC I
as a Smalltalk engine, however, the
RISC I researchers designed a new
RISC and report encouraging performance results from simulations. Still,
designing a processor to run a single

language well is different from creating a single machine such as the
VAX that must exhibit at least acceptable performance for a wide range
of languages. While RISC research
offers valuable insights on a per-language basis, more emphasis on crosslanguage anomalies, commonalities,
and tradeoffs is badly needed.
Especially misleading are RISC
claims concerning the amount of design time saved by creating a simple
machine instead of a complex one.
Such claims sound reasonable. Nevertheless, there are substantial differences in the design environments
for an academic one-of-a-kind project
(such as MIPS or RISC I) and a
machine with lifetime measured in
years that will require substantial software and support investments. As was
pointed out in a recent Electronics
Week article, R. D. Lowry, market
development manager for Denelcor,

COMPUTER

noted that "commercial-product development teams generally start off a
project by weighing the profit and loss
impacts of design decisions."13 Lowry
is quoted as saying, "A university
doesn't have to worry about that, so
there are often many built-in deadends
in projects. This is not to say the value
of their research is diminished. It does,
however, make it very difficult for
someone to reinvent the system to
make it a commercial product." For a
product to remain viable, a great deal
of documentation, user training, coordination with fabrication or production facilities, and future upgrades
must all be provided. It is not known
how these factors might skew a designtime comparison, so all such comparisons should be viewed with suspicion.
Even performance claims, perhaps
the most interesting of all RISC assertions, are ambiguous. Performance as
measured by narrowly compute-

September 1985

bound, low-level benchmarks that
have been used by RISC researchers
(e.g., calculating a Fibonacci series recursively) is not the only metric in a
computer system. In some', it is not
even one of the most interesting. For
many current computers, the only useful performance index is the number
of transactions per second, which has
no direct or simple correlation to the
time it takes to calculate Ackermann's
function. While millions of instructions
per second might be a meaningful metric in some computing environments,
reliability, availability, and response
time are of much more concern in
others, such as space and aviation computing. The extensive error checking
incorporated into these machines at
every level may slow the basic clock
time and substantially diminish performance. Reduced performance is
tolerable; but downtime may not be.
In the extreme, naive application of

the RISC rules for designing an instruction set might result in a missile
guidance computer optinized for running its most common task-diagnostics. In terms ofinstruction frequencies,
of course, flight control applications
constitute a trivial special case and
would not be given much attention. It is
worth emphasizing that in efforts to
quantify performance and apply those
measurements to system design, one
must pay attention not just to instruction execution frequencies, but also to
cycles consumed per instruction execution. Levy and Clark make this point
regarding the VAX instruction set,'4
but it has yet to appear in any papers
on RISC.
When performance, such as
throughput or transactions per second,
is a first-order concern, one is faced
with the task of quantifying it. The
Berkeley RISC I efforts to establish the
machine's throughput are laudable, but

13

N.

before sweeping conclusions are drawn
one must carefully examine the benchmark programs used. As Patterson
noted:
The performance predictions for
[RISC I and RISC II] were based on
small programs. This small size was
dictated by the reliability of the
simulator and compiler, the available simulation time, and the inability of the first simulators to handle UNIX system calls. "

heterogenous benchmarks in performance measurement is still lost on
many commercial and academic computer evaluators who have succumbed
to the mi1conception that "microbenchmarks" represent a useful measurement in isolation.

Multiple register sets

Probably the most publicized RISCstyle processor is the Berkeley RISC I.
The best-known feature of this chip is
Some of these "small" programs ac- its large register file, organized as a
tually execute millions of instructions, series of overlapping register sets. This
yet they are very narrow programs in is ironic, since the register file is a perterms of the scope of function. For ex- formance feature independent of any
ample, the Towers of Hanoi program, RISC (as defined earlier) aspect of the
when executing on the 68000, spends processor. Multiple register sets could
over 90 percent of its memory accesses be included in any general-purpose
in procedure calls and returns. The register machine.
It is easy to believe that MRSs can
RISC I and II researchers recently
reported results from a large bench- yield performance benefits, since
mark,"I but the importance of large, procedure-based, high-level languages

14

typically use registers for information
specific to a procedure. When a procedure call is performed, the information must be saved, usually on a
memory stack, and restored on a procedure return. These operations are
typically very time consuming due to
the intrinsic data transfer requirements. RISC I uses its multiple register
sets to reduce the frequency of this
register saving and restoring. It also
takes advantage of an overlap between
register sets for parameter passing,
reducing even further the memory
reads and writes necessary. 15
RISC I has a register file of 138
32-bit registers organized into eight
overlapping "windows." In each window, six registers overlap the next
window (for outgoing parameters and
incoming results). During any procedure, only one of these windows is actually accessible. A procedure call
changes the current window to the next

COMPUTER

window by incrementing a pointer,
and the six outgoing parameter registers become the incoming parameters
of the called procedure. Similarly, a
procedure return changes the current
window to the previous window, and
the outgoing result registers become
the incoming result registers of the
calling procedure. If we assume that
six 32-bit registers are enough to contain the parameters, a procedure call
involves no actual movement of information (only the window pointer is adjusted). The finite on-chip resources
limit the actual savings due to register
window overflows and underflows.3
It has been claimed that the small
control area needed to implement the
simple instruction set of a VLSI RISC
leaves enough chip area for the large
register file.3 The relatively small
amount of control logic used by a
RISC does free resources for other
uses, but a large register file is not the

September 1985

only way to use them, nor even necessarily the best. For example, designers
of the 801 and MIPS chose other ways
to use their available hardware; these
RISCs have only a single, conventionally sized register set. Caches, floatingpoint hardware, and interprocess communication support are a few of the
many possible uses for those resources
"freed" by a RISC's simple instruction set. Moreover, as chip technology
improves, the tradeoffs between instruction set complexity and architecture/implementation features become
less constrained. Computer designers
will always have to decide how to best
use available resources and, in doing
so, should realize which relations are
intrinsic and which are not.
The Berkeley papers describing the
RISC I and RISC II processors claimed
their resource decisions produced large
performance improvements, two to
four times over CISC machines like

the VAX and the 68000.3,11 There are
many problems with these results and
the methods used to obtain them.
Foremost, the performance effects of
the reduced instruction set were not
decoupled from those of the overlapped register windows. Consequently, these reports shed little light on the
RISC-related performance of the machine, as shown below.
Some performance comparisons between different machines, especially
early ones, were based on simulated
benchmark execution times. While absolute speed is always interesting,
other metrics less implementation-dependent can provide design information more useful to computer architects, such as data concerning the
processor-memory traffic necessary to
execute a series of benchmarks. It is
difficult to draw firm conclusions
from comparisons of vastly different
machines unless some effort has been

15

made to factor out implementationdependent features not being compared (e.g., caches and floating point

accelerators).
Experiments structured to accommodate these reservations were conducted at CMU to test the hypothesis
that the effects of multiple register sets
are orthogonal to instruction set complexity. 16 Specifically, the goal was to
see if the performance effects of MRSs
were comparable for RISCs and
CISCs. Simulators were written for
two CISCs (the VAX and the 68000) Figure 1. Total processor-memory traffic for benchmarks on the standard
without MRSs, with non-overlapping VAX and two modified VAX computers, one with multiple register sets and
MRSs and with overlapping MRSs. one with overlapped multiple register sets.
Simulators were also written for the
RISC I, RISC I with non-overlapping
register sets, and RISC I with only a
single register set. In each of the
simulators, care was taken not to
change the initial architectures any
more than absolutely necessary to add
or remove MRSs. Instead of simulating execution time, the total amount of
processor-memory traffic (bytes read
and written) for each benchmark was
recorded for comparison. To use this
data fairly, only different register set
versions of the same architecture were
compared so the ambiguities that arise
from comparing different architec- Figure 2. Total processor-memory traffic for benchmarks on the standard
68000 and two modified 68000s, one with multiple register sets and one with
tures like the RISC I and the VAX were overlapped
multiple register sets.
avoided. The benchmarks used were
the same ones originally used to evaluate RISC I. A summary of the experiments and their results are presented by
Hitchcock and Sprunt. 17
As expected, the results show a substantial difference in processor-memory traffic for an architecture with and
without MRSs. The MRS versions of
both the VAX and 68000 show marked
decreases in processor-memory traffic
for procedure-intensive benchmarks,
shown in Figures I and 2. Similarly,
the single register set version of RISC I
requires many more memory reads
and writes than RISC I with overlap- Figure 3. Total processor-memory traffic for benchmarks on the
standard
ped register sets (Figure 3). This result RISC I and two modified RISC l's, one with no overlap between register
sets
is due in part to the method used for and one with only one register set.
16

COMPUTER

handling register set overflow and
underflow, which was kept the same
for all three variations. With a more
intelligent scheme, the single register
set RISC I actually required fewer
bytes of memory traffic on Ackermann's function than its multiple
register set counterparts. For benchmarks with very few procedure calls
(e.g., the sieve of Eratosthenes), the
single register set version has the same
amount of processor-memory traffic
as the MRS version of the same architecture. 17

Clearly, MRSs can affect the amount
of processor-memory traffic necessary
to execute a program. A significant
amount of the performance of RISC I
for procedure-intensive environments
has been shown to be attributable to its
scheme of overlapped register sets, a
feature independent of instruction-set
complexity. Thus, any performance
claims for reduced instruction set computers that do not remove effects due
to multiple register sets are inconclusive, at best.
These CMIU experiments used benchmarks drawn from other RISC
research efforts for the sake of continuity and consistency. Some of the
benchmarks, such as Ackermann,
Fibonacci, and Hanoi, actually spend
most of their time performing procedure calls. The percentage of the total
processor-memory traffic due to "C"
procedure calls for these three benchmarks on the single register set version
of the 68000 ranges from 66 to 92 percent. As was expected, RISC I, with its
overlapped register structure that
allows procedure calls to be almost
free in terms of processor-memory bus
traffic, did extremely well on these
highly recursive benchmarks when
compared to machines with only a
single register set. It has not been established, however, that these benchmarks are representative of any computing environment.
September 1985

The 432
The Intel 432 is a classic example of

a CISC. It is an object-oriented VLSI

microprocessor chip-set designed expressly to provide a productive Ada
programming environment for large
scale, multiple-process, multipleprocessor systems. Its architecture
supports object orientation such that
every object is protected uniformly
without regard to traditional distinctions such as "supervisor/user mode"
or "system/user data structures." The
432 has a very complex instruction set.
Its instructions are bit-encoded and
range in length from six to 321 bits.
The 432 incorporates a significant
degree of functional migration from
software to on-chip microcode. The
interprocess communication SEND
primitive is a 432 machine instruction,
for instance.
Published studies of the performance of the Intel 432 on low-level
benchmarks (e.g., towers of Hanoi 18)
show that it is very slow, taking 10 to
20 times as long as the VAX 11/780.
Such a design, then, invites scrutiny in
the RISC/CISC controversy.
One is tempted to blame the machine's object-oriented runtime environment for imposing too much overhead. Every memory reference is
checked to ensure that it lies within the
boundaries of the referenced object,
and the read/write protocols of the
executing context are verified. RISC
proponents argue that the complexity
of the 432 architecture, and the additional decoding required for a bitencoded instruction stream contribute
to its poor performance. To address
these and other issues, a detailed study
of the 432 was undertaken to evaluate
the effectiveness of the architectural
mechanisms provided in support of its
intended runtime environment. The
study concentrated on one of the central differences in the RISC and CISC
design styles: RISC designs avoid
hardware/microcode structures in-

tended to support the runtime environment, attempting instead to place equivalent functionality into the compiler
or software. This is contrary to the
mainstream of instruction set design,
which reflects a steady migration of
such functionality from higher levels
(software) to lower ones (microcode or
hardware) in the expectation of improved performance.
This investigation should include an
analysis of the 432's efficiency in executing large-system code, since executing such code well was the primary
design goal of the 432. Investigators
used the Intel 432 microsimulator,
which yields cycle-by-cycle traces of
the machine's execution. While this
microsimulator is well-suited to simulating small programs, it is quite unwieldy for large ones. As a result, the
concentration here is on the low-level
benchmarks that first pointed out the
poor 432 performance.
Simulations of these benchmarks
revealed several performance problems with the 432 and its compiler:

(1) The 432's Ada compiler performs almost no optimization. The
machine is frequently forced to make
unnecessary changes to its complex addressing environment, and it often
recomputes costly, redundant subexpressions. This recomputation seriously skews many results from benchmark
comparisons. Such benchmarks reflect
the performance of the present version
of the 432 but show very little about
the efficacy of the architectural tradeoffs made in that machine.
(2) The bandwidth of 432 memory
is limited by several factors. The 432
has no on-chip data caching, no instruction stream literals, and no local
data registers. Consequently, it makes
far more memory references than it
would otherwise have to. These reference requirements also make the code
size much larger, since many more bits
are required to reference data within
an object than within a local register.
17

And because of pin limitations, the 432
must multiplex both data and address
information over only 16 pins. Also,
the standard Intel 432/600 development system, which supports sharedmemory multiprocessing, uses a slow
asynchronous bus that was designed
more for reliability than throughput.
These implementation factors combine to make wait states consume 25 to
40 percent of the processor's time on
the benchmarks.
(3) On highly recursive benchmarks,
the object-oriented overhead in the 432
does indeed appear in the form of a
slow procedure call. Even here,
though, the performance problems
should not be attributed to object
orientation or to the machine's intrinsic complexity. Designers of the 432
made a decision to provide a new, protected context for every procedure call;
the user has no option in this respect. If
an unprotected call mechanism were
used where appropriate, the Dhrystone benchmark19 would run 20 percent faster.
(4) Instructions are bit-aligned, so
the 432 must almost of necessity decode the various fields of an instruction sequentially. Since such decoding
often overlaps with instruction execution, the 432 stalls three percent of the
time while waiting for the instruction
decoder. This percentage will get
worse, however, once other problems
above are eliminated.
Colwell provides a detailed treatment of this experiment and its
results. 20
This 432 experiment is evidence that
RISC's renewed emphasis on the importance of fast instruction decoding
and fast local storage (such as caches
or registers) is substantiated, at least
for low-level compute-bound benchmarks. Still, the 432 does not provide
compelling evidence that large-scale
migration of function to microcode
and hardware is ineffective. On the
contrary, Cox et al.2' demonstrated

that the 432 microcode implementation of interprocess communication is
much faster than an equivalent software version. On these low-level
benchmarks, the 432 could have much
higher performance with only a better
compiler and minor changes to its implementation.Thus, it is wrong to conclude that the 432 supports the general
RISC point of view.

In spite of-and sometimes because
of-the wide publicity given to current RISC and CISC research, it is not
easy to gain a thorough appreciation
of the important issues. Articles on
RISC research are often oversimplified, overstated, and misleading,
and papers on CISC design offer no
coherent design principles for comparison. RISC/CISC issues are best
considered in light of their functionto-implementation level assignment.
Strictly limiting the focus to instruction counts or other oversimplifications can be misleading or meaningless.
Some of the more subtle issues have
not been brought out in current literature. Many of these are design considerations that do not lend themselves
to the benchmark level analysis used in
RISC research. Nor are they always
properly evaluated by CISC designers,
guided so frequently by tradition and
corporate economics.
RISC/CISC research has a great
deal to offer computer designers.
These contributions must not be lost
due to an illusory and artificial
dichotomy. Lessons learned studying
RISC machines are not incompatible
with or mutually exclusive of the rich
tradition of computer design that
preceded them. Treating RISC ideas
as perspectives and techniques rather
than dogma and understanding their
domains of applicability can add important new tools to a computer
designer's repertoire. Z

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the innumerable individuals, from industry
and academia, who have shared their
thoughts on this matter with us and
stimulated many of our ideas. In particular, we are grateful to George Cox
and Konrad Lai of Intel for their help
with the 432 microsimulator.
This research was sponsored in part
by the Department of the Army under
contract DAA B07-82-C-J164.

References
1

.

J. Hennessy et al., "Hardware/Soft-

ware Tradeoffs for Increased Perfor-

mance," Proc. Symp. Architectural
Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, 1982, pp.

2-11.
2. G. Radin, "The 801 Minicomputer,"
Proc. Symp. Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, 1982, pp. 39-47.
3. D. A. Patterson and C. H. Sequin, "A
VLSI RISC," Computer, Vol. 15, No.
9, Sept. 1982, pp. 8-21.
4. R. P. Colwell, C. Y. Hitchcock II1,
and E. D. Jensen, " A Perspective on
the Processor Complexity Controversy," Proc. Int. Conf. Computer
Design: VLSI in Computers, 1983, pp.
613-616.
5. D. Hammerstrom, "Tutorial: The
Migration of Function into Silicon,"
10th Ann. Int'I Symp. Computer Architecture, 1983.
6. J. C. Browne, "Understanding Execution Behavior of Software Systems,"
Cotnputer, Vol. 17, No. 7, July 1984,
pp. 83-87.
7. H. Azaria and D. Tabak, "The
MODHEL Microcomputer for RISCs
Study", Microprocessing and Microprogramming, Vol. 12, No. 3-4,
Oct.-Nov. 1983, pp. 199-206.
8. G. C. Barton "Sentry: A Novel Hardware Implementation of Classic
Operating System Mechanisms,"
Proc. Ninth Ann. Int'l Symp. ConputerArchitecture, 1982, pp. 140-147.
9. A. D. Berenbaum, M. W. Condry,
and P. M. Lu, "The Operating System
and Language Support Features of the
BELLMAC-32 Microprocessor,"
COM PUTER

..W

Proc. Symp. Architectural Support

trical and Computer Engineering Departments of Carnegie-Mellon University for
six years. For the previous 14 years he performed industrial R/D on computer systems, hardware, and software. He consults
and lectures extensively throughout the
world and has participated widely in professional society activities.

for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, 1982, pp. 30-38.
10. J. Hennessy, "VLSI Processor Architecture," IEEE Transactions on
Computers, Vol. C-33, No. 12, Dec.

1984, pp. 1221-1246.
11. D. Patterson, "RISC Watch," ComputerArchitectureNews, Vol. 12, No.
1, Mar. 1984, pp. 11-19.
12. David Ungar et al., "Architecture of
SOAR: Smalltalk on a RISC," 11th
Ann. Int'l Symp. Computer Architecture, 1984, pp. 188-197.
13. W. R. Iversen, "Money Starting to
Flow As Parallel Processing Gets
Hot," Electronics Week, Apr. 22,
1985, pp. 36-38.
14. H. M. LevyandD. W. Clark, "Onthe
Use of Benchmarks for Measuring
System Performance" ComputerArchitectureNews, Vol. 10, No. 6, 1982,
pp. 5-8.
15. D. C. Halbert and P. B. Kessler,
"Windows of Overlapping Register
Frames", CS292R Final Reports,
University of California, Berkeley,
June 9, 1980.
16. R. P. Colwell, C. Y. Hitchcock III,
and E. D. Jensen, "Peering Through
the RISC/CISC Fog: An Outline of
Research," Computer Architecture
News, Vol. 11, No. 1, Mar. 1983, pp.
44-50.
17. C. Y. Hitchcock III and H. M. B.
Sprunt, "Analyzing Multiple Register
Sets," 12th Ann. Int'l Symp. Computer Architecture, 1985, in press.
18. P. M. Hansenetal., "A Performance
Evaluation of the Intel iAPX 432,"
Computer Architecture News, Vol.
10, No. 4, June 1982, pp. 17-27.
19. R. P. Weicker, "Dhrystone: A Synthetic Systems Programming Benchmark," Comm. ACM, Vol. 27, No.
10, Oct. 1984, pp. 1013-1030.
20. R. P. Colwell, "The Performance Effects of Functional Migration and Architectural Complexity in ObjectOriented Systems," PhD. thesis,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. Expected completion in
June, 1985.
21. G. W. Cox et al., "Interprocess Communication and Processor Dispatching on the Intel 432," ACM Trans.
Computer Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1,
Feb. 1983, pp. 45-66.
September 1985

Robert P. Colwell recently completed his
doctoral dissertation on the performance
effects of migrating functions into silicon,
using the Intel 432 as a case study. His industrial experience includes design of a
color graphics workstation for Perq Systems, and work on Bell Labs' microprocessors. He received the PhD and MSEE
degrees from Carnegie-Mellon University
in 1985 and 1978, and the BSEE degree
from the University of Pittsburgh in 1977.
He is a member of the IEEE and ACM.
H. M. Brinkley Sprunt is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering of Carnegie-Mellon
University. He received a BSEE degree in
electrical engineering from Rice University
in 1983. His research interests include computer architecture evaluation and design.
He is a member of the IEEE and ACM.

Charles Y. Hitchcock mI is a doctoral candidate in Carnegie-Mellon University's
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. He is currently pursuing
research in computer architecture and is a
member of the IEEE and ACM. He graduated with honors in 1981 from Princeton
University with a BSE in electrical engineering and computer science. His MSEE from
CMU in 1983 followed research he did in
design automation.

E. Douglas Jensen has been on the

faculties

of both the Computer Science and Elec-

Charles P. Koflar is a senior research staff
member in Carnegie-Mellon University's
computer Science Department. He is currently pursuing research in decentralized
asynchronous computing systems. He has
been associated with the MCF and
NEBULA project at Carnegie-Mellon University since 1978. Previous research has
been in the area of computer architecture
validation and computer architecture
description languages. He holds a BS in
computer science from the University of
Pittsburgh.

Questions about this article can be
directed to Colwell at the Computer Science
Department, Carnegie-Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
19

